The second Tome of Homilees, of such matters as were promised, and entitled
in the former part of Homilees.

Set out by the authority of the Queens Majesty: And to be read in every
parish Church agreeably. 1571.



The Table of homilees ensuyng.
1 OF the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. iii. parts.
3 For repayryng and keeping clean the Church. 4 Of good works. And first of
fasting. ii. parts. 5 Against gluttony and drunkenness. 6 Against excess of
apparel. 7 An Homilee of prayer. iii. parts. 8 Of the place and time of
prayer. ii. parts. 9 Of common prayer and sacraments. 10 An information for
them which take offense at certain places of holy scripture. ii. parts. 11
Of alms deeds. iii. parts. 12 Of the Nativity. 13 Of the passion, for good
Friday. ii. Homilees 14 Of the Resurrection, for Easter day. 15 Of the worthy
receiving of the sacrament. ii. parts. 16 An Homilee concerning the coming
down of the holy Ghost, for Whitsunday. ii. parts. 17 An Homilee for
rogation week. iiii. parts. 18 Of the state of matrimony. 19 Against
idleness. 20 Of repentance and true reconciliation unto God. iii. parts. 21
An Homilee against disobedience and wylfull rebellion. vi. parts.
An admonition to all Ministers ecclesiastical.
FOR that the Lord does require of his servant whom he has set over his
householde, to show both faythfulnesse and prudence in his office: it shall be
necessary that ye above al other do behave your self most faithfully and
diligently in your so high a function: that is, aptly, plainly, and distinctly
to read the sacred scriptures, diligently to instruct the youth in their
Catechism, gravely and reverently to minister his most holy Sacraments,
prudently also to choose out such Homilees as be most meet for the time, and
for the more agreeable instruction of the people committed to your charge, with
such discretion, that where the Homilee may appear to long for one readyng, to
divide the same to be read part in the fore noone, and part in the after noone.
And where it may so chance some one or other chapter of the old Testament to
fall in order to be read upon the Sundays or holy days, which were better
to be changed with some other of the new Testament of more edification: it
shall be well done to spend your time to consider well of such chapters before
hand, whereby your prudence and diligence in your office may appear, so that
your people may have cause to glorify God for you, and be the redyer to
embrace your labors, to your better commendatio^, to the discharge of your
consciences and their own.

An Homilee of the right use of the Church or temple of God, and of the
reverence due unto the same. The first part.
WHERE there appears at these days great slacknesse and negligence of a
great sort of people, in resorting to the Church, there to serve God their
heavenly father, according to their most bounden duty, as also much uncomely
and vnreuerent behavior of many persons in the same, when they be there
assembled, and thereby may just fear arise of the wrath of GOD, and his
dreadful plagues hanging over our heads for our grievous offenses in this
behalf, amongst other many and great sins which we daily and hourly commit
before the Lord. Therefore for the discharge of al our consciences, and the
auoydyng of the common peril and plague hangyng over us, let us consider what
may be said out of Gods holy book concerning this matter, whereunto I pray
you give good audience, for that it is of great wayght, and concerns you all.

Although the eternal and incomprehensible majesty of God, the Lord of
heaven and earth, Act. 7.
whose seat is heaven, and the earth his footestole, can not be enclosed in
temples or houses made with man's hand, as in dwelling places able to receive
or conteyne his majesty, according as is evidently declared by the prophet
Esaias, and by the doctrine of saint Steven, and saint Paul Esai. 16. Act. 7.
17,
in the Acts of the Apostles. And where king Solomon (who builded unto the
Lord the most glorious temple that ever was made) says, Who shall be able to
build a meet or worthy house for him? if heaven, and the heaven above all
heavens can not contain him: how much less can that which I have builded?
And further confesses: What am I, that I should be able to build thee an
house O Lord? But yet for 3. Reg. 8. 2. Par. 2, and* 6.
this purpose only it is made, that thou may regard the prayer of thy
servant and his humble supplication. Much less then be our Churches meet
dwelling places to receive the incomprehensible majesty of God. And in deed,
the chief and special temples of God, wherein he has greatest pleasure, and
most delyghteth to dwell and continue in, are the bodies and minds of true
Christians, and the chosen people of GOD, according to the doctrine of the
holy scripture, declared in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Know ye
not (says Saint Paul) that ye be the temple of God, and that the 1. Cor. 3.
spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defyle the temple of God, him will
God destroy. For the temple of God is holy, which ye are. And again in the
same Epistle: Know ye not that 1. Cor. 6,
your body is the temple of the holy ghost dwelling in you, whom ye have given
you of God, and that ye be not your own? for ye are dearly bought. Glorify
ye now therefore God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And
therefore as our savior Christ teaches in the Gospel of saint John, they
that worship God John. 4.
the father in spirit and truth, in what place so ever they do it, worship
him a right: for such worshyppers does God the father look for. For God is a
spirit, and those that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth,
says our savior Christ. Yet all this notwithstanding, the material Church or
temple is a place appointed as well by the usage and continual examples
expressed in the old Testament, as in the new, for the people of God to
resort together unto, there to hear Gods holy word, to call upon his holy
name, to give him thanks for his innumerable and unspeakable benefits
bestowed upon us, and duly and truly to celebrate his holy sacraments (In
the unfeigned doing and accomplyshyng of the which, stands that true and
right worshipping of God before mentioned) and the same Church or temple, is by
the scriptures both of the old Testament and the new, called the house and
temple of the Lord, for the peculier service there done to his majesty by his
people, and for the effectuous presence of his heavenly grace, where with he
by his said holy word endueth his people so there assembled. And to the said
house or temple of God, at all times by common order appointed, are all people
that be godly in deed, bound with all diligence to resort, unless by
sickness or other most vrgente causes they be let therefro. And all the
same so resortyng thither, ought with all quietness and reverence there to
behave them selves, in doing their bounden duty and service to almighty God,
in the congregation of his Saints. All which things are evident to be proved
by Gods holy word, as hereafter shall playnelye appear.

And first of all, I will declare by the scriptures, that it is called (as it
is indeed) the house of God, and temple of the Lord. He that swears by the
temple (says our savior Christ) Mat. 2^.
swears by it and him that dwells therein, meaning God the father, which
he also expresses plainly in the Gospel of Saint John, saying: Do not make
the house of my father the John. 2.
house of marchaundize. And in the book of the Psalms, the Prophet David
says, I will Psalm. 5.
enter into thine house, I will worship in thy holy temple, in thy fear. And
it is in almost infinite places of the scripture, specially in the prophets
Psalm. 1^1.
and book of psalms, called the house of God, or the house of the Lord.
Sometime it is named the tabernacle of the Lord, and sometime Exo. 25. Leui. 19.
the sanctuarye, that is to say, the holy house or place of the Lord. And it
is in likewise called the house of prayer, as Solomon, who builded 3. Reg. 8.
2. Par. 26.
the temple of the Lord at Jerusalem, does often call it the house of the
Lord, in the which the Lords name should be called upon. And Esaias in the.
50. Chapter, My house shall be called the Esai. 50.
house of prayer amongst all nations. Which text our savior Christ alleges
in the new Testament, as does appear in three of the Evangelists, and in the
parable of the Pharisee and the Mat. 21. Mark. 11. Luke 19. Luke 18.
Publicane which went to pray, in which parable our savior Christ says, They
went up into the temple to pray. And Anna the holy wydo we and prophetisse,
served the Lord in fasting and prayer in the temple, night and day. And in the
Luke. 2. Act. 3.
story of the Acts it is mentioned, how that Peter and John went up into the
temple at the hour of prayer. And saint Paul praying in the temple Act. 2^.
at Jerusalem, was rapte in the spirit, and did see Jesus speaking unto him.
And as in all convenient places, prayer may be used of the godly privately: So
it is most certain, that the Church or temple is the due and appointed place
for common and public prayer.

Now that it is likewise the place of thanks geuyng unto the Lord for his
innumerable and unspeakable benefits bestowed upon us, appears notably in
the latter end of the Gospel of saint Luke, and the beginning of the story
of the Acts, where it is written that the Apostles Luke. 24. Act. 2.
and disciples after the assention of the lord, continued with one accord
daily in the temple, always praysyng and blessyng God.

And it is likewise declared in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, that the
Church is the 1. Cor. 9.
due place appointed for the reverent use of the Sacraments. It remains now
to be declared, Act. 13.
that the Church or temple is the place where the lively word of God (and not
man's inventions) ought to be read and taught, and that the people are bound
thither with all diligence to resort: and this proof likewise to be made by
the scriptures, as hereafter shall appear.

In the story of the acts of the apostles, we read that Paul and Barnabas
preached the word of God in the temples of the Jews at Salamine. And when
they came to Antiochia, they entered on the Sabbath day into the Synagogue or
Church, and sat down, and after the lesson or readyng of the law and the
prophets, the ruler of the temple sent unto them, saying: Ye men and brethren,
if any of you have any exhortation to make unto the people, say it. And so
Paul standing up, and making scilence with his hand, said? Ye men that be
Israelites, and ye that fear God, give ear, and so forth, preaching to them
a sermon out of the scriptures, as there at large appears. And in the same
story of the acts, the seventeenth Act. 17.
Chapter, is testified how Paul preached Christ out of the Scriptures at
Thessalonica. And in Act. 15.
the fifteenth Chapter, James the apostle in that holy council and assembly
of his fellow Apostles says, Moses of old time has in every City certain
that preach him in the Synagogues or temples, where he is read every Sabbath
day. By these places ye may see the usage of readyng of the Scriptures of the
old Testament among the Jews in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, and
sermons usually made upon the same. How much more then is it convenient that
the Scriptures of God, and specially the Gospel of our savior Christ, should
be read and expounded to us that be Christians in our Churches, specially our
savior Christ and his apostles allowyng this most godly and necessary usage,
and by their examples confirming the same.

It is written in the stories of the Gospels in Mat. 4. Mark. i. Luke 4. Mat.
13. 20. Mark. 6. Luke 13.
diverse places, that Jesus went round about all Galilee, teaching in their
Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom: In which places is his
great diligence in continual preaching and teaching of the people, most
evidently set forth.

In Luke ye read, how Jesus according to Luke 4.
his accustomed use came into the temple, and how the book of Esaias the
prophet was delivered him, how he read a text therein, and made a sermon upon
the same.

And in the. xix. is expressed how he taught Luke 19.
daily in the temple. And it is thus written in the. viii. of John: Jesus came
again earlye in John. 8.
the morning into the temple, and all the people came unto him, and he sat
down and taught them. And in the. xviii. of John, our savior testifies
before Pilate, that he spoke openly unto John. 18.
the world, and that he always taught in the Synagogue and in the temple,
whyther all the Jews resorted, and that secretly he spoke nothing. And in
saint Luke: Jesus taught in the Luke 21.
temple, and all the people came early in the morning unto him, that they might
hear him in the temple.

Here ye see as well the diligence of our savior in teaching the word of God
in the temple daily, and specially on the Sabbath days, as also the redynesse
of the people resortyng altogether, and that early in the morning, into the
Temple to hear him.

The same example of diligence in preaching the word of God in the Temple,
shall ye find in the Apostles, and the people resortyng unto them. Act. the.
v. How the Apostles, although they had been whypped and scourged the day
before, and by the high priest commanded that they should preach no more in
the name of Jesus, yet the day following they entered earlye in the morning into
the Temple, and did not cease to teach and declare Jesus Christ. And in
sundry other places of the storye of the Acts, ye shall find like diligence
both in the Apostles in Act. 13. 15. 17.
teaching, and in the people in coming to the temple to hear Gods word. And
it is testified in the first of Luke, that when Zachary the Luke. 1.
holy priest, and father to John baptist, did sacrifice within the temple, all the people stood without a long time praying, such was their zeal and
feruencie at that time. And in the second Luke. 2.
of Luke appears what great iourneyes men, women, yea and children took, to
come to the temple on the feast day, there to serve the Lord, and specially
the example of Joseph, the blessed virgin Marie mother to our Savior Jesus
Christ, and of our savior Christ him self being yet but a child, whose
examples are worthy for us to follow. So that if we would compare our
negligence in resortyng to the house of the Lord there to serve him, to the
diligence of the Jews in coming daily very early, sometime great iourneyes
to their temple, and when the multitude could not be received within the
temple, the fervent zeal that they had, declared in standing long without and
praying: We may justly in this comparison condemn our slothfulness and
negligence, yea plain contempt in coming to the Lords house, standing so
nere unto us, so seldom, and scarcely at none time. So far is it from a
great many of us to come early in the morning, or give attendaunce without, who
disdain to come into the temple, and yet we abhor the very name of the
Jews when we hear it, as of a most wicked and ungodly people. But it is to
be feared, that in this point we be far worse then the Jews, and that they
shall rise at the day of judgment to our condemnation, who in comparison to
them, show such slackenesse and contempt in resortyng to the house of the
Lord, there to serve him, according as we are of duty most bound. And
besides this most horrible dread of Gods just judgment in the great day, we
shall not in this life escape his heavy hand and vengeance for this contempt
of the house of the Lord and his due service in the same, according as the
Lord him self threatens in the first Chapter of his prophet Aggeus after
this sort: Because you have left my house desert and without compayne Agge. 1.
(says the Lord) and ye have made haste every man to his own house, for this
cause are the heavens stayed over you that they should give no deaw, and the
earth is forbidden that it shall bring forth his fruit, and I have called
drought upon the earth, and upon the mountains, and upon corn, and upon
wine, and upon oil, and upon al things that the earth brings forth, and
upon men, and upon beasts, and upon all things that men's hands labor for.
Behold, if we be such worldlinges that we care not for the eternal
judgments of GOD, (which yet of all other are most dreadful and horrible)
we shall not escape the punishment of God in this world by drought and famine,
and the taking away of all worldly commodities, which we as worldlinges seem
only to regard and care for. Whereas on the contrary part, if we would amend
this fault or negligence, slothfulness and contempt of the house of the
Lord, and his due service there, and with diligence resort thither together,
to serve the Lord with one accord and consent, in all holiness and
righteousness before him: we have promises of benefits both heavenly and
worldly. Wheresoever Mat. 18.
two or three be gathered in my name (says our savior Christ) there am I in
the midst of them. And what can be more blessed the^ to have our savior
Christ amongst us? Or what again can be more unhappy or mischeuous, then to
drive our savior Christ from amongst us, and to leave a place for his and our
most ancient and mortal enemy the old dragon and serpent Satan the devil
in the midst of us?

In the second of Luke it is written, how that Luke 2.
the mother of Christ and Joseph, when they had long sought Christ whom they
had lost, and could find him no where, that at the last they found him in
the temple, sittyng in the midst of the doctors. So if we lack Jesus
Christ, that is to say, the savior of our souls and bodies, we shall not
find him in the market place, or in the guylde hal, much less in the alehouse
or tavern amongst good fellows (as they call them) so soon as we shall find
him in the temple the Lords house, amongst the teachers and preachers of his
word, where in deed he is to be found. And as concerning worldly
commodities, we have a sure promise of our savior Christ: Seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and al these things shall
withal be given unto you. And thus we have in the first part of this Homilee
declared by gods word, that the Temple or Church is the house of the Lord,
for that the service of the Lord (as teaching and hearing of his holy word,
calling upon his holy name, geuyng thanks to him for his great and
innumerable benefits, and due ministering of his sacraments) is there used. And
it is like wise declared already by the scriptures, how all godly and Christian
men and women ought at times appointed, with diligence to resort unto the house
of the Lord, there to serve him, and to glorify him, as he is most worthy, and
we most bound, to whom be all glory and honor world without end,

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee of the right use of the Church.
IT was declared in the first part of this Homilee, by gods word, that the
temple or Church is the house of the lord, for that the service of the Lord
(as teaching and hearing of his holy word, calling upon his holy name, geuyng
thanks to him for his great and innumerable benefits, and due ministering of
the sacraments) is there used. And it is like wise already declared by the
scriptures, how all godly and christian men and women, ought at times
appointed, with diligence to resort unto the house of the Lord, there to serve
him, and to glorify him, as he is most worthy, and we most bounden.

Now it remains in this second part of the Homilee concerning the right use
of the temple of God, to be likewise declared by Gods word, with what
quietness, scilence, and reverence, those that resort to the house of the
Lord, ought there to use and behave them selves.

It may teach us sufficiently how well it does become us christian men
reverently to use the Church and holy house of our prayers, by considering in
how great reverence and veneration the Jews in the old law had their
Temple, which appears by sundry places, whereof I will note unto you
certain. In the xxvi. of Mat. 26.
Matthewe, it was laid to our savior Christ's charge before a temporal
judge, as a matter worthy death, by the two false witnesses, that he had said,
he could destroy the temple of GOD, and in three days build it again, not
doubting but if they might make men to believe that he had said any thing
against the honor and majesty of the temple, he should seem to al men most
worthy of death. And in the. xxi. of the Acts, when the Jews found Paul in
the temple, Acts. 21.
they laid hands upon him, crying: Ye men Israelies help, this is that man
who teaches all men every where against the people and the law, and against
this place: besides that, he has brought the Gentiles into the temple, and
has profaned this holy place. Behold how they took it for a like offense to
speak against the temple of God, as to speak against the law of God, and
how they judged it conuement, that none but godly persons and the true
worshippers of God, should enter into the temple of GOD. And the same fault is
laid to Paul's charge by Tertullus an eloquent man, and by the Jews in the.
xxiiii. of the Acts, before a temporal Act. 24.
Judge, as a matter worthy death, that he went about to pollute the temple of
GOD. And in the. xxvii. of Matthewe, when the chief priests had received
again the pieces of silver Mat. 27.
at Judas hand, they said, It is not lawful to put them into Corban (which
was the treasure house of the temple) because it is the price of blood. So that
they could not abide that not only any unclean person, but also any other
dead thing that was judged unclean, should once come into the temple, or any
place thereto belonging. And to this end is saint Paul's sayyng in the second
Epistle to the Corinthians the 2. Cor. 6.
vi. Chapter to be applied: What fellowship is there betwixt righteousness, and
unrighteousness? or what communion between light and darkness? or what concord
between Christ and Beliall? or what part can the faithful have with
thunfaythful? or what agreement can there be between the temple of God and
images? Which sentence, although it be chiefly referred to the temple of ye
mind of the godly: yet seeing that the similitude and pith of the argument is
taken from the material temple, it enforces that no ungodliness, specially of
images or idols, may be suffered in the temple of God, which is the place of
worshyppyng God: and therefore can no more be suffered to stand there, then
light can agree with darkness, or Christ with Belial: for that the true
worshipping of god, and the worshipping of images, are most contrary. And the
setting of them up in the place of worshyppyng, may give great occasion to the
worshyppyng of them. But to turn to the reverence that the Jews had to their
temple. You will say they honored it superstitiously, and a great deal to
much, crying out, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, being
notwithstanding most wicked in life, and be therefore most justly reproved of
Jeremie the prophet Hier. 7.
of the Lord. Truth it is, that they were superstitiously given to the
honoring of their temple: But I would we were not as far to short from the
due reverence of the Lords house, as they ouershot them selves therein. And if
the prophet iustlye reprehended them, hearken also what the Lord requires at
our hands, that we may know whether we be blame worthy or no.

It is written in Ecclesiastes the fourth Chapter: When thou do enter into
the house of God Eccle. 4.
(says he) take heed to thy feet, draw near that thou may hear, for
obedience is much more worth then the sacrifice of fools, which know not
what evil they do. Speak nothing rashly there, neither let thine heart be
swyft to utter words before God. For God is in heaven, and thou art upon the
earth, therefore let thy words be few. Note (well-beloved) what quietness in
gesture and behavior, what scilence in talk and words, is required in the
house of God, for so he calls it. See whether they take heed to their feet,
as they be here warned, which never cease from uncomely walking and ietting up
and down and ouerthwarte the Church, showing an evident signification of
notable contempt, both of God, and all good men there present: and what heed
they take to their tounges, and speech, which do not only speak words swiftly
and rashly before the Lord (which they be here forbidden) but also often
times speak fylthyly, couetously, and ungodly, talkyng of matters scarce
honest or fytte for the alehouse or tavern, in the house of the Lord, little
consyderyng that they speak before God, who dwells in heaven (as is here
declared) when they be but vermins here creeping upon the earth, in camparison
to his eternal majesty, and less regarding that they must give an account at
the great day, of every idle word Mat. 4.
whersoeuer it be spoken, much more of filthy, unclean, or wicked words
spoken in the Lords house, to the great dishonor of his majesty, and offense
of all that hear them. And in deed concerning the people and multitude, the
temple is prepared for the^ to be hearers, rather then speakers, consyderyng
that as well the word of god is there read or taught, whereunto they are bound
to give diligent ear with all reverence and scilence, as also that common
prayer and thanks geuyng are rehearsed and said by the public minister in
the name of the people and the whole multitude present, whereunto they geuyng
their redye audience, should assent and say Amen, as S. Paul teaches in the
first Epistle to the 1. Cor. 14.
Corinthians. And in another place, glorifiyng God, with one spirit and mouth:
which can not be when every man and woman in seuerat pretense of devotion,
prays privately, one askyng, another geuyng thanks, another readyng
doctrine, and forces not to hear the common prayer of the minister. And
peculierly, what due reverence is to be used in the ministering of the
Sacraments in the temple, the same saint Paul 1. Cor. 11.
teaches in his Epistle to the Corinthians, rebukyng such as did irreverently
use them selves in that behalf. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in
(says he?) Do ye despise the Church or congregation of God? What shall I say
to you? Shall I praise you? In this I praise you not. And God requires not
only this outward reverence of behavior and scilence in his house, but al
inward reverence in clensing of the thoughts of our hearts, threatening by his
prophet Ose in the. ix. Chapter, that for the malice Ose. 9.
of the inventions and devises of the people, he will cast them out of his
house: whereby is also signified the eternal castyng of them out of his
heavenly house and kingdom, which is most horrible. And therefore in the.
19. of Leuit. God says, Fear you with reverence my sanctuarye, Leui. 19.
for I am the Lord. And according to the same the prophet David says, I will
enter into Psalm. 5.
thine house, I will worship in thy holy temple in thy fear: showing what
inward reverence and humblenes of mind the godly men ought to have in the
house of the Lord. And to allege some what concerning this matter out of the
new Testament, in what honor God would have his house or temple kept, and
that by the example of our savior Christ, whose authority ought of good
reason with all true Christians Mat. 21. Mark. 11. Luke 19. John. 11.
to be of most wayght and estimation: It is written of all the four
Evangelists, as a notable act, and worthy to be testified by many holy
witnesses, how that our savior Jesus Christ, that merciful and mylde Lord,
compared for his meekness to a sheep, suffering with scilence his fleece to
be shorn from him, and to a lamb led Esai. 53. Act. 8.
without resistaunce to the slaughter, which gave his body to them that did
smite him, answered not him that reviled, nor turned away his face from them
that did reproach him and Esai. 50. Mat. 5.
spit upon him, and according to his own example, gave precepts of mildnes
and sufferaunce to his disciples: Yet when he sees the temple and holy house
of his heavenly father misordred, polluted, and profaned, uses great
severity and sharpenes, ouerturneth the tables of thexchaungers, subuerteth
the seats of them that sold doves, makes a whip of cords, and scourges out
those wicked abusers and prophaners of the temple of God, saying, My house
shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. And in
the. ii. of John, Do not ye make John. 2.
the house of my father, the house of marchaundize. For as it is the house of
GOD, when Gods service is duly done in it: So when we wickedly abuse it with
wicked talk or covetous bargayning, we make it a den of thieves, or an house
of marchaundize. Yea, and such reverence would Christ should be therein,
that he would not Mar. 11.
suffer any vessel to be carried through the temple. And where as our saniour
Christ (as is before mentioned out of S. Luke) could be found no where (when
he was sought) but only in the temple amongst the doctors, and now again
exercises his authority and jurisdiction, not in castles and princely
palaces amongst soldiers, but in the temple: Ye may hereby understand in what
place his spiritual kingdom (which he denies to be of this world) is
sonest to be found, and best to be known of all places in this world. And
according to this example of our savior Christ in the primitive Church,
which was most holy and godly, and in the which due discipline with severity
was used against the wicked, open offenders were not suffered once to enter
into the house of the Lord, nor admitted to common prayer, and the use of the
holy Sacraments with other true Christians, until they had done open penance
before the whole Church. And this was practiced, not only upon mean persons,
but also upon the rich, noble, and mighty persons, yea, upon Theodosius that
puissaunt and mighty Emperor, whom for co^mittyng a grievous and wylfull
murder, S. Ambrose Bishop of Millayne reproved sharply, and did also
excommunicate the said Emperor, and brought him to open penance. And they
that were so justly exempted and banished (as it Chrisost.
were) from the house of the Lord, were taken (as they be in deed) for men
divided and separated from Christ's Church, and in most dangerous estate, yea
as S. Paul says, even given ^. Cor. 5.
unto Satan the devil for a time, and their company was shunned and avoided of
all godly men and women, until such time as they by repentance and public
penance were reconciled. Such was the honor of the Lords house in men's
hearts, and outward reverence also at that time, and so horrible a thing was
it to be shut out of the Church and house of the Lord in those days, when
religion was most pure, and nothing so corrupt as it has been of late days.
And yet we wyllyngly, either by absentyng our selves from the house of the
Lord, do (as it were) excommunicate our selves from the Church and fellowship
of the Saints of God, orels coming thither, by uncomely and vnreuerent
behavior there, by hasty, rash, yea unclean and wicked thoughts and words
before the Lord our God, horribly dishonor his holy house the Church of GOD,
and his holy name and majesty, to the great danger of our souls, yea, and
certain damnation also, if we do not spedily and earnestly repent us of this
wickedness.

Thus ye have heard (dearly beloved) out of Gods word, what reverence is due
to the holy house of the Lord, how all godly persons ought with diligence at
times appointed thither to repair, how they ought to behave them selves
there, with reverence and dread before the Lord, what plagues and
punyshementes, as well temporal, as eternal, the Lord in his holy word
threatens, as well to such as neglect to come to his holy house, as also to
such, who coming thither, do irreverently by iesture or talk, there behave
them selves. Wherefore, if we desire to have seasonable weather, and thereby to
enjoy the good fruits of the earth, if we will avoid drought and
barrenness, thirste and hunger, which are plagues threatened unto such as
make haste to go to their own houses, to alehouses, and to tauernes, and leave
the house of the Lord empty and desolate, if we abhor to be scourged, not
with whyppes made of cords, out of the material temple only (as our savior
Christ served the defilers of the house of God in Jerusalem) but also to be
beaten and driven out of the eternal temple and house of the Lord (which is
his heavenly kingdom) with the iron rod of everlasting damnation, and cast
into outter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, if we fear,
dread, and abhor this (I say) as we have most just cause to do: then let us
amend this our negligence and contempt in coming to the house of the Lord,
this our vnreuerent behavior in the house of the Lord, and resortyng thither
diligently together, let us there with reverent hearing of the Lords holy
word, calling on the Lords holy name, giving of hearty thanks unto the
Lord for his manyfolde and inestimable benefits daily and hourly bestowed
upon us, celebrating also reverently of the Lords holy Sacraments, serve the
Lord Epes. 3.
in his holy house, as becomes the servants of the Lord, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, and then we shall be assured,
after this life, to rest in his holy hill, and to dwell in his tabernacle,
there to praise and magnify his holy name in the congregation of his saints,
in the holy house of his eternal kingdom of heaven, which he has purchased
for us, by the death and sheddyng of the precious blood of his son our
savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, one immortal
majesty of GOD, be all honor, glory, praise, and thankesgeuyng, world
without end,

Amen.
An Homily against peril of idolatry, and superfluous decking of Churches.
The first part.
IN what points the true ornaments of the Church or temple of GOD do consiste
and stand, has been declared in the two last Homilies, entreating of the right
use of the temple or house of god, and of the due reverence that all true
Christian people are bound to give unto the same. The sum whereof, is that the
Church or house of God, is a place appointed by the holy scriptures, where ye
lively word of God ought to be read, taught, and heard, the Lords holy name
called upon by public prayer, hearty thanks given to his majesty for his
infinite and unspeakable benefits bestowed upon us, his holy Sacraments duly
and reverently ministered, and that therefore all that be godly in deed, ought
both with diligence at times appointed, to repair together to the said Church,
and there with all reverence to use and behave them selves before the Lord.
And that the said Church thus godly used by the servants of the Lord, in
the Lords true service, for the effectuous presence of Gods grace, wherewith
he does by his holy word and promises, endue his people there present and
assembled, to the attaynement as well of commodities worldly, necessary for us,
as also of all heavenly gifts, and life everlasting; is called by the word of
GOD (as it is in deed) the temple of the Lord, and the house of God, and that
therefore the due reverence thereof, is stirred up in the hearts of the godly,
by the consyderation of these true ornaments of the said house of God, and
not by any outward ceremonies, or costly and glorious deckyng of the said
house or temple of the Lord, contrary to the which most manifest doctrine of
the scriptures, and contrary to the usage of the primitive Church, which was
most pure and vncorrupt, and contrary to the sentences and judgments of the
most ancient learned and godly doctors of the Church (as hereafter shall
appear) the corruption of these latter days, has brought into the Church
infinite multitudes of images, and the same, with other parts of the temple
also, have decked with gold and silver, painted with colors, set them with
stone and pearl, clothed them with silks and precious vestures, phantasyng
untruly that to be the chief deckyng and adournyng of the temple or house of
God, and that all people should be the more moved to the due reverence of the
same, if all corners thereof were glorious, and glisteryng with gold and
precious stones. Whereas in deed they, by the said images, and such glorious
deckyng of the temple, have nothing at all profited such as were wise and of
understanding: but have thereby greatly hurt the simple and unwise, occasionyng
them thereby to commit most horrible idolatry. And the covetous persons, by
the same occasion, seemyng to worship, and peradventure worshippyng in deed,
not only the images, but also the matter of them, gold and silver, as that
vice is of all others in the scriptures peculierly called idolatry or
worshipping of images. Against the which Ephesians. 5. Coloss. 3.
foul abuses and great enormities, shall be alleged unto you: First, the
authority of Gods holy word, as well out of the old Testament, as of the
new. And secondly, the testimonies of the holy and ancient learned fathers and
doctors, out of their own works and ancient histories ecclesiastical, both
that you may at once know their judgments, and withal understand what
manner of ornaments were in the temples in the primative church in those times,
which were most pure and sincere. Thirdly, the reasons and arguments made
for the defense of images or idols, and the outrageous decking of temples and
Churches, with gold, silver, pearl, and precious stone, shall be confuted, and
so this whole matter concluded. But least any should take occasion by the way
of doubtyng by words or names, it is thought good here to note first of all,
that although in common speech we use to call the likeness or similitudes of
men or other things images, and not idols: yet the scriptures use the said
two words (idols and images) indifferently for one thing always. They be words
of diverse tongues and soundes, but one in sense and signification in the
scriptures. The one is taken of the Greek word (...), an idol, and the other
of the Latin word Imago, an image, and so both used as English terms in the
translatyng of scriptures indifferently, according as the Septuaginta have in
their translation in Greek (...), and saint Hierome in his translation of the
same places 1. John. 5.
in Latin has Simulachra, in English, images. And in the new Testament, that
which saint John calls (...), Saint Hierome like wise translateth
Simulacrum, as in all other like places of scripture usually he does so
translate. And Libr. de corona militis.
Tertullian, a most ancient doctor, and well learned in both the tongues,
Greek and Latin, interpretyng this place of Saint John, Beware of idols, that
is to say (says Tertullian) of the images them selves: The Latin words
which he uses, be Effigies and Imago, to say, an image. And therefore it
forces not, whether in this process we use the one term or the other, or
both together, seeing they both (though not in common English speech, yet in
scripture) signify one thing. And though some, to blind men's eyes, have
heretofore craftily gone about to make them to be taken for words of diverse
signification in matters of religion, and have therefore usually named the
likeness or similitude of a thing set up amongst the heathen in their temples
or other places to be worshipped, an idol. But the like similitude with us,
set up in the Church, the place of worshippyng, they call an image, as though
these two words (idol and image) inscripture, did differ in propriety and
sense, which (as is aforesaid) differ only in sound and language, and in
meaning be in deed all one, specially in the scriptures and matters of
religion. And our images also have been, and be, and if they be publicly
suffered in Churches and temples, ever will be also worshipped, and so idolatry
committed to them, as in the last part of this Homily, shall at large be
declared and proved. Wherefore our images in temples and Churches, be in deed
none other but Idols, as unto the which idolatry has been, is, and ever will
be committed.

And first of all, the scriptures of the old Testament, condemnyng and
abhorring as well all idolatry or worshyppyng of images, as also the very idols
or images them selves, specially in temples, are so many and plentiful, that
it were almost an infinite work, and to be contained in no small volume, to
record all the places concerning the same. For when God had chosen to him
self a peculier and special people from amongst all other nations that knew
not God, but worshypped idols and false gods: he gave unto them certain
ordinances and laws, to be kept and observed of his said people. But
concerning none other matter did he give either mo, or more earnest and
express laws to his said people, then those that concerned the true
worshyppyng of him, and the avoiding and fleeyng of idols and images, and
idolatry: for that, that both the said idolatry is most repugnaunt to the
right worshipping of him and his true glory above all other vices, and that he
knew the pronenesse and inclination of man's corrupt kind and nature, to that
most odious and abominable vice. Of the which ordinances and laws so given
by the Lord to his people concerning that matter, I will rehearse and allege
some that be most special for this purpose, that you by them may judge of the
rest.

In the fourth Chapter of the book named Deuteronomie, is a notable place, and
most worthy with all diligence to be marked, which begins Deuteronomy. 4. Number. 23.
thus: And now Israel hear the commandments and judgments which I teach
thee (says the Lord) that thou doing them, may live, and enter and
possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers will give you. Ye shall
put nothing to the word which I speak to you, neither shall ye take any
thing from it. Keep ye the commandments of the Lord your God, which I
command you. And by and by after he repeateth the same sentence three or four
times, before he come to the matter that he would specially warn them of, as
it were for a preface, to make them to take the better heed unto it. Take
heed to thy self (says he) and to thy soul, with all carefulnes, lest thou
forgettest the things which thine eyes have seen, and that they go not out
of thy heart all the days of thy life, thou shall teach them to thy children
and nephues, or posterity. And shortly after, The Lord spoke unto you out of
the middle of fire, but you heard the voice or sound of his words, but you
did see no form or shape at al. And by and by follows, Take heed therefore
diligently unto your souls, you saw no manner of image in the day in the which
the lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the myddest of the fire, least
peradventure, you being deceived, should make to your selves any graven image,
or likeness of man or woman, or the likeness of any beast which is upon
the earth, or of the birds that flee under heaven, or of any creeping thing
that is moved on the earth, or of the fishes that do continue in the waters:
lest paraduenture thou lyftyng up thine eyes to heaven, do see the sun and
the moon, and the stars of heaven, and so thou being deceived by error,
should honor and worship them which the Lord thy God has created to serve
all nations that be under heaven. And again: Beware that thou forget not the
covenant of the Lord thy God, which he made with thee, and so make to thy
self any carved image of them which the Lord has forbidden to be made: for
the Lord thy God is a consumyng fire, and a ielous God. If thou have children
and nephues, and do tarry in the land, and being deceived do make to your
selves any similitude, doing evil before the Lord your GOD, and provoke him to
anger: I do this day call upon heaven and earth to witness, that ye shall
quicklye peryshe out of the land which you shall possess, you shall not
dwell in it any long time, but the Lord will destroy you, and will scatter
you amongst all nations, and ye shall remain but a very few amongst the
nations, whyther the Lord will lead you away, and then shall you serve gods
which are made with man's hands, of wood and stone, which see not, and hear
not, neither eat, nor smell, and so forth. This is a notable Chapter, and
entreats almost altogether of this matter. But because it is to long to
write out the whole, I have noted you certain principal points out of it.
First, how earnestly and often he calls upon them to mark and to take heed,
and that upon the peril of their souls, to the charge which he gives them.
Then, how he forbyddeth by a solemn and long rehearsal of all things in
heaven, in earth, and in the water, any image or lykenes of any thing at all to
be made. Thirdly, what penalty and horrible destruction, he solemly, with
invocation of heaven and earth for record, denounces and threatens to them,
their children, and posterity, if they contrary to this commandment, do make
or worship any images or similitude, which he so straightly has forbidden.
And when they, this notwithstanding, partlye by inclination of man's corrupt
nature most prone to idolatry, and partly occasioned by the Gentiles and
Heathen people dwelling about them, who were idolaters, did fall to the making
and worshyppyng of Images: GOD according to his word, brought upon them all
those plagues which he threatened them with, as appears in the books of the
kings and the Chronacles, in sundry places at large. And agreeable hereunto
are many other notable places in the old Testament. Deuteronomie. xxvii.
Cursed be he that makes a carved image, or a cast or moulten image, which is
abomination before the Lord, the work of the artificers hand, and sets it
up in a secret corner, and all the people shall say Amen.

Read the, xiii. and. xiiii. Chapters of the book of wisdom, concerning
idols or images, how they be made, set up, called upon, and offered unto, and
how he prayseth the tree whereof the gybbet is made, as happy, in comparison
to the tree that an image or idol is made of, even by these very words,
Happy is the tree wherethrough righteousness comes, (meaning the gybbet)
but cursed is the idol that is made with hands: yea, both it, and he that
made it, and so forth. And by and by he shows how that the things which
were the good creatures of God before (as trees or stones) when they be once
altered and fashioned into images to be worshypped, become abomination, a
temptation unto the souls of men, and a snare for the feet of the unwise. And
why? the seeking out of images, is the beginning of whoredom (says he) and
the bryngyng up of them, is the destruction of life: for they were not from the
beginning, neither shall they continue for ever. The welthy idleness of men
has found them out upon earth, therefore shall they come shortly to an
end, and so forth to the end of the Chapter, conteynyng these points: How
idols or images were first invented, and offered unto, how by an ungracious
custom they were establyshed, how tyrauntes compel men to worship them, how
the ignorant and the common people are deceived by the cunnyng of the
workman, and the beawty of the image, to do honor unto it, and so to err
from the knowledge of God, and of other great and many mischefes that come by
images. And for a conclusion he says, that the honoring of abominable
images, is the cause, the beginning, and end of all evil, and that the
worshippers of them be either mad, or most wicked. See and view the whole
Chapter with diligence, for it is worthy to be well considered, specially that
is written of the deceauing of the simple and unwise common people by idols and
images, and repeated twyse or thrice least it should be forgotten. And in the
Chapter Sapi. 15.
following be these words: The paynting of the picture and carved image with
diverse colors, enticeth the ignorant so, that he honors and loves the
picture of a dead image that has no soul. Nevertheless, they that love such
evil things, they that trust in them, they that make them, they that favor
them, and they that honor them, are all worthy of death, and so forth.

In the book of Psalms, the Prophet curses Psalm. 95. Psalm. 1^5 and. 134.
the image honourers in diverse places. Confounded be all they that worship
carved images, and that delight or glory in them. Like be they unto the images
that make them, and al they that put their trust in them.

And in the Prophet Esai, says the Lord: Even I am the Lord, and this is my
name, Esai. 42.
and my glory will I give to none other, neither my honor to graven images.
And by and by: Let them be confounded with shame that trust in idols or images,
or say to them, you are our Gods. And in the. xl. Chapter, after Esai. 11.
he has set forth the incomprehensible majesty of God, he asks to whom
then will ye make God like? Or what similitude will ye set up unto him? Shall
the Caruer make him a carved image? and shall the Goldsmyth cover him with
Gold, and cast him into a form of silver plates? And for the poor man, shall
the image maker frame an image of timber, that he may have somewhat to set up
also? And after this he cries out: O wretches, heard ye never of this? Has
it not ben preached unto you since the beginning, and so forth, how by the
creation of the world, and the greatness of the work, they might understand
the majesty of God, the Creator and Maker of all, to be greater then that it
should be expressed, or set forth in any image or bodilye similitude? And
besides this preaching, even in the law of God written with his own finger
(as the scripture speaks) and that in the first table, and the beginning
Exodus 20.
thereof, is this doctrine aforesaid against images (not breefely touched) but
at large set forth and preached, and that with denuntiation of destruction to
the contemners and breakers of this law, and their posterity Exodus 20. Leuit.
19 Deuteronomy. 5.
after them. And least it should yet not be marked, or not remembered, the same
is written and reported not in one, but in sundry places of the word of God,
that by often readyng and hearing of it, we might once learn and remember it,
as you also hear daily read in the Church, God spoke these words and said,
I am the Lord thy God. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the earth, thou
shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, For I the Lord thy God am a
ielous God, and visit the sin of the fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands, in them that love me and keep my commandments. All this
notwithstanding, neither could the notablenesse of the place, being the very
beginning of the living Lords Law, make us to mark it, nor the plain
declaration by recountyng of all kind of similitudes, cause us to understand
it, nor the often repeating and reportyng of it in diverse and sundry places, the
often readyng and hearing of it could cause us to remember it, nor the dread of
the horrible penalty to our selves, our children and posterity after us,
fear us from transgressing of it, nor the greatness of the reward to us and
our children after us, move us any thing to obedience, and the obseruyng of
this the Lords great law: But as though it had been written in some corner,
and not at large expressed, but breefely and obscurely touched, as though no
penalty to the transgressors, nor reward to the obedient, had been adjoined
unto it, like blind men without all knowledge and understanding, like
unreasonable beasts; without dread of punishment or respect or reward, have
diminished and dishonored the high majesty of the living God, by the
baseness and vileness of sundry and diverse images of dead stocks, stones, and
metals. And as the majesty of God, whom we have left, forsaken, and
dishonored, and therefore the greatness of our sin and offense against his
majesty, can not be expressed: So is the weakness, vileness, and
foolishness in Places of the Scripture against idol^ or image^.
device of the images (whereby we have dishonored him) expressed at large in
the scriptures, namely the Psalms, the book of wisdom, the Prophet Esaias,
Ezechiel, and Baruch, specially in these places and Chapters of them. Psalm.
Cxv. and. Cxxxiiii. Esai. xl. and. xliiii. Ezechiel the. vi. Wisdom. xiii.
xiiii. xv. Baruch vi. The which places, as Jexhort you often and diligently
to read, so are they to long at this present to be rehearsed in an Homilee.
Notwithstanding, I will make you certain brief or short notes out of them,
what they say of these idols or images. First that they be made but of small
pieces of wood, stone, or metal, and therefore they can not be any
similitudes of the great majesty of God, whose seat is heaven, and the earth
his footestoole. Secundarilye, that they be dead, have eyes and see not, hands
and feel not, feet and can not go. etc. and therefore they can not be fit
similitudes of the living God. Thirdely, that they have no power to do good nor
harm to others, though some of them have an axe, some a sword, some a spear
in their hands, yet do thieves come into their Temples and rob them, and
they can not once stur to defend them selves from the thieves: nay if the
Temple or Church be set a fire, that their priests can run away and save
themselves, but they can not once move, but tarry still like blocks as they
are, and be burned, and therefore they can be no meet figures of the puissaunt
and myghtie GOD, who alone is able both to save his servants, and to destroy
his enemies euerlastinglye. They be trimlye decked in Gold, Silver, and Stone,
as well the images of men, as of women, like wanton wenches (says the Prophet
Baruch) that love paramours, Baruc. 6.
and therefore can they not teach us, nor our wives and daughters, any
soberness, modesty, and chastity. And therefore, although it is now
commonly said that they be the lay men's books, yet we see they teach no good
lesson, neither of GOD, nor godliness, but all error and wickedness.
Therefore GOD by his word, as he forbids any idols or images to be made or
set up: so does he command such as we find made and set up, to be pulled
down, broken, and destroyed.

And it is written in the book of Numbers, Number. 2^.
the. xxiii. Chapter, that there was no idol in Jacob, nor there was no image
seen in Israel, and that the Lord God was with that people. Where note, that
the true Israelites, that is, the people of GOD, have no images among them, but
that God was with them, and that therefore their enemies can not hurt them, as
appears in the process of that Chapter. And as concerning images alredye set
up, thus Deuteronomy. 7. and. 12.
says the Lord in Deuteronomie: Ouerturne their aulters, and break them to
pieces, cut down their groves, burn their images: for thou art an holy people
unto the Lord. And the same is repeated more vehemently again in the twelth
Chapter of the same book. Hear note, what the people of God ought to do to
images, where they find them. But least any private persons, upon color of
destroying of images, should make any stir or disturbaunce in the common
wealth, it must always be remembered, that the redress of such public
enormities apparteyneth to the Magistrates, and such as be in authority
only, and not to pryuate persons, and therefore the good kings of Juda, Asa,
Ezechias, Josaphat, and Josias, are hyghly commended for the breakyng down and
destroying of the aulters, idols, and images. 3. Reg. 16. 2. Par. 14. 15. 31.
And the Scriptures declare that they, specially in that point, did that
which was right before the Lord. And contrarywyse, Hieroboam, Achab, Joas,
and other Princes, which either set up, or suffered such aulters or images
undestroyed, are by the word of God reported to have done evil before the
Lord. And if any, contrary to the commandment of the Lord, will needs
set up such aulters or images, or suffer them undestroyed amongst them, the
Lord him self threatens in the syrst Chapter of the book of Numbers, and by
his holy Prophets, Ezechiel, Micheas, and Abacuc, that Number. 1.
he will come him self and pull them down. And now he will handle, punyshe,
and destroy the people that so set up, or suffer such aulters, images, or
idols undestroyed, he denounces by his Prophet Ezechiel on this manner: I my
Ezech. 6.
self (says the Lord) will bring a sword over you, to destroy your high
places, I will cast down your aulters, and break down your images, your
slain men will I lay before your Gods, and the dead karcases of the children
of Israel will I cast before their idolles, your bones will I strowe round
about your aulters and dwelling places, your Cities shall be desolate, the hill
Chappelles laid waste, your aulters destroyed and broken, your gods cast
down and taken away, your Temples laid even with the ground, your own
works clean rooted out, your slain men shall lie amongst you, that ye may
learn to know how that I am the Lord, and so forth to the Chapters end,
worthy with diligence to be read: that they that be near, shall perish with
the sword, they that be far of, with the pestilence, they that flee into
holds or wilderness, with hunger: and if any be yet left, that they shall be
carried away prisoners to servitude and bondage. So that if either the
multitude, or playnenesse of the places might make us to understand, or the
earnest charge that GOD gives in the said places move us to regard, or the
horrible plagues, punyshmentes, and dreadful destruction, threatened to such
worshyppers of images or idols, setters up, or maynteyners of them, might
engender any fear in our hearts, we would once leave and forsake this
wickedness, being in the Lords sight so great an offense and abomination.
Infinite places almost might be brought out of the scriptures of the old
Testament concerning this matter, but these few at this time shall serve for
all.

You will say peradventure these things parteyne to the Jews, what have we to
do with them? Indeed they parteyne no less to us Christians, then to them.
For if we be the people of God, how can the word and law of GOD not
apparteyne to us? Saint Paul alleging one text out of the old Testamente,
concludes generallye for other scriptures of the old Testamente Romans 15.
as well as that, saying, Whatsoever is written before (meaning in the old
Testament) is written for our instruction: which sentence is most specially
true of such wrytynges of the old Testamente as conteyne the immutable law
and ordinances of GOD, in no age or time to be altered, nor of any persons of
any nations or age to be disobeyed, such as the above rehearsed places be.
Notwithstanding, for your further satisfiyng herein, according to my promise, I
will out of the Scriptures of the new Testamente or Gospel of our Savior
Christ, likewise make a confirmation of the said doctrine against idols or
images, and of our duty concerning the same.

First the Scriptures of the new Testament do in sundry places make mention
with rejoicing, as for a most excellent benefit and gift of God, that they
which received the faith of Christ, were turned from their dumb, and dead
images, unto the true and living God, who is to be blessed for ever: namely in
these places, the. xiiii. and. xvii. of the Acts of the Apostles, the. xi. to
the Romans, the first Epistle to the Corinthians the xii. Chapter, to the
Galathians the. iiii. and the first to the Thessalonians, the first Chapter.

And in like wise the said idols or images, and worshyppyng of them, are in the
Scriptures of the new Testament by the spirit of God much abhorred and
detested, and earnestly forbidden, as appears both in the forenamed places,
and also many others besides, as in the. vii. and. xv. of the Acts of the
Apostles, the first to the Romans, where is set forth the horrible plague of
idolaters, given over by God into a reprobate sense, to work all wickedness
and abominations not to be spoken, as vsuallye spiritual and carnal
fornication go together.

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians the fifth Chapter, we are forbidden
once to keep company, or to eat and drink with such as be called brethren
or Christians that do worship images. In the fifth to the Galathians, the
worshippyng of images is numbered amongst the works of the flesh. And in the
first to the Corinthians the tenth, it is called the service of deuilles, and
that such as use it shall be destroyed. And in the. vi. Chapter of the said
Epistle, and the fifth to the Galathians, is denounced, that such image
worshyppers shall never come into the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.
And in sundry other places is threatened, that the wrath of God shall come upon
al such. And therefore. S. John in his ^. John. 5.
Epistle exhorts us as his dear children to beware of images. And. S. Paul
warns us to flee ^. Cor. 10.
from the worshyppyng of them if we be wise, that is to say, if we care for
health and sear destruction, if we regard the kingdom of God, and life
everlasting, and dread the wrath of God and everlasting damnation. For it is
not possible that we should be worshyppers of images, and the true servants
of God also, as. S. Paul teaches, the second to the Corinthians the. vi.
Chapter, affyrming expressly that there can be no more consent or agreement
between the Temple of God (which al true Christians be) and images, then
between righteousness and unrighteous, between light and darkness,
between the faithful and the unfaithful, or between Christ and the devil.
Which place enforces both that we should not worship images, and that we
should not have images in the Temple, for fear and occasion of worshyppyng
them, though they be of them selves things indifferent: For the Christian is
the holy Temple and lively image of God, as the place well declares, to such
as will read and weight it. And where as all godly men did ever abhor that
any kneelyng and worshipping or offering should be used to them selves when
they were alive (for that it was the honor due to God only) as appears in
the Acts of the Apostles by Saint Act. 1^
Peter forbidding it to Cornelius, and by Saint Paul and Barnabas forbiddyng
the same to the Citezins in Lyftra: Yet we like mad men fall Act. 14.
down before the dead idols orimages of Peter and Paul, and give that honor
to stocks and stones, which they thought abominable to be given to them
selves being alive. And the good angel of God, as appears in the book of S.
John's revelation, refused to be kneeled unto, when that honor was offered him
of John: Beware (says the angel) that thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
servant. But the evil angel satan, desires nothing so much as to be
kneeled unto, and thereby at once both to rob God of his due honor, and to
work the damnation of such as make him so low courtesy, as in the storic of
the Gospel appears in sundry places. Yea, and he offered our Savior Christ
all earthly goods, on the condition that he would Mat. 4. Luke. 4.
kneel down and worship him. But our Savior repelleth Satan by the
Scriptures, saying, it is written, Thou shall worship thy Lord God, and him
alone shall thou serve. But we by not worshyppyng and seruyng God alone (as the
Scriptures teaches us) and by worshypping of images, contrary to the
Scriptures, pluck satan to us, and are ready without reward to follow his
desire: yea rather then fail, we will offer him gifts and oblations to
receive our service. But let us, brethren, rather follow the counsel of the
good angel of GOD, then the suggestion of subtle satan, that wicked angel
and old serpent: Who according to the pride whereby he first fell, attempteth
always by such sacrilege to depryue God (whom he enuyeth) of his due honor:
and (because his own face is horrible and vglye) to convey it to himself, by
the mediation of gylte stocks and stones, and withal to make us the enemies
of God, and his own suppliantes and slaves, and in the end, to procure us for
a reward everlasting destruction and damnation. Therefore above all things, if
we take our selves to be Christians in deed (as we be named) let us credit
the word, obey the law, and follow the doctrine and example of our Savior
and master Christ, repelling satan's suggestion to idolatry and worshyppyng
of images, according to the truth alleged and taught out of the Testament and
Gospel of our said heavenly doctor and scholemaister Jesus Christ, who is
God to be bicssed for ever.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee against peril of Idolatry.
YOu have heard (well-beloved) in the first part of this Homilee, the doctrine
of the word of God against idols and images, against idolatry and worshipping
of images, taken out of the scriptures of the old Testament and the new, and
confirmed by the examples as well of the Apostles, as of our Savior Christ him
self. Now although our Savior Christ takes not, or needs not any
testimony of men, and that which is once confirmed by the certainty of his
eternal truth, has no more need of the confirmation of man's doctrine and
wrytinges, then the bright sun at noone tide has need of the light of a
little candle to put away darkness, and to increase his light: yet for your
further contentation, it shall in this second part be declared (as in the
beginning of the first part was promised) that this truth and doctrine
concerning the forbidding of images and worshipping of them, taken out of the
holy Scriptures as well of the old Testament as the new, was believed and
taught of the old holy fathers and most ancient learned Doctors, and received
in the old primative Church, which was most vncorrupt and pure. And this
declaration shall be made out of the said holy Doctors own wrytynges, and out
of the ancient histories ecclesiastical to the same belongyng.

Tertullian, a most ancient writer and Doctor of the Church, who lived about
one hundredth Lib. contra coronandi morem.
and threescore years after the death of our Savior Christ, both in sundry
other places of his works, and specially in his book written against the
manner of crownyng, and in another little treatise entitled, of the souldyers
crown or garlande, does most sharplye and vehementlye write and inuey
against images or idols. And upon S. John's words, the first Eyistle and. v.
Chapter, says thus, Saint John (says he) depelye consydering the matter,
says: My little children, ^. John. 5.
keep your selves from images or idols. He says not now, keep your selves
from idolatry, as it were from the service and worshyppyng of them: but from
the images or idols them selves, that is, from the very shape and lyknes of
them. For it were an un worthy thing that the image of the living God should
become the image of a dead idol. Do not you think, those persons which place
images and idols in Churches and Temples, yea, shryne them even over the Lords
Table, even as it were of purpose to the worshipping and honoring of them,
take good heed to either S. John's counsels or Tertullians? For so to place
images and idols, is it to keep them selves from them, or else to receive and
embrace them?

Clemens in his book to James brother of the Lib. 5. ad Jacob. domini.
Lord, says: What can be so wicked or so unthankful, as to receive a
benefit of God, and to give thanks therefore unto stocks and stones?
Wherefore awake ye, and understand your health, for God has need of no man,
nor requires any thing, nor can be hurt in any thing. But we be they which
are either helped or hurt, in that we be thankful to God, or unthankful.

Origenes in his book against Celsus, says thus: Christian men and Jews,
when they hear these words of the law (Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and shall not make any image) do not only abhor the Temples, aulters, and
images of the gods, but if need be, will rather dye then they should defyle
them selves with any impiety. And shortly after he says: In the common
wealth of the Jews, the caruer of idols and image maker, was cast far of and
forbidden, least they should have any occasion to make images, which might
pluck certain foolish persons from God, and turn the eyes of their souls
to the contemplation of earthly things. And in an other place of the same
book: It is not only (says he) a mad and ^rantike part to worship images,
but also once to dissemble or wynk at it. And a man may know God and his only
son, and those which have had such honor given them by God, that they be
called Gods: But it is not possible that any should by worshypping of images
get any knowledge of God.

Athanasius in his book against the Gentiles, has these words: Let them tell
I pray you, how God may be known by an image. If it be by the matter of an
image, then there needs no shape or form, seeing that God has appeared in
all material creatures which do testify his glory. Now if they say he is
known by the form or fashion: is he not better to be known by the living
things themselves, whose fashions the images express? For of surety, the
glory of God should be more euidentlye known, if it were declared by
reasonable and living creatures, rather then by dead and immovable images.
Therefore when ye do grave or paynte images, to the end to know God thereby,
surely ye do an unworthy and unfit thing. And in an other place of the same
book he says: The invention of images came of no good, but of evil, and
whatsoever has an evil beginning, can never in any thing be judged good,
seeing it is altogether naught. Thus far Athanasius, a very ancient, holy, and
learned Bishop and Doctor, who judges both the first beginning and the end,
and altogether of images or idols, to be naught.

Lactantius likewise an old and learned writer in his book of the Origin of
error, has these words: God is above man, and is not placed beneath, but is
to be sought in the highest region. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that no
religion is in that place wheresoever any image is. For if religion stand in
godly things (and there is no godliness but in heavenly things) then be
images without religion. These be Lactantius Lib. 2. cap. 16.
words, who was above. xiii. hundredth years ago, and within three hundredth
years after our savior Christ.

Cirillus an old and holy doctor, upon the Gospel of Saint John has these
words: Many have left the creator, and have worshypped the creature, neither
have they ben abashed to say unto a stock: thou art my father, and unto a
stone: thou begottest me. For many, yea almost all (alas for sorrow) are fallen
unto such folly, that they have given the glory of deity or God head, to
things without sense or feelyng.

Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cipres, a very holy and learned man, who
lived in Theodosius the Emperors time, about three hundredth and ninety years
after our Savior Christ's ascension, writes this to John Patriarch of
Jerusalem: I entered (says Epiphanius) into a certain Church to pray, I
found there a lynnen cloth hangyng in the Church door, painted, and having
in it the image of Christ, as it were, or of some other Saint (for I remember
not well whose image it was) therefore when I did see the image of a man
hanging in the Church of Christ, contrary to thauethoritie of the scriptures,
I did tear it, and gave council to the kepers of the Church, that they
should wind a poor man that was dead in the said cloth, and so bury him.
And afterward the same Epiphanius sendyng another vnpaynted cloth for that
painted one which he had torn, to the said Patriarche, writes thus, I pray
you will the elders of that place to receive this clothe which I have sent by
this bearer, and command them that from henceforth no such painted clothes,
contrary to our religion, be hanged in the Church of Christ. For it becomes
your goodness rather to have this care, that you take away such scrupulositie,
which is unsitting for the Church of Christ, and offensive to the people
committed to your charge. And this Epistle, as worthy to be read of many, did
saint Jerome him self translate into the Latin tongue. And that ye may know
that saint Jerome had this holy and learned Bishop Epiphanius in most high
estimation, and therefore did translate this Epistle, as a writing of
authority: hear what a testimony the said saint Jerome gives him in
another place in this treaty against the errors of John Bishop of Jerusalem,
where he has these words: Thou have All notable Bishops were then called
P^pes.
(says saint Jerome) Pope Epiphanius, which does openly in his letters call
thee an Ieritike. Surely thou art not to be preferred before him, neither for
age nor learning, nor godliness of life, nor by the testimony of the whole
world. And shortly after in the same treaty says Saint Jerome: Bishop
Epiphanius was ever of so great veneration and estimation, that Valens the
Emperor, who was a great persecutour, did not once touch him. For heritikes
being princes, thought it their shame if they should persecute such a notable
man. And in the trypartite Lib. 9. cap. 48.
ecclesiastical history, the. ix. book and xlviii. Chapter, is testified,
that Epiphanius being yet alive did work miracles, and that after his death,
devils being expelled at his grave or tomb, did rore. Thus you see what
authority saint Jerome and that most ancient history give unto the holy
and learned Bishop Epiphanius, whose judgment of images in Churches and
temples, then beginning by stealth to creep in, is worthy to be noted.

First, he judged it contrary to Christian religion and the authority of the
scriptures, to have any images in Christ's Church. Secondly, he rejected not
only carved, graven, and moulten images, but also painted images out of
Christ's Church. Thirdly, that he regarded not whether it were the image of
Christ, or of any other saint, but being an image, would not suffer it in the
Church. Fourthlye, that he did not only remove it out of the Church, but
with a vehement zeal tare it a sunder, and exhorted that a corse should be
wrapped and buried in it, iudgyng it meet for nothing but to rotte in the
earth, following herein the example of the good king Ezechias, who brake the
brazen serpent to pieces, and burned it to ashes, for that idolatry was
committed to it. Last of al, that Epiphanius thinks it the duty of vigilant
Bishops, to be careful that no images be permitted in the Church, for that
they be occasion of scruple and offense to the people committed to their
charge. Now whereas neither saint Hierome, who did translate the said Epistle,
nor the aucthours of that most ancient history ecclesiastical trypartite
(who do most highly commend Epiphanius as is aforesaid) nor no other godly or
learned Bishop at that time or shortly after, have written any thing against
Epiphanius judgment concerning images: it is an evident proof, that in those
days, which were about four hundredth years after our savior Christ, there
were no images publicly used and received in the Church of Christ, which
was then much less corrupt, and more pure then now it is.

And where as images began at that time secretelye and by stealth to creep out
of private men's houses into the Churches, and that first in painted clothes
and walls: such Bishops as were godly and vigilante, when they espied them,
removed them away, as unlawful and contrary to Christian religion, as did here
Epiphanius, to whose judgment you have not only Saint Jerome the translatour
of his Epistle, and the writer of the History tripartite, but also all the
learned and godly Bishops and Clerks, yea and the whole Church of that age,
and so upward to our savior Christ's time, by the space of about four
hundredth years, consenting and agreeyng. This is written the more largely of
Epiphanius, for that our image maynteyners now a days, seeing them selves so
pressed with this most plain and earnest act and writing of Epiphanius, a
Bishop and doctor of such antiquity, holiness, and authority, labor by
all means (but in vain against the truth) either to prove that this Epistle
was neither of Epiphanius writing, nor saint Ieromes translation: either if it
be, say they, it is of no great forte, for this Epiphanius, say they, was a
Jew, and being converted to the Christian faith, and made a Bishop, retained
the hatred which Jews have to images still in his mind, and so did and wrote
against them as a Jew, rather then as a Christian. O Iewishe impudency and
malice of such deuisers, it would be proved, and not said only, that
Epiphanius was a Jew. Furthermore concerning the reason they make, I would
admit it gladly. For if Epiphanius judgment against images is not to be
admitted, for that he was borne of a Jew an enemy to images, which be Gods
enemies, converted to Christ's religion: then likewise follows it, that no
sentence in the old doctors and fathers soundyng for images, ought to be of
any authority, for that in the primitive Church the most part of learned
writers, as Tertulian, Cip^ian, Ambrose, Austen, and infinite others, were of
Gentiles (which be favorers and worshyppers if images) converted to the
Christian faith, and so let some what slyppe out of their pens sounding for
images, rather as Gentiles then Christians, as Eusebius in his History
ecclesiastical, and saint Jerome says playnelye, that images came first from
the Gentiles to us Christians. And much more does it follow, that the opinion
of all the rablement of the Popyshe Church, mainteyning images, ought to be
esteemed of small or no authority, for that it is no marvel that they which
have from their childhood ben brought up amongst images and idolles, and have
drunk in idolatry almost with their mothers milk, hold with images and
idolles, and speak and write for them. But in deed it would not be so much
marked whether he were of a Jewe or a Gentile converted to Christ's religion,
that writes, as how agreeably or contrarily to Gods word he does write, and
so to credit or discredit him. Now what gods word says of idols and
images, and the worshyppyng of them, you heard at large in the first part of
this Homilee.

Saint Ambrose in his treaty of the death of Theodosius the Emperor, says,
Helene found the cross and the title on it. She worshypped the king, and not
the wood surely (for that is an ethnyshe error, and the vanity of the wicked)
but she worshypped him that hanged on the cross, and whose name was written in
the title, and so forth. See both the godly Empress fact, and saint Ambrose
judgment at once. They thought it had been an Heathenyshe error and vanity of
the wicked, to have worshypped the cross it self which was embrewed with our
savior Christ's own precious blood. And we fall down before every cross
piece of timber, which is but an image of that cross.

Saint Augustine, the best learned of al ancient doctors, in his. xliiii.
Epistle to Maximus says, Know thou that none of the dead, nor any thing that
is made of God, is worshipped as god, of the catholic Christians, of whom
there is a Church also in your town. Note, that by Saint Augustine, such as
worshypped the dead or creatures, be no catholic Christians.

The same saint Augustine teaches in the. xxii. book of the city of God, the
tenth Chapter, that neither temples or Churches ought to be builded or made for
martyrs or saints, but to God alone: and that there ought no priests to be
appointed for martyr or saint, but to God only. The same saint Augustine in
his book of the manners of the catholic Church, has these words: I know
that many be worshippers of tombs and pictures, I know that there be many
that banquet most ryotously over the graves of the dead, and geuyng meat to
dead carkases, do bury them selves upon the buried, and attribute their
gluttonye and drunkenness to religion. See, he esteems worshyppyng of
saints, tombs, and pictures, as good religion as gluttony and drunkenness,
and no bettter at all. Saint Augustine greatly allows Marcus Lib, 4. de
ciuita, dei cap. 4^. In Psalm. 36. and. 113.
Varro, affirming that religion is most pure without images, and says him
self, images be of more force to crooken an unhappy soul, then to teach and
instruct it. And says further: Every child, yea every beast knows that it
is not God that they see. Wherefore then does the holy ghost so often monyshe
us of that which all men know? Whereunto saint Augustine him self answers
thus, For (says he) when images are placed in temples, and set in honorable
sublimitie, and begin once to be worshypped, forth with breeds the most
vile affection of error. This is saint Augustines judgment of images in
Churches: that by and by they breed error and idolatry. It would be to
tedious to rehearse al other places which might be brought out of the ancient
doctors against images and idolatry. Wherefore we shall hold our self
contented with these few at this present. Now as concerning histories
ecclesiastical, touching this matter, that ye may know why and when, and by
whom images were first used privately, and afterward not only received into
the Christians Churches and temples, but in conclusion worshypped also, and how
the same was gaynesayde, resisted, and forbidden, as well by godly Bishops and
learned doctors, as also by sundry Christian princes: I will breefely collect
into a compendious history, that which is at large and in sundry places
written by diverse ancient writers and historiographers concerning this matter.

As the Jews, having most plain and express commandment of God, that they
should neither make nor worship any image (as it is at large before declared)
did notwithstanding, by the example of the Gentyles or Heathen people that
dwelt about them, fall to the making of images, and worshyppyng of them, and so
to the committyng of most abominable idolatry, for the which God by his holy
prophets does most sharply reprove and threaten them, and afterward did
accomplish his said threatenings by extreme punyshyng of them (as is also
above specified) Even so some of the Christians in old time, which were
converted from worshyppyng of idols and false Gods, unto the true living GOD,
and to our savior Jesus Christ, did of a certain blind zeal (and as men
long accustomed to images) paynt or carue images of our savior Christ, his
mother Marie, and of the Apostles, thynkyng that this was a point of gratitude
and kyndenesse toward those by whom they had received the true knowledge of
God, and the doctrine of the Gospel. But these pictures or images came not yet
into Churches, nor were not worshypped of a long time after. And least you
should think that I do say this of mine own head only without authority,
I allege for me Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, and the most ancient aucthour of
the ecclesiastical history, who lived about the, 330. year of our Lord in
Constantinus magnus days, and his son Constantius, Emperors, in the seventh
book of his history ecclesiastical, the xiiii. Chapter, and saint Jerome
upon the, x. Chapter of the prophet Jeremie: who both expressly say, that the
errors of images (for so saint Jerome calls it) has come in and passed to
the Christians from the Gentyles, by an Heathenyshe use and custom. The cause
and means Eusebius she weth, saying, It is no marvel if they which being
Gentiles before, and did believe, seemed to offer this, as a gift unto our
savior, for the benefits which they had received of him. Yea and we do see
no we that images of Peter and Paul, and of our savior him self be made, and
tables to be painted, which me think to have been observed and kept
indifferently by an Heathenishe custom. For the Heathen are wont so to honor
them whom they judged honor worthy, for that some tokens of old men should be
kept. For the remembrance of posterity, is a token of their honor that were
before, and the love of those that come after.

Thus far I have rehearsed Eusebius words. Where note ye, that both saint
Jerome and he agrees herein, that these images came in amongst Christian men
by such as were Gentyles, and accustomed to idols, and being converted to the
faith of Christ, retained yet some remnauntes of gentilitie not throughlye
purges: For saint Jerome calls it an error manifestlye. And the like
example we see in the Acts of the Apostles, of the Jews, who when Acts. 15.
they were converted to Christ, would have brought in their circumcision
(whereunto they were so long accustomed) with them, into Christ's religion.
With whom the Apostles (namelye saint Paul) had much ado for the staying of
that matter. But of circumcision was less marvel, for that it came first in
by Gods ordinance and commandment. A man may most justly wonder of images,
so directly against gods holy word and straight commandment, how they should
enter in. But images were not yet worshypped in Eusebius time, nor publicly
set up in Churches and temples, and they who privately had them, did err of a
certain zeal, and not by malice: but afterward they crepte out of private
houses into Churches, and so bread first superstition, and last of all
idolatry amongst Christians, as hereafter shall appear.

In the time of Theodosius and Martian Emperors, who reigned about the year of
our Lord 460. and. 1100. years ago, when the people of the city of Nola once
a year did celebrate the birth day of saint Felix in the temple, and used to
banquet there sumptuouslye, Pontius Paulinus Bishop of Nola caused the walls
of the temple to be painted with stories taken out of the old Testament, that
the people beholding and consyderyng those pictures, might the better abstain
from to much surfeiting and riot. And about the same time Aurelius Prudentius,
a very learned and Christian poet, declares how he did see painted in a
Church, the history of the passion of saint Cassian, a scoolemaister and
martyr, whom his own scollers at the commandment of the tyrant, tormented
with the pryckyng or stabbing in of their poyntelles or brazen pens into his
body, and so by a thousand wounds and mo (as says Prudentius) most cruelly
slew him. And these were the first payntings in Churches that were notable of
antiquity. And so by this example came in painting, and afterward images of
timber and stone, and other matter, into the Churches of Christians. Now and
ye will consider this beginning, men are not so redye to worship a picture on
a wall, or in a wyndowe, as an embossed and gylte image set with pearl and
stone. And a process of a story, painted with the gestures and actions of
many persons, and commonly the sum of the story written withal, has
another use in it, then one dumb idol or image standing by it self. But from
learning by painted stories, it came by little and little to idolatry. Which
when godly men (as well Emperors and learned Bishops, as others) perceived,
they commanded that such pyctures, images, or idols, should be used no more.
And I will for a declaration thereof, begin with the decree of the ancient
Christian Emperors, Valens, and Theodosius the second, who reigned about
four hundredth years after our savior Christ's ascension, who forbad that any
images should be made or painted priuatelye. For certain it is, that there
was none in temples publicly in their time. These Emperors did write unto
the captain of the army attendyng on the Emperors, after this sort, Valens
and Theodosius Emperors, unto the captain of the army: Whereas we have a
diligent care to maynteyne the religion of GOD above, in all things: We will
grant to no man to set forth, grave, carue, or paynt the image of our savior
Christ in colors, stone, or any other matter, but in what place soever it
shall be found, we command that it be taken away, and that all such as shall
attempt any thing contrary to our decrees or commandment herein, shall be
most sharply punished. This decree is written in the books, named Libri
Augustales, the Emperial books, gathered by Tribunianus, Basilides, Theophilus,
Dioscorus, and Satira, men of great authority and learning, at the
commandment of the Emperor Iustiniane, and is alleged by Petrus Erinilus, a
notable learned man, in the. ix. book and. ix. Chapter of his work,
entitled, De honesta disciplina, that is to say, of honest learning. Hear you
see what Christian princes of most ancient times decreed against images,
which then began to creep in amongst the Christians. For it is certain that
by the space of three hundredth years and more, after the death of our savior
Christ, and before these godly Emperors reign, there were no images
publicly in Churches or temples. How would the idolaters glory, if they had
so much antiquity and authority for them, as is here against them?

Now shortly after these days, the Goths, Uandales, Hunnes, and other
barberous and wicked nations, burst into Italy, and all parts of the
westcountreyes of Europe, with huge and mighty armies, spoiled all places,
destroyed Cities, and burned Libraries, so that learning and true religion went
to wrack, and decayed incrediblye. And so the Bishops of those latter days,
being of less learning, and in the myddest of wars, taking less heed also
then did the Bishops before, by ignorance of Gods word, and negligence of
Bishops, and specially barbarous princes, not ryghtly instructed in true
religion, bearyng the rule, images came into the Church of Christ in the said
west parts, where these barbarous people ruled, not now in painted clothes
only, but embossed in stone, timber, metal, and other like matter, and were
not only set up, but began to be worshypped also. And therefore Serenus
Bishop of Massile the head town of Gallia Narbonensis (now called the
Province) a godly and learned man, who was about six hundredth years after our
savior Christ, seeing the people by occasion of images fall to most abominable
idolatry, brake to pieces all the images of Christ and saints which were in
that city, and was therefore complained upon to Gregory, the first of that
name Bishop of Rome, who was the first learned Bishop that did allow the open
having of images in Churches, that can be known by any writing or history of
antiquity. And upon this Gregory do all image worshyppers at this day ground
their defense. But as all things that be amysse, have from a tolerable
beginning grown worse and worse, till they at the last became intolerable: So
did this matter of images. First, men used privately stories painted in
tables, clothes, and walls. Afterward, gross and embossed images privately
in their own houses. Then afterward, pictures first, and after them embossed
images began to creep into Churches: learned and godly men ever speaking
against them. Then by use it was openly mayneteyned that they might be in
Churches: but yet forbidden that they should be worshypped. Of which opinion
was Gregory, as by the said Gregory's Epistle to the forenamed Serenus Bishop
of Massile, plainly appears. Which Epistle is to be found in the book of
the Epistles of Gregorye, or Register, in the tenth part of the fourth Epistle,
where he has these words: That thou did forbid images to be worshipped,
we praise altogether, but that thou did break them, we blame. For it is
one thing to worship the pycture, and another thing by the pycture of the
story, to learn what is to be worshypped. For that which scripture is to
them that read, the same does picture perform unto idiottes or the
unlearned, beholding, and so forth. And after a few words: therefore it
should not have been broken, which was set up, not to be worshipped in
Churches, but only to instruct the minds of the ignorant. And a little after,
thus thou should have said, If you will have images in the Church for that
instruction wherefore they were made in old time, I do permit that they may be
made, and that you may have them. And show them, that not the sight of the
story, which is opened by the picture: but that worshyppyng which was
inconueniently given to the pictures, did mistike you. And if any would make
images, not to forbid them: but avoid by all means to worship any image. By
these sentences taken here and there out of Gregory's Epistle to Serenus (for
it were to long to rehearse the whole) ye may understand whereunto the matter
was now come. vi. hundredth years after Christ: that the having of images or
pyctures in the Churches, were then maynteyned in the west part of the world
(for they were not so froward yet in the east Church) but the worshyppyng of
them was utterly forbidden. And you may withal note, that seeing there is no
ground for worshyppyng of images in Gregory's writing, but a plain
condemnation thereof, that such as do worship images, do unjustly allege
Gregory for them. And further, if images in the Church do not teachemen
according to Gregory's mind, but rather blind them: it follows, that images
should not be in the Church by his sentence, who only would they should be
placed there, to the end that they might teach the ignorant. Wherefore, if
it be declared that images have been and be worshypped, and also that they
teach nothing but errors and lies (which shall by Gods grace hereafter be
done) I trust that then by Gregory's own determination, al images and image
worshippers shall be overthrown. But in the mean season, Gregory's authority
was so great in all the west Church, that by his encouragement, men set up
images in all places: but their judgment was not so good to consider why he
would have them set up, but they fell all on heaps to manifest idolatry by
worshyppyng of them, which Bishop Serenus (not without just cause) feared
would come to pass. Now if Serenus his judgment, thinking it meet that
images whereunto idolatry was committed, should be destroyed, had taken place,
idolatry had been overthrown: For to that which is not, no man commits
idolatry. But of Gregory's opinion, thynkyng that images might be suffered in
churches. so it were taught that they should not be worshipped: what ruin of
religion, and what myschiefe insued afterward to all Christendom, experience
has to our great hurt and sorrow proved. First, by the scisme rising between
the East and the West Church about the said images. Next, by the division of
the Empire into two parts by the same occasion of images, to the great
weakening of all Christendom, whereby last of all, has followed the utter
overthrow of the christian religion and noble empire in Greece and all the east
parts of the world, and the increase of Mahomets false religion, and the
cruel dominion and tyranny of the Sarasens and Turks, who do now hang over
our necks also that dwell in the west parts of the world, ready at all
occasions to ouerrunne us. And all this do we owe unto our idols and images,
and our idolatry in worshipping of them.

But now give you ear a little to the process of the history, wherein I do
much follow the histories of Paulus Diaconus, and others, joined with Eutropius
an old writer. For though some of the Eutrop. li. de rebus. Romans 23
aucthours were favorers of images: yet do they most plainly and at large
prosecute the histories of those times, whom Baptist Platina also Platina in
vitis Constantini and Grego. ii.
in his history of Popes, as in the lives of Constantine, and Gregory the
second, bishops of Rome, and other places (where he entreats of this
matter) does chieflye follow. After Gregory's time, Constantine bishop of Rome
assembled a council of bishops in the west Church, and did condemn
Philippicus then emperor, and John bishop of Constantinople, of the heresy of
the Monothelites, not without a cause in deed, but very justly. When he had so
done, by the consent of the learned about him, the said Constantine Bishop of
Rome, caused the images of the ancient fathers which had been at those six
councels which were allowed and received of all men, to be painted in the entry
of saint Peter's Church at Rome. When the Greeks had knowledge hereof, they
began to dispute and reason the matter of images with the Latins, and held
this opinion, that images could have no place in Christ's Church, and the
Latins held the contrary, and took part with the images. So the east and
west Churches which agreed evil before, upon this contention about images fell
to utter enmity, which was never well reconciled yet. But in the mean season
Philippicus and Arthemius, or Anastasius Emperors, commanded images and
pictures to be pulled down, and rased out in every place of their dominion.
After them came Theodosius the third: he commanded the defaced images to be
painted again in their places: but this Theodosius reigned but one year. Leo
the third of that name succeeded him, who was a Syrian borne, a very wise,
godly, merciful, and valiant prince. This Leo by proclamation commanded,
that al images set up in churches to be worshipped, should be plucked down and
defaced: and required specially the bishop of Rome that he should do the same,
and himself in the mean season caused all images that were in the imperial
city Constantinople, to be gathered on an heap in the midst of the city,
and there publicly burned them to ashes, and whyted over, and rased out al
pictures painted upon the walls of the temples, and punished sharply diverse
maynteyners of images. And when some did therefore report him to be a tyrant,
he answered, that such of al other were most justly punished, which neither
worshipped God aryght, nor regarded the imperial majesty and authority, but
malicioustie rebelled against wholesome and profitable laws. When Gregorius, the
third of that name bishop of Rome, heard of the Emperors doings in Greece
concerning images, he assembled a council of Italian Bishops against him, and
there made decrees for Images, and that more reverence and honor should yet
be given to them then was before, and stirred up the Italians against the
Emperor, first at Rauenna, and moned them to rebellion. And as Aspurgensis and
Anthonius Bishop of Florence testify in their Cronicles, he caused Rome and
all Italy at the last to refuse their obedience and the payment of any more
tribute to ye Emperor: and so by treason and rebellion maynteyned their
idolatry. Which example, other bishops Treason (...) rebellion for the
de^^^^^ (...) images.
of Rome have continually followed, and gone through with all most stoutly.

After this Leo, which reigned. xxxiiii. years, succeeded his son Constantine
the fifth, who after his fathers example, kept images out of the temples. And
being moved with the council which Gregory had assembled in Italy for
images against his father: he also assembled a council of all the learned men
and Bishops of Asia and Greece, although some writers place this council in
Leo Isauricus his fathers latter days. In this great assemble they sat in
council from the fourth of the Idus of Februarye, to the sixth of the Idus of
August, and made concerning the (...) co(...) against Images.
use of images this decree. It is not lawful for them that believe in God,
through Jesus Christ, to have any images, neither of the creator, nor of any
creatures, set up in temples to be worshipped: but rather that all images by
the law of God, and for the avoiding of offense, ought to be taken out of the
Churches. And this decree was executed in all places where any images were
found in Asia or Greece. And the Emperor sent the determination of this
council holden at Constantinople, to Paul then Bishop of Rome, and commanded
him to cast all images out of the Churches: which he (trusting in the
friendship of Pipine a mighty prince) refused to do. And both he and his
successor Stephanus the third (who assembled another council in Italy for
images) condemned the Emperor and the council of Constantinople of heresy,
and made a decree that the holy images (for so they called them) of Christ,
the blessed Uirgin, and other saints, were in deed worthy honor and
worshipping. When Constantine was dead, Leo the fourth his son reigned after
him, who married a woman of the city of Athens named Theodora, ^
who also was called Hyrene, by whom he had a son named Constantine the
sixth, and dying whylest his son was yet young, left the regiment of the
empire and governance of his young son to his wife Hyrene. These things
were done in the Church about the year of our Lord 760. Note here I pray you
in this process of the story, that in the Churches of Asia and Greece, there
were no images publicly by the space of almost seven hundred years. And
there is no doubt but the primitive Church next the Apostles time was most
pure. Note also, that when the contention began about images, how of six
Christian Emperors, who were the chief magistrates by Gods law to be obeyed,
only one, which was Theodosius, who reigned but one year, held with images.
All the other Emperors, and all the learned men and Bishops of the East
Church, and that in assembled councels, condemned them, besides the two
Emperors before mentioned, Valen^, and Theodosius the second, who were long
before these times, who strayghtly forbad that any Images should be made. And
universally after this time, all the emperors of Greece (only Theodosius
excepted) destroyed continually all images. Now on the contrary part, note
ye, that the Bishops of Rome, being no ordinary magistrates appointed of
God, out of their diocese, but usurpers of princes authority contrary to
gods word, were the mainteyners of images against Gods word, and stirrers up of
sedition and rebellion, and workers of continual treason against their
sovereign Lords, contrary to gods law and the ordinances of all humane
laws, being not only enemies to God, but also rebels and traitors against
their Princes. These be the first bringers in of images openly into Churches,
these be the mainteiners of them in the Churches, and these be the means
whereby they have maynteyned them ^to wit, conspiracy, treason, and rebellion
against God and their princes. Now to proceed in the history, most worthy
to be known. In the nonage of Constantine the sixth, the Empress Hyrene his
mother, in whose hands the regiment of the Empire remained, was governed much
by the advise of Theodore Bishop, and Tharasius patriarche of Constantinople,
who practiced and held with ye Bishop of Rome in mainteining of images most
earnestly: By whose council and entreatie, the Empress first most wickedly
dug up the body of her father in law Constantine the fifth, and commanded
it to be openly burned, and the ashes to be thrown into the sea. Which
example (as the constant report goes) had like to have been put in practice
with Princes corses in our days, had the authority of the holy father
continued but a little longer. The cause why the Empress Hyrene thus used her
father in law, was, for that he when he was alive had destroyed images, and
had taken away the sumptuous ornaments of Churches, saying that Christ, whose
temples they were, allowed poverty, and not pearls and precious stones.
Afterward the said Hyrene, at the persuasion of Adrian bishop of Rome, and Paul
the patriarch of Constantinople and his successor Tharasius, assembled a
council of the bishops of Asia and Greece, at the city Nicea, where the bishop
of Romes legares, being presidentes of the council, and ordring all things as
they listed: the counsel which was assembled before under the Emperor
Constantine the fifth, and had decreed that all images should be destroyed, was
condemned as an heretical council and assemble: And a decree was made, that
images should be set up in all the Churches of Greece, and that honor and
worship also (...) images (...) be worshipped.
should be given unto the said images. And so the Empress, sparing no
diligence in setting up of Images, nor cost in decking them in all churches,
made Constantinople within a short time altogether like Rome it self. And now
you may see that cummen to pass which Bishop Serenus feared, and Gregory the
first forbad in vain: to wit, that Images should in no wise be worshipped. For
now not only the simple and unwise (unto whom Images, as the scriptures
teach, be specially a snare) but the bishops and learned men also, fall to
idolatry by occasion of images, yea and make decrees and laws for the
mayntenaunce of the same. So hard is it, and in deed impossible any long time
to have images publicly in churches and temples without idolatry, as by the
space of little more then one hundred years betwixt Gregori the first,
forbidding most strayghtly the worshipping of images, and Gregory the third,
Paul, and Leo the third, Bishops of Rome, with this council commanding and
decreeing that images should be worshipped, most evidently appears.

Now when Constantine the young Emperor came to the age of twenty years,
he was daily in less and less estimation: for such as were about his mother,
persuaded her that it was Gods determination that she should reign alone, and
not her son with her. The ambitious woman believing the same, depryued her
son of all imperial dignity, and compelled all the men of war, with their
Capitaynes, to swear to her that they would not suffer her son Constantine
to reign during her life. With which indignity the young Prince being moved,
recovered the regiment of the Empire unto him self by force, and being brought
up in true religion in his fathers time, seeing the superstition of his mother
Hyrene, and the Idolatry committed by images, cast down, brake, and burned al
ye idols and images that his mother had set up. But within a few years after,
Hyrene the Empress, taken again into her sons favor, after she had
persuaded him to put out Nycephorus his uncles eyes, and to cut out the tounges
of his four other uncles, and to forsake his wife, and by such means to
bring him in hatred with all his subjects: now further to declare that she
was no chaungeling, but the same woman that had before dug up and burned her
father in laws body, and that she would be as natural a mother as she had
been kind daughter, seeing the images which she loved so well, and had with so
great cost set up, daily destroyed by her son the Emperor: by the help of
certain good companions, deprived her son of the Empire: And first, like a
kind and loving mother, put out both his eyes, and laid him in prison, where
after long and many torments, she at the last most cruelly (...)ue him. In
this history joined to Eutropius it is written, that the sun was darkened by
the space of xvii. days most strangely and dreadfully, and that all men said,
that for the horriblenes of that cruel and unnatural fact of Hyrene, and the
putting out of the Emperors eyes, the sun had lost his light. But in deed,
God would signify by the darkness of the sun, into what darkness and
blindenes of ignorance and idolatry all christendom should fall by the
occasion of images. The bright sun of his eternal truth and light of his
holy word, by the mistes and black clouds of men's traditions being blemished
and darkened, as by sundry most terrible earthquakes that happened about the
same time, God signified, that the quiet estate of true religion, should by
such idolatry be most horribly tossed and turmoyled. And here may you see what
a gracious and virtuous lady this Hyrene was, how loving a niece to her
husbands uncles, how kind a mother in law to her sons wife, how loving a
daughter to her father in law, how natural a mother to her own son, and
what a stout and valiant Captain the Bishops of Rome had of her, for the
setting up and maintenance of their idols or images. Surely, they could not
have found a meeter patron for the maintenance of such a matter, then this
Hyrene, whose ambition and desire of rule was insatiable, whose treason
continually studied and wrought was most abominable, whose wicked and
unnatural cruelty passed Medea and Progne, whose detestable paricides have
ministered matter to Poets to write their horrible tragidies. And yet certain
Historiographers, who do put in writing all these her horrible wickedness, for
love they had to images, which she maintained, do praise her as a godly
Empress, and as sent from God. Such is the blyndnes of false superstition, if
it once take possession in a man's mind, that it will both declare the vices of
wicked princes, and also commend them. But not long after, the said Hyrene
being suspected to the princes and lords of Greece of treason, in alienating
the Empire to Charles king of the Francons, and for practicing a secret
marriage between herself and the said king, and being convicted of the same,
was by the said Lords deposed and deprived again of the Empire, and carried
into exile into the Island Lesbos, where she ended her leude life.

Whiles these tragidies about Images were thus in workyng in Greece, the same
question of ye use of images in churches began to be moved in Spain also. And
at Eliberi, a noble city, now called Granate, was a council of Spanishe
Bishops Anoth^^ council against ^^^^es.
and other learned men assembled, and there, after long deliberation and
debating of the matter, it was concluded at length of the whole council after
this sort, in the 36. article.

We think that pictures ought not to be in Churches, least that which is
honored or worshipped (...) of the c(...)ell aga(...) (...).
be painted on walls. And in the. xli. Canon of that council it is thus
written: We thought good to admonish the faithful, that as much as in them
lies, they suffer no images to be in their houses, but if they fear any
violence of their servants, at the least let them keep themselves clean and
pure from images, if they do not so, let them be accounted as none of the
Church. Note here I pray you, how a whole and great country in the West and
South parts of Europe, nearer to Rome a great deal then to Greece in situatio^
of place, do agree with the Greeks against images, and do not only forbid them
in churches, but also in private houses, and do excommunicate them that do the
contrary: and another council of the learned men of all Spain also, called
Concilium Toletanum yet ^n ^th^^ counsel (...) gaynst (...)
duodecimum, decreed and determined likewise against images and image
worshippers. But when these decrees of the Spanishe council at Eliberi came to
the knowledge of the bishop of Rome and his adherents, they fearyng least al
Germany also would decree against images, and forsake them, thought to prevent
the matter, and by the consent and help of the Prince of Francons (whose power
was then most great in the West parts of the world) assembled a counsel of
Germans at Frankford, and there procured the spanishe council against images,
before mentioned, to be condemned by the name of the Foelician heresy, (for
that Foelix Bishop of Aquitania was chief in that council) and obtained that
the acts of the second Nicene counsel, as^e^bled by Hyrene (the holy Empress
whom ye heard of before) and the sentence of the bishop of Rome for images,
might be received. For much after this sort do the papists report of the
history of the council of Frankforde. Notwithstanding the book of Carolus
magnus his own writing, as the title shows, which is now put in print, and
commonly in men's hands, shows the judgment of that prince, and of the whole
council of Frankforde also, to be against images, and against the second
council of Nice assembled by Hyrene for images, and calls it an arrogant,
foolish, and ungodly council, and declares the assemble of the council of
Frankforde, to have been directly made and gathered against that Nicene
council, and the errors of the same. So that it must needs follow, that
either there were in one princes time two councels assembled at Frankforde, one
contrary to another, which by no history does appear, or else that after
their custom, the Popes and Papists have most shamefully corrupted that
council, as their manner is to handle, not only councels, but also all
histories and wrytinges of the old Doctors, falsifiyng and corrupting them
for the mayntenaunce of their wicked and ungodly purposes, as has in times of
late come to light, and does in our days more and more continuallye appear
most evidently. Let the forged gift of Constantine, ^he ^o^g^d gift of
Constantine. etc.
and the notable attempt to falsify the first Nicene council for the Popes
supremacy, Nicene council like to be ^alsitied.
practiced by Popes in Saint Augustines time, be a witness hereof: which
practice in deed had then taken effect, had not the diligence and wisdom of
saint Augustine and other learned and godly bishops in A(...)rike, by their
great labor and charges also resisted and stopped the same. Now to come
toward an end of this history, and to show you the principal point that
came to pass by the maintenance of images: Where as from Constantinus Magnus
time until that day, al authority imperial and princely dominion of the
empire of Rome, remained continually in the right and possession of the
Emperors, who had their continuance and seat imperial at Constantinople the
city royal.

Leo the third, then Bishop of Rome, seeing the Greek Emperors so vent against
his Gods of gold and silver, timber and stone, and having the king of the
Francons or Frenchemen, named Charles, whose power was exceeding great in the
west countries, very appliable to his mind, for causes here after appearing:
under the pretense that they of Constantinople were for that matter of images
under the Popes ban and curse, and therefore unworthy to be emperors, or to
bear rule, and for that the emperors of Greece being far of, were not redye
at a beche to defend the Pope against the Lumbardes his enemies, and other
with whom he had variaunce: This Leo the third, I say, attempted a thing
exceeding strange and unheard of before, and of incredible boldness and
presumption: For he by his papal authority, does translate the government
of the Empire, and the crown and name imperial from the Greeks, and gives
it unto Charles the great, king of the Francons, not with out the consent of
the forenamed Hyrene empress of Greece, who also sought to be joined in marriage
with the said Charles. For the which cause, the said Hyrene was by the Lords
of Greece deposed and banished, as one that had betrayed the empire, as ye
before have heard. And the said princes of Greece did, after the deprivation of
the said Hyrene, by common consent, elect and create (as they always had
done) an Emperor, named Nycaephorus, whom the Bishop of Rome and they of the
west would not acknowledge for their Emperor, for they had already created them
another: and so there became two Emperors. And the empire which was before
one, was divided into two parts, upon occasion of idols and images, and the
worshipping These things were done about the 803. year of our Lord.
of them: Even as the kingdom of the Israelites was in old time for the like
cause of Idolatry divided in King Roboam his time. And so the Bishop of Rome
having the favor of Charles the great by this means assured to him, was
wonderously enhaunced in power and authority, and did in all the west Church
(specially in Italy) what he lust, where images were set up, garnished, and
worshipped of al sorts of men. But images were not so fast set up, and so much
honored in Italy and the west: but Nycaephorus emperor of Constantinople,
and his successors Scauratius, the two Michaels, Leo, Theophilus, and other
emperors their successors in Or Staura ^ius.
the empire of Greece, continually pulled them down, brake them, burned them,
and destroyed them as fast. And when Theodorus Emperor, would at the council
of Lions have agreed with the Bishop of Rome, and have set up images: he was by
the nobles of the empire of Greece deprived, and another chosen in his place:
and so rose agelousie, suspicion, grudge, hatred, and enmity between the
christians and empires of the East countries and west, which could never be
quenched nor pacified. So that when the Sarasens first, and afterward the
Turks, invaded the Christians: the one part of christendom would not help
the other. By reason whereof, at the last, the noble empire of Greece, and the
city imperial Constantinople was lost, and is come into the hands of the
infidels, who now have ouerrunne almost all christendom, and possessing past
the middle of Hungary, which is part of the west empire, do hang over all our
heads, to the utter danger of all christendom.

Thus we see what a sea of mischiefs the maintenance of images has brought
with it, what an horrible scisme between the east and the west Church, what
an hatred between one christian and another, councels against councels, church
against church, christians against christians, princes against princes,
rebellions, treasons, unnatural and most cruel murders, the daughter digging
up and burning her father the Emperors body, the mother for love of idols
most abominably murdering her own son being an Emperor, at the last, the
tearing in sunder of Christendom and the empire into two pieces, till the
Infidels, Sarasens, and Turks, common enemies to both parts have most
cruellye vanquished, destroyed, and subdued the one part, the whole empire of
Greece, Asia the less, Thrasia, Macedonia, Epirus, and many other great and
goodlye countries and provinces, and have won a great piece of the other
empire, and put the whole in dreadful fear and most horrible danger. For it
is not without a just and great cause to be dread, least as the Empire of Rome
was even for the like cause of images and the worshyppyng of them torn in
pieces and divided, as was for Idolatry the kingdom of Israel in old time
divided: so like punishment, as for the like offense fell upon the Jews, will
also light upon us: That is, least the cruel tyrant and enemy of our common
wealth and religion the Turk, by Gods just vengeance, in likewise partly
murder, and partly lead away into captivity us christians, as did the
Assyrian and Babylonian kings murder and lead away the Israelites: and least
the empire of Rome and christian religion be so utterly brought under foot, as
was then the kingdom of Israel and true religion of God, whereunto the matter
already (as I have declared) shrewdlye inclyneth on our part, the greater part
of christendom within less then three hundredth years space, being brought
into captivity and most miserable thraldom under the Turk, and the noble
empire of Greece clean euerted. Whereas if the christians, divided by these
image matters, had holden together, no Infidels and miscreauntes could thus
have prevailed against christendom. And all this mischief and misery, which
we have hitherto fallen into, do we owe to our mighty gods of gold and silver,
stock and stone, in whose help and defense (where they can not help them
selves) we have trusted so long, until our enemies the Infidels have overcome
and over run us almost altogether. A just reward for those that have left
the myghtie living God, the Lord of hosts, and have stopped and given the
honor due to him, to dead blocks and stocks, who have eyes and see not,
cares and hear not, feet and can not go, and so forth, and are cursed of
God, and all they that make them, and that put their trust in them.

Thus you understand (well-beloved in ou^ Savior Christ) by the judgment of
the old learned and godly Doctors of the Church, and by ancient histories
Ecclesiastical, agreeyng to the verity of Gods word, aleaged out of the old
Testament and the new, that images and image worshyppyng, were in the
primative Church (which was most pure and vncorrupt) abhorred and detested,
as abominable and contrary to true Christian religion: And that when images
began to creep into the Church, they were not only spoken and written
against by godly and learned Bishops, Doctors, and Clerks, but also
condemned by whole counselles of Bishops and learned men assembled together,
yea, the said images by many Christian Emperors and Byshopyes, were defaced,
broken, and destroyed, and that above. vii. C. and viii. C. years ago, and that
therefore it is not of late bays (as some would bear you in hand) that
images and image worshyppyng have been spoken and written against. Finally you
have heard what mischief and misery has by the occasion of the said images,
fallen upon whole Christendom, besides the loss of infinite souls, which is
most horrible of all. Wherefore let us beseech God that we being warned by his
holy word, forbidding all idolatry, and by the wrytynges of old godly
Doctors and ecclesiastical histories written, and preserved by Gods
ordinance for our admonition and warnyng, may flee from all idolatry, and so
escape the horrible punishment and plagues, as well worldly, as everlasting,
threatened for the same, which God our heavenly father grant us, for our only
Savior and Mediator Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
The third part of the Homilee against images and the worshipping of them,
containing the confutation of the principal arguments which are used to be
made for the mayntenaunce of images. Which part may serve to instruct the
Curates them selves, or men of good understanding.
Now ye have heard how plainelye, how vehementlye, and that in many places,
the word of God speaks against not only idolatry and worshipping of
images, but also against idols and images them selves: (I mean always thus
herein, in that we be stirred and provoked by them to worship them, and not as
though they were simply forbidden by the new Testament, without suth occasion
and danger) And ye have heard likewise out of histories Ecclesiastical, the
beginning, proceedyng, and success of idolatry by images, and the great
contention in the Church of Christ about them, to the great trouble and decay
of Christendom: and withal ye have heard the sentences of old ancient
fathers and godly learned Doctors and Bishops against images and idolatry,
taken out of their own wrytynges. It remains, that such reasons as be made
for the maintenance of images, and excessyue payntyng, gyldyng, and deckyng,
as well of them, as of the Temples or Churches, also be answered and confuted,
partly by application of some places before alleged, to their reasons, and
partly by otherwise aunswering the same. Which part has the last place in this
treatise, for that it can not be well understood of the meaner sort, nor the
arguments of image maynteyners, can without prolixitie to much tedious, be
answered without the knowledge of the treatise going before. And although
diverse things before mentioned, be here rehearsed again: yet this repetition
is not superfluous, but in a manner necessary, for that the simple sort can
notels understand how the foresaid places are to be applied to the arguments
of such as do maynteyne images, wherewith otherwise they might be abused.

First, it is alleged by them that maynteyne images that all laws,
prohibitions, and curses, noted by us out of the holy Scripture, and sentences
of the Doctors also by us alleged, against images and the worshyppyng of
them, apparteyne to the idolles of the Gentiles or Pagans, as the idol of
Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, etc. and not to our images of God, of Christ, and his
Saints. But it shall be declared both by Gods word, and the sentences of the
ancient Doctors, and judgment of the primative Church, that all images,
as well ours, as the idolles of the Gentiles, be forbidden and unlawful, namely
in Churches and temples. And first this is to be replied out of Gods word,
that the images of God the father, the son, and the holy ghost, either
severally, or the images of the Trinity, which we had in every Church, be by
the Scriptures expressly and directly forbidden, and condemned, as appears by
these places: The Lord spoke unto you out of the middle of fire, you heard
the voice or sound of his words, but ^.
you did see no form or shape at all, least peradventure you being deceived,
should make to your self any graven image or likeness, and so forth, as is
at large rehearsed in the first part of this treaty against images. And
therefore in the old law, the middle of the propitiatory which presented
Gods seat, was empty, least any should take occasion to make any similitude
or likeness of him. Esaias, after he has set forth the incomprehensible
majesty of God, he asks, to whom then will ye make God like? or (...). xl.
what similitude will ye set up unto him? Shall the Caruer make him a caruen
image? and shall the Goldsmyth cover him with gold, or cast him into a form
of silver plates? And for the poor man, shall the image maker frame an image
of timber, that he may have somewhat to set up also? And after this he cries
out: O wretches, heard ye never of this? Has it not ben preached to you since
the beginning, how by the creation of the world, and the greatness of the
work, they might understand the majesty of God, the Maker and Creator of
all, to be greater then that it could be expressed or set forth in any image
or bodily similitude? Thus far the Prophet Esaias, who from the. xliiii.
Chapter, to the xlix. entreats in a manner of no other thing. And. S. Paul in
the Acts of the Apostles euidentlye Acts. 17.
teaches the same, that no similitude can be made unto God in gold, silver,
stone, or any other matter. By these and many other places of scripture it is
evident, that no image either ought or can be made unto God. For how can God, a
most pure spirit, whom man never saw, be expressed by a gross, bodily, and
visible similitude? How can the infinite majesty and greatness of god,
incomprehensible to man's mind, much more not able to be compassed with the
sense, be expressed in an infinite and little image? How can a dead and dombe
image express the living God? What can an image, which when it is fallen, can
not rise up again, which can neither help his friends, nor hurt his enemies,
express of the most puissaunt and myghtie God, who alone is able to reward
his friends, and to destroy his enemies euerlastyngly? A man might justly cry
with the prophet Habacus, Shall such images instruct or teach any thing right
of God? or shall Habac. 20.
they become doctors? Wherefore men that have made an image of God whereby to
honor him, have thereby dishonored him most hyghly, diminished his majesty,
blemished his glory, and falsified his truth. And therefore saint Paul says,
that such as have framed any similitude or Romans 1.
image of God like a mortal man, or any other lykenes, in timber, stone, or
other matter, have changed his truth into a lie. For both they thought it to
be no longer that which it was, a stock or a stone, and took it to be that
which it was not, as God, or an image of God. Wherefore an image of God, is not
only a lie, but a double lie also. But the devil is a liar, and the father of
lies: wherefore the lying images which be made of God, to his great dishonor,
and horrible danger John. 8.
of his people, came from the devil.

Wherefore they be convict of foolishness and wickedness in making of images
of God, or the Trinity: for that no image of God ought or can be made, as by
the scriptures and good reason evidently appears: yea, and once to desire an
image of God, comes of infidelity, thinking not God to be present, except
they might see some sign or image of him, as appears by the Hebrews in the
wilderness, wyllyng Aaron to make them gods whom they might see go before
them. Where they object, that seeing in Esaias and Daniel be certain
descriptions of God, as sittyng on a high seat. etc. why may not a paynter
likewise set him forth in colors to be seen, as it were a judge syttyng in a
throne, as well as he is described in writing of the prophets, seeing that
scripture or writing, and picture, differ but a little? First, it is to be
answered, that things forbidden by Gods word as payntyng of images of God,
and things permitted of God, as such discriptions used of the prophets, be not
all one: neither ought, nor can man's reason (although it show never so goodly)
prevail any thing against Gods express word, and plain statute law, as I
may well term it. Furthermore, the scripture although it have certain
discriptions of God, yet if you read on forth, it expounds it self,
declaring that God is a pure spirit, infinite, who replenisheth heaven and
earth, which the picture does not, nor expounds not it self: but rather
when it has set God forth in a bodily similitude, (...) a man there, and will
easyly bring one into the heresy of the Anthropomorphites, thinking God to
have hands and feet, and to sit as a man does: which they that do (says
saint Augustine in his book de fide and simbolo cap. 7.) fall into that
sacrilege which the apostle (...), in (...) who have changed the glory of
the (...) God, into the similitude of a (...) ^^n. For it is wickedness for a
Christian to (...) such an image to God in a Temple, and much more
wickedness to erecte such a one in ^is heart by (...) ^^yng of it. But to
this (...), that this reason notwithstanding, (...) of Christ may be made, for
that he took upon him flesh, and became man. It were well that they would
first grant, that they have hitherto done most wyckedlye in making and
maynteyning of images of God, and of the trinity in every place, whereof they
are by force of Gods word and good reason convicted: and then to descend to the
trial for other images. Now concerning their objection, that an image of
Christ may be made: the answer is easy. For in Gods word and religion, it
is not only required whether a thing may be done or no: but also, whether it
be lawful and agreeable to Gods word to be done, or no. For all wickedness
may be and is daily done, which yet ought not to be done. And the words of the
reasons above alleged out of the Scriptures are, that images neither ought nor
can be made unto God. Wherefore to reply that images of Christ may be made,
except withal it be proved that it is lawful for them to be made, is, rather
then to hold ones peace, to say somewhat, but nothing to the purpose. And yet
it appears, that no image can be made of Christ, but a lying image (as the
scripture peculierlye calls images lies) For Christ is God and man. Seeing
Romans 1.
therefore that for the Godhead, which is the most excellent part, no images
can be made, it is falsely called the image of Christ: wherefore images of
Christ be not only defectes, but also lies. Which reason serves also for the
images of saints, whose souls, the more excellent parts of them, can by no
images be represented and expressed. Wherefore, they be no images of saints,
whose souls reign in joy with God, but of the bodies of Saints, which as
yet lie putrified in the graves. Furthermore, no true image can be made of
Christ's body, for it is unknown now of what form and countenance he was.
And there be in Greece and at Rome, and in other places, diverse images of
Christ, and none of them like to other, and yet every of them affirms, that
theirs is the true and lively image of Christ, which can not possible be.
Wherefore, as soon as an image of Christ is made, by and by is a lie made of
him, which by Gods word is forbidden. Which also is true of the images of any
Saints of antiquity, for that it is unknown of what form and countenance
they were. Wherefore seeing that religion ought to be grounded upon truth,
images which can not be without lies, ought not to be made, or put to any use
of religion, or to be placed in Churches and Temples, places peculierly
appointed to true religion and service of God. And thus much, that no true
image of God, our savior Christ, or his saints can be made: wherwithall is
also confuted that their allegation, that images be the lay men's books. For
it is evident of that which is before rehearsed, that they teach no things of
God, of our savior Christ, and of his saints, but lies and errors.
Wherefore, either they be no books, or if they be, they be false and lying
books, the teachers of all error.

And now if it should be admitted and granted, that an image of Christ could
truly be made, yet it is unlawful that it should be made, yea, or that the
image of any saint should be made, specially to beset up in Temples, to the
great and unavoidable danger of idolatry, as hereafter shall be proved. And
first concerning the image of Christ, that though it might be Lib. 1. ca. ^4.
had truly, yet it were unlawful to have it in Churches publicly, is a
notable place in Ireneus, who reproved the heritikes called Gnostici, for that
they carried about the image of Christ, made truly after his own proportion
in Pilates time (as they said) and therefore more to be esteemed, then those
lying images of him which we now have. The which Gnostici also used to set
garlandes upon the head of the said image, to show their affection to it.
But to go to Gods word. Be not I pray you the words of the scripture plain?
Beware least thou being Leui. 2^. Deuteronomy. 5. Sculptile, ^u^^le. Similitudo. Deuteronomy.
^7
deceived, make to thy self (to say to any use of religion) any graven image,
or any similitude of any thing etc. And cursed be the man that makes a graven
or molten image, abomination before the Lord. etc. Be not our images such? Be
not our images of Christ and his saints, (...) (...)ed, or molten, or cast,
or similitudes of men and women? It is happy that we have not followed the
Gentiles in making of images of (...)es, fyshes, and vermynes also.
Notwithstanding, the image of an Horse, as also the (...) the Ass that Christ
^ode on, have in di(...) places ben brought into the Church and Temple of God.
And is not that which is written in the beginning of the Lords most holy
Exodus 20.
law, and daily read unto you, most evident also? Thou shall not make any
likeness of any thing in heaven above, in earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth. etc. Could any more beforbidden and said then this? either
of the kinds of images, which be either carved, molten, or otherwise
similitudes? or of things whereof images are forbidden to be made? Are not all
things either in heaven, earth, or water under the earth? And be not our
images of Christ and his saints, lykenesses of things in heaven, earth, or
in the water? If they continue in their former answer, that these
prohibitions concern the idols of the Gentiles, and not our images: First
that answer is already confuted, concerning the images of God and the
trinity at large, and concerning the images of Christ also, by Ireneus. And
that the law of God is likewise to be understood against all our images,
as well of Christ, as his saints, in Temples and Churches, appears further
by the judgment of the old Doctors, and the primative Church. Epiphanius
rentyng a painted cloth, wherein was the picture of Christ, or of some saint,
affyrmyng it to be against our religion, that any such image should be had in
the temple or Church (as is before at large declared) judged that not only
idols of the Gentiles, but that all images of Christ and his saints also,
were forbidden by Gods word and our religion. Lactantius affyrming it to be
certain that no true religion can be where an image or picture is, (as is
before declared) judged, that as well all images and pictures, as the idols of
the gentiles, were forbidden, else would he not so generallye have spoken and
pronounced of them. And saint Augustine (as is before alleged) greatly
allows Lib. 4. ca. 3. deciuit. dei.
M. Varro, affyrmyng that religion is most pure without images: and says him
self, Images be of more force to crook an unhappy soul, then to teach and
instruct it. And he says further, Every child, yea, every beast knows, that
it is not God that they see. Wherefore In Psalm. ^6. and, 113
then does the holy ghost so often monishe us of that which all men know?
Whereunto saint Augustine answers thus. For (says he) when images are
placed in Temples, and set in honorable sublimitie, and begin once to be
worshypped, forthwith breeds the most vile affection of error. This is
saint Augustines judgment of images in Churches, that by and by they breed
error and idolatry. The Christian Emperors, the learned Bishops, all the
learned men of Asia, Greece, and Spain, assembled in counselles at
Constantinople and in Spain. vii. and. viii. C. years ago and more, condemnyng
and destroying al images, as well of Christ, as of the Saints, set up by the
Christians (as is before at large declared) testify, that they understood Gods
word so, that it forbad our images, as well as the idols of Sapi. 14.
the Gentiles. And as it is written. Sapi. xiiij. that images were not from the
beginning, neither shall they continue to the end: so were they not in the
beginning in the primative Church, God grant they may in the end be
destroyed. For all Christians in the primative Church, as Origin against
Celsus, Ciprian also and Arnobius do testified, were sore charged and
complained on, Origin. cont. Celsum. lib. 4. et. 8. Ciprianus cont. Demetrium.
that they had no aulters nor images. Wherefore did they not I pray you,
confourme themselves to the Gentiles in making of images, but for lack of them
sustained their heavy displeasure, if they had taken it to be lawful by Gods
word to have images? It is evident therefore that they took al images to be
unlawful in the Church or Temple of God, and therefore had none, though the
Gentiles therefore were most highly displeased, following this rule: We must
obey God rather then men. And Zephirius in his notes upon the Apology of
sertullian, gathers, that all his vehement Acts. 5.
persuasion should be but cold, except we know this once for all, that
Christian men in his time did most hate images with their ornaments. And
Ireneus (as is above declared) reproves the heretics called Gnostici, for
that they carried about the image of Christ. And therefore the primative Church
which is specially to be followed as most incorrupt and pure, had publicly in
Churches, neither idols of the Gentiles, nor any other images, as things
directly forbidden by Gods word. And thus it is declared by Gods word, the
sentences of the Doctors, and the judgment of the primative Church, which
was most pure and sincere, that all images, as well ours, as the idols of the
Gentiles, be by Gods word forbidden, and therefore unlawful, specially in
Temples and Churches.

Now if they (as their custom is) flee to this answer, that Gods word
forbids not absolutely all images to be made, but that they should not be
made to be worshypped, and that therefore we may have images, so we worship
them not, for that they be things indifferent, which may be abused, or well
used. Which seems also to be the judgment of Damascene and Gregory Damas.
lib. 4. de side orth. ca. 17. Gre go. in Episto. ad Serenum Massil.
the first, as is above declared. And this is one of their chief allegations
for the maynteynance of images, which have been alleged since Gregory the
first his time.

Well, then we be come to their second allegation, which in part we would
not stick to grant them. For we are not so superstitious or scrupulous, that
we do abhor either flowers wrought in Carpettes, hangynges, and other
arrasse, either the Images of Princes prynted or stamped in their Coins,
which when Christ did see in a Roman Coin, we read not that he reprehended
it, neither do we condemn the arts of payntyng and image making, as wicked of
them selves. But we would admit and grant them, that images used for no
religion, or superstition rather, we mean images of none worshipped, nor in
danger to be worshypped of any, may be suffered. But images placed publicly
in Temples, can not possiblye be without danger of worshyppyng and idolatry,
wherefore they are not publicly to be had or suffered in Temples and Churches.
The Jews, to whom this law was first given (and yet being a moral
commandment, and not ceremonial, as all Doctors interpret it, byndeth us
as well as them) the Jews I say, who should have the true sense and meaning of
Gods law so peculierly given unto them, neither had in the beginning any
images publicly in their Temple (as Origines Origin. cont. Celsum. lib. 4.
Joseph. antiq. lib. 17. cap. 8. lib. 18, ca. 5 lib. 18. c^. 15.
and Josephus at large declares) neither after the restitution of the Temple,
would by any means consent to Herod, Pilate, or Petronius, that images
should be placed only in the Temple at Jerusalem, although no worshyppyng of
images was required at their hands: but rather offered them selves to the
death, then to assent that images should once be placed in the Temple of God,
neither would they suffer any image maker among them. And Origene adds this
cause, least their minds should be plucked from God, to the contemplation of
earthly things. And they are much commended for this earnest zeal, in
maynteyning of Gods honor and true religion. And truth it is, that the Jews
and Turks, who abhor images and idols as directly forbiddenby Gods word,
will never come to the truth of our religion, whiles these stumbling blocks of
images remain amongst us, and lie in their way. If they object yet the brazen
serpent which Moses did set up, or the images of the Cherubims, or any other
Images which the Jews had in their Temple, the answer is easy. We must in
religion obey Gods general law, which binds al men, and not follow examples
of particular dispensation, which be no warrantes for us: else we may by the
same reason resume circumcision and sacrifising of beasts, and other rites
permitted to ye Jews. Neither can those images of cherubim, set in secret where
no man might come nor behold, be any example for our public setvp of images
in Churches and Temples. But to let the Jews go. Where they say that images,
so they be not worshypped, as things indifferent may be tolerated in Temples
and Churches: We infer and say for the aduersatiue, that all our images of
God, our Savior Christ, and his Saints, publicly set up in Churches and
Temples, places peculierlye appointed to the true worshipping of God, be not
things indifferent, nor tolerable: but against Gods law and commandment,
taking their own interpretation and exposition of it. First, for that all
images so set up publicly, have been worshipped of the unlearned and simple
sort, shortly after they have been publicly so set up, and in conclusion, of
the wise and learned also. Secondly, for that they are worshypped in sundry
places now in our time also. And thirdly, for that it is impossible that images
of God, Christ, or his Saints, can be suffered (specially in Temples and
Churches) any while or space without worshipping of them: and that idolatry,
which is most abominable before God, can not possibly be escaped and avoided,
without the abolishing and destruction of images and pictures in Temples and
Churches, for that idolatry is to images, specially in Temples and Churches,
an inseparable accident (as they term it) so that images in Churches, and
idolatry, go always both together, and that therefore the one can not be
avoided, except the other, (specially in all public places) be destroyed.
Wherefore, to make images, and publicly to set them up in Temples and
Churches, places appointed peculierly to the service of God, is, to make images
to the use of religion, and not only against this precept: Thou shall make no
manner of image, but against this also: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. For they being set up, have been, be, and ever will be worshipped.
And the full proof of that which in the beginning of the first part of this
treaty was touched, is here to be made and performed: To wit, that our
images, and idols of the Gentiles be all one, as well in the things them selves,
as also in that our images have been before, be now, and ever will be worshypped,
in like form and manner, as the idols of the Gentiles were worshipped, so long
as they be suffered in Churches and temples. Whereupon it follows, that our
images in Churches have been, be, and ever will be none other but abominable
idols, and be therefore no things indifferent. And every of these parts
shall be proved in order, as hereafter follows.

And first, that our images and the idols of Simulachra gent^um, Argentu^ and
aurum, Fusile. Similitud Sculptile. Simulachru^ opera manu^ hominu^
the Gentiles be all one concerning themselves, is most evident, the matter of
them being gold, silver, or other metal, stone, wood, clay, or plaster, as
were the idols of the Gentiles, and so being either moulten or cast, either
carved, graven, hewed, or otherwise fourmed and fashioned, after the similitude
and likeness of man or woman, be dead and dumb works of man's hands, having
mouth and speak not, eyes and see not, hands and feel not, feet and go not,
and so as well in form as matter, be altogether like the idols of the
Gentiles. Insomuch that all the titles which be given to the idols in the
Scriptures, may be verified of our images. Wherefore, no doubt but the like
curses which are mentioned in the scriptures, will light upon the makers and
worshippers of them both. Secondly, that they have been and be worshypped in our
time, in like form and manner, as were the idols of the Gentiles, is now to
be proved. And for that idolatry stands cheefely in the mind, it shall in
this part first be proved, that our image maynteyners have had, and have the
same opinions and judgment of saints, whose images they have made and
worshipped, as the Gentiles idolaters had of their gods. And afterward shall be
declared, that our image maynteyners and worshyppers, have used, and use the
same outward rites and manner of honoring and worshipping their images, as the
Gentiles did use before their idols, and that therefore they commit idolatry,
as well inwardly and outwardlye, as did the wicked Gentiles idolaters.

And concerning the first part of the idolatrious opinions of our image
maynteyners. What I pray you be such saints with us, to whom we attribute the
defense of certain countries, spoylyng God of his due honor herein, but Dij
tutelares of the Gentiles idolaters? Such as were Belus to the Babylonians and
Assyrians, Dij tutelares.
O siris and Isis to the Egyptians, Vulcane to the Lemnians, and such other.
What be such saints to whom the sauegarde of certain cities are appointed,
Dij praesides.
but Dij praesides, with the Gentiles idolaters? Such as were at Delphos
Apollo, at Athens Minerua, at Carthage Juno, at Rome Quirinus. etc. What be
such saints, to whom contrary to the use of the primitive Church, Temples and
Churches be builded, and aulters erected, but Dij patroni, of the Gentiles
idolaters. Dij patroni.
Such as were in the Capitol Jupiter, in Paphus temple Venus, in Ephesus temple
Diana, and such like. Alas, we seem in thus thynkyng and doing, to have
learned our religion not out of Gods word, but out of the Pagan poets, who
say, Excessere omnes aditis, arisque relictis, Dij quibus imperium hoc
steterat. etc. That is to say: All the gods by whose desence this Empire
stood, are gone out of the temples, and have forsaken their aulters. And where
one saint has images in diverse places, the same saint has diverse names
thereof, most like to the Gentiles. When you hear of our Lady of Walsingham,
our Lady of Ipswich, our Lady of Wilsdon, and such other: what is it but an
imitation of the Gentiles idolaters? Diana Agrotera, Diana Coriphea, Diana
Ephesia, etc. Venus Cipria, Venus Paphia, Venus Gnidia. Whereby is evidently
meant, that the saint for the image sake, should in those places, yea in the
images them selves, have a dwelling, which is the ground of their idolatry.
For where no images be, they have no such means. Terentius varro shows, that
there were three hundred Jupiters in his time, there were no fewer Veneres and
Dianae, we had no fewer Christophers, Ladies, and Marie Magdalens, and other
saints. Oenomaus and Hesiodus show, that in their time there were thirty
thousand Gods. I think we had no fewer saints, to whom we gave the honor
due to God. And they have not only spoiled the true living God of his due
honor, in temples, cities, countries and lands, by such devises and
inventions, as the Gentiles idolaters have done before them: but the Sea and
waters have as well special saints with them, as they had Gods with the
Gentiles, Neptune, Tritron, Nereus, Castor, and Pollux, Venus, and such other.
In whose places be come saint Christopher, saint Clement, and diverse other, and
specially our Lady, to whom shypmen sing Aue maris stella. Neither has the
fire escaped their idolatrious inventions. For in stead of Vulcane and Vesta,
the Gentiles gods of the fire, our men have placed saint Agatha, and make
letters on her day for to quench fire with. Every artificer and profession
has his special saint, as a peculier God. As for example, scollers have saint
Nicholas and saint Gregory, paynters saint Luke, neither lack soldiers their
Mars, nor lovers their Venus, amongst Christians. All diseases have their
special saints, as gods the curers of them. The pockes saint Roche, the
falling evil saint Cornelis, the toothe ache saint Appoline. etc. neither do
beasts and cattle lack their Gods with us, for saint Loy is the horseleache,
and saint Anthony the swinehearde. etc. Where is Gods providence and due
honor in the mean season? who says, The heavens be mine, and the earth is
mine, the whole world and all that in it is, I do give victory, and I put to
flight, of me be al councels and help. etc. Except I keep the city, in vain
does he watch that keeps it, thou Lord shall save both men and beasts. But
we have left him neither heaven, nor earth, nor water, nor country, nor city,
peace no war to rule and govern, neither men, nor beasts, nor their
diseases to cure, that a godly man might iustlye for zealous indignation cry
out, O heaven, O earth, and seas, what madness and wickedness against God are
men fallen into? What dishonor do the creatures to their creator and maker?
And if we remember God sometime, yet because we doubt of his ability or will
to help, we join to him another helper, as he were a nowne adjective, vsyng
these sayings: such as learn, God and saint Nicholas be my speed: such as
neese, God help and saint John: to the horse, God and saint Loy save thee.
Thus are we become like horses and moyles, which have no understanding. For,
is there not one God only, who by his power and wisdom made all things, and
by his providence governs the same? and by his goodness maynteyneth and saves
them? Be not all things of him, by him, and through him? Why do thou turn
from the creator to the creatures? This is the manner of the Gentiles
idolaters: but thou art a Christian, and therefore by Christ alone have
access to God the father, and help of him only. These things are not written
to any reproach of the saints them selves, who were the true servants of
God, and did give all honor to him, taking none unto themselves, and are
blessed souls with God: but against our foolishnes and wickedness, making of
the true servants of God, false gods, by attributyng to them the power and
honor which is Gods, and due to him only. And for that we have such opinions
of the power and ready help of saints, al our Legendes, Hymns, Sequences, and
Masses, did conteyne stories, lauds, and praises of them, and prayers to them:
yea, and sermons also altogether of them and to their praises, Gods word being
clean laid aside. And this we do altogether agreeable to the saints, as did
the Gentiles idolaters to their false gods. For these opinions which men have
had of mortal persons, were they never so holy, the old most godly and
learned Christians, have written against the faygned gods of the Gentiles, and
Christian princes have destroyed their images, who if they were now living,
would doubtless likewise both write against our false opinions of saints,
and also destroy their images. For it is evident, that our image maynteyners,
have the same opinion of saints, which the Gentiles had of their false gods,
and thereby are moved to make them images as the Gentiles did. If answer be
made, that they make saints but intercessours to God, and means for such
things as they would obtain of God: that is even after the Gentiles
idolatrious usage, to make them of saints, gods, called Dij Medioximi, to be
mean Medioximi Dij.
intercessours and helpers to God, as though he did not hear, or should be
weerye if he did all alone. So did the Gentiles teach, that there was one
chief power workyng by other, as means, and so they made all gods subject to
fate or destenye: as Lucian in his dialogues fayneth, that Neptune made suite
to Mercury, that he might speak with Jupiter. And therefore in this also, it
is most evident that our image mainteiners be al one in opinion with the
Gentiles idolaters.

Now remains the third part, that their rites and ceremonies in honoring
and worshipping of the images or saints, be all one with the rites which the
Gentiles idolaters used in honoring their idols. First, what means it, that
Christians after the example of the Gentiles idolaters, go on pylgrimage to
visit images, where they have the like at home, but that they have a more
opinion of holiness and virtue in some images, then other some, like as the
Gentiles idolaters had? which is the redyest way to bring them to idolatry by
worshypping of them, and directly against Gods word, who says, Seek me, and
ye shall live, and do not Amos. v.
seek Bethel, neither enter not into Gilgal, neither go to Bersaba. And
against such as had any superstition in the holiness of the place, as though
they should be heard for the places sake, saying, Our fathers worshypped in
this John 4.
mountain, and ye say, that at Jerusalem is the place where men should
worship, our savior Christ pronounces: Believe me, the hour comes when you
shall worship the father neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem, but
true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and truth. But it is to
well known, that by such pilgrimage going, Lady Venus and her son Cupide,
were rather worshipped wantonly in the flesh, then God the father, and our
savior Christ his son, truly worshipped in the spirit.

And it was very agreeable (as saint Paul teaches) that they which fell to
idolatry, which Romans ^.
is spiritual fornication, should also fall into carnal fornication, and all
uncleanness, by the just judgments of God, delivering them over ^o
abominable concupiscences.

What means it that Christian men, after the use of the Gentiles idolaters,
cap and kneel before images? which if they had any sense and gratitude,
would kneel before men, Carpenters, Masons, Plasterers, Founders, and
Goldsmithes, their makers and framers, by whose means they have attained this
honor, which else should have been evil favored and rude lumpes of claye, or
plaster, pieces of timber, stone, or metal, without shape or fashion, and so
without all estimation and honor, as that idol in the Pagane poet confesses,
saying, I was Ho^a^ius.
once a vile block, but now I am become a God. etc. What a fond thing is it
for man, who has life and reason, to bow him self to a dead and insensible
image, the work of his own hand? is not this stouping and kneeling before
Adorare. Gene. 23. and. 33.
them, adoration of them, which is forbidden so earnestly by Gods word? Let
such as so fall down before images of saints, know and 3. Reg. ^^.
confess that they exhibit that honor to dead stocks and stones, which the
saints them selves, Peter, Paul, and Barnabas, would not Acts. (...). and.
14. Apo. 19.
to be given them being alive: which the angel of GOD forbids to be given to
him. And if they say, they exhibit such honor not to the image, but to the
saint whom it represents, they are convicted of follye, to believe that they
please saints with that honor, which they abhor, as a spoil of Gods
honor. For they be no chaungelynges: but now both having greater
understanding, and more fervent love of God, do more abhor to deprive him of
his due honor: and being now like unto the angels of God, do with angels flee
to take unto them by sacrilege the honor due to God. And herewithall is
confuted their lewd distinction of Latria and Dulia: where it is evident, that
the saints of God can not abide, that as much as any outward worshippyng be
done or exhibited to them. But satan, Gods enemy, desyryng to rob God of his
honor, desires exceedynglye that such honor might be given to him. Wherefore,
Mat. 4.
those which give the honor due to the creator to any creature, do service
acceptable to no saints (who be the friends of God) but unto satan, Gods and
man's mortal and sworn enemy. And to attribute such desire of divine honor
to saints, is to blot them with a most odious and deuilyshe ignominy and
villainy, and in deed of saints, to make them satan's and very devils, whose
property is to challenge to them selves, the honor which is due to God only.
And furthermore, in that they say that they do not worship the images, as the
Gentiles did their idols, but God and the saints whom the images do represent,
and therefore that their doings before images, be not like the idolatry of
the Gentiles before their idols: saint Augustine, Lactantius, and Clemens, do
prove evidently, that by this their answer, they be all one with the Gentiles
idolaters. The Gentiles (says saint Augustine) which seem to Augusti. Psalm.
^^^.
be of the purer religion, say, We worship not the images, but by the corporal
image, we do behold the signs of the things which we ought to worship. And
Lactantius says, The Gentiles Lactan. li.2. institu.
say, we fear not the images, but them after whose likeness the images be
made, and to whose names they he consecrate. Thus far Lactantius. And Clemens
says, That serpent the devil, utters these words by the mouth Lib. 5. ad
^acobum Domini.
of certain men: We to the honor of the invisible God, worship visible
images: which surely is most false. See how in vsyng the same excuses
which the Gentiles idolaters pretended, they show them selves to be all one
with them in idolatry. For notwithstanding this excuse, saint Augustine,
Clemens, and Lactantius prove them idolaters. And Clemens says, that the
serpent the devil puts such excuses in the mouth of idolaters. And the
Scriptures says, they worship the stocks and stones notwithstanding this
excuse) even as our image maynteyners do. And Ezechiel therefore calls the
gods of the Assyrians, stocks and stones, although they were but images of
their gods. So are our images of God and the saints, named by the names of god
and his saints, after the use of the Gentiles. And the same Clemens says
thus in Lib. 5. ad Iacobum Domini fratrem.
the same book, They dare not give the name of the Emperor to any other, for
he punysheth his offendour and traitor by and by: but they dare give the name
of god to other, because he for repentance suffers his offenders. And even
so do our image worshyppers, give both names of god and the saints, and also
the honor due to God, to their images, even as did the Gentiles idolaters to
their idols. What should it mean, that they according as did she Gentiles
idolaters, light candelles at noone time, or at mydnyght, before them, but
therewith to honor them: for other use is there none in so doing. For in the
day it needs not, but was ever a proverb of foolishness, to light a candle
at noone time. And in the night, it avails not to light a candle before the
blind: and god has neither use nor honor thereof. And concerning this candle
lighting, it is notable that Lactantius above a thousand years ago has
written, Liber. 6. iustit. ca. 2
after this manner, If they would behold the heavenly light of the Sun,
then should they perceive that God has no need of their candelles, who for
the use of man has made so goodly a light. And whereas in so little a circle of
the Sun, which for the great distaunce, seems to be no greater then a man's
head, there is so great bryghtnesse, that the sight of man's eye is not able to
behold it, but if one stedfastlye look upon it a while, his eyes will be
dulled and blinded with darkness. How great light, how great clearenesse may
we think to be with God, with whom is no night nor darkness? and so forth.
And by and by he says, Seems he therefore to be in his right mind, which
offers up to the geuer of light, the light of a wax candell for a gift? He
requires another light of us, which is not smokye, but bright and clear,
even the light of the mind and understanding. And shortly after he says,
But their gods, because they be earthlye, have need of light, lest they
remain in darkness, whose worshyppers, because they understand no heavenly
thing, do draw religion which, they use, down to the earth, in the which
being dark of nature, is need of light: Wherefore they give to their gods no
heavenly, but the earthlye understanding of mortal men. And therefore they
believe those things to be necessary and pleasant unto them, which are so to
us, who have need either of meat when we be hungrye, or drink when we be
thirsty, or clothyng when we be a cold, or when the sun is set, candle
light, that we may see. Thus far Lactantius, and much more, to long here to
write, of candle lyghtyng in temples before images and idols for religion:
whereby appears both the foolyshnesse thereof and also, that in opinion and
act, we do agree altogether in our candle religion, with the Gentiles
idolaters. What means it that they, after the example of the Gentiles
idolaters, burn incense, offer up gold to images, hang up crouches, chains,
and ships, legs, arms, and whole men and women of wax, before images, as
though by them, or saints (as they say) they were delivered from lamenesse,
sickness, captivity, or shypwracke? Is not this Colere imanines, Colere
to worship images, so earnestly forbidden in Gods word? If they deny it, let
them read the xi. Chapter of Daniel the prophet, who says of Antechriste: He
shall worship God whom his fathers knew not, with gold, silver, and with
precious stone, and other things of pleasure: in which place the Latin word
is Colet. And in the second of Paralepomenon the. xxix. Chapter, all the
outward rites and ceremonies, as burning of incence, and such other, wherewith
God in the temple was honored, is called Cultus Cultus.
(to say) worshyppyng, which is forbidden strayghtly by Gods word to be given
to images. Do not all stories ecclesiastical declare, that our holy martyrs,
rather then they would bow and kneel, or offer up one crumbe of incense
before an image or idol, have suffered a thousand kinds of most horrible and
dreadful death? And what excuse soever they make, yet that all this running on
pilgrimage, burning of incence and candels, hanging up of crouches, chains,
ships, arms, legs, and whole men and women of wax, kneelyng and holdyng up
of hands, is done to the images, appears by this, that where no images be,
or where they have been and be taken away, they do no such things at all. But
the places frequented when the images were there, now they be taken away, be
forsaken and left desert, nay now they hate and abhor the place deadlye,
which is an evident proof, that that which they did before, was done in
respect of the images. Wherefore, when we see men and women on heaps to go on
pylgrimage to images, kneel before them, hold up their hands before them,
set up candles, burn incense before them, offer up gold and silver unto them,
hang up shyps, crouches, chains, men and women of wax before them,
attributyng health and sauegard, the gifts of God to them, or the saints whom
they represent, as they rather would have it: Who I say, who can doubt, but
that our image maynteyners, agreeyng in all idolatrious opinions, outward
rites and ceremonies with the Gentiles idolaters, agree also with them in
committing most abominable idolatry. And to increase this madness, wicked
men which have the keeping of such images, for their more lucre and
advantage, after the example of the Gentiles idolaters, have reported and
spread abroad, as well by lying tales, as written fables, diverse miracles of
images: Is that such an image miraculously was sent from heaven, even like
Palladium, or magna Diana Ephesiorum. Such another was as miraculously found
in the earth, as the man's head was in Capitol, or the horse head in Capua.
Such an image was brought by angels. Such an one came it self far from the
east to the west, as Dame Fortune flyt to Rome. Such an image of our Lady was
painted by saint Luke, whom of a physician they have made a paynter for that
purpose. Such an one a hundred yokes of oxen could not move, like Bona Dea,
whom the ship could not carry, or Jupiter Olympius, which laughed the
artificers to scorn that went about to remove him to Rome. Some images, though
they were hard and stony, yet for tender heart and pity, wept. Some like
Castor and Pollux, helpyng their friends in battle, swet, as marble pyllers
do in dankyshe weather. Some spoke more monstrouslye then ever did Balams Ass,
who had life and breath in him. Such a creple came and saluted this saint of
oak, and by and by he was made whole, and lo here hangs his crouche. Such an
one in a tempest vowed to saint Christopher, and escaped, and behold here is
his ship of wax. Such an one by saint Leonardes help brake out of prison,
and see where his fetters hang. And infinite thousands mo miracles, by like o^
more shameless lies were reported. Thus do our image maynteyners, in earnest
apply to their images, all such miracles as the Gentiles have feigned of their
idolles. And if it were to be admitted, that some miraculous acts were by
illusion of the devil done where images be: (For it is evident that the most
part were feigned lies, and crafty iuglynges of men) yet follows it not
therefore, that such images are either to be honored, or suffered to remain,
no more then Ezechias left the brazen serpent undestroyed, when it was
worshipped, although it were both set up by Gods commandment, and also
approved by a great and true miracle, for as many as beheld it, were by and by
healed: neither ought miracles to persuade us to do contrary to Gods word.
For the Scriptures have for a warnyng hereof foreshewed, that the kingdom of
Antechriste shall be myghtie in miracles and wonders, to the strong illusion of
all the rebrobate. But in this they pass the follye and wickedness of the
Gentiles, that they honor and worship the relics and bones of our saints,
which prove that they be mortal men and dead, and therefore no gods to be
worshypped, which the Gentiles would never confess of their gods for very
shame. But the relics we must kiss and offer unto, specially on relic
Sunday. And while we offer (that we should not be weery or repent us of our
cost) the music and mynstrelsie goes merylye all the offertorie time, with
praysyng and calling upon those saints whose relics be then in presence.
Yea, and the water also wherein those relics have been dipped, must with great
reverence be reserved, as very holy and effectuous. Is this agreeable to saint
Chrysostom, who writes Homilia de sep^e^. Machabaeis.
thus of relics? Do not regard the ashes of the saints bodies, nor the
relics of their flesh and bones, consumed with time: But open the eyes of
thy faith, and behold them clothed with heavenly virtue and the grace of the
holy ghost, and shynyng with the bryghtnesse of the heavenly light. But our
idolatours found to much vauntage of relics and relic water, to follow
saint Chrisostomes counsel. And because relics were so gaynefull, few
places were there, but they had relics provided for them. And for more
plentye of relics, some one saint had many heads, one in one place, and
another in another place. Some had six arms, and xxvi. fyngers. And where our
Lord bare his cross alone, if all the pieces of the relics thereof were
gathered together, the greatest ship in England would scarsly bear them, and
yet the greatest part of it, they say, does yet remain in the hands of the
Infidels, for the which they way in their beads biddyng, that they may get it
also into their hands, for such godly use and purpose. And not only the
bones of the saints, but every thing apparteynyng to them was an holy relic.
In some place they offer a sword, in some the scaberd, in some a shoe, in some
a saddle that had been set upon some holy horse, in some the coals where with
saint Laurence was roasted, in some place the tail of an ass which our Lord
Jesus Christ sat on, to be kyssed and offered to for a relic. For rather
then they would lack a relic, they would offer you a horse bone, in stead
of a virgins arm, or the tail of the ass, to be kyssed and offered unto for
relics. O wicked impudent, and most shameless men, the deuisers of these
things, O sely, foolyshe, and dastardly dawes, and more beastly then the ass
whose tail they kyssed, that believe su^he things. Now God be merciful to
such miserable and seely Christians, who by the fraud and falsehood of those
which should have taught them the way of truth and life, have been made not
only more wicked then the Gentyles idolaters, but also no wyser then asses,
horses, and moyles, which have no understanding.

Of these things already rehearsed, it is evident, that our image maynteyners
have not only made images and set them up in Temples, as did the Gentyles
idolaters their idols: but also that they have had the same idolatrious
opinions of the saints, to whom they have made images, which the Gentyles
idolatours had of their false Gods, and have not only worshypped their images
with the same rites, ceremonies, superstition, and all circumstaunces, as did
the Gentyles idolatours their idols: but in many points also, have far
exceeded them in all wyckednes, foolyshnesse, and madness. And if this be not
sufficient to prove them image worshyppers, that is to say, idolaters: Lo you
shall here their own open confession, I mean, not only the decrees of the
second Nicene counsel under Hirene, the Roman counsel under Gregory the
third, in the which as they teach that images are to be honored and
worshipped, as is before declared: so yet do they it warelye and fearefullye,
in comparison to the blasphenious bold blasyng of manifest idolatry to be
done to images, set forth of late, even in these our days, the light of Gods
truth so shynyng, that above other abominable doings, and wrytynges, a man
would marvel most at their impudent, shameless, and most shameful
blusteryng boldness, who would not at the least have chosen them a time of
more darkness, as meeter to veter their horrible blasphemies in: But have now
taken an harlottes face, not purposed to blushe, in setting abroad the
furniture of their spiritual whordome. And here the plain blasphemy of the
reverend father in GOD, James Naclantus bishop of Clugium, written in his
exposition of saint Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and the first Chapter, and
put in prynte now of late as Venice, may stand in stead of all, whose words
of image worshyppyng be these in Latin, as he did write them, not one silable
altered.

Ergo non solum fatendum est, fideles in Ecclesia adorare coram imagine (vt
nonnulli ad cautelam forte loquuntur) sed and adorare imagine, sine quo
volueris scrupulo, quin and eo illam venerantur cultu, quo and prototypon eius,
propter quod si illud habet adorare latria, and illa latria: si dulia, vel
hiperdulia, and illa pariter eiusmodi cultu adora^da est.

The sense whereof in English is this: Therefore it is not only to be confessed,
that the faithful in the Church do worship before an image (as some
peradventure do warely speak) but also do worship the image it self, without
any scruple or doubt at al: Yea, and they worship the image with the same
kind of worship, wherewith they worship the copy of the image, or the thing
where after the image is made. Wherefore if the copy it self is to be
worshypped with divine honor (as is God the father, Christ, and the holy
ghost) the image of them is also to be worshypped with divine honor. If the
copye ought to be worshypped with inferior honor, or higher worship: the
image also is to be worshypped with the same honor or worship. Thus far has
Naclantus, whose blasphemies let pope Gregorius the first confute, and by his
aucthority dam^n^ them to hell, as his successors have horribly thundered. For
although Gregory permits images to be had, yet he forbids them by any
Gregor. Episto. ad Serenum Massil.
means to be worshypped, and prayseth much Bishop Serenus for the forbyddyng
the worship of them, and wylleth him to teach the people to avoid by all
means to worship any image. But Naclantus blows forth his blasphemous
idolatry, wyllyng images to be worshypped with the highest kind of adoration
and worship: and least such wholesome doctrine should lack authority, he
groundeth it upon Aristotle in his book de somno and vigilia, that is, of
sleeping and waking, as by his printed book, noted so in the margent, is to be
seen, whose impudent wickedness and idolatrious judgment, I have therefore
more larglye set forth, (...)
that ye may (as Virgil speaks of Simon) of one, know all these image
worshippers and idolaters, and understand to what point in conclusion, the
public having of images in Temples and Churches has brought us: comparing
the times and wrytynges of Gregory the first, with our days, and the
blasphemies of such idolaters as this beast of Belial, named Naclantus, is.
Wherefore, now it is by the testimony of the old godly fathers and doctors,
by the open confession of Bishops assembled in counselles, by most evident
signs and arguments, opinions, idolatrous acts, deeds, and worshyppyng done
to our images, and by their own open confession and doctrine set forth in
their books, declared and showed, that our images have been, and be commonly
worshipped, yea, and that they ought so to be: I will out of Gods word make
this general argument against al such makers, letters up, and maynteyners of
images in public places. And first of all I will begin with the words of
our savior Christ. Do be to that Mat. 18.
man by whom an offense is given, woe be to him that offends one of these
little ones, or weak ones: better were it for him, that a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he cast into the middle of the sea and drowned, then he
should offend one of these little ones or weak ones. And in Deuteronomy. God himself
denounces him accursed that makes Deuteronomy. 27.
the blind to wander in his way. And in Leuit. Thou shall not lay a stumbling
block or Leuit. 19.
stone before the blind. But images in Churches and temples have been and be,
and (as afterward shall be proved) ever will be offenses and stumbling blocks,
specially to the weak, simple, and blind common people, deceauing their
hearts by the cunnyng of the artificer (as the scripture expressy in sundry
places does testify) and so bryngyng Sapi. 1^, and. 14.
them to idolatry. Therefore woe be to the erecter, setter up, and maynteyner
of images in Churches and temples, for a greater penalty remains for him
then the death of the body.

Jf answer be yet made, that this offense may be taken away by diligent and
sincere doctrine and preaching of Gods word, as by other means: And that
images in Churches and Temples therefore, be not things absolutely evil to
all men, although dangerous to some: And therefore that it were to be holden,
that the public having of them in Churches and Temples, is not expedient, as
a thing perilous, rather then unlawful, as a thing utterly wicked.

Then follows the third article to be prouen, which is this: That it is not
possible, if images be suffered in Churches and Temples, either by preaching of
Gods word, or by any other means, to keep the people from worshyppyng of
them, and so to avoid idolatry. And first concerning preaching, if it
should be admitted, that although images were suffered in Churches, yet might
idolatry by diligent and sincere preaching of Gods word be avoided: it
should follow of necessity, that sincere doctrine might always be had and
continue, (...) as images. And so that wheresoever, to offense, were erected an
image, there also of reason, a godly and sincere preacher should and might be
continually maynteyned. For it in reason, that the warnyng be as common as the
stumblyng block: the remedy as large as is the offense: the medicine as
general as the poison, but that is not possible, as both reason and experience
teaches. Wherefore preaching cannot stay idolatry, images being publicly
suffered. For an image which will last for many hundred years, may for a little
be bought: but a good preacher can not be with much contynually maynteyned.

Item if the prince will suffer it, there will be by and by many, yea, infinite
images: But sincere preachers were and ever shall be but a few, in respect of
the multitude to be taught. For our savior Christ says, the harvest is
plentiful, but the workmen be but a few: which has been hitherto
continually true, and will be to the worlds end. And in our time, and here in
our country so true, that every shyre should scarsly have one good preacher,
if they were divided.

Now images will continually to the beholders preach their doctrine, that is,
the worshipping of images and idolatry, to the which preaching mankind is
exceedyng prone, and inclined to give ear and credit: as experience of all
nations and ages does to much prove. But a true preacher to stay this
mischief, is in very many places scarsly heard once in a whole year, and some
where is not once in seven years, as is evident to be proved. And that evil
opinion which has been long rooted in men's hearts, can not suddenly by one
sermon be rooted out clear. And as few are inclined to credit sound
doctrine: as many, and almost all, be prone to superstition and idolatry. So
that herein appears not only a difficulty, but also an impossibility of the
remedy.

Further, it appears not by any story of credit, that true and sincere
preaching has endured in any one place above one hundred years: But it is
evident, that images, superstition, and worshyppyng of images and idolatry,
have continued many hundred years. For all wrytynges and experience do
testify, that good things do by little and little ever decay, until they be
clean banished: and contrarywyse, evil things do more and more increase,
till they come to a full perfection of wickedness. Neither need we to seek
examples far of for a proof hereof, our present matter is and example. For
preaching of Gods word (most sincere in the beginning) by process of time,
waxed less and less pure, and after corrupt, and last of all, altogether
laid down and left of, and other inventions of men crept in place of it. And
on the other part, images among Christian men were first painted, and that in
whole stories together, which had some signification in them: Afterward,
they were imbossed, and made of timber, stone, plaster, and metal. And
first they were only kept pryuately in pryuate men's houses: And then after,
they crepte into Churches and Temples, but first by payntyng, and after by
embossyng: And yet were they no where at the first worshypped. But shortly
after, they began to be worshypped of the ignoraunte sort of men: as appears
by the Epistle that Gregory the first of that name Bishop of Rome, did write
to Serenus Bishop of Marcelles. Of the which two Bishops, Serenus for
idolatry committed to images, brake them, and burned them, Gregory although
he thought it tolerable to let them stand: yet he judged it abominable that
they should be worshypped, and thought (as is now alleged) that the
worshyppyng of them might be stayed, by teaching of Gods word, according as he
exhorts Serenus to teach the people, as in the same Epistle appears. But
whether Gregory's opinion, or Serenus judgment, were better herein consider ye
I pray you, for experience by and by confuteth Gregory's opinion. For
notwithstanding Gregory's writing, and the preaching of others, images being
once publicly set up in Temples and Churches, simple men and women shortly
after fell on heaps to worshyppyng of them: And at the last, the learned also
were carried away with the public error, as with a violent stream or fludde.
And at the second counsel Nicene, the Bishops and Clergy decreed, that
images should be worshypped: and so by occasion of these stumblyng blocks,
not only the unlearned and simple, but the learned and wise, not the people
only, but the Bishops, not the sheep, but also the shepheardes them selves
(who should have been guydes in the right way, and light to shine in
darkness) being blinded by the be witching of images, as blind guydes of the
blind, fell both into the pit of damnable idolatry. In the which all the
world, as it were drowned, continued, vntylourage, by the space of above eight
hundred years, unspoken against in a manner. And this success had Gregory's
order: which mischief had never come to pass, had Bishop Serenus way ben
taken, and all idols and images ben utterly destroyed and abolished: for no man
worshippeth that that is not. And thus you see, how from having of images
privately, it came to public setting of them up in Churches and Temples,
although without harm at the first, as was then of some wise and learned men
judged: and from simple, having them there, it came at the last to worshippyng
of them. First, by the rude people, who specially (as the Sapi. 13, and 14.
Scriptures teaches) are in danger of superstition and idolatry, and
afterward by the Bishops, the learned, and by the whole Clergy. So that
laytie and Clearge, learned and unlearned, all ages, sects, and degrees of
men, women and children of whole Christendom (an horrible and most dreadful
thing to think) have been at once drowned in abominable idolatry, of all
other vices most detested of God, and most damnable to man, and that by the
space of eight hundred years and more. And to this end is come that beginning
of setting up of images in Churches then judged harmless, in experience
proved not only harmefull, but exitious and pestilent, and to the destruction
and subuertion of all good religion vniuersaliye. So that I conclude, as it may
be possible in some one City or little Country, to have images set up in
temples and Churches, and yet idolatry, by earnest and continual preaching of
Gods true word, and the sincere Gospel of our savior Christ, may be kept
away for a short time: So is it impossible, that (images once set up and
suffered in temples and Churches) any great countries, much less the whole
world, can any long time be kept from idolatry. And the godly will respect
not only their own City, Country, and time, and the health of men of their
age: but be careful for all places and times, and the salvation of men of all
ages. At the least, they will not lay such stumblyng blocks and snares, for
the feet of other countrymen and ages, which experience has alredie proved
to have been the ruin of the world.

Wherefore I make a general conclusion of all that I have hitherto said: if
the stumblyng blocks, and poisons of men's souls, by setting up of images, will
be many, yea, infinite if they be suffered, and the warnynges of the same
stumblyng blocks, and remedies for the said poisons by preaching, but few,
as is already declared: if the stumblyng blocks be easy to be laid, the
poisons soon provided, and the warnynges and remedies hard to know or come
by: if the stumblyng blocks lie continuallye in the way, and poison be redye
at hand every where, and warnynges and remedies but seldom given: and if all
men be more ready of them selves to stumble and be offended, then to be warned,
all men more ready to drink of the poison, then to taste of the remedy (as is
before partly, and shall hereafter more fully be declared) and so in fine, the
poison continually and deeply drunk of many, the remedy seldom and fayntly
tasted of a few: How can it be but infinite of the weak and infirm shall be
offended, infinite by ruin shall break their necks, infinite by deadly
v^nome be poisoned in their souls? And how is the charity of God, or love of
our neighbor in our hearts then, if when we may remove such dangerous
stumbling blocks, such pestilent poisons, we will not remove them? What shall
I say of them which will lay stumbling blocks, where before was none, and
set snares for the feet, nay, for the souls of weak and simple ones, and
work the danger of their eternal ruin, for whom our Savior Christ shed his
precious blood, where better it were that the arts of painting, playstering,
caruing, grauing, and foundyng, had never ben found nor used, then one of
them, whose souls in the sight of God are so precious, should by occasion of
image or picture perish and be lost. And thus is it declared that preaching
can not possiblye stay idolatry, if images be set up publicly in Temples and
Churches. And as true is it, that no other remedy, as writing against
idolatry, counsels assembled, decrees made against it, severe laws likewise
and proclamations of princes and Emperors, neither extreme punyshmentes and
penalties, nor any other remedy could or can be possibly devised for the
auoydyng of idolatry, if images be publicly set up and suffered. For
concerning writing against images, and idolatry to them committed, there has been alleged unto you in the second part of this treatise a great many of
places, out of Tertulian, Origene, Lactantius, S. Augustine, Epiphanius, S.
Ambrose, Clemens, and diverse other learned and holy bishops and doctors of the
Church. And besides these, all histories ecclesiastical, and books of other
godly and learned bishops and Doctors are full of notable examples and
sentences against images and the worshyppyng of them. And as they have most
earnestly written, so did they sincerely and most diligently in their time
teach and preach, according to their wrytynges and examples. For they were
then preaching Bishops, and more often seen in pulpittes, then in princes
palaces, more often occupied in his legacy, who said, go ye into the whole
world, and preach the Gospel to all men: then in imbassages and affairs of
princes of this world. And as they were most zealous and diligent, so were
they of excellent learning and godlynes of lyse, and by both of great
authority and credit with the people, and so of more force and lykelyhood to
persuade the people, and the people more like to believe and follow their
doctrine. But if their preachynges could not help, much less could their
writings, which do but come to the knowledge of a few that be learned, in
comparison to continual preaching, whereof the whole multitude is partaker.
Neither did the old fathers, Bishops, and Doctors, seuerallye only by
preaching and writing, but also together, great numbers of them assembled in
synodes and counsels make decrees and ecclesiastical laws against images, and
the worshipping of them: neither did they so once or twyse, but diverse times,
and in diverse ages and countries, assemble synodes and counsels, and made
severe decrees against images and worshyppyng of them, as has been at large in
the second part of this Nomilee before declared. But all their writing,
preaching, assemblyng in counselles, decreeyng, and making of laws
ecclesiastical, could nothing help either to pull down images to whom
idolatry was committed, or against idolatry whilst images stood. For those
blind books and dumb Scholemaisters, I mean images and idols (for they call
them lay men's books, and Scholemaisters) by their carved and painted
wrytynges, teaching and preaching idolatry, prevailed against all their
written books, and preaching with lively voice, as they call it. Well, if
preaching and writing could not keep men from worshyppyng of images and
idolatry, if pens and words could not do it, you would think that
penalty and swords might do it, I mean, that princes by severe laws and
punishments, might stay this unbridled affection of al men to idolatry,
though images were set up and suffered. But experience proves, that this can
no more help against idolatry, then writing and preaching. For Christian
Emperors (whose authority ought of reason, and by Gods law, to be greatest)
above eight in number, and six of them successiuelye reigning one after
another (as is in the histories before rehearsed) making most severe laws and
proclamations against idols and idolatry, images, and the worshipping of
images, and executing most grievous punishments, yea, the penalty of death,
upon the mainteiners of images, and upon idolaters and image worshyppers:
could not bring to pass, that either images once set up, might thoroughly be
destroyed, or that men should refrain from the worshyppyng of them, being set
up. And what think you then will come to pass, if men of learning should
teach the people to make them, and should maynteyne the setting up of them,
as things necessary in religion? To conclude, it appears evidently by all
stories and wrytynges, and experience of times past, that neither preaching,
neither writing, neither the consent of the learned, nor authority of the
godly, nor the decrees of counsels, neither the laws of princes, nor extreme
punyshmentes of the offenders in that behalf, nor no other remedy or means,
can help against idolatry, if images be suffered publiquelye. And it is truly
said, that times past are scholemaisters of wisdom to us that follow and live
after. Therefore in times past, the vertuest and best learned, the most
diligent also, and in number almost infinite ancient fathers, Bishops, and
Doctors, with their writing, preaching, industry, earnestnes, authority,
assembles, and counselles, could do nothing against images and idolatry, to
images once set up: What can we, neither in learning, nor holiness of life,
neither in diligence, neither authority to be compared with them, but men in
contempt, and of no estimation (as the world goes now) a few also in number,
in so great a multitude and malice of men: What can we do I say, or bring to
pass, to the stay of idolatry or worshippyng of images, if they be allowed to
stand publicly in temples and Churches? And if so many, so mighty Emperors,
by so severe laws and proclamations, so rigorous and extreme punishments and
executions, could not stay the people from setting up and worshypppng of
images: what will ensue think you, when men shall commend them as necessary
books of the lay men? Let us therefore of these latter days learn this
lessen of the experience of the ancient antiquity, that idolatry can not
possibly be separated from images any long time: but that as an inseperable
accident, or as a shadow follows the body when the sun shyneth, so
idolatry follows and cleaves to the public having of images in Temples and
Churches. And finally, as idolatry is to be abhorred and avoided, so are
images (which can not be long without idolatry) to be put away and destroyed.
Besides the which experimentes and proofs of times before, the very nature
and origin of images them selves draws to idolatry most violently, and man's
nature and inclination also is bent to idolatry so vehemently, that it is not
possible to sever or part images, nor to keep men from idolatry, if images be
suffered publicly. That I speak of the nature and origin of images, is this:
Even as the first intention of them is naught, and no good can come of that
which had an evil beginning, for they be altogether naught, as Athanasius in
his book against the gentiles declares, and saint Jerome also upon the
prophet Jeremie the. vi. Chapter, and Eusebius the seventh book of his
ecclesiastical history the. xviii. Chapter testifies, that as they first
came from the Gentiles, which were idolaters and worshippers of images, unto
us, and as the invention of them was the beginning of spiritual fornication,
as the word of God testifies, Sap. 14. So will they naturally (as it were,
and of necessity) turn to their origin from whence they came, and draw us
with them most violently to idolatry, abominable to God and all godly men. For
if the origin of images, and worshipping of them, as it is recorded in the
eight chapter of the book of wisdom, began of a blind love of a fond
father, framing for his comfort an image of his son, being dead, and so at
the last men fell to the worshipping of the image of him whom they did know to be
dead: How much more will men and women fall to the worshipping of the images
of God, our savior Christ, and his saints, if they be suffered to stand in
churches and temples publicly? For the greater thoppinion is of the majesty
and holiness of the person to whom an image is made, the sooner will the people
fall to the worshipping of the said images. Wherefore the images of God, our
savior Christ, the blessed virgin Mary, the apostels, martirs, and other of
notable holiness, are of all other images most dangerous for the peril of
idolatry, and therefore greatest heed to be taken that none of them be
suffered to stand publicly in Churches and temples. For there is no great
dread least any should fall to the worshipping of the images of Annas, Cayphas,
Pilat, or Judas the traitor, if they were set up. But to the other, it is
already at full proved, that idolatry has ben^ is, and is most like
continually to be committed. Now as was before touched, and is here more
largely to be declared, the nature of man is none otherwise bent to worshipping
of images (if he may have them and see them) then it is bent to whoredom and
adultrie in ^he company of harlots. And as unto a man given to the lust of the
flesh, seeing a wanton harlot, sitting by her, and embracing her, it profits
little for one to say be ware of fornication, God will condemn fornicatours
and adulterers: (...). Cor. 6. i. Tess. 4. Heb. 13.
For neither will he, being overcome with greater enticementes of the strumpet,
give ear or take heed to such godly admonitions, and when he is left
afterward alone with the harlot, nothing can follow but wickedness: Even so,
suffer images to be sight in Churches and Temples, ye shall in vain did them
beware of images (as saint John does) and flee idolatry, as all the scriptures
warn us, ye shall in vain John. 5.
preach and teach them against idolatry. For a number will notwithstanding
fall headlonges unto it, what by the nature of images, and by the inclination
of their own corrupt nature. Wherefore as a man given to lust, to sit down
by a strumpet, is to tempt God: So is it likewise to erect an idol in this
pronenesse of man's nature to idolatry, nothing but a tempting. Now if any
will say that this similitude proves nothing, yet I pray them let the word
of God, out of the which the similitude is taken, Leui. 17. and. 20. Number. 25.
Deute. 31. Baruc. 6.
prove something. Does not the word of God call idolatry spiritual
fornication? Does it not call a gilt or painted idol or image, astrumpet with
a painted face? Be not the spiritual wickedness of an idols intising, like the
flatteries of a wanton harlot? Be not men and women as prone to spiritual
fornication (I mean idolatry) as to carnal fornication? It this be denied,
let all nations upon the earth which have been idolaters (as by all stories
appears) prove it true. Let ye Jews and the people of God which were so
often and so earnestly warned, so dreadfully threatened concerning images and
idolatry, and so extremely punished therefore (and yet fell unto it) prove it
to be true: as in almost all the books of the old Testament, namely the Kings
and the Cronicles, and the Prophets, it appears most evidently. Let all ages
and times, and men of all ages and times, of all degrees and conditions, wise
men, learned men, princes, idiotes, unlearned, and comminaltie, prove it to be
true. If you require examples: For wise men, ye have the Egyptians, and the
Indian Gimnosophistes, the wysest men of the world, you have Solomon the
wysest of all other. For learned men, the Greeks, and namely the Atheniens,
exceeding all other nations in superstition and idolatry, as in the history
of the Acts of the Apostles saint Paul charge them. Acts. 17.
For princes and governors, you have the Romans, Romans i.
the rulers of the roste (as they say) you have the same forenamed king
Solomon, and all the kings of Israel and Juda after him, saving David,
Ezechias, and Josias, and one or two more. All these (I say) and infinite
others, wise, learned, princes, and governors, being all idolatours, have you
for examples and a proof of men's inclination to idolatry. That I may pass
over with silence in the mean time, infinite multitudes and millions of
idiotes and unlearned, the ignorant and gross people like unto horses and
moyles in whom is no understanding, Psalm. 31.
whose peril and danger to fall on heaps to idolatry by occasion of images,
the Scriptures specially foreshe we and give warning of. And Sap. 13, 14.
in deed how should the unlearned, simple, and foolish, escape the nets and
snares of idols and images, in the which the wysest and best learned have been
so entangled, trapped, and wrapped? Wherefore the argument holds this ground
sure, that men be as enclyned of their corrupt nature to spiritual fornication
as to carnal, which the wisdom of God foreseeing, to the general
prohibition that none should make to them selves any image or similitude,
adds a cause, depending of man's corrupt nature: Least (says God) thou being
deceived with error, Deuteronomy. 4.
honor and worship them. And of this ground of man's corrupt inclination, as
well to spiritual fornication as to carnal, it must needs follow, that as it
is the duty of the godly Magistrate, loving honesty, and hating whoredom,
to remove all Strumpets and harlots, specially out of places notoriously
suspected, or resorted unto of naughty packes, for the avoiding of carnal
fornication: So it is the duty of the same godly magistrate, after the
examples of the godly Kings Ezechias and Josias, to drive away all spiritual
harlottes (I mean idols and images) specially out of suspected places,
churches and temples, dangerous for idolatry to be committed to images placed
there, as it were in the appointed place and height of honor and worship (as
saint Augustine says) where the living god only (and not dead stones and
stoches) is to be worshipped: Augustine. in psalm. 36. et 113. et. li. 4. ca. 3.
de ciuitate dei.
It is I say ye office of godly magistrates likewise to avoid images and
Idolles out of Churches and Temples, as spiritual harlottes out of suspected
places, for the avoiding of idolatry, which is spiritual fornication. And as
he were the enemy of all honesty, that would bring strumpettes and harlottes
out of their secret comers into the public market place, there freely to
dwell and occupy their filthy marchaundyse: So is he the enemy of the true
worshipping of God, that brings idols and images into the Temple and Church
the house of God, there openly to be worshipped, and to spoil the zealous GOD
of his honor, who will not give it to any other, nor his glory to caruen
Jmages, who is as much forsaken, and the bond of love between man and him as
much broken by idolatry, which is spiritual fornication, as is the knot and
bond of marriage broken by carnal fornication. Let all this be taken as a lie,
if the word of God enforce it not to be true. Cursed be the man, says God in
Deuteronomium, Deuteronomy. 2^.
that makes a caruen or moulten Image, and places it in a secret corner: and
all the people shall say Amen. Thus says God, for at that time no man durst
have or worship images ope^lye, but in corners only, and the whole world being
the great Temple of God, he that in any corner thereof robs God of his
glory, and gives it to stocks and stones, is pronounced by Gods word
accursed. Now he that will bring these spiritual harlottes out of their
lurkyng corners, into public Churches and Temples, that spiritual
fornication may there openly of all men and women without shame be committed
with them, no doubt that person is cursed of God, and twyse cursed, and all
good and godly men and women will say Amen, and their Amen will take effect
also. Yea, and furthermore the madness of all men professing the religion of
Christ, now by the space of a sort of hundred years, and yet even in our
time in so great light of the Gospel very many running on heaps by sea and
land, to the great loss of their time, expense and waste of their goods,
destitution of their wives, children, and families, and danger of their own
bodies and lives, to Compostile, Rome, Jerusalem, and other far countries,
to visit dumb and dead stocks and stones, does sufficiently prove the
pronenesse of man's corrupt nature to the seeking of idolles once set up, and
the worshipping of them. And thus as well by the origin and nature of Idolles
and Images them selves, as by the prouenesse and inclination of man's corrupt
nature to idolatry, it is evident, that neither images, if they be publicly
set up, can be separated, nor men, if they see images in Temples and Churches,
can be stayed and kept from idolatry. Now where as they yet allege, that
howsoever the people, princes, learned, and wise of old time, have fallen into
idolatry by occasion of images, that yet in our time the most part, specially
the learned, wise, and of any authority, take no hurt nor offense by idolles
and images, neither do run into far countries to them and worship them:
And that they know well what an idol or Jmage is, and how to be used, and
that therefore it follows, images in Churches and temples to be an indifferent
thing, as the which of some is not abused: and that therefore they may justly
hold (as was in the beginning of this part by them alleged) that it is not
unlawful or wicked absolutelye to have images in Churches and temples, though
it may for the danger of the simple sort seem to be not altogether
expedient.

Whereunto may be well replied, that Solomon also the wysest of all men, did
well know what an idol or image was, and neither took any harm thereof a
great while himself, and also with his godly Wrytinges armed others against
Sap. 13. 14.
the danger of them. But yet afterward the same Solomon suffering his wanton
Paramours to bring their idolles into his court and palace, was by carnal
harlottes persuaded and brought at the last to the committing of spiritual
fornication with idolles, and of the wysest and godliest prince, became the
most foolyshest Eccle. iii. and, xiii. i. Cor. x.
and wickeddest also. Wherefore it is better even for the wysest to regard
this warning, He that loves danger shall perish therein: and, let him that
stands, beware least he fall, rather then wittyngly and willingly to lay
such a stumblyng block for his own feet and others, that may perhaps
bring at last to breakenecke. The good King Ezechias did know well enough, ^.
Reg. 18.
that the brazen Serpent was but a dead image, and therefore he took no hurt
himself thereby through idolatry to it: Did he therefore let it stand,
because himself took no hurt thereof? No not so: but being a good king, and
therefore regarding the health of his seely subjects, deceived by that image,
and committing idolatry thereto, he did not only take it down, but also
break it to pieces. And this he did to that image that was set up by the
commandment of God, in the presence whereof great miracles were wrought, as
that which was a figure of our savior Christ to come, who should deliver us
from the mortal styng of the old Serpent Satan. Neither did he spare it in
respect of the auncientnesse or antiquity of it, which had continued above
seven hundred years, nor for that it had been suffered, and preserved by so many
godly kings before his time. How think you would that Godly Prince (if he
were now living) handle our Idolles, set up against Gods commandment
directly, and being figures of nothing but folly, and for fools to gase on,
till they become as wise as the blocks them selves which they stare on, and
so fall down as dared Larkes in that gase, and being them selves alive,
worship a dead stock or stone, gold or silver, and so become idolaters,
abominable and cursed before the living God, giving the honor due unto him
which made them when they were nothing, and to our Savior Christ who redeemed
them being lost, to the dead and dumb idol, the work of man's hand, which
never did nor can do any thing for them, no is not able to stir nor once to
move, and therefore worse then a vile worm which can move and creep. The
excellent king Josias also did take him self no hurt of Images and Idols, for
he did know well what they were: did he therefore because of his own
knowledge let Idols and images stand? much less did he set any up? Or rather
did he not by his knowledge and authority also succor the ignorance of
such as did not know what they were, by utter taking away of all such
stumbling blocks as might be occasion of ruin to his people and subjects.
Will they because a few took no hurt by images or idols, break the general
law of God, Thou shall make to thee no similitude. etc They might as well,
because Moses was not seduced by Iethroes daughter, nor Boos by Ruth, being
strangers, reason, that all the Jews might break the general law of God,
forbidding his people to join their children in marriage with strangers, least
they seduce their children that they should not follow God. Wherefore they
which thus reason, Though it be not expedient, yet it is lawful to have images
publicly, and do prove that lawfulness by a few pyked and chosen men: if
they obiecte that indifferently to all men, which a very few can have
without hurt and offense, they seem to take the multitude for vile souls (as
he says in Virgil) of whose loss and safegarde no reputation is to be had,
for whom yet Christ paid as dearelye as for the myghtiest prince, or the
wysest and best learned in the earth. And they that will have it generally to
be taken for indifferent, for that a very few take no hurt of it, though
infinite multitudes beside perish thereby: show that they put little
difference between the multitude of christians and brute beasts, whose
danger they do so little esteem. Besides this, if they be Bishops or
parsonnes, or otherwise having charge of men's consciences, that thus reason, It
is lawful to have images publicly, though it be not expedient, what manner of
pastors show they the^ selves to be to their flock, which thrust unto them
that, which they them selves confess not to be expedient for them, but to the
utter ruin of the souls committed to their charge, for whom they shall give a
strayte account before the prince of pastors at the last day? For in deed,
to obiecte to the weak and ready to fall of them selves such stumbling blocks,
is a thing not only not expedient, but unlawful, yea, and most wicked also.
Wherefore it is to be wondered how they can call images, set up in churches and
temples to no profit or benefit of any, and to so great peril and danger,
yea, hurt and destruction of many, or rather infinite, things indifferent. Is
not the public setting up of them rather a snare for all men, and the
tempting of God? I beseech these reasoners to call to mind their own
accustomed ordinance and decree, whereby they determined that the Scripture,
though by GOD him self commanded to be known of all men, women, and
children, should not be read of the simple, nor had in the vulgar Deuteronomy. 31.
tongue, for that (as they said) it was dangerous, by bringing the simple
people into errors. And will they not forbid Images to be set up in Churches
and Temples, which are not commanded, but forbidden most straytlye by God,
but let them still be there, yea, and maintain the^ also, seeing the people are
brought, not in danger only, but in deed into most abominable error and
detestable idolatry thereby? Shall Gods word, by God commanded to be read
unto all and known of all, for danger of heresy (as they say) be shut up?
and idolles and images, not withstanding they be forbidden by God, and not
withstanding the danger of idolatry by them, shall they yet be set up,
suffered, and mainteyned in churches and temples? O worldly and fleshely
wisdom, ever bent to maynteyne the inventions and traditions of men by carnal
reason, and by the same to disanull or deface the holy ordinances, laws, and
honor of the eternal God, who is to be honored and praised for ever. Amen.

Now it remains for the conclusion of this treaty, to declare as well the
abuse of churches and temples, by to costely and sumptuous deckyng and
adourning of them, as also the leude paintyng, gylding, and clothing of idols
and images, and so to conclude the whole treaty. Tertull. Apollog. cap. 39.


In Tertulians time, an hundred and threescore years after Christ, Christians
had none other temples but common houses, whyther they for the most part
secretly resorted. And so far of was it that they had before his time any
goodly or gorgious declied temples, that laws were made in Antonius Verus and
Commodus the Emperors times, that no christians should dwell in houses, come
in public bathes, or be Eus. lib. 5. Eccl. hist.
seen in streets, or any where abroad, and that if they were once accused to
be Christians, they should by no means be suffered to escape. As was practiced
in Apolonius a noble Senator Hieronimus.
of Rome, who being accused of his own bondeman and slave that he was a
Christian, could neither by his defense and appologie learnedly and
eloquently written, and read publicly in the Senate, nor in respect that he
was a ci(...)zen, nor for the dignity of his order, nor for the vileness and
unlawfulness of his accuser, being his own slave, by lykelihoode of malice
moved to forge lies against his lord, nor for no other respect or help, could
be delivered from death. So that christians were then driven to dwell in caves
and dens: so far of was it that they had any public temples adourned and
decked as they now be. Which is here rehearsed to the confutation of those
impudent shamlesse liars, which report such glorious glosed fables, of the
goodly and gorgious Temple that Saint Peter, Linus, Cletus, and those thirty
Bishops their successors had at Rome, until the time of the Emperor
Constantine, and which saint Policarpe should have in Asia, or Ireneus in
France, by such lies, contrary to all true Histories, to maynteyne the
superfluous gylding and decking of Temples now a days, wherein they put almost
the whole sum and pith of our religion. But in those times the world was
won to Christendom, not by gorgious, gylted, and painted temples of
christians, which had scarsely houses to dwell in: but by the godly, and as it
were golden mynds, and fyrine faith of such as in all adversity and
persecution professed the truth of our religion. And after these times, in
Maximian Eus. lib. 8. cap. 19. et li. 9. ca. 9.
and Constantius the Emperors proclamation, the places where Christians resorted
to public prayer, were called conuenticles. And in Galerius Maximinus the
Emperors Epistle, they are called Oratories and Dominica, to say, places
dedicate to the service of the Lord. And here by the way it is to be noted,
that at that time there were no Churches or temples erected unto any saint, but
to God only, as Saint Augustine De ciuita. li. 8. ca. 1.
also records, saying: we buyld no temples unto our martirs. And Eusebius him
self calls Churches, houses of prayer, and shows that in Constantine the
emperors time, al men rejoiced, seeing in stead of low conuenticles, which
tyraunts had destroyed, high temples to be builded. Lo, unto the time of
Constantine, by the space of above three hundred years after our savior
Christ, when christian religion was most pure, and in deed golden, Christians
had but low and poor conuenticles and simple oratories, yea, caves under the
ground called Cryptae, Cryptae (...).
where they for fear of persecution assembled secretly together. A sigure
whereof remains in the vaultes which yet are builded under great Churches,
to put us in remembrance of the old state of the primitive church before
Constantine, where as in Constantines time, and after him, were builded great
and goodly temples for christians, called Basilicae, either for that the Greeks
Basilicae.
used to call all great and goodly places Basilicas, or for that the high and
everlasting king God and our Savior Christ was served in them. But although
Constantine, and other princes, of good zeal to our religion, did sumptuouslye
deck and adourne Christians temples, yet did they dedicate at that time all
Churches and temples to God or our Savior Christ, and to no saint, for that
abuse began long after in Justinians Nouel constitu. 3. et. 47.
time. And that gorgeousnes then used, as it was borne with, as rising of a
good zeal: so was it signified of ye godly learned even at that time, that
such cost might otherwise have been better bestowed. Let saint Jerome (although
otherwise to great a lyker and a lower of external and outward things) be a
proof hereof, who has these words in his Epistle to Demetriades: Let other
(says saint Jerome) build Churches, cover walls with tables of marble,
carrye together huge pyllers, and gylde their tops or heads, which do not
feel or understand their precious decking and adourning, let them deck the
doors with iuorie and silver, and set the golden Aulters with precious stones,
I blame it not, let every man abound in his own sense, and better is it so
to do, then carefullye to keep their riches laid up in store. But thou have
another way appointed thee, to cloth Christ in the poor, to visit him in the
sick, feed him in the hungry, lodge him in those who do lack harbor, and
specially such as be of the householde of faith.

And the same Saint Jerome touches the same matter some what more freelye in
his treaty of the life of Clerks to Nepotian, saying thus: Many build
walls, and erect pyllers of Churches, the smoothe marbles do glister, the
roof shyneth with Gold, the altar is set with precious stone: But of the
ministers of Christ, there is no election or choice. Neither let any man
obiecte and aleage against me the rich temple that was in Jurie, ye table,
candlestickes, incense, ships, platters, cups, morters, and other things
all of gold. Then were these things allowed of the Lord, when the Priests
offered sacrifices, and the blood of beasts was accounted the redemption of
sins. Howbeit, all these things went before in figure, and they were written
for us, upon whom the end of the world is come. And now when that our Lord
being poor, has dedicate the poverty of his house, let us remember his
cross, and we shall esteem riches as mire ordongue. What do we marvel at
that which Christ calls wicked Mammon? Whereto do we so hyghlye esteem and
love that, which saint Peter does for a glory testify that he had not.
Nytherto saint Jerome.

Thus you see how saint Jerome teaches the sumptuousnes amongst ye Jews to be
a figure to signify, and not an example to follow, and that those outward
things were suffered for a time, until Christ our Lord came, who turned all
those outward things into spirit, faith, and truth. And the same saint
Jerome upon the seventh chapter of Jeremy says: God commanded both the Jews
at that time, and now us who are placed in the Church, that we have no trust
in the goodlinesse of building and gylte rooffes, and in walls covered with
tables of marble, and say: the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord. For that is the temple of the lord wherein dwells true
faith, godly conversation, and the company of all virtues. And upon the
Prophet Agge, he descrybeth the true and right decking of ornaments of the
Temple after this sort: I (says Saint Jerome) do think the silver wherewith
the house of God is decked, to be the doctrine of the scriptures, of the which
it is spoken: The doctrine of the Lord is a pure doctrine, silver tried in
fire, purged from dross, purified seven times. And I do take gold to be that
which remains in the hid sense of the saints, and the secret of the heart,
and shyneth with the true light of God. Which is evident that the Apostle also
meant of the saints that build upon the foundation of Christ, some silver,
some gold, some precious stones: that by the Gold, the hid sense, by silver,
godly vtteraunce, by precious stones, works which please God, might be
signified. With these metals, the Church of our savior is made more goodly
and gorgeous, then was the synagogue in old time. With these lively stones, is
the Church and house of Christ builded, and peace is given to it for ever. All
these be saint Hieromes sayings. No more did the old godly Bishops and
doctors of the Church, allow the outrageous furniture of Temples and
Churches, with plate, vessels of gold, silver, and precious vestures. Saint
Chrysostom says, In the ministry of the holy Sacraments, there is no need
of golden vessels, but of golden minds. And saint Ambrose says, 2. Offi
capitu. 28.
Christ sent his Apostles without gold, and gathered his Church without
gold. The Church has gold, not to hepe it, but to bestow it on the
necessities of the poor. The Sacraments look for no gold, neither do they
please God for the commendation of gold, which are not bought for gold. The
adournyng and deckyng of the Sacraments, is the redemption of captyues. Thus
much saint Ambrose.

Saint Hierome commends Exuperius Bishop of Tolose, that he carried the
Sacrament of the Lords body in a wycker basket, and the Sacrament of his
blood in a glass, and so cast covetousness out of the Church. And Bonifacius
Tit. de co^secra. can. Triburien
Bishop and martyr, as it is recorded in the decrees, testifies, that in old
time the ministers used treene, and not golden vessels. And Zepherinus the.
xvi. Bishop of Rome made a decree that they should use vessels of glass.
Likewise were the vestures used in the Church in old time very plain and
single, and nothing costly. And Rabanus at large declares, that this Li. 1.
insti. cap. 14.
costly and manifold furniture of vestmentes of late used in the Church, was
fet from the Jewishe usage, and agrees with Aarons apparelling almost
altogether. For the maintenance of the which, Innocentius the Pope pronounces
boldly, that all the customs of the old law be not abolished, that we might
in such apparel, of Christians, the more willingly become Jewish. This is
noted, not against Churches and temples, which are most necessary, and ought to
have their due use and honor, as is in another Homilee for their purpose
declared, nor against the convenient cleanliness and ornaments thereof: but
against the sumptuousnes and abuses of Temples and Churches. For it is a
Church or Temple also, that glistereth with no marble, shyneth with no gold,
nor silver, glittereth with no pearls nor precious stones: but with plainness
and frugalitie, signifies no proud doctrine nor people, but humble, frugall,
and nothing esteemyng earthly and outward things, but gloriouslye decked with
inward ornaments, according as the prophet declares, saying, The kings
daughter is altogether glorious inwardlye.

Now concerning outrageous deckyng of images and idolles, with paynting,
gyldyng, adournyng with precious vestures, pearl, and stone, what is it else,
but for the further provocation and intisement to spiritual fornication, to
deck spiritual harlottes most costly and wantonlye: which the idolatrious
Church understands well enough. For she being in deed not only an harlot
(as the scriptures calls her) but also a foul, filthy, old, withered
harlot (for she is in deed of ancient years) and understanding her lack of
natural and true beawtie, and great lothsomenesse, which of her self she
has, does (after the custom of such harlottes) paynte her self, and deck
and tire her self with gold, pearl, stone, and all kind of precious jewels,
that she shyning with the outward beawtie and glory of them, may please the
foolyshe fantasy of fond lovers, and so entice them to spiritual fornication
with her: Who, if they saw her (I will not say naked) but in simple apparel,
would abhor her, as the fowlest and fylthyest harlot that ever was seen:
According as appears by the description of the garnyshyng of the great
strumpette of all strumpettes, the mother of whoredom, set forth by saint
John in his Apo. 16. 18
revelation, who by her glory provoked the Princes of the earth to commit
whoredom with her. Whereas on the contrary part, the true Church of GOD, as
a chaste matrone, espoused (as the scripture teaches) to one husband, our
savior Jesus Christ, whom alone she is content only to please and serve, and
looks not to delyght the eyes or fantasies of any other strange lovers, or
wooers: is content with her natural ornaments, not doubtyng, by such sincere
simplicity, best to please him, which can well skill of the difference between
a painted visage, and true natural beawtie. And concerning such glorious
gildyng and decking of images, both Gods word written in the. x. Chapter of
the prophet Hierome, Hier. 10.
and saint Hieromes commentaries upon the same, are most worthy to be noted.
First, the words of the scriptures be these: The workman with his are he wed
the timber out of the wood, with the work of his hands, he decked it with
gold and silver, he joined it with nails and pinnes, and the stroke of an
hammer, that it might hold together. They be made smothe as the Palm, and
they can not speak: if they be borne, they remove, for they can not go. Fear
ye them not, for they can neither do evil nor good. Thus says the prophet.
Upon which text, saint Hierome has these words: This is the description of
idols, which the Gentiles worship, their matter is vile and corruptible. And
whereas the artificer is mortal, the things he makes must needs be
corruptible, he decketh it with silver and gold, that with glitteryng or
shynyng of both metals, he may deceive the simple. Which error in deed has
passed over from the Gentiles, that we should judge religion to stand in
riches. And by and by after, he says, They have the beawtie of metals, and be
beawtified by the art of payntyng, but good or profit is there none in them.
And shortly after again, They make great promises, and devise an image of
vain worshipping of their own plantasies, they make great bragges to deceive
every simple body, they dull and amase the understanding of the unlearned, as
it were with golden senses, and eloquence, shynyng with the bryghtnesse of
silver. And of their own deuisers and makers, are these images advanced and
magnified, in the which is no utility nor profit at all, and the worshyppyng
of the which, properly parteineth to the Gentiles and Heathen, and such as
know not God.

Thus far of faint Hieromes words. Whereupon you may note as well his
judgment of images them selves, as also of the paynting, gildyng, and deckyng
of them: that it is an error which came from the Gentiles, that it persuades
religion to remain in richesse, that it amaseth and deceaueth the simple and
unlearned, with golden senses and silver shinyng eloquence, and that it
apparteyneth properlye to the Gentiles and Heathens, and such as know not
GOD. Wherefore the having, payntyng, gyldyng, and deckyng of images by S.
Hieromes judgment, is erroneous, seducing and bringing into error (specially
the simple and unlearned) heathenish, and void of the knowledge of God.

Surely the prophet Daniel in the. xi. Chapter declares such sumptuous
decking of images with gold, silver, and precious stones, to be a token of
antechristes kingdom, who (as the prophet foresheweth) shall worship God with
such gorgeous things. Now vsuallye such outrageous adorning and deckyng of
images, has risen and ben maynteyned, either of offerings provoked by
superstition and given in idolatry, or of spoils, robberies, vsurye, or
goods otherwise unjustly gotten, whereof wicked men have given part to the
images or saints, (as they call them) that they might be pardoned of the
whole: as of diverse writings and old monuments, concerning the cause and end
of certain great gifts, may well appear. And in deed such money so
wyckedly gotten, is most meet to be put to so wicked a use. And that which
they take to be amends for the whole before God, is more abominable in his
sight, then both the wicked gettyng, and the more wicked spendyng of all the
rest. For how the Lord aloweth such gifts, he declares euidentlye in the
prophet Esaias, saying, I (says the Lord) do love judgment, and I hate
spoil and rauenie offered Esai. 61.
in sacrifice: which the very Gentiles understood. For Plato shows, that
such men as suppose Dialogo. de legib' 10.
that God does pardon wicked men, if they give part of their spoils and
rauine to him, take him to be like a dog, that would be entreated and hired
with part of the pray, to suffer the Wolves to weerye the sheep. And in case
the goods wherewith images be decked, were justly gotten, yet is it extreme
madness, so foolyshly and wickedlye to bestow goods purchased by wisdom and
truth. Of such lewdness Lactantius Li. 2. insti. cap. 4.
writes thus. Men do in vain deck images of the gods with gold, Juorie, and
precious stone, as though they could take any pleasure of these things: For
what use have they of precious gifts, which understand nor feel nothing? Even
the same that dead men have. For with like reason do they bury dead bodies,
farced with spyces and odours, and clothed with precious vestures, and deck
images, which neither felt or knew when they were made, nor understand when
they be honored, for they get no sense and understanding by their
consecration. Thus far Lactantius, and much more, to long here to rehearse,
declaryng that as little girls play with little puppettes, so be these decked
images great puppettes for old fools to play with. And that we may know
what, not only men of our religion, but Ethnikes also, judge of such decking
of dead images, it is not unprofitable to hear what Seneca, a wise and
excellent learned Senator of Rome and Philosopher, says concerning the
foolyshnesse of ancient and grave men, used in his time in worshyppyng and
decking of images: We says (Seneca) be not twyse children (as the common
saying is) but always children: but this is the difference, that we being
elder, play the children, and in these plays they bring in before, great and
well decked puppettes (for so he calls images) oyntmentes, incense, and
odours. To these puppettes they offer up sacrifice, which have a mouth, but
not the use of teethe. Upon these they put attyryng and precious apparel,
which have no use of clothes. To these they give gold and silver, which they
who receive it (meaning the images) lack, as well as they that have given it
from them. And Seneca much commends Dionisius king of Sicile, for his merrye
robbyng of such decked and iewelled puppettes. But you will ask, what does
this apparteyne to our images, which is written against the idols of the
Gentiles? Altogether surely. For what use or pleasure has our images of their
deckyng and precious ornaments? Did our images understand when they were
made? or know when they be so trimmed and decked? Be not these things bestowed
upon them, as much in vain, as upon dead men which have no sense? Wherefore it
follows, that there is like foolishness and lewdenesse in deckyng of our
images, as great puppettes for old fools, like children, to play the wicked
play of idolatry before, as was among the Ethnikes and Gentiles. Our Churches
stand full of such great puppettes, wonderously decked and adourned,
Garlandes, and Coronettes be set on their heads, precious pearls hangyng
about their necks, their fyngers shine with rings, set with precious stones,
their dead and styffe bodies, are clothed with garments styffe with gold. You
would believe that the images of our men saints, were some Princes of Persie
land with their proud apparel, and the idolles of our women saints, were
nice and well trimmed harlottes, temptyng their paramours to wantonness:
Whereby the saints of God are not honored, but most dishonored, and their
godliness, soberness, chastity, contempt of riches and of the vanity of the
world, defaced and brought in doubt, by such monstrous deckyng, most
differyng from their sober and godly lives. And because the whole Pageaunt
must thoroughly be playde, it is not enough thus to deck idols, but at the
last come in the Priests them selves, likewise decked with gold and pearl,
that they may be meet servants for such Lords and ladies, and fyt
worshyppers of such gods and goddesses. And with a solemn pace they pass
forth before these golden puppets, and down to the ground on their marybones
before these honorable idols, and then rising up again, offer up odours and
incense unto them, to give the people an example of double idolatry, by
worshyppyng not only the idol, but the gold also, and richesse wherewith it
is garnished. Which things, the most part of our old martyrs rather then they
would do, or once kneel, or offer up one crumbe of incense before an image,
suffered most cruel and terrible deaths, as the histories of them at large
do declare. And here again their allegatian out of Gregory the first and
Damassen, that Gregor. Episto. ad Serenum Massile. Damas. de fide or tho. lib.
4. cap. 17.
images be the lay men's books, and that pycture is the scripture of idiottes
and simple persons, is worthy to be considered. For as it has been touched in
diverse places before, how they be books teaching nothing but lies, as by
saint Paul in the first Chapter to the Romans evidently appears, of the
images of GOD: So what manner of books and scripture these painted and gylte
images of saints be unto the common people, note well I pray you. For after
that our preachers shall have instructed and exhorted the people to the
following of the virtues of the saints, as contempt of this world, poverty,
soberness, chastity, and such like virtues, which undoubtedly were in the
saints: Think you as soon as they turn their faces from the preacher, and
look upon the graven books and painted scripture of the glorious gylte
images and idolles, all shynyng and glytteryng with metal and stone, and
covered with precious vestures, or else with Choerea in Terence, behold a
painted table, wherein is set forth by the art of the paynter, an image with a
nice and wanton apparel and countenance, more like to Venus or Flora, then
Marie Magdalene, or if like to Marie Magdalene, it is when she played the
harlot, rather then when she wept for her sins. When I say they turn about
from the preacher, to these books and scoolemaisters and painted scriptures:
shall they not find them lying books? teaching other manner of lessons, of
esteeming of riches, of pride, and vanity in apparel, of nycenesse and
wantonness, and peradventure of whoredom; as Choerea of like pyctures was
taught. And in Lucian, one learned of Venus Gnidia a lesson, to abominable here
to be remembered. Be not these think you pretye books and scriptures for
simple people, and specially for wives and young maidens to look in, read on,
and learn such lessons of? What will they think either of the preacher, who
taught them contrary lessons of the saints, and therefore by these caruen
doctors, are charged with a lie, or of the saints them selves, if they believe
these graven books and painted scriptures of them, who make the saints now
reigning in heaven with God, to their great dishonor, scoolemaisters of such
vanity, which they in their life time most abhorred? For what lessons of
contempt of richesse and vanity of this world, can such books so besmeared
with gold, set with stone, covered with silks, teach? What lessons of
soberness and chastity, can our women learn of these pyctured scriptures,
with their nice apparel and wanton looks? But away for shame with these
colored clokes of idolatry, of the books and scriptures of images and
pictures, to teach idiottes, nay to make idiotes and stark fools and beasts
of Christians. Do men, I pray you, when they have the same books at home with
them, run on pilgrimage to seek like books at Rome, Compostella, or
Jerusalem, to be taught by them, when they have the like to learn of at home?
Do men reverence some books, and despise and set light by other of the same
sort? Do men kneel before their books, light candels at noone time, burn
incense, offer up gold and silver, and other gifts to their books? Do men
either feign or believe miracles to be wrought by their books? I am sure that
the new Testament of our savior Jesus Christ, conteynyng the word of life,
is a more lively, express, and true image of our savior, then all carved,
graven, moulten, and painted images in the world be, and yet none of all these
things be done to that book or scripture of the Gospel of our savior, which
be done to images and pictures, the books and scriptures of lay men and
idiotes, as they call them. Wherefore call them what they list, it is most
evident by their deeds, that they make of them no other books nor scriptures
then such as teach most filthy and horrible idolatry, as the users of such
books daily prove by continual practisyng the same. O books and scriptures,
in the which the deuilyshe scoolemaister satan, has penned the lewd lessons
of wicked idolatry, for his dastardelye disciples and scollers to behold,
read, and learn, to Gods most high dishonor, and their most horrible
damnation. Have not we ben much bound, think you, to those which should
have taught us the truth out of Gods book and his holy scripture, that they
have shut up that book and scripture from us, and none of us so bold as once
to open it, or read on it? and in stead thereof, to spread us abroad these
goodly caruen and gylted books and painted scriptures, to teach us such good
and godly lessons? Have not they done well, after they ceased to stand in
pulpittes them selves, and to teach the people committed to their instruction,
keeping scilence of Gods word and become dumb dogs (as the prophet calls
them) to set up in their stead, on every pyller and corner of the Church, such
goodly doctors, as dumb, but more wicked then them selves be? We need not to
complain of the lack of one dumb Parson, having so many dumb deuelish
Uicars (I mean these idols and painted puppets) to teach in their stead.
Now in the mean season, whilst the dumb and dead idols stand thus decked
and clothed, contrary to gods law and commandment, ye poor christian people,
the lively images of God, commended to us so tenderly by our savior Christ as
most dear to him, stand naked, shyneryng for cold, and their teeth
chatteryng in their heads, and no man covers them, are pyned with hunger and
thirste, and no man gives them a penny to refresh them, where as pounds be
redye at all times (contrary to Gods word and will) to deck and trymme dead
stocks and stones, which neither feel cold, hunger, ne thirst.

Clemens has a notable sentence concerning this matter, saying thus, That
serpent the devil Lib 5. ad Iacobum Domini.
does by the mouth of certain men utter these words: ^e for the honor of the
invisible god, do worship visible images: which doubtless is most false. For
if you will truly honor the image of God, you should by doing well to man,
honor the true image of God in him. For the image of God is in every man: But
the likeness of God is not in every one, but in those only which have a godly
heart and pure mind. If you will therefore truly honor the image of God, we
do declare to you the truth, that ye do well to man, who is made after the
image of God, that you give honor and reverence to him, and refreshe the
hungry with meat, the thirsty with drink, the naked with clothes, the sick
with attendaunce, the stranger harbourlesse with lodgyng, the prisoners with
necessaries, and this shall be accounted as truly bestowed upon God. And these
things are so directlye apparteynyng to Gods honor, that whosoever does not
this, shall seem to have reproched and done villanye to the image of GOD. For
what honor of God is this, to run to images of stock and stone, and to
honor vain and dead figures of God, and to despise man, in whom is the true
image of God? And by and by after he says, Understande ye therefore that this
is the suggestion of the serpent satan, lurkyng within you, which persuades
you that you are godly when you honor insensible and dead images, and that
you be not ungodly when you hurt or leave vnsuccoured the lively and reasonable
creatures. All these be the words of Clemens.

Note I pray you, how this most ancient and learned doctor, within one
hundred years of our savior Christ's time, most plainly teaches, that no
service of God, or religion acceptable to him, can be in honoring of dead
images: but in succouring of the poor, the lively images of God, according to
saint James, who says, This is the pure and true religion before God the
father, to succor fatherless and motherlesse children and wyddowes in their
affliction, and to hepe him self undefiled from this world. True religion
then and pleasing of god, stands not in making, setting up, payntyng,
gylding, clothing, and decking of dumb and dead images (which be but great
puppettes and mawmettes for old fools in dotage, and wicked idolatry, to
dally and play with) nor in kyssyng of them, cappyng, kneelyng, offering to
them, in sensyng of the^, setting up of candels, hanging up of legs, arms,
or whole bodies of wax before them, or praying, and askyng of them or of
saints, things belongyng only to God to give. But al these things be vain
and abominable, and most damnable before God. Wherefore all such do not only
bestow their money and labor in vain: but with their pains and cost,
purchase to them selves gods wrath and utter indignation, and everlasting
damnation both of body and soul. For ye have heard it evidently proved in
these Homilees against idolatry, by Gods word, the doctors of the Church,
ecclesiastical histories, reason, and experience, that images have been and be
worshypped, and so idolatry committed to them by infinite multitudes, to the
great offense of Gods majesty, and danger of infinite souls, and that
idolatry can not possiblye be separated from images set up in Churches and
Temples, gylded and decked gorgeouslye, and that therefore our images be in
deed very idols, and so all the prohibitions, laws, curses, threatenings of
horrible plagues, as well temporal as eternal, contained in the holy
scripture, concerning idols, and the makers, mainteyners, and worshyppers of
them, apparteyne also to our images set up in Churches and Temples, to the
makers, maynteyners, and worshyppers of them. And all those names of
abomination, which Gods word in the holy scriptures gives to the idols of the
Gentiles, apparteyne to our images, being idolles like to them, and having like
idolatry committed unto them. And Gods own mouth in the holy scriptures
calls them vanities, lies, deceyptes, vncleanlynesse, fylthynesse, dounge,
mischief, and abomination before the Lord. Wherefore Gods horrible wrath, and
our most dreadful danger, can not be avoided, without the destruction and
utter abolishing of all such images and idols out of the Church and Temple of
God, which to accomplish, GOD put in the minds of all Christian princes. And
in the mean time, let us take heed and be wise, O ye beloved of the Lord, and
let us have no strange gods, but one only god, who made us when we were
nothing, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who redeemed us when we were
lost, and with his holy John. 17.
spirit who does sanctify us. For this is life everlasting, to know him to
be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Let us honor and
worship for religions sake none but him, and him let us worship and honor as
he will him self, and has declared by his word, that he will be honored and
worshipped, not in, nor by images or idolles, which he has most strayghtly
forbidden, neither in kneelyng, lyghtyng of candels, burning of incense,
offering up of gifts unto images and idols, to believe that we shall please
him, for all these be abomination before God: but let us honor and worship god
in spirit and truth, fearyng and loving him John 4.
above all things, trustyng in him only, calling upon him, and praying to
him only, praysyng and laudyng of him only, and all other in him, and for him.
For such worshyppers does our heavenly father love, who is the most purest
spirit, and therefore will be worshypped in spirit and truth. And such
worshyppers were Abraham, Moses, David, Helias, Peter, Paul, John, and all
other the holy patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, and all true saints
of God, who all as the true friends of God, were enemies and destroyers of
images and idols as the enemies of God and his true religion. Wherefore take
heed and be wise, O ye beloved of the Lord, and that which others, contrary
to gods word, bestow wickedly, and to their damnation, upon dead stocks and
stones, (no images, but enemies of god and his saints) that bestow ye, as the
faithful servants of God, according to Gods word, mercifully upon poor men
and women, fatherless children, wydowes, sick persons, strangers, prisoners,
and such others that be in any necessity, that ye may at that great day of
the Lord, hear that most blessed and comfortable saying of our Savior
Christ: Come ye blessed into the kingdom of my father, prepared for you before
the beginning of the world. For I was hungrye, and ye gave me meat, thirsty,
and ye gave me drink, naked, and ye clothed me, harbourlesse, and ye lodged
me, in prison, and ye visited me, sick, and ye comforted me. For whatsoever ye
have done for the poor and needy in my name, and for my sake, that have ye
done for me. To the which his heavenly kingdom, God the father of mercies
bring us, for Jesus Christ's sake our only savior, mediator, and advocate,
to whom, with the holy ghost, one immortal, invisible, and most glorious God,
be all honor and thankesgeuing, and glory world without end.

Amen.
An Homilee for repairing and keeping clean, and comelye adourning of Churches.
IT is a common custom used of all me^, when they intend to have their
friends or neighbors to com to their houses to eat or drink with them, or to
have any solemn assembly to treat and talk of any matter, they will have
their houses which they keep, in continual reparations, to be clean and fine,
lest they should be counted sluttish, or little to regard their friends, and
neighbors. How much more then ought the house of God, which we commonly call
the Church, to be sufficiently repaired in all places, and to be honorably
adourned and garnished, and to be kept clean and sweet, to the comfort of the
people that shall resort thereto.

It appears in the holy scripture, how Gods house, which was called his holy
temple, and was the mother Church of all Jewry, fell sometimes into decay,
and was oftentimes profaned and defiled, through the negligence and
ungodliness of such as had charge thereof. But when godly Kings and
governors were in place, then commandment was given forthwith, that the
Church and temple of god should be repaired, and the devotion of the people to
be gathered, for the reparatio^ of the same. We read in the fourth book of
the kings, how that king 4. Reg. 1^.
Joas, being a godly prince, gave commandment to the priests, to convert
certain offerings of the people, toward the reparation and amendment of Gods
temple.

Like commandment gave that most godly king Josias, concerning the reparation
and reedification 4. Reg. 22.
of Gods te aple, which in his time he found in sore decay. It has pleased
almightye God, that these histories touching the reedifying and repayring of
his holy temple, should be written at large, to the end we should be taught
thereby: First, that God is well pleased that his people should have a
convenient place to resort unto, and to come together, to praise and magnify
Gods holy name. And secondly, he is hyghlye pleased with all those, which
diligently and zelously go about to amend and restore such places as are
appointed for the congregation of Gods people to resort unto, and wherein they
humblye and jointly render thanks to God for his benefits, and with one heart
and voice praise his holy name. Thirdlye, God was sore displeased with his
people, because they builded, decked, and trimmed up their own houses, and
suffered Gods house to be in ruin and decay, to lie uncomely and fulsomly.
Wherefore God was sore grieved with them, and plagued them, as appears in the
Prophet Aggeus. Thus says Agge. ^^
the Lord: Is it time for you to dwell in your seeled houses, and the Lords
house not regarded? Ye have sowed much, and gathered in but little, your meat
and your clothes have neither filled you, nor made you warm, and he that had
his wages, put it in a bottomless purse. By these plagues which God laid
upon his people for neglecting of his temple, it may euidentlye appear that
GOD will have his Temple, his Church, the place where his congregation shall
resort to magnify him, well edified, well repaired, and well maintained. Some,
neither regarding godliness, nor the place of godly exercise, will say: The
temple in the old law, was commanded to be buylte and repaired by God him
self, because it had great promises annexed unto it, and because it was a
figure, a sacrament, or a signification of Christ, and also of his Church. To
this may be easylye answered: First, that our Churches are not destitute of
promises, forasmuch as our Savior Christ says: Where two or three are
gathered in my name, there am I in the midst among them. A great number
therefore coming to Church together in the name of Christ, have there, that is
to say in the Church, their God and Savior Christ Jesus, presently among the
congregation of his faithful people, by his grace, by his favor and godly
assistance, according to his most assured and comfortable promises. Why then
ought not Christian people to build them Temples and Churches, having as great
promises of the presence of God, as ever had Solomon for the material temple
which he did buyld? As touching the other point, that Salomons temple was a
figure of Christ: We know that now in the time of the clear light of Christ
Jesus the son of God, all shadows, figures, and significations are utterly
gone, all vain and unprofitable ceremonies, both Jewishe and Heathenishe,
fully abolished. And therefore our churches are not set up for figures and
significations of Messiah and Christ to come, but for other godly and
necessary purposes. That is to say, that like as every man has his own
house to abide in, to refreshe him self in, to rest in, with such like
commodities: So almighty God will have his house and palace whyther the whole
parish and congregation shall resort, which is called the Church and temple
of God, for that the Church, which is the company of Gods people, does there
assemble and come together to serve him. Not meaning hereby, that the Lord whom
the heaven of heavens is not hable to hold or compryse, does dwell in the
Church of lyme, and stone, made with man's hands, as wholly and only
contained there within, and no where else, for so he never dwelt in Salomo^s
temple. Moreover, the Church or Temple is counted and called holy, yet not of
it self, but because Gods people resorting thereunto, are holy, and exercise
themselves in holy and heavenly things. And to the intent ye may understand
further, why Churches were buylte among Christian people, this was the greatest
consideration: that God might have his place, and that God might have his time,
duly to be honored and served of the whole multitude in the parish. First
there to hear and learn the blessed word and will of the everlasting God.
Secondly, that there the blessed Sacraments, which our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus has ordained and appointed, should be dulye, reverently, and
honorably ministered. Thirdlye, that there the whole multitude of Gods people in
the parish, should with one voice and heart, call upon the name of God,
magnify and praise the name of GOD, render earnest and hartye thanks to our
heavenly father, for his heap of benefits daily and plentifully powered upon
us, not forgetting to bestow our alms upon Gods poverty, to the intent GOD
may bless us the more rychely. Thus ye may well perceive and understand
wherefore Churches were buylt and set up amongst Christian people, and dedicated
and appointed to these godly uses, and utterly exempted from all filthy,
profane, and worldly uses. Wherefore all they that have little mind or
devotion to repair and buyld Gods Temple, are to be counted people of much
ungodliness, spurning against good order in Christ's church, despysing the
true honor of God, with evil example offendyng and hinderyng their
neighbors, otherwise well and godly disposed. The world thinks but a trifle
to see their Church in ruin and decay. But who so does not lay to their
helping hands, they sin against God, and his holy congregation. For if it
had not ben sin to neglect and pass little upon the reedifying and buylding
up again of his Temple, God would not have been so much grieved, and so soon
have plagued his people, because they builded and decked their own houses so
gorgeouslye, and despised the house of God their lord. It is sin and shame to
see so many Churches, so ruynous, and so foully decayed, almost in every
corner. If a man's private house wherein he dwells be decayed, he will never
cease till it be restored up again. Yea, if his barn where he keeps his
corn be out of reparations, what diligence uses he to make it in perfeete
state again? If his stable for his horse, yea, the stye for his swyne, be not
able to hold out water and wind, how careful is he to do cost thereon? And
shall we be so myndful of our common base houses, deputed to so low occupying?
And be forgetful toward that house of God, wherein be ministered the words of
our eternal salvation, wherein be entreated the Sacraments and mysteries of
our redemption? The fountain of our regeneration is there presented to us, the
partaking of the body and blood of our Savior Christ, is there offered unto
us: And shall we not esteem the place where so heavenly things be handled?
Wherefore if ye have any reverence to the service of God, if ye have any common
honesty, if ye have any conscience in keeping of necessary and godly
ordinances, keep your churches in good repair, whereby ye shall not only
please God, and deserve his manifold blessings, but also deserve the good
report of all godly people.

The second point, which apparteyneth to the mayntenaunce of Gods house, is,
to have it well adourned, and comely, and clean kept. Which things may be
the more easylye performed, when the Church is well repaired. For like as men
are well refreshed and comforted, when they find their houses having all
things in good order, and all corners clean and sweet: So when Gods house
the Church is well adourned, with places convenient to sit in, with the pulpit
for the preacher, with the Lords table for the ministration of his holy
supper, with the Font to Christen in, and also is kept clean, comely, and
sweetly, the people is the more desirous, and the more comforted to resort
thither, and to tarrye there the whole time appointed them. With what
earnestness, with what vehement zeal did our Savior Christ drive the buyers
Mat. v.
and sellers out of the temple of God, and hurled down the tables of the
chaungers of money, and the seats of the dove sellers, and could not abide that
any man should carry a vessel through the temple? He told them that they had
made his fathers house a den of thieves, partelye through their superstition,
hypocrisy, false worship, false doctrine, and insatiable covetousness, and
partly through contempt, abusing that place, with walking and talking, with
worldly matters, without all fear of God, and due reverence to that place.
What dens of thieves the Churches of England have been made by the
blasphemous bying and selling the most precious body and blood of Christ in
the Mass, as the world was made to believe, at Diriges, at months minds, in
trentalles, in abbeyes and chauntries, beside other horrible abuses (Gods holy
name be blessed for ever) we no we see and understand. All these abominations,
they that supply the room of Christ, have cleansed and purged the Churches
of England of, taking away all such fulsumnesse and filthynesse, as through
blind devotion and ignorance has crept into the Church this many hundred
years. Wherefore, O ye good Christian people, ye dearelye beloved in Christ
Jesu, ye that glory not in worldly and vain religion, in fantastical
adourning and decking, but rejoice in heart to see the glory of God truly set
forth, and the Churches restored to their ancient and godly use, render your
most hearty thanks to the goodness of almighty God, who has in our days
styrred up the hearts, not only of his godly preachers and ministers, but also
of his faithful and most Christian magistrates and governors, to bring such
godly things to pass.

And forasmuch as your Churches are scoured and swept from the sinful and
superstitious fylthynesse wherewith they were defiled and disfigured: Do ye
your parts, good people, to keep your Churches comely and clean, suffer them
not to be defiled with rain and weather, with dounge of doves, and owls,
stares, and choughes, and other filthiness, as it is soul and lamentable to
behold in many places of this country. It is the house of prayer, not the
house of talking, of walking, of ^rawling, of minstrelsie, of hawks, of
dogs. Provoke not the displeasure and plagues of God, for despysing and
abusing his holy house, as the wicked Jews did. But have God in your heart, be
obedient to his blessed will, bind your selves every man and woman, to their
power, toward the reparations and clean keeping of your Church, to the intent
ye may be partakers of Gods manifold blessings, and that ye may be the better
encouraged to resort to your parish church, there to learn your duties toward
God and your neighbor, there to be present and partakers of Christ's holy
sacraments, there to render thanks to your heavenly father for the manifold
benefits which he daily powers upon you, there to pray together, and to
call upon Gods holy name, which be blessed, world without end.

An Homilee of good works. And first of Fasting.
THE life which we live in this world (good Christian people) is of the free
benefit of God lent us, yet not to use it at our pleasure, after our own
fleshly will: but to trade over ye same in those works which are beseeming them
that are become new creatures in Christ. These works the Apostle calls good
works, saying: Ephesians. ^.
We are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesu to good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them. And yet his meaning is not by these
words, to induce us to have any affiaunce, or to put any confidence in our
works, as by the merit and deserving of them to purchase to our selves and
others remission of sin, and so consequently everlasting life, for that were
mere blasphemy against Gods mercy, and great derogation to the bloodshedding
of our savior Jesus Christ. For it is of the free grace and mercy of God, by
the mediation of the blood of his son Jesus Christ, without merit or
deserving on our part, that our sinues are forgeuen us, that we are reconciled
and brought again into his favor, and are made heirs of his heavenly
kingdom. Grace (says S. Augustine) belongs to God, who does call us, and
then has he good works, whosoever received grace. Augu. de diuer. questi. ad
simplic. lib. i. quest. 28.
Good works then bring not forth grace: but are brought forth by grace. The
wheel (says he) turns round, not to the end that it may be made round:
but because it is first made round, therefore it turns round. So, no man
does good works, to receive grace by his good works: but because he has
first received grace, therefore consequentlye he does good works. And in
another place he says: Good works go not before in him which shall
afterward be justified, but good works do follow after when Augu. de fide and
operibus cap. 4.
a man is first justified. Saint Paul therefore teaches, that we must do good
works for diverse respects. First, to show our selves obedient children unto
our heavenly father, who has ordained them, that we should walk in them.
Secondly, for that they are good declarations and testimonies of our
justification. Thirdly, that others seeing our good works, may the rather by
them be stirred up and excited to glorify our father which is in heaven. Let
us not therefore be slack to do good works, seeing it is the will of God, that
we should walk in them, assuring our selves that at the last day, every man
shall receive of God for his labor done in true faith, a greater reward then
his works have deserved. And because somewhat shall now be spoken of one
particular good work, whose commendation is both in the law, and in the
Gospel: thus much is said in the beginning generally of all good works.
First, to remove out of the way of the simple and unlearned, this dangerous
stumbling block, that any man should go about to purchase or bye heaven with
his works. Secondly, to take away (so nyghe as may be) from envious minds,
and slanderous tongues, all just occasion of slanderous speaking, as though
good works were rejected. This good work which now shall be entreated of, is
Fasting, which is found in the scriptures to be of two sorts. The one
outward, parteyning to the body, the other inward, in the heart and mind. This
outward fast, is an abstinence from meat, drink, and all natural food, yea,
from al delicious pleasures and delectations worldly. When this outward fast
parteyneth to one particular man, or to a few, and not to the whole number of
the people, for causes which hereafter shall be declared, then it is called a
private fast: But when the whole multitude of men, women, and children, in a
towneship of City, yea, though a whole country do fast, it is called a
public fast. Such was that fast which the whole multitude of the children
of Israel were commanded to keep the tenth day of the seventh month,
because almighty God appointed that day to be a clensing day, a day of an
atonement, a time of reconciliation, a day wherein the people were cleansed
from their sins. The order and manner how it was done, is written in the xvi.
and. xxiii. Chapter of Leuiticus. That day the people did lament, mourn, weep
Leui. xvi. and. xxiii.
and bewail their former sins. And whosoever upon that day did not humble
his soul, bewayling his sins, as is said, abstayning from all bodyly food,
until the evening, that soul, (says almighty God) should be destroyed from
among his people. We do not read that Moses ordained by order of law, any
days of public fast throughout the whole year, more then that one day. The
Jews notwithstanding had more times of common fasting, which the Prophet
Zachary recites, to be the fast of the fourth, ye Zach. 8.
fast of the fifth, the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth month.
But for that it appears not in the leuiticall law when they were instituted,
it is to be judged, that those other times of fasting, more then the fast of
the seventh month, were ordained among the Jews by the appointment of their
governors, rather of devotion, then by any open commandment given from God.
Upon the ordinance of this general fast, good men took occasion to appoint to
them selves private fastes, at such times as they did either earnestlye lament
and bewail their sinful lives, or did addict them selves to more fervent
prayer, that it might please God to turn his wrath from them, when either they
were admonished and brought to the consideration thereof by the preaching of the
Prophets, or otherwise when they saw present danger to hang over their
heads. This sorowfulnes of heart, joined with fasting, they uttered sometime
by their outwade behavior and gesture of body, putting on sackcloth,
sprinckling them selves with ashes and dust, and sitting or lying upon the
earth. For when good men feel in them selves the heavy burden of sin, see
dampnation to be the reward of it, and behold with the eye of their mind the
horror of hell, they tremble, they quake, and are inwardly touched with
sorowfulnesse of heart for their offenses, and cannot but accuse them selves,
and open this their grief unto almyghtie God, and call unto him for mercy.
This being done seriously, their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and
heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from this danger of
hell and damnation, that all lust of meat and drink is laid apart, and
lothsomnesse of all worldly things and pleasures comes in place, so that
nothing then likes them more, then to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both
with words and behavior of body, to show them selves weary of this life.
Thus did David fast, when he made intercession to almighty God for the chyldes
life, begotten in adultrie of Bethsabe Vrias wife. King Achab fasted after this
sort, when it repented him of murdering of Naboth, bewayling his own sinful
doings. Such was the Ninevites fast, brought to repentance by Jonas
preaching. When forty thousand of the Israelites were slain in battle
against the Beniamites, the scripture says: All the children of Israel, Judge.
20.
and the whole multitude of people went out to Bethel, and sat there weeping
before the Lord, and fasted all that day until night. So did Daniel, Hester,
Nehemias, and many others in ye old testament fast. But if any man will say,
it is true, so they fasted in deed, but we are not now under that yoke of the
law, we are set at liberty by the freedom of the Gospel: therefore those
rites and customs of the old law, bind not us, except it can be showed by
the scriptures of the new Testament, or by examples out of the same, that
fasting now under the Gospel, is a restraint of meat, drink, and all bodily
food and pleasures from the body, as before. First, that we ought to fast, is
a truth more manifest, then that it should here need to be proved, the
scriptures which teach the same, are evident. The doubt therefore that is, is
whether when we fast, we ought to withhold from our bodies all meat and drink,
during the time of our fast, or no? That we ought so to do, may be well
gathered upon a question moved by the Pharisees to Christ, and by his answer
again to the same. Why (say they) do John's Disciples fast often, and pray,
and we likewise? but thy disciples eat Luke. v.
and drink, and fast not at all. In this smoothe question, they coutch up
subtly this argument or reason: Who so fasteth not, that man is not of God.
For fasting and prayer are works both commended, and commanded of GOD in his
scriptures: and all good men, from Moses till this time, as well the
prophets, as others, have exercised them selves in these works. John also and
his disciples at this day do fast often, and pray much, and so do we the
Pharisees in like manner: But thy disciples fast not at all, which if thou will
deny, we can easylye prove it. For whosoever eats and drinks, fasteth not.
Thy disciples eat and drink, therefore they fast not. Of this we conclude
(say they) necessaryly, that neither art thou, nor yet the disciples of GOD.
Christ makes answer, saying, Can ye make that the children of the weddyng
shall fast, while the brydegrome is with them? The days shall come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken from them: In those days shall they fast. Our savior
Christ, like a good master, defends the innocence of his disciples,
against the malice of the arrogant Pharisees, and proves that his disciples
are not gyltie of transgressyng any jot of Gods law, although as then they
tasted not, and in his answer reproves the Pharisees of superstition and
ignorance. Superstition, because they put a religion in their doyngs, and
ascribed holiness to the outward work wrought, not regardyng to what end
fasting is ordained. Of ignorance, for that they could not discern between
time and time. They knew not that there is a time of reioycyng and mirth, and
a time again of lamentation and mournyng, which both he teaches in his
answer, as shall be touched more largely hereafter, when we shall show what
time is most fit to fast in.

But here beloved let us note, that our savior Christ, in making his answer
to their question, denied not, but confessed that his disciples fasted not, and
therefore agrees to the pharisees in this, as unto a manifest truth: that who
so eats and drynketh fasteth not. Fasting then, even by Christ's assent, is a
with holdyng of meat, drink, and all natural food from the body, for the
determined time of fasting. And that it was used in the primative Church,
appears most evidently by the Chalcedon counsel, one of the four first
general counselles. The fathers assembled there, to the number of. 630.
consydering with them selves how acceptable a thing fasting is to God, when it
is used according to his word: Again, having before their eyes also the great
abuses of the same, crept into the Church at those days, through the
negligence of them which should have taught the people the right use thereof,
and by vain gloses, devised of men: To refourme the said abuses, and to
restore this so good and godly a work, to the true use thereof, decreed in that
counsel, that every person, as well in his private as public fast, should
continue all the day without meat and drink, till after the Euenyng prayer.
And whosoever did eat or drink before the Evening prayer was ended, should
be accounted and reputed not to consider the purity of his fast. This cannon
teaches so evidently how fasting was used in the primative Church, as by
words, it can not be more plainly expressed.

Fasting then, by the decree of those six hundredth and thirty fathers,
groundyng their determination in this matter upon the sacred scriptures, and
long continued usage or practice, both of the prophets and other godly persons
before the coming of Christ, and also of the apostles and other devout men
in the new Testament: is, a with holdyng of meat, drink, and all natural
fodde from the body for the determined time of fasting. Thus much is spoken
hitherto, to make plain unto you what fasting is. Now hereafter shall be showed
the true and right use of fasting.

Good works are not all of one sort. For some are of them selves, and of
their own proper nature always good: as to love God above all things, to
love my neighbor as my self, to honor father and mother, to honor the
higher powers, to give to every man that which is his due, and such like.
Other works there be, which considered in themselves without further respect,
are of their own nature, mere indifferent, that is, neither good nor evil,
but take their denomination of the use or end whereunto they serve. Which
works having a good end, are called good works, and are so in deed: but yet
that comes not of them selves, but of the good end whereunto they are
referred. On the other side, if the end that they serve unto be evil, it can
not then otherwise be, but that they must needs be evil also. Of this sort of
works, is fasting, which of it self is a thing merely indifferent: But is
made better or worse by the end that it serves unto. For when it respects a
good end, it is a good work: but the end being evil, the work it self is
also evil. To fast then with this persuasion of mind, that our fasting, and
our good works, can make us perfect and just men, and finally, bring us to
heaven: this is a deuelish persuasion, and that fast, so far of from pleasing
god, that it refuses his mercy, and is altogether derogatorie to the merits
of Christ's death, and his precious blood shedding. This does the parable of
the Pharisee and the Publicane teach. Two men (says Luke. viii.
Christ) went up together into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the
other a Publicane. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus within him self: I
thank thee O God, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, and as this Publicane is. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
of all that I possess. The Publicane stood a far of, and would not lift up
his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast, and said, God be merciful to me a
sinner. In the person of this Pharisee, our Savior Christ sets out to the
eye, and to the judgment of the world, a perfect, just, and righteous man,
such one as is not spotted with those vices that men commonly are infected
with, extortion, briberie, polling, and pilling their neighbor, robbers and
spoylers of commonweals, crafty, and subtle, in chopping and changing,
using false waightes, and detestable perjury in their buying and selling,
fornicatours, adulterers, and vicious livers. The Pharisee was no such man,
neither faulty in any such like notorious crime. But where other transgressed
by leaving things undone, which yet the law required: this man did more then
was requisite by law. For he fasted twyse in the week, and gave tithes of all
that he had. What could the world then justly blame in this man? yea, what
outward thing more could be desired to be in him, to make him a more perfect,
and a more just man? Truly nothing by man's judgment: And yet our Savior
Christ prefers the poor Puplicane without fasting before him with his
fast. The cause why he does so, is manifest. For yt Publicane having no good
works at al to trust unto, yielded up him self unto God, confessing his sins,
and hoped certainly to be saved by Gods free mercy only. The Pharisee
gloried, and trusted so much to his works, that he thought him self sure
enough without mercy, and that he should come to heaven by his fasting and
other deeds. To this end serves that parable. For it is spoken to them that
trusted in them selves, that they were ryghteous, and despised other. Now
because the Pharisee directed his work to an evil end, seeking by them
justification, which in deed is the proper work of God, without our merits,
his fasting twice in the week, and all his other works, though they were
never so many, and seemed to the world never so good and holy, yet in very
deed before god, they are altogether evil and abominable. The mark also that
the Hypocrites shoot at with their fast, is, to appear holy in the eye of the
world, and so to win commendation and praise of men. But our Savior Matthew.
^.
Christ says of them, they have their reward, that is, they have praise and
commendation of men, but of God they have none at all. For whatsoever tends
to an evil end, is it self by that evil end, made evil also. Again, so
long as we keep ungodliness in our hearts, and suffer wicked thoughts to
tarry there, though we fast as often as did either saint Paul, or John Baptist,
and keep it as strayghtly as d^d the Ninevites: yet shall it be not only
unprofitable to us, but also a thing that greatly displeases almighty God.
For he says, that his soul abhors Esai. 1.
and hates such fastings, yea they are a burden unto him, and he is weary of
bearyng them. And therefore he inuayeth most sharply against them, saying by
the mouth of the prophet Esai, Behold, when you fast, your lust remains
still, for ye do no less violence to your debtors. Lo, ye Esai. 8.
fast to strife and debate, and to smite with the fiste of wickedness. Now ye
shall not fast thus, that you may make your voice to be heard above. Think
ye this fast pleases me, that a man should chasten him self for a day? should
that be called a fasting, or a day that pleases the Lord? Now dearly
beloved, seeing that almighty God aloweth not our fast for the works sake,
but chiefly respects our heart how it is affected, and then esteems our
fast either good or evil by thend that it serves for: it is our part to rent
our hearts, and not our garments, as we are advertised by the prophet Joel,
that is, Joel. 2.
our sorrow and mournyng must be inward in heart, and not in outward show
only, yea it is requisite that first before all things we cleanse our hearts
from sin, and then to direct our fast to such an end as God will allow to be
good.

There be three ends, whereunto if your fast be directed, it is then a work
profitable to us, and accepted of God.

The first is, to chastise the flesh, that it be not to wanton, but tamed and
brought in subjection to the spirit. This respect had Saint Paul (...). Cor.
9.
in his fast, when he said, I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection,
least by any means it comes to pass, that when I have preached to other, I
my self be found a castaway.

The second, that the spirit may be more fervent and earnest to prayer. To
this end fasted the prophets and teachers that were at Antioche, Acts. 13.
before they sent forth Paul and Barnabas to preach the Gospel. The same two
Apostles fasted for the like purpose, when they commended to God, by their
earnest prayers, the congregations that were at Antioch, Pisidia, Iconium,
Acts. 14.
and Listris, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles.

The third, that our fast be a testimony and witness with us before God, of
our humble submission to his high majesty, when we confess and acknowledge
our sins unto him, and are inwardly touched with sorowfulnesse of heart,
bewayling the same in the affliction of our bodies. These are the three ends,
or right uses of fasting. The first belongs most properly to private fast
The other two are common, as well to p(...)que fast, as to private. And thus
much for the use of fasting. Lord have mercy upon us, and give us grace,
that while we live in this miserable world, we may through thy help bring
forth this and such other fruits of the spirit, commended and commanded in
thy holy word, to the glory of thy name, and to our comfortes, that after the
race of this wretched life, we may live everlastingly with thee in thy
heavenly kingdom, not for the merits and worthynesse of our works, but for
thy mercy sake, and the merits of thy dear son Jesus Christ, to whom with
thee and the holy ghost, be all laud, honor, and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee of fasting.
IN the former Homilee (beloved) was showed, that among ye people of ye Jews,
fasting as it was commanded them from god by Moses, was to abstain ye whole
day, from morrow til night, from meat, drink, and al manner of food that
nourishes the body, and that who so tasted ought before ye Evening, on the day
appointed to fasting, was accounted among them a breaker of his fast. Which
order, though it seems strange to some in these our days, because it has
not ben so used generally in this Realm of many years past: yet that it was so
among gods people (I mean the Jews) whom before ye coming of our savior
Christ, god did vouchsafe to chose unto him self, a peculier people above all
other nations of the earth, and that our savior Christ so understood it, and
the apostles after Christ's ascension did so use it, was there sufficiently
proved by the testimonies and examples of the holy scriptures, as well of the new
Testament, as of the old. The true use of fasting was there also showed. In
this second part of this Homilee shall be showed, that no constitution or law
made by man, for things which of their own proper nature be mere
indifferent, can bind the conscience of Christen men to a perpetual
observation and keeping thereof, but that the higher powers has full liberty to
alter and change every such law and ordinance, either ecclesiastical, or
political, when time and place shall require. But first an answer shall be
made to a question that some may make, demanding what judgment we ought to
have of such abstinences as are appointed by public order and laws made by
princes, and by the authority of the Magistrates, upon policy, not
respecting any religion at all in the same. As when any Realm in consyderation
of the mainteyning of fissher towns borderyng upon the seas, and for the
increase of fisshermen, of whom do spring Mariners to go upon the sea, to the
furnishing of the navy of the Realm, whereby not only the commodities of
other countries may be transported, but also may be a necessary defense to
resist the invasion of the adversary.

For the better understanding of this question, it is necessary that we make a
difference between the policies of princes, made for the orderyng of their
commonweals, in provision of things serving to the more sure defense of
their subjects and countries, and between ecclesiastical policies, in
prescribing such works, by which, as by secondary means, Gods wrath may be
pacified, and his mercy purchased. Positive laws made by princes for
conservation of their policy, not repugnaunt unto Gods law, ought of all
Christian subjects with reverence of the magistrate to be obaied, not only for
fear of punishment, but also (as the apostle says) for conscience sake.
Conscience I say, not of the thing which of the own nature is indifferent: but
of our obedience, which by the law of God we owe unto the Magistrate, as unto
Gods minister. By which positive laws, though we subjects for certain times
and days appointed, be restrained from some kinds of meats and drink,
which God by his holy word has left free to be taken and used of all men
with thanks giving in all places and at all times: yet for that such laws of
princes and other magistrates are not made to put holiness in one kind of meat
and drink more then another, to make one day more holy then another, but are
grounded merely upon poliicie, al subjects are bound in conscience to keep
them by Gods commandment, who by the Apostle wills all without exception,
to submit them selves unto the authority of ye higher powers. And in this
point concerning our duties which be here dwelling in England, environed with
the sea as we be, we have great occasion in reason to take the commodities of
the water, which almighty God by his divine providence has laid so nigh unto
us, whereby the increase of victuals upon the land may the better be spared
and cherished, to the sooner reducing of victualles to a more moderate price,
to the better sustenaunce of the poor. And doubtless he seems to be to
dainty an English man, which consydering the great commodities which may
ensue, will not forbear some piece of his licentious appetite upon the
ordinance of his prince, with the consent of the wise of the Realm. What good
English heart would not wish the old ancient glory should return to ye
realm, wherein it has with great commendations excelled before our days, in
the furniture of the Navy of the same? What will more daunt the hearts of the
adversary, then to see us as well fenced and armed on the sea, as we be
reported to be on the land? If the prince requested our obedience to forbear
one day from flesh more then we do, and to be contented with one meal in ye
same day, should not our own commodity thereby persuade us to subjection.
But now that two meals be permitted on that day to be used, which sometime
our elders in very great numbers in the Realm did use with one only spare
meal, and that in fish only: shall we think it so great a burden that is
prescribed?

Furthermore consider the decay of the towns nigh the seas, which should be
most ready by the number of the people there to repulse the enemy, and we
which dwell further of upon the land, having them as our buckler to defend
us, should be ye more in surety. If they be our neighbors, why should we not
wish them to prosper? If they be our defense, as nyest at hand to repel the
enemy, to keep out the rage of ye seas which else would break upon our fair
pastures, why should we not cherish them? Neither do we urge that in the
ecclesiastical policy, prescribing a form of fasting, to humble our selves
in the sight of almighty God, that that order which was used among the Jews,
and practiced by Christ's Apostles after his ascension, is of such force and
necessity, that that only ought to be used among Christians, and none other,
for that were to bind Gods people unto the yoke and burden of Moses
policy, yea, it were the very way to bring us which are set at liberty by
the freedom of Christ's Gospel, into the bondage of the law again, which God
forbid that any man should attempt or purpose. But to this end it serves, to
show how far the order of fasting now used in the Church at this day,
differs from that which then was used. Gods Church ought not, neither may i^
be so tied to that or any other order now made, or hereafter to be made and
devised by thaucthoritie of man, but that it may lawfully for just causes,
alter, change, or mitigate those ecclesiastical decrees and orders, yea
recede wholly from them, and break them, when they tend either to
superstition, or to impiety, when they draw the people from God, rather then
work any edification in them. This authority Christ him self used, and left
it unto his Church. He used it I say: For the order or decree made by the
elders for washing often times, which was diligently observed of the Jews: yet
tendyng to superstition, our savior Christ altered and changed the same in
his Church, into a profitable sacrament, the sacrament of our regeneration or
new birth. This authority to mittigate laws and decrees ecclesiastical,
thapostles practiced, when they, writing from Jerusalem Acts. 15.
unto the congregation that was at Antioche, signified unto them that they
would not lay any further burden upon them, but these necessaries: That is,
that they should abstain from things offered unto idols, from blood, from
that which is strangled, and from fornication, notwithstanding that Moses law
required many other obseruances. This authority to change the orders,
decrees, and constitutions of the Church, was after the Apostles time used of
the fathers about the manner of fasting, as it appears in the Tripartite
history, where it is thus Tripartit. hist. lib. 9. cap. 38.
written: Touching fasting, we find that it was diversely used in diverse places
by diverse men. For they at Rome fast three weeks together before Easter,
saving upon the Saterdayes and Sundays, which fast they call Lent. And after
a few lines in the same place, it follows: They have not all one uniform
order in fasting. For some do fast and abstain both from fish and flesh.
Some when they fast, eat nothing but fish. Others there are, which when they
fast, eat of all water fowls, as well as of fish, grounding themselves upon
Moses, that such fowls have their substance of the water, as the fishes
have. Some others when they fast, will neither eat herbs nor eggs. Some
fasters there are, that eat nothing but dry bread. Others when they fast,
eat nothing at all, no not so much as dry bread. Some fast from all manner of
food till night, and then eat, without making any choice or difference of
meats. And a thousand such like diverse kinds of fasting may be found in
diverse places of the world, of diverse men diversely used. And for all this
great diversity in fasting, yet charity the very true bond of Christian Eus.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
peace was not broken, neither did the diversity of fasting break at any
time their agreement and concord in faith. To abstain sometime from certain
meats, not because the meats are enill, but because they are not necessary:
Dogma. ecclesiast. cap. 66.
This abstinence (says Saint Augustine) is not evil. And to restrain the use
of meats when necessity and time shall require: this (says he) does
properly parteyne to Christian men.

Thus ye have heard good people, first that Christian subjects are bound even
in conscience to obey princes laws, which are not repugnaunt to the laws of
God. Ye have also heard that Christ's Church is not so bound to observe any
order, law, or decree made by man, to prescribe a form in religion: but that
the Church has full power and authority from God, to change and altar the
same when need shall require, which has been showed you by the example of our
savior Christ, by the practice of the apostles, and of the fathers since that
time.

Now shall be showed briefly what time is meet for fasting, for all times
serve not for all things. But as the wise man says: All things have their
times. There is a time to weep, and a time again to laugh, a time to mourn,
Ecclesi. 3.
and a time to rejoice. etc. Our Savior Christ excused his disciples, and
reproved the Pharisees, because they neither regarded the use of fasting, nor
considered what time was meet for the same. Which both he teaches in his
answer, saying, The children of the marriage can not Matthew. 9.
mourn, while the bridegroom is with them. Their question was of fasting, his
answer is of mournyng, signifying unto them plainly, that the outward fast
of the body, is no fast before God, except it be accompanied with the inward
fast, which is a mournyng and a lamentation in the heart, as is before
declared. Concerning Matthew. 9. Luke. 5.
the time of fasting, he says? The days will come, when the bridegroom shall be
taken from them, in those days they shall fast. By this it is manifest, that
it is no time of fasting while the marriage lasts, and the bridegroom is there
present. But when the marriage is ended, and the bridegroom gone, then is it a
meet time to fast. Now to make plain unto you what is the sense and meaning
of these words: We are at the marriage, and again, The bridegroom is taken
from us. Ye shall note, that so long as GOD reuealeth his mercy unto us, and
gives us of his benefits, either spiritual or corporal, we are said to be
with the bridegroom at the marriage. So was that good old father Jacob at the
marriage, when he understood that his son Joseph was alive, and ruled all
Egypt under king Pharao. So was David in the marriage with the bridegroom, when
he had gotten the victory of great Goliath, and had smitten of his head. Judith
and all the people of Bethulia were the children of the wedding, and had the
bridegroom with them, when God had by the hand of a woman slain Holofernes,
the graund captain of the Assyrians hoaste, and discomfited al their enemies.
Thus were the Apostles the children of the marriage while Christ was corporally
present with them, and defended them from all dangers, both spiritual and
corporal. But the marriage is said then to be ended, and the brydegrome to be
gone, when almighty God smites us with affliction, and seems to leave us in
the midst of a number of adversities. So GOD sometime strikes private men
priuatelye with sundry adversities, as trouble of mind, loss of friends,
loss of goods, long and dangerous sicknesses. etc. Then is it a fit time
for that man to humble him self to almighty God by fasting, and to mourn and
bewail his sins with a sorrowful heart, and to pray unfeignedly, saying with
the prophet David: Turn away thy face, Psalm. 51.
O Lord, from my sins, and blot out of thy remembrance all mine offenses.
Again, when God shall afflict a whole region or country with wars, with
famine, with pestilence, with strange diseases, and unknown sicknesses, and
other such like calamities: then is it time for all states and sorts of
people, high and low, men, women, and children, to humble them selves by
fasting, and bewail their sinful living before God, and pray with one common
voice, saying thus, or some other such like prayer. Be favorable, O Lord, be
favorable unto thy people, which turns unto thee, in weepyng, fasting, and
praying, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and
suffer not thine inheritance to be destroyed and brought to confusion.

Fasting thus used with prayer, is of great efficacy, and wayeth much with
God. So the angel Raphel told Tobias. It also appears Tobi. 12.
by that which our savior Christ answered to his disciples, demanding of
him why they could not cast forth the evil spirit out of him that was
brought unto them. This hynde (says he) is not cast out but by fasting and
prayer. How auayleable fasting is, how much it wayeth with God, and what it is
able to obtain at his hand, can not better be set forth, then by openyng
unto you, and laying before you some of those notable things that has been
brought to pass by it.

Fasting was one of the means whereby almyghtie God was occasioned to alter
the thing which he had purposed concerning Ahab, for murdering the innocent
man Naboth, to possess his vineyarde. God spoke unto Elia, saying: Go thy way
and say unto Ahab, Have thou killed, and also gotten possession? Thus says the
Lord: 3. Reg. 11.
It the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs even lick
thy blood also. Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity: Yea, the dogs shall eat him of Ahabs stock that dies in the
City, and him that dies in the feelde shall the fowls of the air eat. This
punishment had almighty God determined for Ahab in this world, and to destroy
all the male kind that was begotten of Ahabs body, besides that punishment
which should have happened unto him in the world to come. When Ahab heard
this, he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon him, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went bare footed. Then the word of the Lord came to Elia,
saying: See thou how Ahab is humbled before me? Because he submits him
self before me, I will not bring that evil in his days, but in his sons
days will I bring it upon his house. Although Ahab through the wicked counsel
of Iesabel his wife had committed shameful murder, and against all right,
disherited and dispossessed for ever Nabothes stock of that vineyarde: yet
upon his humble submission in heart unto God, which he declared outwardly by
putting on sackcloth and fasting, God changed his sentence, so that the
punishmente which he had determined, fell not upon Ahabs house in his time,
but was deferred unto the days of Ioram his son. Here we may see of what
force our outward fast is, when it is accompanied with the inward fast of the
mind, which is (as is said) a sorowfulnesse of heart, detesting and bewayling
our sinful doings. The like is to be seen in the Ninevites: For when God had
determined to destroy the whole City of Niniue, and the time which he had
appointed, was even no we at hand, he sent the prophet Jonas to say unto them:
yet forty Jonas. 3.
days, and Niniue shall be overthrown. The people by and by believed God, and
gave them selves to fasting, yea, the king by thaduise of his counsel caused
to be proclaimed, saying: Let neither man nor beast, bullock nor sheep taste any
thing, neither feed, nor drink water: But let man and beast put on sackcloth,
and cry mightily unto God, yea, let every man turn from his evil way, and
from the wickedness that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? And upon
this their hearty repentance, thus declared outwardly with fasting, renting
of their clothes, putting on sackcloth, and sprinkling them selves with dust
and ashes, the scripture says: God saw their works that they turned from
their evil ways, and God repented of the evil that he had said that he
would do unto them, and he did it not. Now beloved, ye have heard first
what fasting is, as well that which is outward in the body, as that which is
inward in the heart. Ye have heard also that there are three ends or
purposes, whereunto if our outward fast be directed, it is a good work that
God is pleased with. Thirdely, has been declared what time is most meet for
to fast, either privately or publicly. Last of al, what things fasting has
obtained of God, by the examples of Ahab and the Ninevites. Let us therefore
dearly beloved, seeing there are many more causes of fasting and mournyng in
these our days, then has been of many years heretofore in any one age,
endeavor our selves both inwardly in our hearts, and also outwardly with our
bodies, diligently to exercise this godly exercise of fasting, in such sort
and manner, as the holy prophets, the Apostles, and diverse other devout
persons for their time used the same. God is now the same God that was then,
God that loves righteousness, and that hates iniquity, God which wylleth
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness, and
live. God that has promised to turn to us, if we refuse not to turn to him:
yea, if we turn our evil works from before his eyes, cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek to do right, relieve the oppressed, be a right judge
to the fatherless, defend the wydowe, break our bread to the hungry, bring
the poor that wander into our house, clothe the naked, and despise not our
brother which is our own flesh: then shall thou call (says the Prophet) and
the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here am I: Yea, God
which heard Ahab and the Ninevites, and spared them, will also hear our
prayers, and spare us, so that we, after their example, will unfeignedly turn
unto him, yea he will bless us with his heavenly benedictions the time that we
have to tarry in this world, and after the raze of this mortal life, he will
bring us to his heavenly kingdom, where we shall reign in everlasting
blessedness with our savior Christ, to whom with the father and the holy
ghost be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
An Homilee against gluttony and and drunkenness.
YE have heard in the former Sermon well-beloved, the description and the virtue
of fasting, with the true use of the same. No we ye shall hear how foul a
thing gluttony and drunkenness is before God, the rather to move you to use
fasting the more diligently. Understande ye therefore, that almighty God (to
to thend that we might keep our selves undefiled, and serve him in holiness
and righteousness according to his word) has charged in his scriptures, so
many as look for the glorious appearing Titus. 2.
of our savior Christ, to lead their lives in all sobriety, modesty, and
temperancie. Whereby we may learn how necessary it is for every Christian that
will not be found unready at the coming of our savior Christ, to live sober
minded in this present world, forasmuch as otherwise being unready, he can
not enter with Christ Titus. 2.
into glory: And being unarmed in this behalf, he must needs be in
continual danger of that cruel adversary the roaring Lion, against whom the
Apostle Peter warns us to prepare our selves in continual sobriety, that we
may resist, being steadfast in faith. To the intent therefore 1. Pet. 5.
that this soberness may be used in all our behavior, it shall be expedient for
us to declare unto you how much all kind of excess offends the majesty of
almighty God, and how greeuouslye he punishes the immoderate abuse of those
his creatures which he ordeyneth to the mayntenaunce of this our needy life,
as meats, drynkes, and apparel. And again to show the noisome diseases and
great mischeefes that commonly do follow them that inordinately give up them
selves to be carried headlong with such pleasures as are joined either with
dainty and ouerlarge fare, or else with costly and sumptuous apparel.

And first, that ye may perceive how detestable and hateful all excess in
eating and drynking is before the face of almyghtie God, ye shall call to mind
what is written by saint Paul to the Galathians, where he numbreth gluttony
Galat. v.
and drunkenness among those horrible crimes, with the which (as he says) no
man shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. He reckeneth them among the deeds
of the flesh, and coupleth them with idolatry, whoredom, and murder, which
are the greatest offenses that can be named among men: For the first spoyleth
God of his honor, the second defiles his holy Temple, that is to wit, our
own bodies, the third makes us companions of Cayne in the slaughter of our
brethren, and who so commits them as saint Paul says, can not inherit the
kingdom of God. Certainly, that sin is very odious and loathsome before the
face of God, which causes him to turn his favorable countenance so far
from us, that he should clean bar us out of the doors, and disherite us of
his heavenly kingdom. But he so much abhors all beastly Luke. 6.
banqueting, that by his son our Savior Christ in the Gospel, he
declares his terrible indignation against all belly Gods, in that he
pronounces them accursed, saying: Woe be to you that are full, for ye shall
hunger. And by the prophet Esaias he cries out: Woe be to you that rise up
early to give your selves to drunkenness, and set al your minds so on
drinkyng, that ye Esaias. 5.
sit swearing thereat until it be night. The harp, the lute, the shaume, and
plenty of wine are at your feasts, but the works of the Lord ye do not
behold, neither consider the works of his hands, Woe be unto you that are
strong to drink wine. and are mighty to advance drunkenness. Here the
prophet plainly teaches, that feastyng and banqueting makes men forgetful
of their duty toward God, when they give themselves to all kinds of
pleasures, not considering nor regarding the works of the Lord, who has
created meats and drinks, as. S. Paul says, to be received thankfully of
them that believe and know the truth. So that the very beholding of these
creatures (being the handy work of almyghtie God) might teach us to use them
thankfully as 1. Tim. 4.
God has ordained. Therefore they are without excuse before god, which either
filthily feed themselves, not respecting the sanctification which is by the
word of god and prayer, or else unthankfully abuse the good creatures of God by
surfeiting and drunkenness, forasmuch as Gods ordinances in his creatures
plainly forbids it. They that give them selves therefore to bibbing and
banqueting, being altogether without consideration of Gods judgments, are
suddenly oppressed in the day of vengeance. And therefore our savior Christ
warns his disciples, saying: Take heed to your selves, least at any time
your Luke 2.
hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this
world, and so that day come on you unawares. Whosoever then will take warning at
Christ, let him take heed to Luke 12.
him self, least his heart being overwhelmed by surfeiting, and drowned in
drunkenness, he be taken unawares with that unthrifty servant, which,
thinking not on his masters coming, began to smite his fellow servants, and
to eat and drink, and to be drunken, and being suddenly taken, has his just
reward with unbelieving hypocrites. They that use to drink depely, and to
feed at full (wallowing them selves in all kind of wickedness) are brought a
sleep in that slumbring forgetfulness of Gods holy will and commandments.
Therefore almighty God cries by the prophet Joel: Awake ye drunkardes, weep
and howl all ye drinkers Joel. 1.
of wine, because the new wine shall be pulled from your mouth. Here the Lord
terribly threatens to withdraw his benefits from such as abuse them, and to
pull the cup from the mouth of drunkardes. Here we may learn not to sleep in
drunkenness and surfeiting, least God deprive us of the use of his creatures,
when we unkindly abuse them. For certainly the Lord our God will not only take
away his benefits when they are unthankfully abused: but also in his wrath and
heavy displeasure, take vengeance on such as immoderatly abuse them. If our
first parents Gene. 3.
Adam and Eve had not obeyed their greedy appetite, in eating the forbidden
fruit, neither had they lost the fruition of Gods benefits which they then
enjoyed in paradise, neither had they brought so many mischeefes both to
themselves and to all their posterity. But when they passed the bonds that
God had appointed them, as unworthy of Gods benefits they are expelled and
driven out of paradise, they may no longer eat the fruits of that garden,
which by excess they had so much abused: As transgressors of Gods
commandment, they and their posterity are brought to a perpetual shame and
confusion, and as accursed of God they must now sweat for their living, which
before had abundance at their pleasure. Even so, if we in eating and drinking
exceed, when God of his large liberality sends plenty, he will soon
change plenty into scarsenesse: And where as we gloryed in fullness, he will
make us empty, and confound us with penury, yea we shall be compelled to
labor and travail with pains, in seeking for that which we sometime enjoyed
at ease. Thus the Lord will not leave them unpunished, which not regardyng
his works, follow the lusts and appetites of their own Gene. 3 Noah.
hearts. The patriarch Noah, whom the Apostle calls the preacher of
righteousness, a man exceedingly in Gods favor, is in holy scripture made an
example, whereby we may learn to avoid drunkenness. For when he had powered
in wine more then was convenient, in filthy manner he lay naked in his tent,
his priuities discovered: And whereas sometime he was so much esteemed, he is
now become a laughing stock to his wicked son Cham, no small grief to Sem
and Japheth his other two sons, which were ashamed of their fathers beastly
behavior. Here we may note that drunkenness brings with it shame and
derision, so that it never escapes unpunished. Lot in like manner being
overcome with wine, commits abominable incest with his own daughters. So
will almyghtie God give over drunkardes, to the shameful lusts of their own
hearts. Here is Lot by drinkyng fallen so far beside him Gene. 3. Lot.
self, that he knows not his own daughters. Who would have thought that an
old man in that heavy case, having lost his wife and all that he had, which
had seen even now Gods vengeance in fearful manner declared on the five
Cities for their vicious living, should be so far past the remembrance of
his duty? But men overcome with drink, are altogether mad as Seneca says.
He was deceived by his daughters: but now many deceive themselves, Epist. 84.
never thinking that GOD by his terrible punishments wylbe avenged on them
that offend by excess. It is no small plague that Lot purchased by his
drunkenness? For he had copulation most filthily with his own daughters,
which conceived thereby, so that the matter is brought to light, it can no
longer be hid. Two incestuous children are borne, Ammon and Moab, of whom came
two nations, the Ammonites and Moabites, abhorred of God, and cruel adversaries
to his people the Israelites. Lo Lot has gotten to him self by drynking,
sorrow, and care, with perpetual infamy and reproach unto the worlds end. If
God spared not his servant Lot, being otherwise a godly man, nephewe unto
Abraham, one that entertained the angels of God: What will he do to these
beastly belly slaves, which void of all godlynes or virtuous behavior, not
once, but continually day and night, give them selves wholly to bibbyng and
banqueting? Butlet us yet further behold the terrible examples of Gods
indignation against 2. Sam. 13.
such as greedyly follow their insatiable lusts. Ammon the son of David,
feastyng him self Ammon
with his brother Absolon, is cruelly murdered of his own brother
Holophernes, a valiant and mighty captain, being over whelmed with Judith. 19.
wine, had his head stricken from his shoulders by that seely woman Judith.
Simon the hie priest and his two sons Mattathias and Judas, being entertained
of Ptolomie the son of Abobus, 1. Mac. 18.
who had before married Simons daughter, after much eating and drynkyng, were
traitorously murdered of their own kynsman. If the Israelites had not given
them selves to belly cheer Fxod. 32.
they had never so often fallen to idolatry: Neither would we at this day be
so addict to superstition, were it not that we so much esteemed the fillyng of
our bellies. The Israelites when they served idolles, sat down to eat and
drink, 1. Cor. x.
and rose again to play, as the scripture reports. Therefore seeking to
serve their bellyes, they forsook the service of the Lord their God. So are
we drawn to consent unto wickedness, when our hearts are overwhelmed by
drunkenness and feasting. So Herod setting his mind on banqueting, was
content to grant that Mat. 14.
the holy man of God John Baptist should be beheaded at the request of his
whores daughter, Had not the rich glutton ben so greedely given to the
pamperyng of his belly, he would never Luke 6.
have been so unmerciful to the poor Lazarus, neither had he felt the
torments of the unquenchable fire. What was the cause that god so horribly
punished Sodoma and Gomorrha? was it not Eze. 16.
their proud banqueting and continual idleness, which caused them to be so
lewd of life, and so unmerciful toward the poor? What shall we now think
of the horrible excess whereby so many have perished, and ben brought to
destruction? Alexan.
The great Alexander after that he had conquered the whole world, was himself
overcome by drunkenness, insomuche that being drunken he slew his faithful
freende Clitus, whereof when he was sober, he was so much ashamed, that for
anguishe of heart he wished death. Yet notwithstanding, after this he left not
his banqueting, but in one night swilled in so much wine that he fell into a
fever, and when as by no means he would abstain from wine, within few days
after in miserable sort he ended his life. The conqueror of the whole world
is made a slave by excess, and becomes so mad that he murdereth his dear
friend, he is plagued with sorrow, shame, and grief of heart for his
intemperauncie, yet can he not leave it, he is kept in captivity, and he
which sometime had subdued many, is become a subject to the vile belly. So are
drunkardes and gluttons altogether without power of them selves, and the more
they drink, the dryer they wax, one banquet provoke an other, they study
to fill their greedy stomachs. Therefore it is commonly said, A drunken man
is always dry, and, A gluttons gutte is never filled. Unsatiable truly are
the affections and lusts of man's heart, and therefore we must learn to bridle
them with the fear of God, so that we yield not to our own lusts, lest we
kyndle Gods indignation against our selves, when we seek to satisfy our
beastly appetite. Saint Paul teaches us, whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do, to do all to the glory of God. Where he appoynteth as it were
by a measure, how much a man may 1. Cor. x.
eat and drink: that is to wit, so much that the mind be not made sluggishe
by cromming in meat, and pouring in drink, so that it can not lift up it
self to the glory and praise of God. Whatsoever he be then, that by eating and
drinking makes him self unlusty to serve God, let him not think to escape
unpunished.

Ye have heard how much almyghtie God detesteth the abuse of his creatures,
as he him self declares, as well by his holy word, as also by the fearful
examples of his just judgment. Now if neither the word of God can restrain
our ragyng lusts and greedy appetites, neither the manifest examples of Gods
vengeance, fear us from riotous, and excessive eating and drynking, let us
yet consider the manyfolde mischeefes that proceeds thereof, so shall we know
the tree by the fruits. It hurts the body, it infecteth the mind, it wastes
the substance, and is noyfull to the neighbors. But who is able to express
the manifold dangers and inconneniences that follow of intemperate diet? Often
comes sudden death by banquettyng, sometime the members are dissolved, and
so the whole body is brought into a miserable state. He that eats and
drynketh vnmeasurably, kyndeleth often times such an unnatural heat in his
body, that his appetite is provoked thereby to desire more then it should, or
else it overcomes his stomach, and fi^leth all the body full of sluggishnes,
makes it unlusty and unfit to serve either God or man, not norishyng the
body, but hurtyng it: and last of all, bring many kinds of incurable diseases,
whereof ensues sometimes desperate death. But what should I need to say any
more in this behalf? For except God bless our meats, and give them strength
to feed us: again except GOD give strength to nature to digest, so that we
may take profit by them, either shall we filthily vomit them up again, or
else shall they lie stinking in our bodies, as in a lothesome sink or channel,
and so diversely infecte the whole body. And surely the blessyng of God is so
far from such as use riotous banqueting, that in their faces be some times
seen the express tokens of this intemperauncie: As Solomon notes in his
proverbs. To whom is woe (says he) to whom is sorrow? Pro. 23.
to whom is strife? to whom is brawling? to whom are wounds without cause? and
for whom is the redness of eyes? even to them that tarry long at the wine.
Mark I beseech you the terrible tokens of Gods indignation: woe and sorrow,
strife and brawling, wounds without cause, disfigured face, and redness of
eyes are to be looked for, when men set them selves to excess and gurmaundise,
devising all means to increase their greedy appetites by tempering the wine,
and sawcing it in such sort, that it may be more delectable and pleasant unto
them. It were expediente, that such delicate persons should be ruled by
Solomon, who in consideration of the aforesaid inconveniences, forbids the
very sight of wine. Look not upon the wine (says he) when it is red, and
when he shows his color in the cup, or goes down pleasauntly: for in the
end thereof it will bite like a serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice. Thine
eyes shall look upon strange women, and thine heart shall speak lewd things,
and thou shall be as one that sleeps in the mids of the sea, and as he that
sleeps in the top of the mast. They have stricken me thou shall say, but I
was not sick, they have beaten me, but I felt it not, therefore will I seek
it yet still (...) Certaynely that must needs be very hurtfu(...) which
(...)eth, and infecteth like a poisoned (...)ent, whereby men are brought to
filthy fornication, which causes the heart to devise mischief. He
doubtless is in great danger that sleeps in the midst of the sea, for
soon he is overwhelmed with waves. He is like to fall suddenly that sleeps in
the top of the maste. And surely he has lost his senses, that can not feel
when he is stricken, that knows not when he is beaten. So, surfeiting and
drunkenness bites by the belly, and causes continual gnawing in the stomach,
bringes men to whoredom and lewdenesse of heart, with dangers unspeakable: so
that men are bereeued and robbed of their senses, and are altogether without
power of them selves. Who sees not now the miserable estate where into men
are brought, by these foul filthy monsters, gluttony, and drunkenes. The body
is so much disquieted by them, that as Jesus the son of Sirach affirms,
the insatiable feeder never sleeps quietly, such an unmeasurable heat is
kindeled, whereof ensues continual Ecclesi. 31.
ache and pain to the whole body. And no less truly the mind is also
annoyed by surfeiting banquettes: For somtymes men are stricken with frenzy of
mind, and are brought in manner to meare madness, some wax so brutishe and
blockishe, that they become altogether void of understanding. It is an
horrible thing that any man should mayme him self in any member: but for a
man of his own accord to bereeue him self of his wits, is a mischief
intolerable. The Prophet Osee in the fourth Chapter says, that wine and
drunkenness takes away the Osee. 4.
heart. Alas then, that any man should yield unto that, whereby he might
bereeue him self of the possession of his own heart. Wine and Eccle. 1^.
women lead wise men out of the way, and bring men of understanding to reprofe
and shame, says Jesus the son of Sirach. Yea, he asks what is the life of
man that is overcome with drunkenness. Wine drunken with excess, makes Eccle.
3^.
bitterness of mind, and causes brawling and strife. In Magistrates it
causes cruelty in stead of justice, as that wise Philosopher Plato perceived
right well, when he affirmed that a drunken man has a tyrannous heart, and
therefore will rule all at his pleasure, contrary to right and reason. And
certainly drunkenness makes men forget both law and equity, which caused
king Solomon so straightlye to charge that no Prou. 31.
wine should be given unto rulers, least peradventure by drinking, they forget
what the law appoynteth them, and so change the judgment of all the children
of the poor. Therefore among De rep^. lib. 3.
all sorts of men, excessive drynking is most intolerable in a magistrate, or
man of authority, as Plato says: For a drunkarde knows not where he is
himself. If then a man of authority should be a drunkarde, alas, how might
he be a guide unto other men, standing in need of a governor himself?
Besides this, a drunken man can keep nothing secret, many fond, foolyshe
and filthye words are spoken when men are at their bankettes. Drunkenness (as
Seneca affirms) discovers all wickedness, and brings it to light, it
remoueth all sham(...) fastness, and increases all mischief. The proud man
being drunken, utters his pride, the cruel man his cruelty, and the envious
man his envy, so that no vice can lie hid in a drunkarde. Moreover in that he
knows not him self, ^umbleth and stam^ereth in his speech, staggereth to
and fro in his going. beholds nothing steadfastly with his staring eyes,
believes that the house runs round about him. It is evident that the mind
is brought clean out of frame by excessive drinking, so that whosoever is
deceived by wine or strong drink, be^o^meth as Solomon says, a mocker, or a
mad man, so Prou, 20.
that he can never be wise. If any man think that he may drink much wine,
and yet be well in his wits, he may as well suppose, as Seneca says, that
when he has drunken poison, he shall not dye. For whersoeuer excessive
drinking is, there must needs follow perturbation of mind, and where the
belly is stuffed with dainty fare, there the mind is oppressed with s^othfull
sluggishnesse. A full belly, makes a gross understanding, Ad sororem sermona.
24.
says saint Barnarde, and much meat makes a weary mind. But alas, now a
days men pass little either for body or mind: so they have worldly wealth
and riches aboundaunts to satisfy their unmeasurable lusts, they care not
what they do. They are not ashamed to she we their drunken faces, and to play
the mad men openly. They think them selves in good case, and that all is well
with them. if they be not pynched by lack and poverty. Least any of ^s
therefore might take ocasion to flatter him self in this beastly kind of
excess, by the abundance of riches, let us call to mind what Solomon
writes in the. xxi. of his Proverbs, He Prou. 21.
that loves wine and fat fare, shall never be rich says he. And in the
xxiii. Chapter, he makes a vehement exhortation, on this wise, Keep not Prou.
2^.
company with drunkardes and gluttons, for the glutton and drunkarde shall
come to poverty. He that draws his patrimony through his throat, and eats
and drynketh more in one hour or in one day, then he is able to earne in a
whole week, must needs be an unthrift and come to beggerye. But some will
say, what need any to find fault with this? H^ hurts no man but him self,
he is no man's foe but his own. In deed I know^ this is commonly spoken in
defense of these beastly ^elly gods, but it is easy to see how hurtful they
are, not only to the^ selves, but also to the common wealth, by their example.
Every one that meets them is troubled with brawling and contentious language,
and often times ragyng in beastly lusts, like fed Horses, they ney on their
neighbors wives, as Hieremie says, and defyle their children and daughters.
Their example is evil to them among whom they dwell, they are an occasion of
offense to many, and whiles they waste their substance in banqueting, their
own householde is not provided of things necessary, their wives and their
children are evil entreated, they have not where with to relieve their poor
neighbors in ^^me of necessity, as they might have, if they ^yued soberlye.
They are unprofitable to the common wealth. For (...) drunkarde is neither fit
to rule, nor to be ruled. They are a slander to the Church or congregation of
Christ, and therefore saint Paul does excommunicate (...). Tim. 5.
them among whoremongers, idolaters, covetous persons, and extortioners,
forbidding Christians to eat with any such. Let us therefore, good people,
eschew every one of us, all intemperauncie, let us love sobriety and moderate
diet, often give our selves to abstinence and fasting, whereby the mind of man
is more lift up to God, more ready to all godly exercises, as prayer, hearing
and reading of Gods word, to his spiritual comfort. Finally, whosoever
regards the health and safetye of his own body, or wishes always to be
well in his wits, or desires quietness of mind, and abhors furye and
madness, he that would be rich and escape poverty, he that is willing to
live without the hurt of his neighbor, a profitable member of the common
wealth, a christian without slander of Christ and his Church: let him avoid
all ryotous and excessyue banqueting, let him learn to keep such measure as
behooves him that professes true godliness, let him follow saint Paul's rule,
and so ear and drink, to the glory and praise of God, who has created al
things to be soberly used with thanks giving, to whom he all honor and glory
forever.

Amen.
An Homilee against excess of apparel.
WHere ye have heretofore ben excited and stirred to use temperaunce of meats
and drinks, and to avoid thexcesse thereof, many ways hurtful to the state
of the common wealth, and also odious before almighty God, being the aucthour
and geuer of such creatures, to comfort and stablishe our frail nature, with
thanks unto him, and not by abusing of the^ to provoke his liberality to
severe punishing of that disorder. In like manner it is co^uenie^^ that ye be
admonished of another foul and chargeable excess: I mean, of Apparel, at
these days so outrageous, that neither almighty god by his word can stay our
proud curiosity in the same, neither yet godly and necessary laws made of
our Princes, and often repeated with the penalties, can bridle this detestable
abuse, whereby both god is openly contemned, and the princes laws manifestly
disobeyed, to the great peril of the Realm. Wherefore, that sobriety also in
this excess may be espied among us, I shall declare unto you, both the
moderate use of apparel, approved by God in his holy word, and also the
abuses thereof, which he forbids and disaloweth, as it may appear by the
incenueniences which daily increase by the just judgment of God, where that
measure is not kept, which he himself has appointed. If we consider the end
and purpose whereunto almighty God has ordained his creatures, we shall easyly
perceive, that he aloweth us apparel, not only for necessities sake, but also
for an honest comeliness. Even as in herbs trees, and sundry fruits, we
have not only, diverse necessary uses, but also the pleasant sight and sweet
smell, to delyght us withal, wherein we may behold the singular love of God
toward mankind, in that he has provided both to relieve our necessities,
and also to refreshe our senses with an honest and moderate recreation.
Therefore David in the Ciiii. Psalm, confessing Gods careful providence,
Psalm. 104.
shows that God not only provides things necessary for men, as herbs
and other meats, but also such things as may rejoice and comfort, as wine
to make glad the heart, oils and oyntmentes to make the face to shine. So that
they are altogether past the limittes of humanity, which yelding only to
necessity, forbid the lawful fruition of Gods benefits. With whose
traditions we may not be led, if we give ear to saint Paul, who writing to
the Collossians, wills them not to harken unto such men Colloss. 2.
as shall say, touch not, taste not, handle not, superstitiouslye bereeuing
them of the fruition of Gods creatures. And no less truly ought we to
beware, least under pretense of Christian liberty, we take license to do what
we list, aduauncing our selves in sumptuous apparel, and despysing other,
preparing our selves in fine bravery, to wanton, lewd, and unchaste
behavior. To the avoiding whereof, it behooves 4. Lessons
us to be myndefull of four lessons, taught in holy scripture, whereby we
shall learn to temper our selves, and to restrain our immoderate affections,
to that measure which God has 1. Romans 1^.
appointed. The first is, that we make not provision for the flesh, to
accomplish the lusts thereof, with costlye apparel, as that harlot did, of
Prou. 7.
whom Solomon speaks, Proverbs the* vii. which perfumed her bed, and decked
it with costly ornaments of Egypt, to the fulfilling of her lewd lust: but
rather ought we by moderate temperaunce to cut of al occasions, whereby the
flesh might get the victory. The second is written 2 1. Cor. 7.
by saint Paul, in the* vii. Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthes,
where he teaches us to use this world, as though we used it not. Whereby he
cutteth away, not only al ambition, pride, and vain pomp in apparel: but also
all inordinate care and affection, which withdraws us from the contemplation
of heavenly things, and consideration of our duty toward God. They that
are much occupied in caryng for things parteyning to the body, are most
commonly negligent and careless in matters concerning the soul. Therefore
our Savior Math. ^.
Christ wills us not to take thought what we shall eat, or what we shall
drink, or wherewith we shall be clothed, but rather to seek the kingdom of
God* and the righteousness thereof. Whereby we may learn to beware, least we
use those things to our hinderaunce, which God has ordained for our comfort
and furtheraunce toward his Kingdom. The third is, that we take in good part
our estate and condition, and content our selves with that which 3.
God sends, whether it be much or little. He that is ashamed of base and
simple attire, will be proud of gorgeous apparel, if he may get it. We must
learn therefore of the Apostle S. Paul Phil. 4.
both to use plentye, and also to suffer penurye, remembering that we must
yield accomptes of those things which we have received, unto him who
abhors al excess, pride, ostentation, and vanity, who also utterly
condempneth and disaloweth whatsoever draws us from our duty toward God,
or diminishe our charity toward our neighbors and brethren, whom we ought
to love as our selves. The fourth and 4.
last rule is, that every man behold and consider his own vocation, in as
much as God has appointed every man his degree and office, within the limittes
whereof it behooves him to keep him self. Therefore all may not look to
wear like apparel, but every one according to his degree, as God has placed
him. Which, if it were observed, many one doutlesse should be compelled to
wear a russet coat, which now ruffeleth in silks and veluettes, spending
more by the year in sumptuous apparel, the^ their fathers received for the
whole revenue of their lands. But alas now a days how many may we behold
occupied wholly in pampering the flesh? taking no care at all, but only how
to deck them selves, setting their affection altogether on worldly brauerye,
abusing Gods goodness, when he sends plenty, to satisfy their wanton
lusts, having no regard to the degree wherein God has placed them. The
Israelites were contented with such apparel as God gave them, Deuteronomy. 2^.
although it were base and simple: And God so blessed them, that their shoes
and clothes lasted them forty years, yea, and those clothes which their
fathers had worn, their children were content to use afterward. But we are
never contented, and therefore we prosper not, so that most commonly he that
ruffleth in his Sables, in his fine furred gown, corked slippers, trim
buskins, and warm mittons, is more ready to chill for cold, then the poor
laboring man, which can abide in the field all the day long, when the north
wind blows, with a few beggerlye cloutes about him. We are loath to wear
such as our fathers have left us, we think not that sufficient or good enough
for us. We must have one gown for the day, another for the night, one long,
another short, one for winter, another for summer, one through furred, another
but faced, one for the workyng day, another for the holy day, one of this
color, another of that color, one of cloth, another of sylke or Damask. We
must have change of apparel, one before dinner, another after, one of the
Spanishe fassion, another Turkey, and to be brief, never content with
sufficient. Our savior Christ bad his Disciples Mat. 10.
they should not have two coats: but the most men, far unlike to his
scollers, have their presses so full of apparel, that many knows not how
many sorts they have. Which thing caused Saint James to pronounce this
terrible Jacob. 5.
curse against such welthy worldlynges. Go to ye rich men, weep and houle in
your wretchedness that shall come upon you, your riches are corrupt, and your
garments are moth eaten, ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in
wantonness, ye have nourished your hearts, as in the day of slaughter. Mark
I beseech you, saint James calls them miserable, notwithstanding their riches
and plenty of apparel, forasmuch as they pamper their bodies, to their own
destruction. What was the rich glutton the better for his syne fare and costly
apparel? Did not he nourishe him self to be tormented in hell Luke. 16.
fire? Let us learn therefore to content our selves, having food and raiment,
as saint Paul 1. Tim. 6.
teaches, least desyring to be enryched with abundance, we fall into
temptations, snares, and many noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition
and destruction. Certaynlye, such as delyght in gorgeous apparel, are
commonly puffed up with pride, and filled with diverse vanities. So were the
daughters of Sion and people of Jerusalem, whom Esai the Prophet Esaias. 3.
threatens, because they walked with stretched out necks and wandering eyes,
mincing as they went, and nicely treading with their feet, that almighty God
should make their heads balde, and discover their secret shame. In that
day, says he, shall the Lord take away the ornament of the slippers, and the
caules, and the round attires, and the sweet balls, and the bracelets, and
the attires of the head, and the sloppes, and the headbandes, and the
tablettes, and the earerynges, the ringes, and the mustlers, the costlye
apparel, and the vayles, and wymples, and the crisping pin, and the glasses,
and the fine linen, and the hoodes, and the lawnes. So that almighty god would
not suffer his benefits to be vainly and wantonly abused, no not of that
people who^ he most tenderly loved, and had chosen to him self before all
other. No less truly is the vanity that is used amongst us in these days.
For the proud and hautie stomachs of the daughters of England, are so
mainteyned with diverse disguised sorts of costlye apparel, that as Tertulian
Apollog. con. genesis tes. cap. 6.
an ancient father says, there is left no difference in apparel between an
honest matrone and a common strumpet. Yea many men are become so effeminate,
that they care not what they spend in disguysing them selves, ever desyring
new toys, and inuenting new fassions. Therefore a certain man that would
picture every country man in his accustomed apparel, when he had painted
other nations, he pictured the English man all naked, and gave him cloth under
his arm, and bad him make it him self as he thought best, for he changed his
fassion so often, that he knew not how to make it. Thus with our fantastical
devises, we make our selves laughing stocks to other nations, while one
spends his patrimony upon pounces and cuttes, another bestows more on a
dauncyng shyrt, then might suffyce to buy him honest and comelye apparel for
his whole body. Some hang their revenues about their necks, ruffling in their
ruffes, and many a one ieopardeth his best joint, to maynteyne him self in
sumptuous raiment. And every man, nothing considering his estate and condition,
seeks to excel other in costely attire. Whereby it comes to pass, that in
abundance and plenty of al thin The cause of dearth.
ges, we yet complain of want and penurye, while one man spends that which
might serve a multitude, and no man distributeth of the abundance which he
has received, and all men excessiuely waste that which should serve to supplye
the necessities of other. There has been very good provision made against such
abuses, by diverse good and wholesome laws, which if they were practiced as they
ought to be of all true subjects, they might in some part serve to diminishe
this ragyng and ryotous excess in apparel. But alas, there appears amongst
us little fear and obedience either of God, or man. Therefore must we needs
look for Gods fearful Act. 12.
vengeance from heaven, to overthrow our presumption and pride, as he
ouerthrewe Herod, who in his royal apparel, forgetting God, was smitten of
an Angel, and eaten up of worms. By which terrible example, God has taught
us that we are but worms meat, although we pamper ourselves never so much in
gorgeous apparel.

Here we may learn that which Jesus the son of Syrache teaches, not to be
proud of clothing Eccle. 11.
and raiment, neither to exalte our selves in the day of honor, because the
works of the Lord are wonderful, and glorious, secret, and unknown,
teaching us with humbleness of mind, every one to be myndeful of the vocation
whereunto God has called him. Let Christians therefore endeavor them selves to
quench the care of pleasing the flesh, let us use the benefits of God in
this world, in such wise, that we be not to much occupied in providing for the
body. Let us content our selves quyetlye with that which God sends, be it
never so little. And if it please him to send plentye, let us not wax proud
thereof, but let us use it moderatly, as well to our own comfort, as to the
relief of such as stand in necessity. He that in abundance and plentye of
apparel, hydeth his face from him that is naked, despyseth his own flesh, as
Esai Esai. 58.
the Prophet says. Let us learn to know our selves, and not to despise
other, let us remember that we stand all before the majesty of almyghtie God,
who shall judge us by his holy word, wherein he forbids excess, not only
to men, but also to women. So that none can excuse them selves, of what estate
or condition so ever they be. Let us therefore present our selves before his
throne as Tertulian exhorts, with the ornaments which the Apostle speaks
of, Ephesians the. vi. Chapter, having our loins gyrte Ephe. 6.
about with the verity, having the breast plate of righteousness, and shodde
with shoes prepared by the Gospel of peace. Let us take unto us simplic(...)e,
Mat. 11.
c(...)itie, and comeliness, submitting our ne(...)s to the sweet yoke of
Christ. Let women be subject to their husbands, and they are sufficiently
attyred says Tertulian. The wife of one Philo an heathen Philosopher, being
demanded why she ware no gold? she answered, that she thought her husbands
virtues sufficient ornaments. How much more ought Christian women,
instructed by the word of God, to content them selves in their husbands? Yea,
how much more ought every Christian to content him self in our savior
Christ, thinkyng him self sufficientlye garnished with his heavenly virtues?
But it will be here objected and said of some nyce and vain women, that al
which we do in paintyng our faces, in dying our here, in embawming our bodies,
in decking us with gay apparel, is to please our husbands, to delyght his
eyes, and to retain his love toward us. O vain excuse, and most shameful
answer, to the reproach of thy husband. What could thou more say to set
out his foolishnes, then to charge him to be pleased and delyghted with the
deuyls tire? Who can paint her face and curle her here, and change it into an
unnatural color, but therein does work reprofe to her maker, who made her?
As though she could make her self more comely then God has appointed the
measure of her beawtie. What do these women, but go about to refourme that
which God has made? not knowing that all things natural is the work of
God, and things disguysed and unnatural be the works of the devil. And as
though a wise and Christian husband should delyght to see his wife in such
painted and flourished visions, which common harlottes mostly do use, to train
therewith their lovers to naughtiness, or as though an honest woman could
delight to be like an harlot for pleasing of her husband. Nay, nay, these be
but vain excuses of such as go about to please rather others, then their
husbands. And such attyres be but to provoke her to show her self abroad,
to entyce others a worthy matter. She must keep debate with her husband to
maynteyne such apparel, whereby she is the worse huswyfe, the seldomer at home
to see to her charge, and so to neglect his thrift, by giving great provocation
to her household to waste and wantonness, while she must wander abroad to show
her own vanity, and her husbands foolishness. By which her pride, she
styrreth up much envy of others which be so vaynly delighted as she is. She
does but deserve mockes and scorns, to set out all her commendation in Jewish
and Ethnic apparel, and yet brag of her Christianity. She does but waste
superfluouslye her husbands stock by such sumptuousness, and sometimes is
the cause of much bryberie, extortion, and deceit in her husbands occupying,
that she may be the more gorgeouslye set out to the sight of the vain world,
to please the devils eyes, and not gods, who gives to every creature
sufficient and moderate comlynes, wherewith we should be contented if we were of
God. What other thing do thou by those means, but prouokest other to tempt
thee, to deceive thy soul, by the bayte of thy pomp and pride? What else do
thou, but set out thy pride, and make of thy vndecente apparel of thy
body, the devils net, to catch the souls of them which behold thee? O thou
woman, not a Christian, but worse then a Painim, thou minister of the devil:
Why pamperest thou that carren flesh so hye, which sometime does stink and
rot on the earth as thou go? Howsoever thou perfumest thy self, yet cannot
thy beastlynesse be hidden or overcome with thy smelles and savors, which do
rather defourme and mishape thee, then beawtifie thee. What meant Salomo^ to
say, of such trimming of vain women, when he said, A fair woman without good
manners and conditions, is like a Sow which has a ryng of gold upon her
snout: but that the more thou garnishe thy self with these outward blasinges,
the less thou carest for the in ward garnishing of thy mind, and so do
but defoule thy self by such array, and not beawtify thy self? Hear, hear,
what Christ's holy Apostles do write, Let not the outward apparel of women
(says saint Peter) be decked with the broiding of here, with wrapping on of
gold, or goodlye clothing: but let the mind, and the conscience, which is
not seen with the eyes, be pure and clean, that is, says he, an acceptable
and an excellent thing before God. For so the old ancient holy women attyred
themselves, and were obedient to their husbands. And saint Paul says, that
women should apparel them selves with shame^astnesse and sobernes, and not
with braydes of their here, or gold, or pearl, or precious clothes, but as
women should do which will express godliness by their good outward works.
Jf ye will not keep the Apostles precepts, at the least let us hear what
pagans, which were ignorant of Christ, have said in this matter. Democrates
says, The ornament of a woman, stands in scarsitie of speech and apparel.
Sophocles says of such apparel thus, It is not an ornament, O thou fool, but
a shame and a manifest show of thy folly. Socrates says, that that is a
garnishyng to a woman, which declares out her honesty. The Grecians use it
in a proverb: It is not gold or pearl which is a beauty to a woman, but
good conditions.

And Aristotle byddeth that a woman should use less apparel then the law
does suffer. For it is not the goodlynesse of apparel, nor the excellency of
beauty, nor the abundance of gold, that makes a woman to be esteemed, but
modesty, and diligence to live honestly in althynges. This outrageous vanity
is now grown so far, that there is no shame taken of it. We read in
histories, that when king Dionisius sent to the women of Lacedemon rich robes,
they answered and said, that they shall do us more shame then honor: and
therefore refused them. The women in Rome in old time abhorred that gaye
apparel which king Pirrus sent to them, and none were so greedy and vain to
accept them. And a law was openly made of the senate, and along time observed,
that no woman should wear over half anounce of gold, nor should wear
clothes of diverse colors. But perchance some dainty dame will say and
answer me, that they must do somthyng to show their birth and blood, to
show their husbands riches. As though nobility were cheefely seen by these
things, which be common to those which be most vile, as though thy husbands
riches were not better bestowed then in such superfluities, as though when thou
were christened, thou did not renounce the pride of this world, and the
pomp of the flesh. I speak not against convenient apparel for every state
agreeable: but against the superfluity, against the vain delyght to covet
such vanities, to devise new fashions to feed thy pride with, to spend so
much upon thy carcass, that thou and thy husband are compelled to rob the
poor, to mainteyne thy costlynesse. Hear how that noble holy woman Queen
Hester, sets out these goodly ornaments (as they be called? when (in
respect of saving Gods people) she was compelled to put on such glorious
apparel, knowing that it was a fit stale to blind the eyes of carnal fools.
Thus she prayed. Thou know, O Lord, the necessity which I am driven to, to
put on this apparel, and that I abhor this sign of pride, and of this glory
which I bear on my head, and that I defy it as a filthy cloth, and that I
wear it not when I am alone. Again by what means was Holophernes deceived,
but by the glitteryng show of apparel, which that holy woman Judith did put
on her, not as delighting in them, nor seeking vain voluptuous pleasure by
them: but she ware it of pure necessity by Gods dispensation, vsyng this
vanity to overcome the vain eyes of Gods enemy. Such desire was in those
noble women, being very loath and vnwylling otherwise to wear such sumptuous
apparel, by the which others should be caused to forgette them selves. These
be commended in Scripture for abhorring such vanities, which by constraynt
and great necessity against their hearts desired were compelled to wear them
for a time. And shall such women be worthy commendations, which neither be
comparable with these women aforesaid in nobility, nor comparable to them in
their good zeales to God and his people, whose daily delight and seeking is to
florishe in such gaye shifts and chaunges, never satisfied, nor regardyng who
smarteth for their apparel, so they may come by it? O vain men, which be
subjects to their wives in these inordinate affections. O vain women to
procure so much hurt to them selves, by the which they come the sooner to
misery in this world, and in the mean time be abhorred of God, hated and
scorned of wise men, and in the end, like to be joined with such, who in hell
to late repenting them selves, shall openly complain with these words: What
has our pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of riches brought
us? All those things are passed away like a shadow: As for virtue we did
never show any sign thereof: And thus we are consumed in our wickedness. If
thou say that the custom is to be followed, and the use of the world does
compel thee to such curiosity, then I ask of thee, whose custom should be
followed? wise folks manners, or fools? If thou say the wise: then I say
follow them: For fools customs, who should follow but fools? Consider that
the consent of wise men, ought to be alleged for a custom. Now if any lewd
custom be used, be thou the first to break it, labor to diminishe it and
lay it down: and more laud before God, and more commendation shall thou win by
it, then by all the glory of such superfluity.

Thus ye have heard declared unto you, what God requires by his word
concerning the moderate use of his creatures. Let us learn to use them
moderatly as he has appointed. Almyghtie God has taught us, to what end and
purpose we should use our apparel: Let us therefore learn so to behave our
selves in the use thereof, as becomes Christians, always she wing our selves
thankful to our heavenly father for his great and merciful benefits, who
gives unto us our daily bread, that is to say, al things necessary for this
our needy life, unto whom we shall render accomptes for all his benefits, at
the glorious appearing of our savior Christ, to whom with the father, and the
holy ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
An Homilee or Sermon concerning prayer.
THere is nothing in all man's life (well-beloved in our savior Christ) so
needeful to be spoken of, and daily to be called upon, as hearty, zeious, and
devout prayer, the necessity whereof is so great, that without it nothing may
be well obtained at gods hand. For as the Apostle Jacob. 1.
James says, Every good and perfect gift comes from above, and proceeds
from the father of lyghtes, who is also said to be rich and liberal toward
all them that call upon him, not because Romans x.
he either will not or can not give without askyng, but because he has
appointed prayer as an ordinary means between him and us. There is no doubt
but he always knows what we Mat. 6.
have need of, and is always most ready to give abundance of those things
that we lack. Yet to the intent we might acknowledge him to be the geuer of
all good things, and behave our selves thankfully toward him in that
behalf, loving, fearyng, and worshippyng him sincerely and truly, as we ought
to do, he has profitably and wisely ordained, that in time of necessity we
should humble our selves in his sight, power out the secrets of our heart
before him, and crave help at his hands, with continual, earnest, and devout
prayer. By the mouth of his holy prophet David, he says on this wise: Call
upon me in the days of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Likewise in the
Gospel by the mouth of his well-beloved son Christ, Mat. 7.
he says: Ask, and it shall be given you, knock, and it shall be opened: for
whosoever asks, receaueth, whosoever seeks, finds, and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. Saint Paul also most agreeably consenting
hereunto, wylleth men to pray every where, and to continue therein (...). Tim.
Phil. 4. Colo. 4.
with thanks geuyng. Neither does the blessed Apostle saint James in this
point any thing descent, but earnestly exhorting all men to diligent prayer,
says: If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, which gives
liberally to all men, and reprocheth no man. Also in an other Jacob. 1.
place, Pray one for another (says he) that ye may be healed: For the
ryghteous man's prayer avails much, if it be fervent. What other Jacob. 5.
thing are we taught by these and such other places, but only this, that
almyghtie God notwithstanding his heavenly wisdom and foreknowledge, wylbe
prayed unto, that he will be called upon, that he will have us no less wylling
on our part to ask, then he on his part is wyllyng to give? Therefore most
fond and foolish is the opinion and reason of those men, which therefore think
all prayer to be superfluous and vain, because God searches the heart and the
raynes, and knows the meaning of the spirit before we ask. For if this
fleshly and carnal reason were sufficient to disanull prayer: then why did our
savior Christ so often cry to his disciples, Mat. 1^.
watch and pray? Why did he prescribe them a form of prayer, saying, when ye
pray, pray after this sort: Our father which art in heaven Luke ^.
etc. Why did he pray so often and so earnestly him self before his passion?
Finally, why did the Act^. 1.
Apostles immediately after his ascension, gather them selves together into one
several place, and there continue a long time in prayer? Either they must
condemn Christ and his Apostles of extreme folly, or else they must needs
grant that prayer is a thing most necessary for all men, at all times, and in
all places. Sure it is, that there is nothing more expedient or needful for
mankind in all the world, then prayer. Pray always (says saint Paul) with
all manner Ephesians. 6.
prayer and supplication, and watch thereto with all diligence. Also in
another place he wills us to pray continually without any intermission 2.
These. 3.
or ceassyng, meaning thereby that we ought never to slack or faint in prayer,
but to continue therein to our lives end. A number of other such places might
here be alleged of like effect, I mean, to declare the great necessity and
use of prayer: But what need many proofs in a plain matter? seeing there is
no man so ignorant but he knows, no man so blind but he sees, that prayer
is a thing most needful in all estates and degrees of men. For only by the
help hereof, we attain to those heavenly and everlasting treasures, which
God our heavenly father has reserved and laid up for his John. 16.
children in his dear and well-beloved son Jesus Christ, with this covenant
and promise most assuredly confirmed and sealed unto us, that if we ask, we
shall receive.

Now the great necessity of prayer being sufficiently known, that our minds
and hearts may be the more provoked and stirred thereunto, let us breefely
consider what wonderful strength and power it has, to bring strange and
myghtie things to pass. We read in the book of Exodus, that Iousa fighting
against the Amalekites, Exodus 17.
did conquer and overcome them, not so much by virtue of his own strength,
as by the earnest and continual prayer of Moses, who as long as he held up
his hands to God, so long did Israel prevail. But when he faynted, and let
his hands down, then did Amaleck and his people prevail. Insomuch that Aaron
and Hur, being in the mount with him, were feign to stay up his hands until
the going down of the sun, otherwise had the people of God that day ben
utterly discomfited and put to flight. Also we read in an other place of Joshua
him self, how he at the beseging of Gibeon, making his Joshua. ^.
humble petition to almyghtie God, caused the sun and the moon to stay their
course, and to stand still in the midst of heaven for the space of a whole
day, until such time the people were sufficiently avenged upon their enemies.

And was not Iehosaphates prayer of great force and strength, when God at his
request caused 2. Par. 20.
his enemies to fall out among them selves, and wylfully to destroy one
another? Who can maruayle 3. Reg. 18.
enough at the effect and virtue of Elias prayer? He being a man subject to
affections as we are, prayed to the Lord that it might not rain, and there
fell no rain upon the earth for the space of three years and. vi. months.
Again, he prayed that it might rain, and there fell great plenty, so that
the earth brought forth her increase most aboundauntly.

It were to long to tell of Judith, Hester, Susanna, and of diverse other godly
men and women, how greatly they prevailed in all their doings, by giving their
minds earnestly and devoutly to prayer. Let it be sufficient at this time to
conclude with the sayings of Augustine and Chrysostom, whereof the one calls
prayer the key of Aug. Ser. 26. de tem por^. Chri. sup. Mat. 22.
heaven, the other plainly affyrmeth that there is nothing in all the world
more strong then a man that gives him self to fervent prayer. Now then,
dearly beloved, seeing prayer is so needeful a thing, and of so great strength
before God, let us, according as we are taught by the example of Christ and
his apostles, be earnest and diligent in calling on the name of the Lord. Let
us never faint, never slack, never give over, but let us daily and hourly,
early and late, in season, and out of season, be occupied in godly meditations
and prayers. What if we obtain not our petitions at the first? yet let us not
be discoraged, but let us continually cry and call upon God: He will surely
hear us at length, if for no other cause, yet for very importunities sake.
Remember the parable of the unrighteous judge, and the poor wydowe, how she by
Luke 17.
her importunate means caused him to do her justice against her adversary,
although otherwise he feared neither God nor man. Shall not God much more
avenge his elect (says our savior Christ) which cry unto him day and
night? Thus he taught his disciples, and in them all other true Christian men,
to pray always, and never to faint or shrink. Remember also the Mat. 15.
example of the woman of Canaan, how she was rejected of Christ, and called
dog, as one most unworthy of any benefit at his hands: yet she gave not
over, but followed him still, crying and calling upon him to be good and
merciful unto her daughter. And at length by very importunity, she obtained
her request. O let us learn by these examples, to be earnest and fervent in
prayer, assuryng our selves that whatsoever we ask of God the father in the
name of his son Christ, and according to his will, he will undoubtedly
grant it. He is truth it self and as truly as he has promised it, so
truly will he John. 16
perform it. God for his great mercies sake so work in our hearts by his
holy spirit, that we may always make our humble prayers unto him as we ought
to do, and always obtain the thing which we ask, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be al honor and glory,
world without end.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee concerning prayer.
IN the first part of this sermon ye heard the great necessity, and also
the great force of devout and earnest prayer declared and proved unto you, both
by diverse weighty testimonies, and also by sundry good examples of holy
scripture. Now shall you learn whom you ought to call upon, and to whom ye
ought always to direct your prayers. We are evidently taught in Gods holy
Testament, that almighty God is the only fountain and welspring of al
goodness, and that whatsoever we have in this world, we receive it only at his
hands. To this effect serves the place of S. James: Every good and perfect
Jacob. 1.
gift, says he, comes from above, and proceeds from the father of lyghtes.
To this effect also serves the testimony of Paul, in diverse places of his
Epistles, witnessing that the spirit of wisdom, the spirit of knowledge and
revelation, yea every good and heavenly gift, as faith, hope, charity, grace,
and peace, comes only and solely of God. In consideration whereof, he
bursteth out into a sudden passion, and says: O man, what thing have thou,
which thou i. Cor. 4.
have not received? Therefore whenever we need or lack any thing,
parteyning either to the body, or to the soul, it behooves us to run only
unto GOD, who is the only geuer of all good things. Our savior Christ in
the Gospel, teaching his disciples how they should pray, sends them to the
father in his name, saying: Uerily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask
the father in my name, he will give it unto you. And in an other place, when ye
pray, pray after this sort: Our father which art in John. 19. Mat. 6. Luke 11.
heaven. etc. And does not God him self, by the mouth of his Prophet David,
will and command us to call upon him? The Apostle wysheth grace and peace to
all them that call on the Psalm. 50.
name of our Lord, and of his son Jesus Christ, as does also the Prophet
Joel, saying: And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on Joel. 2.
Acts. 1.
the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

Thus then it is plain by the infallible word of truth and life, that in all
our necessities we must flee unto God, direct our prayers unto him, call upon
his holy name, desire help at his hands, and at no others. Whereof if ye will
yet have a further reason, mark that which follows. There are certain
conditions most requisite to be found in every such a one that must be called
upon, which if they be not found in him unto whom we pray, then does our
prayer avail us nothing, but is altogether in vain.

The first is this, that he to whom we make our prayers, be able to help us.
The second is, that he will help us. The third is, that he be such a one as
may hear our prayers. The fourth is, that he understand better then we our
selves what we lack, and how far we have need of help. If these things
be to be found in any other saving only God, then may we lawfully call upon
some other besides God. But what man is so gross, but he well understands
that these things are only proper to him which is omnipotent, and knows al
things, even the very secrets of the heart, that is to say, only and to God
alone, whereof it follows, that we must call neither upon angel, nor yet upon
saint, but only and soly upon God, as S. Paul does write: Now shall men call
upon him in whom they have not believed? So that invocation or prayer, may not
be made without faith in him on Romans x.
whom they call, but that we must first believe in him, before we can make our
prayers unto him, whereupon we must only and solely pray unto God. For to say
that we should believe either in angel or saint, or in any other living
creature, were more horrible blasphemy against God and his holy word, neither
ought this fancy to enter into the heart of any Christian man, because we are
expressly taught in the word of the Lord only to repose our faith in the
blessed trinity, in whose only name we are also baptized, according to the
express commandment of our savior Jesus Christ, in the last of Matthewe.
Mat. 28.


But that the truth hereof may the better appear, even to them that be most
simple and Despi. and lit. cap. 50.
unlearned, let us consider what prayer is. Saint Augustine calls it a
liftyng up of the mind to God, that is to say, an humble and lowly pouring De
sommo bono ca. 8. li. 3.
out of the heart to God. Isidorus says, that it is an affection of the heart,
and not alabour of the lips. So that by these places, true prayer does
consist not so much in the outward sound and voice of words, as in the
inward gronyng, and crying of the heart to God.

Now then, is there any angel, any virgin, any patriarche or prophet among
the dead, that can understand, or know the meaning of Psalm. 7. Apoca. 2.
Iere. 7. 2. Par. 6.
the heart? The scriptures says, it is God that searches the heart and
raynes, and that he only knows the hearts of the children of men. As for the
saints, they have so little knowledge of the secrets of the heart, that many
of the ancient fathers greatly doubt, whether they know any thing at al, that
is commonly done on earth. And albeit some think they do, yet saint Augustine
Lib. de cura pro mort. age^ da. cap 13
a Doctor of great authority, and also antiquity, has this opinion of
them: that they know no more what we do on earth, then we know what they do in
heaven. For proof whereof, he alleges the words of Esai the prophet, where
it is said, Abraham is ignorant of us, De vera reli. ca. 55.
and Israel knows us not. His mind therefore is this, not that we should
put any religion in worshyppyng them, or praying unto them: but that we should
honor them by following their virtuous and godly life. For as he witnesses
Lib. 22. de ciuit. dei. ca. 10.
in an other place, the martyrs and holy men in times past, were wont after
their death, to be remembered, and named of the priest at divine service: but
never to be inuocated or called upon. And why so? because the priest (says
he) is Gods priest, and not theirs: Whereby he is bound to call upon God, and
not upon them. Thus you see, that the authority both of scripture, and also
of Augustine, does not permit, that we should pray unto them. O that al men
would studiously read, and search the scriptures, then John. 5.
should they not be drowned in ignorance, but should easily perceive the
truth, as well of this point of doctrine, as of all the rest. For there does
the holy ghost plainly teach us, that Christ is our only mediator and
intercessour with God, and that we must seek and run to no other. If any
man sins says saint John, we have i. John. ^.
an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the ryghteous, and he is the
propitiation for our i. Tim. 2.
sins. Saint Paul also says, There is one God, and one mediator between
God and man, even the man Jesus Christ. Whereunto agrees the testimony of
our savior him self, John. 14.
witnessing that no man comes to the father, Ibidem.
but only by him, who is the way, the truth, the life, yea and the only door
whereby we must John. 10.
enter into the kingdom of heaven, because GOD is pleased in no other but in
him. For Mat. 16.
which cause also he cries, and calls unto us, that we should come unto
him, saying: Come Mat. 11
unto me all ye that labor and be heavy laden, and I shall refreshe you.
Would Christ have us so necessarily come unto him? and shall we most
unthankfully leave him, and run unto other? This is even that which God so
greatly complayneth of by his prophet Jeremy, saying, My people have committed
two great offenses, they have forsaken me the fountain of the waters of life,
and have dug to them selves broken pits that can hold no water. Is not that
man think you unwise, that will run for water to a little brook, when he may
as well go to the head spryng? Even so may his wisdom be justly susspected,
that will flee unto saints in time of necessity, when he may boldly and
without fear declare his grief and direct his prayer unto the Lord himself.
If God were strange, or dangerous to be talked withal, then might we justly
draw back and seek to some other. But the Lord is nygh unto them that call
upon him in faith and truth, and the prayer of Pal. 144.
the humble and meek has always pleased him. What if we be sinners, shall we
not therefore Judith. 9.
pray unto God? or shall we despair to obtain any thing at his hands? Why
did Christ then teach us to ask forgiveness of our sins? saying: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. Shall
we think that the saints are more merciful in hearing sinners, then God?
David says, that the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger,
and of great kyndnesse. Saint Paul Psalm. 103.
says, that he is rich in mercy toward all them that call upon him. And he
himself by Ephesians. 2.
the mouth of his prophet Esai says: For a little while have I forsaken thee,
but with great compassion will I gather thee: For a moment Esai. 52.
in mine anger, I have hid my face from thee, but with everlasting mercy have I
had compassion upon thee. Therefore the sins of any man ought not to
withholde him from praying unto the Lord his God. But if he be truly penitent
and steadfast in faith, let him assure him self that the Lord wylbe merciful
unto him, and hear his prayers. O but I dare not (will some man say) trouble
God at all times with my prayers: We see that in kings houses and courts of
princes, men can not be admitted, unless they first use the help and mean of
some special noble man, to come unto the speech of the king, and to obtain
the thing that they would have. To this reason does saint Ambrose answer
very Ambro. sup. cap. 1, Romans
well, writing upon the first Chapter to the Romans. Therefore (says he) we
use to go unto the king by officers and noble men, because the king is a
mortal man, and knows not to whom he may commit the government of the
common wealth. But to have God our friend, from whom nothing is hid, we need
not any helper, that should further us with his good word, but only a devout
and godly mind. And if it be so, that we need one to entreat for us: why
Hebre. 7.
may we not content our selves with that one mediator, which is at the right
hand of God the father, and there lives for ever to make intercession for us?
As the blood of Christ did redeem us on the cross, and cleanse us from our
sins: even so it is now able to save all them that come unto God by it. For
Christ sitting in heaven, has an everlasting priesthood, and always prays
to his father for them that be penitent, obtaining by virtue of his wounds,
which are evermore in the sight of God, not only perfect remission of our
sins, but also all other necessaries that we lack in this world, so that
his only mediator is sufficient in heaven, and needs no others to help him.
Why then do Matthew. 6. Jacob. 5. Coloss. 4. 1. Tim. 2.
we pray one for another in this life, some man perchance will here demand?
Forsoothe we are wylled so to do, by the express commandment both of Christ
and his disciples, to declare therein as well the faith that we have in Christ
toward God, as also the mutual charity that we bear one toward another,
in that we pity our brothers case, and make our humble petition to God for
him. But that we should pray unto Saints, neither have we any commandment
in all the Scripture, nor yet example which we may safely follow. So that
being done without authority of Gods word, it lacks the ground of faith,
and therefore can not be acceptable before GOD. For whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin. And the Apostle says, Heb. 11. Romans 14. Romans 10.
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Yet thou wylt
object further, that the saints in heaven do pray for us, and that their
prayer proceeds of an earnest charity that they have toward their brethren
on earth. Where to it may be well answered. First, that no man knows whether
they do pray for us or no. And if any will go about to prove it by the nature
of charity, concludyng, that because they did pray for men on earth,
therefore they do much more the same now in heaven: Then may it be said by
the same reason, that as often as we do weep on earth, they do also weep in
heaven, because while they lived, in this world, it is most certain and sure
they did so. And for that place which is written in the Apocalips, namely that
the angel did offer up the prayers of the saints upon the golden altar: it
is properly meant, and ought properly to be understood of those saints that
are yet living on earth, and not of them that are dead, otherwise what need
were it, that the angel should offer up their prayers, being now in heaven
before the face of aimightie god? But admit the saints do pray for us, yet do
we not know how, whether specially for them which call upon them, or else
generally for all men, wishing well to every man a like. If they pray
specially for them which call upon them, then it is like they hear our
prayers, and also know our hearts desire. Which thing to be false, it is
already proved both by the scriptures, and also by the authority of Augustine.
Let us not therefore put our trust or confidence in the saints or martyrs that
be dead. Let us not call upon them, nor desire help at their hands: but let
us always lift up our hearts to GOD, in the name of his dear son Christ,
for whose sake as God has promised to hear our prayer, so he will truly
perform it. Invocation is a thing proper unto God, which if we attribute
unto the saints, it sounds to their reproach, neither can they well bear it
at our hands. When Paul had Acts. 14.
healed a certain lame man, which was impotent in his feet, at Listra, the
people would have done sacrifice to him and Barnabas: who renting their
clothes, refused it, and exhorted them to worship the true GOD. Likewise in ye
revelation, when saint John fell before the angels feet to worship him, the
angel Apoc. 19.
would not permit him to do it, but commanded him that he should worship
GOD. Which examples declare unto us, that the saints and angels in heaven,
will not have us to do any honor unto them, that is due and proper unto God.
He only is our father, he only is omnipotent, he only knows and
understands all thing, he only can help us at all times, and in all places,
he suffers the sun to shine upon the good and the bad, he feeds the
young Ravens that cry unto him, he saves both man and beast, he will not that
any one here of our head shall perish: but is always redye to help and
preserve all them that put their trust in him, according as he has promised,
saying, Before they call, I will answer, and whiles Esai. 55.
they speak, I will hear. Let us not therefore any thing mistrust his
goodness, let us not fear to come before the throne of his mercy, let us not
seek the aid and help of saints: but let us come boldlye our selves,
nothing doubting but God for Christ's sake in whom he is well pleased, will
hear us without a spokes man, and accomplish our desire in all such things
as shall be agreeable to his most holy will. So says Chrysostom, an ancient
Doctor of the Chriso. 6. Home. de profectu. Euange.
Church, and so must we steadfastly believe, not because he says it, but much
more because it is the doctrine of our Savior Christ him self, who has
promised that if we pray to the father in his name, we shall certainly be
heard, both to the relief of our necessities, and also to the salvation of
our souls, which he has purchased unto us, not with gold or silver, but
with his precious blood, shed once for all upon the cross. To him therefore,
with the father and the holy ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor,
praise and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
The third part of the Homilee concerning prayer.
YE were taught in the other part of this Sermon, unto whom ye ought to direct
your prayers, in time of need and necessity, that is to wit, not unto
angels or saints, but unto the eternal and euerlyuing God, who because he is
merciful, is always redye to hear us, when we call upon him in true and
perfect faith. And because he is omnipotent, he can easily perform and bring
to pass, the thing that we request to have at his hands. To doubt Psalm. 5.
of his power, it were a plain point of infidelity, and clean against the
doctrine of the holy ghost, which teaches that he is al in all. And as
touching his good will in this behalf, we have express testimonies in
scripture, how that he will help us, and also deliver us, if we call upon him
in time of trouble. So that in both these respects, we ought rather to call
upon him, then upon any other. Neither ought any man therefore to doubt to
come boldlye unto God, because he is a sinner: For the Lord (as the prophet
David says) is gracious and merciful, yea, his Psalm. 107.
mercy and goodness endures forever. He that sent his own son into the
world to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1.
will he not also hear sinners, if with a true penitent heart and a steadfast
faith they pray unto him? Yes, if we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, 1. John. 1.
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, as we are plainly taught by the
examples of David, Peter, Marie Magdalene, the Publicane, and diverse other. And
where as we must needs use the help of some mediator and intercessour, let us
content our selves with him that is the true and only mediator of the new
Testament, namely the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For as saint John says,
If any man sin, we 1. John. 1.
have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
propitiation for our sins. And saint Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy,
says, There is one God, and one mediator 1. Tim. 1.
between God and man, even the man Jesus Christ, who gave him self a
ransom for all men, to be a testimony in due time.

Now after this doctrine established, you shall be instructed for what kind of
things, and what kind of persons ye ought to make your prayers unto God. It
greatly behooves all men, when they pray, to consider well and diligently with
them selves, what they ask and require at Gods hands, lest if they desire the
thing which they ought not, their petitions be made void, and of none effect.
There came on a time unto Agesilaus the king, a certain importunatesuter, who
requested him in a matter earnestly, saying, Sir, and it please your grace, you
did once promise me. Truth quoth the king, if it be just that thou requirest,
then I promised thee: otherwise I did only speak it, and not promise it. The
man would not so be answered at the kings hand, but still urging him more
and more, said: It becomes a king to perform the least word he has
spoken, yea if he should only beck with his head. No more says the king, then
it behooves one that comes to a king, to speak and ask those things which
are rightful and honest. Thus the king cast of this unreasonable and
importunate suter.

Now if so great consyderation be to be had, when we kneel before an earthly
king: how much more ought to be had, when we kneel before the heavenly king,
who is only delighted with justice and equity, neither will admit any vain,
foolish, or unjust petition? Therefore it shall be good and profitable,
thoroughly to consider and determine with our selves, what things we may
lawfully ask of God, without fear of repulse, and also what kind of persons
we are bound to commend unto god in our daily prayers. Two things are chiesely
to be respected in every good and godly man's prayer: His own necessity, and
the glory of almighty God. Necessity belongs either outwardly to the body,
or else inwardly to the soul. Which part of man, because it is much more
precious and excellent then the other, therefore we ought first of all, to
crave such things as properly belong to the salvation thereof: as the gift of
repentance, the gift of faith, the gift of charity and good works,
remission and forgiveness of sins, patience in adversity, lowliness in
prosperity, and such other like fruits of the spirit, as hope, love, joy,
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, Gala. 6.
and temperauncie, which things God requires of all them that profess them
selves to be his children, saying unto them in this wise: Let your light so
shine before men, that they Matthew. 5.
may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. And in
another place he also says: Seek first the kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.
and his righteousness, and then al other things shall be given unto you. Wherein
he puts us in mind, that our chief and greatest care, ought to be for those
things which parteine to the health and safegarde of the soul, because we have
here (as the apostle says) no continuing city, but do Hebre. 13.
seek after another in the world to come.

Now when we have sufficiently prayed for things belonging to the soul, then
may we lawfully and with safe conscience, pray also for our bodily necessities,
as meat, drink, clothing, health of body, deliverance out of prison, good
luck in our daily affairs, and so forth, according as we shall have need.
Whereof, what better example can we desire to have, then of Christ him self,
who taught his disciples, and all other Christian men, first to pray for
heavenly things, Matthew. 6. Luke. 11.
and afterward for earthly things, as is to be seen in that prayer, which
he left unto his Church, commonly called the Lords prayer? In the third
book of kings and third Chapter, it is written, that God appeared by night
in a dream unto Solomon the king, saying, Ask of me whatsoever thou wylt, and
I will give thee. Solomon made his humble prayer, and asked a wise and prudent
heart, that might judge and understand what were good, and what were ill,
what were godly, and what were ungodly, what were righteous, and what were
unrighteous in the sight of the Lord. It pleased God wonderously that he had
asked this thing. And God said unto him, Because thou have requested this
word, and have not desired many days and long years upon the earth, neither
abundance of riches and goods, nor yet the life of thine enemies which hate
thee, but have desired wisdom to sit in judgment: Behold, I have done unto
thee according to thy words, I have given thee a wise heart, full of knowledge
and understanding, so that there was never none like thee before time, neither
shall be in time to come. Moreover I have besides this, given thee that which
thou have not required, namelye worldly wealth and richesse, princely honor
and glory, so that thou shall therein also pass all kings that ever were.
Note this example, how Solomon being put to his choice to ask of God
whatsoever he would, requested not vain and transitory things, but the high
and heavenly treasures of wisdom, and that in so doing, he obtayneth as it
were in recompense, both riches and honor. Wherein is given us to understand,
that in our daily prayers, we should chiefly and principally ask those things
which concern the kingdom of God, and the salvation of our own souls,
nothing doubting but all other things shall (according to the promise of
Christ) be given unto us. But here we must take heed, that we forget not that
other end whereof mention was made before, namely the glory of God. Which
unless we mind, and set before our eyes in making our prayers, we may not
look to be hard, or to receive any thing of the Lord. In the. xx. Chapter of
Matthewe, the mother of the two sons of Zebedee came unto Jesus, worshipping
him, and saying: Grant that my two sons may sit in thy kingdom, the one at
thy right hand, and the other at thy left hand. In this petition she did not
respect the glory of GOD, but plainly declared the ambition and vain glory of
her own mind; for which cause she was also most worthyly repelled, and
rebuked at the Lords hand. In like manner we read in the Acts of one Simon
Magus a Sorcerer, how that he Acts. 8.
perceauyng that through laying on of the Apostles hands the holy ghost was
given, offered them money, saying: Give me also this power, that on whom soever
I lay my hands, he may receive the holy ghost. In making this request, he
sought not the honor and glory of GOD, but his own private gain and lucre,
thinking to get great store of money by this feate, and therefore it was justly
said unto him: Thy money perish with thee, because thou think that the
gift of God may be obtained with money. By these and such other examples we
are taught, whenever we make our prayers unto God, chiefly to respect the
honor and glory of his name. Whereof we have this general precept in the
Apostle Paul: Whether ye eat or 1. Cor. 10. Coloss. 3.
drink, or whatsoever you do, look that you do it to the glory of God. Which
thing we shall best of all do, if we follow the example of our savior Christ,
who praying that the bitter cup of Mat. 26. Luke. 22.
death might pass from him, would not therein have his own will fulfilled,
but referred the whole matter to the good will and pleasure of his father.

And hitherto concerning those things, that we may lawfully and boldly ask of
God.

Now it follows, that we declare what kind of persons we are bound in
conscience to pray for. Saint Paul writing to Timothy, exhorts 1. Tim. 2.
him to make prayers and supplications for all men, exempting none, of what
degree or state soever they be. In which place he makes mention by name of
Kings and Rulers which are in authority, putting us thereby to knowledge
how greatly it concerns the profit of the common wealth, to pray
diligently for Coloss. 4. Romans 15. 2. These. 3. Ephesians. 6.
the higher powers. Neither is it without good cause, that he does so often in
all his Epistles crave the prayers of Gods people for him self. For in so
doing, he declares to the world, how expedient and needful it is daily to
call upon GOD for the ministers of his holy word and sacraments, that they
may have the door of vtteraunce opened unto them, that they may truly
understand the scriptures, that they may effectually preach the same unto the
people, and bring forth the true fruits thereof, to the example of all other.
After this sort did the congregation continually pray for Peter at Jerusalem,
and for Paul among the Acts. 12.
Gentiles, to the great increase and furtherance of Christ's Gospel. And if
we, following their good example herein, will study to do the like, doubtless
it can not be expressed, how greatly we shall both help our selves, and also
please God.

To discourse and run through all degrees of persons, it were to long.
Therefore ye shall briefly take this one conclusion for all: Whomsoever we are
bound by express commandment to love, for those also are we bound in
conscience to pray. But we are bound by express commandment, to love all
men as our selves: therefore we are also bound to pray for all men, even as
well as if it were for our selves, notwithstanding we know them to be our
extreme and deadly enemies. For so does our savior Christ plainly teach us
in his Gospel, saying, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
Matthew. 5.
good to them that hate you, pray for them that persecute you, that ye may be
the children of your father which is in heaven. And as he taught Luke. 25.
his disciples, so did he practice him self in his life time praying for his
enemies upon the cross, and desyring his father to forgive them, because they
knew not what they did: As did also that holy and blessed martyr Stephen, when
he was Acts. 7.
cruelly stoned to death of the stubberne and stifnecked Jews, to the example
of all them that will truly and unfeignedly follow their Lord and master
Christ in this miserable and mortal life.

Now to entreat of that question, whether we ought to pray for them that are
departed out of this world, or no. Wherein if we will cleave only unto the word
of God: then must we needs grant, that we have no commandment so to do. For
the scripture does acknowledge but two places after this life. The one proper
to the elect and blessed of god, the other to the reprobate and dampened souls,
as may be well gathered by the parable of Lazarus and the rich man, which
place saint Augustine expoundyng, says in this wise: That which Abraham
speaks unto the Luke. 10.
rich man in Lukes Gospel, namely that the just can not go into those places
where the wicked Lib. 2. Euange. questi. cap. 38.
are tormented: What other things does it signify, but only this, that the
just by reason of gods judgment, which may not be revoked, can show no deed
of mercy in helping them, which after this life are cast into prison, until
they pay the uttermost farthyng? These words as they confound the opinion of
helping the dead by prayer, so they do clean confute and take away the vain
error of purgatory, which is grounded upon this saying of the gospel: Thou
shall not depart thence, until thou have paid the vttermoste farthing. Now
does saint Augustine say, that those men which are cast into prison after this
life, on that condition may in no wise be helped, though we would help them
never so much. And why? Because the sentence of God is unchangeable, and can
not be revoked again. Therefore let us not deceive our selves, thinking that
either we may help other, or other may help us by their good and charitable
prayers in time to come. For as the preacher says: When the Eccle. 11
tree falls, whether it be toward the South, or toward the North, in what
place soever the tree falls, there it lies: meaning thereby that every
mortal man dies either in the state of salvation or dampnation, according as
ye words of the Evangelist John do also plainly impart, saying, He that
believes on the son of God, John. 3.
has eternal life: But he that believes not on the son, shall never see
life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Where is then the third place
which they call purgatory? or where shall our prayers help and profit the
dead? Saint Augustine does only acknowledge two places Li. 5. Hypogno.
after this life, heaven and hell: As for the third place, he does plainly
deny, that there is any such to be found in all scripture. Chrysostom
Chris. in Heb. 2. Hom. 4. Ciprian. cont. De metrianu^.
likewise is of this mind, that unless we wash away our sins in this
present world, we shall find no comfort afterward. And saint Ciprian says,
that after death, repentance and sorrow of pain shall be without fruit, weping
also shall be in vain, and prayer shall be to no purpose. Therefore he counsels
all men to make provision for them selves while they may, because when they
are once departed out of this life, there is no place for repentance, nor yet
for satisfaction. Let these and such other places be sufficient to take away
the gross error of Purgatory out of our heads, neither let us dream any
more, that the souls of ye dead are any thing at all helped by our prayers:
But as the scripture teaches us, let us think that the soul of man passing
out of ye body, goes straightwayes either to heaven, or else to hell, whereof
the one needs no prayer, and the other is without redemption. The only
Purgatory wherein we must trust to be saved, is the death and blood of
Christ, which if we apprehend with a true and steadfast faith, it purges and
cleanses us from all our sins, even as well as if he were now hanging upon
the cross. The blood of Christ says 1. John. 1.
saint John, has cleansed us from all sin. The blood of Christ says saint
Paul, has purged Heb. 9.
our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God. Also in another
place he says: We Heb. 10.
be sanctified and made holy, by the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ
done once for all. Yea Ibidem.
he adds more, saying With the one oblation of his blessed body and precious
blood, he has made perfect for ever and ever all them that are sanctified.
This then is that Purgatory, wherein all Christian men must put their whole
trust and confidence, nothing doubting, but if they truly repent them of
their sins, and dye in perfect faith, that then they shall forth with pass
from death to life. If this kind of purgation will not serve them, let them
never hope to be releassed by other men's prayers, though they should continue
therein unto the worlds end. He that can not be saved by faith in Christ's
blood, how shall he look to be delivered by man's intercessions? Has God more
respect to man on earth, then he has to Christ in heaven? If any man sin
(says saint John) we have an advocate John. 2.
with the father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sins. But we must take heed that we call upon this advocate while we
have space given us in this life, lest when we are once dead, there be no hope
of salvation left unto us. For as every man sleeps with his own cause, so
every man shall rise again with his own cause. And look in what state he
dies, in the same state he shall be also judged, whether it be to salvation or
dampnation. Let us not therefore dream either of purgatory, or of prayer for
the souls of them that be dead: but let us earnestly and diligently pray for
them which are expressly commanded in holy scripture, namely for kings and
rulers, for ministers of Gods holy word and sacraments, for the saints of
this world, otherwise called the faithful: to be short, for all men living,
be they never so great enemies to god and his people, as Jews, Turks, Pagans,
Infidels, Heretics, etc. Then shall we truly fulfill the commandment of God
in that behalf, and plainly declare our selves to be the true children of our
heavenly father, which suffers the sun to shine upon the good and the bad,
and the rain to fall upon the just and the unjust: For which and al other
benefits most aboundauntlye bestowed upon mankind from the beginning, let
us give him hearty thanks, as we are most bound, and praise his name for ever
and ever.

Amen.
An Homilee of the place and time of prayer.
GOD through his almighty power, wisdom, and goodness, created in ye beginning
heaven and earth, the Sun, the Moon, the stars, the fowls of ye air, the
beasts of the earth, the fishes in the sea, and all other creatures, for the
use and commodity of man, whom also he had created to his own image and
likeness, and given him the use and government over them al, to the end he
should use them in such sort as he had given him in charge and commandment,
and also that he should declare him self thankful and kind for all those
benefits, so liberally and so graciously bestowed upon him, utterly without
any deserving on his behalf. And although we ought at al times, and in all
places to have in remembrance, and to be thankful to our gracious Lord,
according as it is written: I will magnify ye lord at al times. Psalm. 33. Psalm.
102.
And again: Wheresoever the lord bears rule, O my soul praise the Lord: Yet
it appears to be Gods good will and pleasure, that we should at special
times, and in special places, gather our selves together, to the intent his
name might be renowned, and his glory set forth in the congregation and
assembly of his saints. As concerning the time which almighty God has
appointed his people to assemble together solemly, it does appear by the
fourth commandment of God: Remember says God, that thou keep holy the
Sabbath day. Upon the which day, as is plain in the acts of the Apostles, the
people accustomablye Acts. 13.
resorted together, and heard diligently the law and the prophets read among
them. And albeit this commandment of God does not bind christian people so
straytlye to observe and keep the utter ceremonies of the Sabbath day, as it
was given unto ye Jews, as touching the forbearing of work and labor in time
of great necessity, and as touching the precise keeping of the seventh day,
after the manner of the Jews. For we keep now the first day, which is our
sunday, and make that our sabbath, that is, our day of rest, in the honor of
our savior christ, who as upon that day rose from death, conquering the same
most triumphantly: Yet notwithstanding, whatsoever is found in the
commandment apparteyning to the law of nature, as a thing most godly, most
just, and needeful for the setting forth of Gods glory, it ought to be
retained and kept of all good Christian people. And therefore by this
commandment, we ought to have a time, as one day in a week, wherein we ought
to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works. For like as it appears by
this commandment, that no man in the six days ought to be slothful or
idle, but diligently to labor in that state wherein God has set him: Even
so, God has given express charge to all men, that upon the sabbath day, which
is now our sunday, they should cease from all weaklye and workeday labor, to
the intent, that like as God him self wrought six days, and rested the
seventh, and blessed, and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quyetnes and
rest from labor: even so Gods obedient people should use the sundaye holyly,
and rest from their common and daily business, and also give them selves
whollye to heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and service. So that God
does not only command the observation of this holy day, but also by his own
example does stir and provoke us to ye diligent keeping of the same. Good
natural children will not only become obedient to the commandment of their
parents, but also have a diligent eye to their doings, and gladly follow the
same. So, if we will be the children of our heavenly father, we mu^^ be careful
to keep the christian sabbath day, which is the sunday, not only for that it
is Gods express commandment, but also to declare our selves to be loving
children, in following the example of our gracious Lord and father. Thus it may
plainly appear, that Gods will and commandment was, to have a solemn time
and standing day in the weke, wherein the people should come together, and have
in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render him thanks for them,
as apparteyneth to loving, kind, and obedient people. This example and
commandment of God, the godly Christian people began to follow immediately
after the ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to chose them a standing
day of the week to come together in: Yet not the seventh day which ye Jews
kept, but the Lords day, the day of the Lords resurrection, the day after the
seventh day, which is the first of the week. Of the which day mention is made
of saint Paul on this wise: In the first day of ye sabbath let every man lay
up what (...). Cor. xvi.
he thinks good, meaning for the poor. By the first day of the sabbath, is
meant our Sundaye, which is the first day after the Jews seventh day. And in
the Apocalips it is more plain, where as saint John says: I was in the spirit
upon the sunday. Since which time, Gods people Apaca. i.
has always in all ages, without any gaynsaying, used to come together upon
the Sunday, to celebrate and honor the Lords blessed name, and carefully to
keep that day in holy rest and quyetnes, both man, woman, child, servant, and
stranger. For the trangression and breach of which day, God has declared him
self much to be grieved, as it may appear by him who for gathering Number. xv.
of sticks on the sabbath day was stoned to death. But alas, all these
notwithstanding, it is lamentable to see the wicked boldenes of those that will
be counted gods people, who pass nothing at al of keeping and halowing the
sundaye. And these people are of two sorts. The one sort if they have any
business to do, though there be no extreme need, they must not spare for the
sunday, they must ride and journey on the sunday, they must drive and carry on
the sunday, they must row and ferry on the sunday, they must buy and sell on
the sunday, they must keep markets, and fayres on the sundaye: Finallye, they
use all days alike, workdaies, and holy days al are one. The other sort is
worse: For although they will not travel nor labor on the sunday, as they do
on the weke day, yet they will not rest in holiness, as God commands: but they
rest in ungodliness and filthiness, prauncing in their pride, prancking and
pricking, pointing and painting them selves to be gorgeous and gay: they rest
in exces and superfluity, in glutteny and drunkenness like rattes and swyne,
they rest in brawling and railing, in quarreling and fyghting: they rest in
wantonness, in toyishe talkyng, in filthy fleshlinesse, so that it does to
euidentlye appear that God is more dishonored and the devil better served on
the sunday, then upon all the days in the week beside. And I assure you, the
beasts which are commanded to rest on the sunday, honor God better then
this kind of people: For they offend not God, they break not their holyday.
Wherefore, O ye people of God, lay your hands upon your hearts, repent and
amend this grievous and dangerous wickedness, stand in awe of the
commandment of God, gladlye follow the example of God him self, be not
disobedient to the godly order of Christ's Church, used and kept from the
apostles time, until this day. Fear the displeasure and just plagues of
almighty God, if ye be negligent and forbear not laboring and trauayling on
the sabbath day or sunday, and do not resort together to celebrate and magnify
Gods blessed name, in quiet holiness and godly reverence.

Now concerning the place where the people of God ought to resort together,
and where especially they ought to celebrate and sanctify the sabbath day,
that is the sunday, the day of holy rest: That place is called Gods Tentple
or the church, because the company and congregation of Gods people (which is
properly called ye church) does there assemble them selves on the days
appointed for such assemblies and meetinges. And sorasmuch as almighty God
has appointed a special time to be honored in, it is very meet, godly, and
also necessary, that there should be a place appointed where these people
should meet and resort, to serve their gracious God and merciful father.
Truth it is, the holy Patriarchs for a great number of years had neither
temple, nor church to resort unto. The cause was, they were not stayed in any
place, but were in a continual perigrination and wandering, that they could
not conveniently buyld any church. But so soon as God had delivered his
people from their enemies, and set them in some liberty in the wilderness, he
set them up a costly and a curious tabernacle, which was as it were the
paryshe church, a place to resort unto of the whole multitude, a place to have
his sacrifices made in, and other obseruaunces and rites to be used in.
Furthermore, after that God according to the truth of his promise, had placed
and quyetlye settled his people in the land of Chanaan, now called Jury, he
commanded a great and a magnificent temple to be builded by king Solomon, as
seldom the like has been seen, a temple so decked and adourned, so gorgeously
garnished, as was meet and expedient for people of that time, which would be
allured and stirred with nothing so much as with such out ward goodlye gaye
things. This was now the temple of God, endued also with many gyttes and
sundry promyses. This was the paryshe church, and the mother Church of all
Jury. Here was God honored and served. Hither was the whole realm of all the
Israelites bound to come at three solemn feasts in the year, to serve their
Lord God here. But let us proceed further. In the time of Christ and his
Apostles, there was yet no temples nor Churches for Christian men. For why?
they were always for the most part in persecution, veration, and trouble, so
that there could be no liberty nor license obtained for that purpose. Yet God
delyghted much that they should often resort together in a place, and
therefore after his ascension they remained together in an upper chamber,
sometime they entered into the Temple, sometime into the synagoges, sometime
they were in prison, sometimes in their houses, sometimes in the feeldes. etc.
And this continued so long, till the faith of Christ Jesus began to multiplye
in a great part of the world. Now when diverse Realms were establyshed in
gods true religion, and God has given them peace and quyetnes: then began
kings, noble men, and the people also, stirred up with a godly zeal and
feruentnesse, to build up temples and Churches, whyther the people might
resort, the better to do their duty toward God, and to keep holy their
sabbath day, the day of rest. And to these temples have the Christians
customably used to resort from time to time, as unto meet places where they
might with common consent praise and magnify Gods name, yielding him thanks
for the benefits that he daily powers upon them, both mercifully and
aboundantlye, where they might also hear his holy word read, expounded, and
preached sincerely, and receive his holy sacraments ministered unto them duly
and purely. True it is that the chief and special temples of God, wherein he
has greatest pleasure, and most delights to dwell, are the bodies and minds
of true christians, and the chosen people of God, according to the doctrine of
holy scriptures, declared by Saint Paul. Know ye not (says he) 1. Cor. 3.
that ye be the temple of God, and that the spirit of God does dwell in you?
The temple of God is holy, which ye are. And again in the same Epistle: Know
ye not that your body is the temple 1. Cor. 6.
of the holy Ghost dwelling in you, whom you have given you of God, and that
ye be not your own? Yet this notwithstanding, God does allow the material
temple made with lyme and stone (so often as his people come together into it, to
praise his holy name) to be his house, and the place where he has promised to
be present, and where he will hear the prayers of them that call upon him. The
which thing both Christ and his apostles, with all the rest of the holy
fathers, do sufficiently declare by this: That albeit they certaynlye knew
that their prayers were heard in what place soever they made them, though it
were in caves, in woods, and in desartes, yet (so often as they could
conveniently) they resorted to the material temples, there with the rest of the
congregation, to join in prayer and true worship.

Wherefore (dearly beloved) you that profess your selves to be Christians,
and glory in that name, disdain not to follow the example of your master
Christ, whose scholars you say ye be, show you to be like them whose
scholemates you take upon you to be, that is, the Apostles and disciples of
Christ. Lift up pure hands, with clean hearts in all places, and at all
times. But do the same in the temples and Churches upon the sabbath days also.
Our godly predecessors and the ancient fathers of ye primitive Church, spared
not their goods to build Churches, no they spared not their lives in time of
persecution, and to hazard their blood, that they might assemble them selves
together in Churches. And shall we spare a little labor to come to churches?
Shall neither their example, nor our duty, nor the commodities (that thereby
should come unto us) move us? If we will declare our selves to have the fear
of God, if we will show our selves true christians, if we will be the folowers
of Christ our master, and of those godly fathers that have lived before us,
and now have received the reward of true and faithful christians, we must
both willingly, earnestly, and reverently, come unto the material churches and
temples to pray, as unto fit places appointed for that use: And that upon the
sabbath day, as at most convenient time for Gods people, to cease from bodyly
and worldly business, to give them selves to holy rest, and godly
contemplation parteining to the service of almighty God: Whereby we may
reconcile our selves to God, be partakers of his reverent sacraments, and be
devout hearers of his holy word, so to be established in faith to godwarde,
in hope against all adversity, and in charity toward our neighbors. And
thus running our course as good christian people, we may at the last attain
the reward of everlasting glory, through the merits of our savior Jesus
Christ, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee of the place and time of prayer.
IT has been declared unto you (good Christian people) in the former Sermon
read unto you, at what time and into what place ye shall come together to praise
God.

Now I entende to set before your eyes, first how zealous and desirous ye ought
to be to come to your Church. Secondly, how sore God is grieved with them that
do despise or little regard to come to the Church upon the holy restfull day.
It may well appear by the scriptures, that many of the godly Israelites being
no we in captivity for their sins among the Babilonians, full often wysshed
and desired to be again at Jerusalem: And at their return, through Gods
goodness (though many of the people were negligent) yet the fathers were
marvelous devout to buyld up the temple, that Gods people might repair thither
to honor him. And King David when he was a banished man out of his country,
out of Jerusalem the holy City, from the sanctuary, from the holy place,
and from the tabernacle of God: What desire, what feruentnesse was in him
toward the holy place? What wysshinges and prayers made he to God to be a
dweller in the house of the Lord? One thing (says he) have I asked of the
Lord, and this will I still crave, that I may resort and have Psalm. 16.
my dwelling in the house of the Lord, so long as I live. Again, Oh how I
ioyed when I heard these words, We shall go into the Lords Psalm. 121.
house. And in other places of the Psalms he declares for what intent and
purpose he has such a feruente desire to enter into the Temple and Church of
the Lord: I will fall down (says Psalm. 157.
he) and worship in the holy temple of the Lord. Again, I have appeared in thy
holy place, that Psalm. 63.
I might behold thy might and power, that I might behold thy glory and
magnificence.

Finally he says, I will show forth thy name to my brethren, I will praise
thee in the mids Psalm. 21.
of the congregation. Why then had David such an earnest desire to the house
of God? First, because there he would worship and honor God. Secondly, there
he would have a contemplation and a sight of the power and glory of God.
Thirdly, there he would praise the name of god, with all the congregation and
company of the people. These considerations of this blessed prophet of God,
ought to stir up and kindle in us the like earnest desire to resort to the
church, especially upon the holy restfull days, there to do our duties and to
serve God, there to call to remembrance how God, even of his mere mercy, and
for the glory of his name sake, works myghtely to conserve us in health,
wealth, and godliness, and myghtyly preserves us from the assaults and rages
of our fierce and cruel enemies, and there joyfully in the number of his
faithful people to praise and magnitie the Lords holy name. Set before your
eyes also that ancient father Simeon, of whom the scripture speaks thus, to
his great commendation, and an incourageme^t for us to do the like. There was a
man at Jerusalem named Simeon, a just man, fearing God: Luke. 2.
he came by the spirit of God into the temple, and was told by the same
spirit that he should not dye before he saw the anointed of the Lord. In
the temple his promise was fulfilled, in the temple he saw Christ, and took
him in his arms, in the Temple he braste out into the mighty praise of God
his Lord. Anna a Prophetisse, Anna.
an old widow, departed not out of the temple, giving her self to prayer and
fasting day and night: And she coming about the same time, was likewise
inspyred, and confessed and spoke of the Lord to all them that looked for the
redemption of Israel. This blessed man, and this blessed woman, were not
disapoynted of wonderful fruit, commodity and comfort which God sent them,
by their diligent resorting to Gods holy temple. Now ye shall hear how
greuouslye God has been offended with his people, for that they passed so little
upon his holy Temple, and foully either despised or abused the same. Which
thing may plainly appear by the notable plagues and punishments which God
has laid upon his people, especially in this, that he stirred up their
adversaries, horribly to beat down, and utterly to destroy his holy temple
with a perpetual desolation. Alas, how many Churches countries and kingdoms
of christian people, have of late years ben plucked down, ouerrunne, and left
wast, with grievous and intolerable tyranny and cruelty of the enemy of our
Lord Christ the great Turk, who has so universally scourged the Christians,
that never the like was heard and read of? Above thirty years past, the great
Turk had ouerrun, conquered, and brought into his dominion and subjection
twenty Christian kingdoms, turnyng away the people from the faith of Christ,
poysonyng them with the devilish religion of wicked Mahomet, and either
destroying their Churches utterly, or filthily abusing them with their wicked
and detestable errors. And now this great Turk, this bitter and sharp
scourge of Gods vengeance, is even at hand in this part of christendom, in
Europe, at the borders of Italy, at the borders of Germany, greedylye gaping to
devour us, to ouerrunne our country, to destroy our Churches also, unless we
repent our sinful life, and resort more diligently to the Church to honor
God, to learn his blessed will, and to fulfill the same. The Jews in their
time provoked justly the vengeance of God, for that partly they abused his
holy temple with the detestable idolatry of the heathen, and supersticious
vanities of their own inventions, contrary to Gods commandment, partly they
resorted unto it as hypocrites, spotted, imbrewed, and foully defiled with all
kind of wickedness and sinful life, partly many of them passed little upon
the holy temple, and forced not whether they came thither, or no. And have not
the Christians of late days, and even in our days also, in like manner
provoked the displeasure and indignation of almighty God? partly because they
have profaned and defiled their churches with heathenishe and Jewish abuses,
with images and idols, with numbers of aulters, too too superstitiously, and
intollerablye abused, with gross abusing, and filthy corrupting of the Lords
holy supper, the blessed sacrament of his body and blood, with an infinite
number of toys and tryfles of their own deuyces, to make a godly outward
show, and to deface the homely, simple, and sincere religion of Christ Jesus,
partlye they resort to the Church like hypocrites, full of all iniquity and
sinful life, having a vain and dangerous fancy and persuasion, that if they
come to the church, besprinkle them with holy water, hear a mass, and be
blessed with the challice, though they understand not one word of the whole
service, nor feel one motion of repentance in their hearts, all is well, all
is sure. Fie upon such mocking and blaspheming of gods holy ordinance.
Churches were made for an other purpose, that is, to resort thither, and to
serve God truly, there to learn his blessed will, there to call upon his
mighty name, there to use the holy sacraments, there to travail how to be in
charity with thy neighbor, there to have thy poor and needy neighbor in
remembrance, from thence to depart better and more godly then thou came
thither. Finallye, Gods vengeance has been, and is daily provoked, because
much wicked people pass nothing to resort to the Church, either for that they
are so sore blinded that they understand nothing of God and godliness, and care
not with deuilishe example to offend their neighbors, or else for that they
see the Church altogether scoured of such gay gasing sightes as their gross
fantasy was greatly delyghted with, because they see the false religion
abandoned, and the true restored, which seems an unsavory thing to their
unsavory taste, as may appear by this that a woman said to her neighbor: Alas
gossip, what shall we now do at Church since all the saints are taken away, since
all the goodly sightes we were wont to have are gone, since we cannot hear the
like pyping, singing, chaunting, and playing upon the organs that we could
before. But (dearelye beloved) we ought greatly to rejoice and give God
thanks, that our Churches are delivered of all those things which displeased
God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy house and his place of prayer, for
the which he has justly destroyed many nations, according to the saying of
saint Paul: If any man defyle the temple of God, God will him destroy. 1.
Cor. iii.
And this ought we greatly to praise god for, that such superstitious and
idolatrious manners as were utterly naught and defaced gods glory, are utterly
abolished, as they most justly deserved: and yet those things that either god
was honored with, or his people edified, are decently retained, and in our
Churches comely practiced. But now forasmuch as ye perceive it is gods
determinate pleasure, ye should resort unto your churches upon the day of holy
rest, seeing ye hear what displeasure God conceaueth, what plagues he pours
upon his disobedient people, seeing ye understand what blessings of God are
given, what heavenly commodities come to such people as desirously and zelously
use to resort unto their Churches, seeing also ye are now freendly bidden and
jointly called, beware that ye slack not your duty, take heed that you
suffer nothing to let you hereafter to come to the Church at such times as you
are ordinarily appointed and commanded. Our savior Christ tells in a
parable, that a great Luke. iiii.
supper was prepared, gestes were bidden, many excused themselves and would not
come: I tell you (says Christ) none of them that were called shall taste of my
supper. This great supper, is the true religion of almighty God, wherewith he
will be worshipped in the due receauyng of his sacraments, and sincere
preaching and hearing his holy word, and practicing the same by godly
conversation. This feast is now prepared in Gods banqueting house the
Church, you are thereunto called and jointly bidden: if you refuse to come, and
make your excuses, the same will be answered to you, that was unto them. Now
come therefore (dearly beloved) without delay, and chearefully enter into Gods
feastyng house, and become partakers of the benefits provided and prepared for
you. But see that ye come thither with your holiday garment, not like
hypocrites, not of a custom and for manner sake, not with lothsomnesse, as
though ye had rather not come then come, if ye were at your liberty. For God
hates and punishes such counterfaite hypocrites, as appears by Christ's
former parable. My friend (says God) how came thou in without a wedding
garment? And therefore commanded his servants to bind him hand and foot,
and to cast him into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and wayling, and
gnashyng of teethe. To the intent ye may avoid the like danger at Gods hand,
come to the Church on the holyday, and come in your holyday garment, that is to
say, come with a cheareful and a godly mind, come to seek Gods glory, and to
be thankful unto him, come to be at one with thy neighbor, and to enter in
friendship and charity with him. Consider that all thy doings stink before the
face of God, if thou be not in charity with thy neighbor. Come with an heart
syfted and cleansed from worldly and carnal affections and desires, shake of
all vain thoughts which may hinder thee from Gods true service. The bird
when she will flee, shakes her wings: Shake and prepare thy self to flee hyer
then all birds in the air, that after thy duty duly done in this earthlye
Temple and Church, thou may flee up and be received into the glorious Temple
of GOD in heaven, through Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom with the father, and
the holy ghost, be all glory and honor.

Amen.
An Homilee wherein is declared that Common prayer and Sacraments, ought to be
ministered in a tongue, that is understood of the hearers.
AMong the manifold exercises of Gods people (dear Christians) there is none
more necessary for all estates and at all times, the^ is public prayer, and
the due use of sacraments. For in the first, we beg at Gods hand all such
things, as otherwise we can not obtain. And in the other, he imbraseth us,
and offreth him self to be imbrased of us. Knowing therefore that these two
exercises are so necessary for us, let us not think it unmeet to consider,
first what prayer is, and what a sacrament is, and then how many sorts of
prayers there be, and how many sacraments, so shall we the better understand
how to use them aright. To know what they be, saint Augustine teaches us in
his August de spiritu and anima.
book entitled, Of the spirit and the soul. He says this of prayer: Prayer
is (says he) the devotion of the mind, that is to say, the returning to God
through a godly and humble affection, which affection is a certain willing
and sweet enclining of the mind it self toward GOD. August. lib. 2. contra
aduersarios legis and prophet. August. ad Bonifacium.
And in the second book against the adversary of the law and the prophets,
he calls sacraments holy signs. And writing to Bonifacius of the baptism
of infantes, he says, If sacraments had not a certain similitude of those
things whereof they be sacraments, they should be no sacraments at all. And
of this similitude, they do for the most part receive the names of the self
things they signify. By these words of saint Augustine it appears, that he
aloweth the common description of a sacrament, which is, that it is a visible
sign of an invisible grace, that is to say, that sets out to the eyes and
other outward senses, the inward workyng of Gods free mercy, and does (as it
were) seal in our hearts the promises of God. And so was circumcision a
sacrament, which preached unto the outward senses, the inward cutting away
of the foreskin of the heart, and sealed and made sure in the hearts of the
circumcised, the promise of god touching the promised seed that they looked
for. Now let us see how many sorts of prayer, and how many sacraments
there be. In the scriptures we read of three sorts of prayer, whereof two are
private, and the third is common. The first is that which Saint Paul speaks
of in his Epistle to Timothy, saying, I will that men pray in every place,
lifting up 1. Tim. 2.
pure hands without wrath and sttriuing. And it is the devout lifting up of
the mind to God, without the uttering of the hearts grief or desire by open
voice. Of this prayer we have example in the first book of the kings in Anna
the mother of Samuel, when in the heaviness of 1. Reg. 1.
her heart she prayed in the temple, desyring to be made fruitful. She prayed
in her heart (says the tert) but there was no voice heard. After this sort
must all Christians pray, not once in a week, or once in a day only: but as
saint Paul writes to the Thessalonians, without ceassyng. (...). These. 5.
Jacob. 5.
And as Saint James writes, The continual prayer of a just man is of much
force. The second sort of prayer is spoken of in the Gospel of Matthew, where
it is said, When thou prayest, enter into thy secret closet, and when thou
have shut Matthew. 6.
the door to thee, pray unto thy father in secret, and thy father which sees
in secret, shall reward thee. Of this sort of prayer, there be sundry examples
in the scriptures, but it shall suffice to rehearse one, which is written in
the Acts of the Apostles. Cornelius a devout man, a captain Acts. 10.
of the Italian army, says to Peter: that being in his house in prayer, at the
ninth hour there appeared unto him one in a white garment. etc. This man
prayed unto God in secret, and was rewarded openly. These be ye two private
sorts of prayer. The one mental, that is to say, the devout lifting up of
the mind to God: And the other vocal, that is to say, the secret vtteryng
of the griefs and desires of the heart with words, but yet in a secret
closet or some solitary place. The third sort of prayer, is public or
common. Of this prayer speaks our Savior Christ, when he says, If two of
you shall agree upon earth upon any thing, whatsoever ye shall ask, Matthew. 18.
my father which is in heaven shall do it for you, for wheresoever two or three
be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Although
God has promised to hear us when we pray privately, so it be done faithfully
and devoutly (For he says, Call upon me in the day Psalm. 50. Jacob. 5.
of thy trouble, and I will hear thee. And Elias being but a mortal man,
says Saint James, prayed, and heaven was shut three years and six months,
and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain:) Yet by the histories of the
Bible it appears, that public and common prayer is most available before
god, and therefore is much to be lamented that it is no better esteemed among us
which profess to be but one body in Christ. When the city of Niniue was
threatened to be destroyed within. xl. days, the Prince and Jonas. 3.
people joined them selves together in public prayer and fasting, and were
preserved. In the prophet Joel, God commanded a fasting to Joel. 2.
be proclaimed, and the people to be gathered together, young and old, man and
woman, and are taught to say with one voice: Spare us O Lord, spare thy
people, and let not thine inheritance be brought to confusion. When ye Jews
should have been destroyed all in one day through the malice of Haman, at the
commandment of Hester they fasted and prayed, and were Hester. 4.
preserved. When Holophernes besieged Bethulia, by the advice of Judith they
fasted and prayed, and were delivered. When Peter was in prison, the Judith. 8.
congregation joined them selves together in prayer, and Peter was wonderfully
delivered. Acts. 12.
By these histories it appears, that common or public prayer is of great
force to obtain mercy, and deliverance at our heavenly fathers hand.
Therefore brethren, I beseech you, even for the tender mercies of GOD, let us no
longer be negligent in this behalf: but as the people wylling to receive at
Gods hand such good things as in the common prayer of the Church are craved,
let us join our selves together in the place of common prayer, and with one
voice and one heart, beg at our heavenly father all those things, which he
knows to be necessary for us. I forbid you not private prayer, but I exhort
you to esteem common prayer as it is worthy. And before all things, be sure,
that in all these three sorts of prayer, your minds be deuoutlye lifted up to
God, else are your prayers to no purpose, and this saying shall be verified in
you: This people honors me with their lips, but their Esai. 29. Matthew. 15.
heart is far from me. Thus much for the three sorts of prayer, whereof we
read in ye scriptures.

Now with like or rather more brevity, you shall hear how many sacraments
there be, that were instituted by our Savior Christ, and are to be continued,
and received of every Christian in due time and order, and for such purpose
as our savior Christ wylled them to be received. And as for the number of
them, if they should be considered according to the exact signification of a
sacrament, namely for the visible signs, expreslye commanded in the new
Testament, whereunto is anexed the promise of free forgiveness of our sin,
and of our holiness and ioynyng in Christ: there be but two, namely Baptism,
and the supper of the Lord. For although absolution has the promise of
forgiveness of sin: yet by the express word of the new Testament, it has
not this promise annexed and tied to the visible sign, which is imposition of
hands. For this visible sign (I mean laying on of hands) is not expressly
commanded in the new Testament to be used in absolution, as the visible
signs in baptism and the Lords supper are: and therefore absolution is no
such sacrament as baptism and the Communion are. And though the orderyng of
ministers has his visible sign and promise: yet it lackes the promise of
remission of sinue, as all other sacraments besides do. Therefore neither it,
nor any other sacrament else, be such sacraments as Baptism and the Communion
are. But in a general acception, the name of a Sacrament may be attributed to
any thing whereby an holy thing is signified. In which understanding of the
word, the ancient writers have given this name, not only to ye other five,
commonly of late years taken and used for supplying the number of the seven
sacraments: Dionisi. Barnard. de coena domini, and abluti pedum.
but also to diverse and sundry other ceremonies, as to oil, wasshing of feet,
and such like, not meaning thereby to repute them as sacraments, in the same
signification that ye two forenamed sacraments are. And therefore saint
Augustine weyghyng the true signification and exact meaning of the word,
writing to Ianuarius, and also in ye third book of christian doctrine,
affirms that the sacraments of the Christians, as they are most excellent in
signification, so are they most few in number, and in both places makes
mention expressedlye of two, the sacrament of baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord. And although there are retained by thorder of ye church of England,
besides these two, certain other Rites and Ceremonies about the institution of
ministers in the Church, Matrimony, Confirmation of children, by examining
them of their knowledge in the articles of the faith, and ioynyng there to the
prayers of the Church for them, and like wise for the visitation of the sick:
yet no man ought to take these for sacraments in such signification and
meaning, as the sacrament of Baptism and the Lords Supper are: but either for
godly states of life, necessary in Christ's church, and therefore worthy to be
set forth by public action and solempnitie by the ministry of the Church,
or else judged to be such ordinances, as may make for the instruction, comfort,
and edification of Christ's Church.

Now, understanding sufficiently what prayer is, and what a sacrament is also,
and how many sorts of prayers there be, and how many sacraments of our
savior Christ's institution: let us see whether the scriptures and the
examples of the primative Church will allow any vocal prayer, that is, when
the mouth utters the petitions with voice, or any manner of sacrament, or
other public and common rite or action, parteyning to the profit and
edifying of the poor congregation, to be ministered in a tongue unknown or not
understand of the Minister or people: yea, and whether any person may
privately use any vocal prayer, in a language that he him self understands
not. To this question we must answer, no. And first of Common prayer and
administration of Sacraments. Although reason, if it might rule, would soon
persuade us to have our common prayer and administration of sacraments in a
known tongue, both for that to pray commonly, is for a multitude to ask one
and the self thing with one voice and one consent of mind, and to administer
a sacrament, is by the out ward word and element, to preach to the receauer
the inward and invisible grace of God, and also for that both these exercises
were first instituted, and are still continued, to the end that the
congregation of Christ might from time to time be put in remembrance of their
unity in Christ, and that as members all of one body, they ought both in
prayers and otherwise to seek and desire one another commodity, and not
their own without others: Yet shall we not need to flee to reasons profes in
this matter, sith we have both the plain and manifest words of the scripture,
and also the consent of the most learned and ancient writers to commend the
prayers of the congregation in a known tongue. First, Paul to the Corinthians
says: 1. Cor. 14.
Let all things be done to edifying. Which can not be, unless commonpraiers
and administration of sacraments be in a tongue known to the people. For
where the prayers spoken by the minister, and the words in the administration
of the sacraments, be not understood of them that be present, they can not
thereby be edified. For as when the trumpet that is blown in the feelde gives
an uncertain sound, no man is thereby stirred up to prepare him self to the
fight: And as when an instrument of music makes no distinct sound, no man
can tell what is piped: Even so when prayers or administration of sacraments
shall be in a tongue unknown to the hearers, which of them shall be thereby
stirred up to lift up his mind to God, and to beg with the Minister at Gods
hand, those things which in the words of his prayers the minister asks? Or
who shall in the ministration of the Sacraments understand what invisible
grace is to be craved of the hearer, to be wrought in the inward man? Cruely
no man at al. For (says S. Paul) he that speaks in a tongue unknown, shall be
unto the hearer an alient, which in a Christian congregation is a great
absurdity. For we are not strangers one to another, but we are the citizens
of the saints, and of the householde of GOD, yea, and members of one body.
And therefore whiles our minister is in rehersing Ephe. 2. 1. Cor. 10. and. 12.
the prayer that is made in the name of us all, we must give diligent ear to
the words spoken by him, and in heart beg at Gods hand those things that
he beggeth in words. And to signify that we so do, we say Amen at the end of
the prayer that he makes in the name of us al. And this thing can we not do
for edification, unless we understand what is spoken. Therefore it is required
of necessity, that ye common prayer be had in a tongue that the hearers do
understand. If ever it had been tolerable to use strange tongues in the
congregations, the same might have been in ye time of Paul and the other
apostles, when they were miraculously endued with the gift of tongues. For it
might then have persuaded some to embrace the Gospel, when they had heard men
that were Hebrews borne, and unlearned, speak ye Greek, the Latin, and other
languages. But Paul thought it not tolerable then: And shall we use it now,
when no man comes by ye knowledge of tongues, other wise then by diligent and
earnest study? God forbid. For we should by that means bring all our Church
exercises to friuolus superstition, and make them altogether unfruitful. Luke
writes, that when Peter and John were Acts. 4.
discharged by the Princes and high Priests of Jerusalem, they came to their
fellows, and told them all that the princes of the priests and elders had
spoken unto them. Which when they heard, they lyfted up their voice together to
God with one assent, and said, Lord, thou arthe that have made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all things that are in them. etc. Thus could they not
have done, if they had prayed in a strange tongue, that they had not
understand. And no doubt of it, they did not all speak with several voices:
but some one of them spoke in the name of them all, and the rest giving
diligent ear to his words, consented thereunto, and therefore it is said, that
they lifted up their voice together. Saint Luke says not, Their voices, as
many: but, their voice, as one. That one voice therefore was in such language
as they al understood, other wise they could not have lifted it up with the
consent of their hearts. For no man can give consent of the thing he knows
not. As touching ye times before the coming of Christ, there was never man
yet that would affirm, that either the people of God or other, had their
prayers or administrations of sacraments, or sacrifices, in a tongue that they
them selves understood not. As for the time since Christ, till that usurped
power of Rome began to spread it self, and to enforce all the nations of
Europe to have the Romish language in admiration, it appears by ye consent
of the most ancient and learned writers, that there was no strange or
unknown tongue used in the congregations of Christians. Instinus martyr, who
lived about. 160. years after Christ, Justinius. Apol. 2.
says thus of the administration of the Lords supper in his time, Upon the
Sunday assembles are made, both of them that dwell in cities, and of the^ that
dwell in ye country also. Amongst who^, as much as may be, the writings of
the apostles and prophets are read. Afterward, when ye reader does cease, the
chief minister makes an exhortation, exhorting them to follow so honest
things. After this, we rise altogether and offer prayers, which being ended (as
we have said) bread and wine and water are brought forth: Then the head
minister offers prayers and thankesgeuing with all his power, and the people
answer, Ame^. These words with their circumstaunces being duly considered,
do declare plainly, that not only the scriptures were read in a known tongue:
but also that prayer was made in the same in the congregations of Iustines
time. Basilius magnus, and Johannes Chrisostomus did in their time prescribe
public orders of public administration, which they call Liturgies, and in
them they appointed the people to answer to the prayers of the Minister,
sometime, Amen, sometime, Lord have mercy upon us, sometime, and with thy
spirit, and, we have our hearts lyfted up unto, the Lord, etc. Which
aunsweres the people could not have made in due time, if the prayers had not
ben in a tongue that they understood. The same Basil writing to the Clergy
of Epist. 63.
Neocaesaria, says thus of his usage in common prayer, appoynting one to
begin the song, the rest follow: And so with diverse songs and prayers,
passing over the night, at the dawnyng of the day, altogether (even as it were
with one mouth and one heart) they sing unto the Lord a song of confession,
every man framing unto him self meet words of repentance. In another place
he says, If the Sea be fair, how is not the assemble of the congregation
much more fair, in which a joined sound of men, women, and children (as it
were of the waves beating on the shore) is sent forth in our prayers unto our
God? Mark his words: A joined sound (says he) of men, women, and children.
Which can not be, Basil. Romans 4.
unless they all understand the tongue wherein the prayer is said. And
Chrysostom upon the words of Paul says, So soon as the people hear these
words, world without end, they all do forthwith answer, Amen. This could
they 1. Cor. 14.
not do, unless they understood the word spoken by the priest. Dionisius
says, that hymns were Dionisi.
said of the whole multitude of people in the administration of the Communion.
Ciprian says, Ciprian. Ser. 6. de ora. dominica.
the Priest does prepare the minds of the brethren, with a preface before the
prayer, saying, Lift up your hearts: That whiles the people does answer, We
have our hearts lyfted up to the Lord, they be admonished that they ought to
think on none other thing then the Lord. Saint Ambrose writing upon the
words of saint Paul, says, This is it that he says, because 1. Cor. 14.
he which speaks in an vnknowe^tongue, speaks to God, for he knows all
things: but men know not, and therefore there is no profit of this thing. And
again upon these words: If thou bless, or give thanks with the spirit,
how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving
of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? That is (says
Ambrose) if thou speak ye praise of God in a tongne unknown to the hearers.
For the unlearned, hearing that which he understands not, knows not ye end
of the prayer, and answers not Amen, which word is as much to say, as
truth, that the blessing or thankesgeuing may be confirmed. For the
confirmation of the prayer is fulfilled by them that do answer, Amen, that
all things spoken, might be confirmed in the minds of the hearers, through
the testimony of the truth. And after many weighty words, to the same end,
he says: The conclusion is this, that nothing should be done in the Church
in vain, and that this thing ought chiefly to be labored for, that the
unlearned also might take profit, least any part of the body should be dark
through ignorance. And least any man should think all this to be meant of
preaching, and not of prayer, he takes occasion of these words of saint Paul
(If there be not an interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church) to say,
as follows: Let him pray secretly, or speak to GOD, who hears all things
that be dumb: For in the Church must he speak that may profit all
persons. Saint Hierome writing upon these words of saint Paul, How shall he
that supplieth the 1. Cor. 14.
place of the unlearned. etc. says, It is the lay man whom Paul understands
here to be in the place of the ignorant man, which has no ecclesiastical
office: How shall he answer, Amen to the prayer that he understands not? And
a little after, upon the words of saint Paul, For if I should pray in a
tongue. etc. he says thus, This is Paul's meaning: If any may speak in
strange and unknown tongues, his mind is made unfruitful, not to him
self, but to the hearer: For whatsoever is spoken, he knows it not. Saint
Augustine writing upon the. xviii Psalm, says: What this should be we ought
to understand, that we may sing with reason of Psalm. 28.
man, and not with chattering of birds. For Owls, Popingayes, Ravens, Pies,
and other such like birds are taught by men to prate they know not what: But
to sing with understanding, is given by Gods holy will to the nature of man.
Again, the same Augustine says, There needs no speech when we pray, saving
perhaps as De magist.
the priests do, for to declare their meaning, not that God, but that men may
hear them. And so being put in remembrance by consentyng with the priest,
they may hang upon God:

Thus are we taught both by the scriptures and ancient doctors, that in the
administration of Common prayer and Sacraments, no tongue unknown to the
hearers ought to be used. So that for the satisfying of a Christian man's
conscience we need to spend no more time in this matter. But yet to stop the
mouths of the adversaries, which stay them selves much upon general
decrees, it shall be good to add to these testimonies of scriptures and doctors,
one constitution made by Justinian the Emperor, who lived five hundred and
twenty and seven years after Christ, and was Emperor of Rome. The
constitution is this. We command that Novel. Consti. 23.
all Bishops and Priests do celebrate the holy oblation, and the prayers used
in holy Baptism, not speaking low, but with a clear or loud voice, which
may be heard of the people, that thereby the mind of the hearers may be stirred
up with great devotion in uttering the prayers of the Lord God, for so the
holy Apostle teaches in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, saying: Truly,
if thou only bless or give thanks in spirit, how does he which occupyeth
the place of the unlearned, say Amen at thy geuyng of thanks unto God, for he
understands not what thou say? Thou verily geuest thanks well, but the
other is not edified. And again in the Epistle to the Romans, he says: With
the heart a man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. Therefore for these causes it is convenient that among
other prayers those things also which are spoken in the holy oblation, be
uttered and spoken of the most religious bishops and priests, unto our
Lord Jesus Christ our God, with the father and the holy ghost, with a loud
voice. And let the most religious priests know this, that if they neglecte
any of these things, that they shall give an account for them in the dreadful
judgment of the great God and our savior Jesus Christ: Neither will we when
we know it, rest and leave it unrevenged.

This Emperor (as Sabellicus writes) favored the bishop of Rome, and yet
we see ho we plain a decree he makes for the praying and administering of
sacraments in a known tongue, that the devotion of the hearers might be
stirred up by knowledge, contrary to the judgment of them that would have
ignorance to make devotion. He makes it also a matter of dampnation, to do
these things in a tongue that the hearers understand not. Let us therefore
conclude with God and al good men's assent, that no common prayer or Sacraments
ought to be ministered in a tongue that is not understood of the hearers. Now
a word or two of private prayer in an unknown tongue. We took in hand where
we began to speak of this matter, not only to prove that no common prayer or
administration of Sacraments, ought to be in a tongue unknown to the hearers:
but also that no person ought to pray privately in that tongue that he him
self understands not. Which thing shall not be hard to prove, if we forget
not what prayer is. For if prayer be that devotion of the mind which
enforces the heart to lift up it self to God: how should it be said, that
that person prays, that understands not the words that his tongue speaks
in prayer? Yea, how can it be said that he speaks? For to speak, is by
voice to utter the thought of the mind. And the voice that a man utters in
speaking is nothing else, but the messenger of the mind, to bring abroad the
knowledge of that, which otherwise lies secret in the heart, and can not be
known, according to that which Saint Paul writes: What man (says he) knows
1. Cor. 2
the things that apparteyne to man, saving only the spirit of man, which is
in man? He therefore that does not understand the voices that his tongue does
utter, can not properly be said to speak, but rather to counterfayte, as
parattes, and such other birds use to counterfaite men's voices. No man
therefore that fears to provoke the wrath of God against him self, wylbe so
bold to speak of God unadvisedly, without regard of reverent understanding,
in his presence, but he will prepare his heart before he presume to speak unto
God. And therefore in our common prayer the minister does oftentimes say. Let
us pray, meaning thereby to admonish the people that they should prepare
their ears to hear, what he should crave at Gods hand, and their hearts to
consent to the same, and their tongues to say Amen at the end thereof. On this
sort did the prophet David prepare his heart, when he said: My heart is ready
(O God) my heart is ready, I will sing and declare Psalm. 57.
a Psalm. The Jews also, when in the time of Judith they did with all their
heart pray God to visit his people of Israel, had so prepared their hearts
before they began to pray. After this sort had Manasses prepared his heart
before he prayed, and said: And now (O Lord) do I bow the knees of mine
heart, asking of thee part 2. Par. 36.
of thy mercyful kindness. When the heart is thus prepared, the voice vttred
from the heart, is harmonious in the ears of god: otherwise he regards it
not to accept it. But forasmuch as the person that so ^ableth his words
without sense in the presence of God, shows himself not to regard the
majesty of him that he speaks to: He takes him as a contemner of his
almyghtie majesty, and gives him his reward among hypocrites, which make an
outward she we of holiness, but their hearts are full of abominable
thoughts, even in the time of their prayers. For it is the heart that the
Lord looks upon, as it is written in the history of 1. Reg. 16.
kings. If we therefore will that our prayers be not abominable before God,
let us so prepare our hearts before we pray, and so understand the things
that we ask when we pray, that both our hearts and voices may together sound
in the ears of Gods majesty, and then we shall not fail to receive at his
hand the things that we ask: as good men which have been before us did, and
so have from time to time received that which for their souls health they did
at any time desire. Saint Augustine seems to De cathechizandis rudibus.
bear in this matter: For he says thus of them, which being brought up in
grammar and rhethoricke, are converted to Christ, and so must be instructed in
Christian religion: Let them know also (says he) that it is not the voice, but
the affection of the mind that comes to the ears of God. And so shall it
come to pass, that if happily they shall mark that some bishops or ministers
in the Church do call upon God, either with barbarous words, or with words
disordered, or that they understand not, or do disorderly divide the words
that they pronounce, they shall not laugh them to scorn. Hitherto he seems to
bear with praying in an unknown tongue. But in the next sentence he opens
his mind thus: Nor for that these things ought not to be amended, that the
people may say Amen to that which they do plainly understand: But yet these
things must be godly borne withal of these catechistes or instructours of the
faith, that they may learn, that as in the common place where matters are
pleaded, the goodness of an oration consists in sound: so in the Church it
consists in devotion. So that he allows not the praying in a tongue not
understand of him that prays: But he instructs the skillful Orator, to
bear with the rude tongue of the devout simple minister. To conclude, if the
lack of understanding the words that are spoken in the congregation, do make
them unfruitful to the hearers: How should not the same make the words read,
unfruitful to the reader? The merciful goodness of God, grant us his grace
to call upon him as we ought to do, to his glory and our endless felicity,
which we shall do, if we humble our selves in his sight, and in all our
prayers both common and private, have our minds fully fixed upon him. For the
prayer of them that Eccle. 35.
humble them selves, shall pearse through the doudes, and till it draw nygh
unto God, it will not be answered, and till the most high do regard it, it
will not depart. And the Lord will not be slack, but he will deliver the
just, and execute judgment. To him therefore be all honor and glory, for ever
and ever.

Amen.
An information for them which take offense at certain places of the holy
Scripture. The first part.
THe great utility and profit that Christian men and women may take (if they
will) by hearing and reading the holy scriptures (dearly beloved) no heart can
sufficiently conceive, much less is my tongue able with words to express.
Wherefore satan our enemy, seeing the scriptures to be the very mean and right
way to bring the people to the true knowledge of God, and that Christian
religion is greatly furthered by diligent hearing and reading of them, he also
perceauing what an hinderance and let they be to him and his kingdom, does
what he can to drive the reading of them out of Gods Church. And for that end,
he has always stirred up in one place or other, cruel tyrauntes, sharp
persecutors, and extreme enemies unto God and his infallible truth, to pull
with violence the holy Bibles out of the peoples hands, and have most
spitefully destroyed and consumed the same to ashes in the fire, pretending
most untruly, that the much hearing and readyng of Gods word, is an
occasion of heresy and carnal liberty, and the overthrow of all good order
in all well ordered commonweals. If to know God aryght, be an occasion of
evil, then must we needs grant, that the hearing, and readyng of the holy
scriptures, is the cause of heresy, carnal liberty, and the subuertion of
all good orders. But the knowledge of God, and of our selves, is so far from
being an occasion of evil, that it is the redyest, yea, the only mean to
bridle carnal liberty, and to kill all our fleshly affections. And the
ordinary way to attain this knowledge, is with diligence to hear and read
the holy scriptures. For the whole scriptures (says Saint Paul) were given
by the inspiration 2. Tim. 3.
of God. And shall we Christian men think to learn the knowledge of God and
of our selves, in any earthly man's work or writing, sooner or better then in
the holy scriptures, written by the inspiration of the holy ghost? The
scriptures were not brought unto us by the will of man: but holy men of God (as
witnesses Saint Peter) spoke as they were moved by the holy spirit of God.
The holy ghost is the scholemaister 2. Pet. 1.
of truth, which leads his scholars (as our Savior Christ says of him)
into all John. xvi.
truth. And who so is not led and taught by this scholemaister, can not but
fall into deep error, how godly soever his pretense is, what knowledge and
learning soever he has of all other works and wrytynges, or how fair soever
a show or face of truth he has in the estimation and judgment of the
world. If some man will say, I would have a true pattern and a perfect
description of an vpryght life, approved in the sight of God: can we find
(think ye) any better or any such again, as Christ Jesus is, and his
doctrine? whose virtuous conversation and godly life, the scripture so lively
painteth and sets forth before our eyes, that we beholding that pattern,
might shape and frame our lives as nigh as may be, agreeable to the perfection
of the same: Follow you me (says. S. 1. Cor. 2
Paul) as I follow Christ. And saint John in his Epistle says: Who so abides
in Christ, must walk even so as he walked before him. 1. John. 2.
And where shall we learn the order of Christ's life, but in the scripture?
Another would have a medicine to heal all diseases and maladies of the mind.
Can this be found or gotten other where, then out of Gods own book, his
sacred scriptures? Christ taught so much when he said to the obstinate
Jews: Search the scriptures, for John. 3.
in them ye think to have eternal life. If the scriptures conteyne in them
everlasting life, it must needs follow, that they have also present remedy
against all that is an hinderaunce and let unto eternal life. If we desire the
knowledge of heavenly wisdom: why had we rather learn the same of man, then
of God him self, who (as saint James says) is the geuer of wisdom? Jacob. 2.
Yea, why will we not learn it at Christ's own mouth, who promising to be
present with his Church till the worlds end, does perform Mat. 28.
his promise, in that he is not only with us by his grace and tender pity: but
also in this that he speaks presently unto us in the holy scriptures, to the
great and endless comfort of all them that have any feelyng of God at all in
them. Yea he speaks now in the scriptures more profitably to us, then he did
by word of mouth to the carnal Jews when he lived with them here upon earth.
For they (I mean the Jews) could neither hear nor see those things which
we may now both hear and see, if we will bring with us those ears and eyes
that Christ is heard and seen with, that is, diligence to hear and read
his holy scriptures, and true faith to believe his most comfortable promises. If
one could show but the printe of Christ's foot, a great number I think would
fall down and worship it: But to the holy scriptures, where we may see daily
(if we will) I will not say the print of his feet only, but the whole shape
and lively image of him, alas we give little reverence or none at all. If any
could let us see Christ's coat, a sort of us would make hard shift except
we might come nygh to gase upon it, yea and kiss it to: And yet all the
clothes that ever he did wear, can nothing so truly nor so lively express
him unto us, as do the scriptures. Christ's images made in wood, stone, or
metal, some men for the love they bear to Christ, do garnishe and beautify
the same with pearl, gold, and precious stone: And should we not (good
brethren) much rather embrace and reverence Gods holy books, the sacred
bible, which do represent Christ unto us, more truly then can any image? The
image can but express the form or shape of his body, if it can do so much:
But the scripture does in such sort set forth Christ, that we may see both
God and man, we may see him (I say) speaking unto us, healyng our infirmities,
diyng for our sins, rising from death for our justification. And to be short,
we may in the scriptures so perfectly see whole Christ with the eye of faith,
as we lacking faith, could not with these bodily eyes see him, though he
stood now present here before us. Let every man, woman, and child, therefore
with all their heart, thirst and desire gods holy scriptures, love them,
embrace them, have their delight and pleasure in hearing and readyng them, so
as at length we may be transfourmed and changed into them. For the holy
scriptures are Gods treasure house, wherein are found al things needful for
us to see, to hear, to learn, and to believe, necessary for the attaynyng of
eternal life. Thus much is spoken, only to give you a taste of some of the
commodities which ye may take by hearing and reading the holy scriptures. For
as I said in the beginning, no tongue is able to declare and utter all. And
although it is more clear then the noone day, that to be ignorant of the
scriptures, is the cause of error, as Christ says to the Saducees: Ye err,
not knowing the scriptures, and that error does hold back, and pluck men
Mat. 22.
away from the knowledge of God. And as saint Hierome says: Not to know the
scriptures, is to be ignorant of Christ. Yet this notwithstanding, some there
be that think it not meet for all sorts of men to read the scriptures,
because they are, as they think, in sundry places stumblyng blocks to the
unlearned. First, for that the phrase of the scriptures is sometime so homlye,
gross, and plain, that it offends the fine and delicate wits of some
courtiers. Furthermore, for that the scripture also reports, even of them
that have their commendation to be the children of God, that they did diverse
acts, whereof some are contrary to the law of nature, some repugnaunt to the
law written, and other some seem to fight manifestly against public
honesty. All which things (say they) are unto the simple an occasion of
great offense, and cause many to think evil of the Scriptures, and to
discredit their authority. Some are offended at the hearing and readyng of
the diversity of the rites and ceremonies of the sacrifices and oblations of
the law. And some worldly witted men, think it a great decay to the quiet and
prudent governing of their commonweals, to give ear to the simple and plain
rules and precepts of our savior Christ in his Gospel, as being offended,
that a man should be ready to turn his right ear, to him that struck him on
the left, and to him which would take away his coat, to offer him also his
cloak, with such other sayings of perfection in Christ's meaning. For carnal
reason being always an enemy to God, and not perceauing the things of Gods
spirit, does abhor such precepts, which yet rightly understood,
infringeth no judicial policies, nor Christian men's gouernementes. And some
there be, which hearing the scriptures to bid us to live without (...),
without study or forecasting, do deride the (...)ities of them. Therefore to
remove and put away occasions of offense so much as may be, I will answer
orderly to these objections. First I shall rehearse some of those places that
men are offended at, for the homelynes and grossness of speech, and will show
the meaning of them. In the book of Deuteronomie it is written, that almyghtie
God made a law, if a man dyed without issue, his brother or next kynsman
should marrye his wydowe, and the child that were first borne between them,
should be called his child that was dead, that the dead man's name might not
be put out in Israel: And if the brother or next kynsman would not marry the
widow, then she before the magistrates of the City should pull of his shoe,
and spitte in his face, saying: So be it done to that man that will not build
his brothers house. Here (dearly beloved) the pullyng of his shoe and spitting
in his face, were ceremonies to signify unto all the people of that City,
that the woman was not now in fault that Gods law in that point was broken,
but the whole shame and blame thereof did now redound to that man which openly
before the magistrates refused to marry her. And it was not a reproach to him
alone, but to all his posterity also: For they were called ever after, the
house of him whose shoe is pulled of. Another place out of the Psalms: I will
break (says David) the horns of the ungodly, and the horns of the ryghteous
Psalm. 75.
shall be exalted. By anhorne, in the scripture, is understand power, might,
strength, and sometime rule and government. The prophet then saying, I will
break the horns of the ungodly, means, that all the power, strength, and
might of Gods enemy, shall not only be weakened and made feeble, but shall at
length also be clean broken and destroyed, though for a time for the better
trial of his people, God suffers the enemies to prevail and have the upper
hand. In the* 132. Psalm. 132.
Psalm it is said, I will make David's horn to florishe. Here David's horn
signifies his kingdom. Almighty God therefore by this manner of speaking,
promises to give David victory over all his enemies, and to stablishe him in
his kingdom, spyte of all his enemies. And in the threescore psalm it is
written: Moab is my Psalm. 60.
washpot, and ever Edom will I cast out my shoe, etc. In that place the prophet
shows how grati^usly God has dealt with his people the children of Israel,
giving them great victories upon their enemies on every side. For the Moabites
and Idumeans, being two great nations, proud people, stout and mighty, God
brought them under, and made them servants to the Israelites, servants I
say, to stowpe down, to pull of their shoes, and wash their feet. Then Moab
is my washpot, and over Edom will I cast out my shoe, is as if he had said: The
Moabites and the Idumeans, for all their stoutnesse against us in the
wilderness, are now made our subjects, our servants, yea underlings to pull
of our shoes, and wash our feet. Now I pray you, what uncomely manner of
speech is this, so used in common phrase among the Hebrews? It is a shame that
Christian men should be so light headed, to toy as ruffians do of such manner
speeches, uttered in good grave signification by ^he holy ghost. More
reasonable it were for vain men to learn to reverence the form of Gods
words, then to gaude at them to his damnation. Some again are o^^ended to
hear that the godly fathers had many wives and concubines* although after the
phrase of the scripture, a concubine is an honest name, for every concubine is
a lawful wife, but every wife is not a concubine. And that ye may the better
understand this to be true, ye shall note that it was permitted to the fathers
of the old Testament, to have at one time mo wives then one, for what purpose
ye shall afterward hear. Of which wives some were free women borne, some
were bond women and servants. She that was free borne, had a prerogative
above those that were servants and bond women. The free borne woman was by
marriage made the ruler of the house under her husband, and is called the mother
of the household, the maistres or the dame of the house after our manner of
speaking, and had by her marriage an interest, a right, and an ownership of his
goods unto whom she was married. Other servants and bond women were given by
the owners of them, as the manner was then, I will not say always, but for the
most part, unto their daughters at that day of their marriage, to be
handmaydens unto them. A(...)ter such a sort did Pharao king of Egypt give unto
Sara Abraham's wife, Agar the Egyptian to be her maid. So did Laban give unto
his daughter Lia, at the day of her marriage, Genesis 29.
Zilpha, to be her handmayde. And to his other daughter Rachell, he gave
another bondmayde, named Bilham. And the wives that were the owners of their
handmaydes, gave them in marriage to their husbands, upon diverse occasions.
Sara gave her maid Agar in marriage Genesis 15^
to Abraham. Lia gave in like manner her maid Zilpha to her husband Jacob. So
did Rachell his other wife give him Bil^am her maid, saying unto him: Go in
unto her, and she Genesis 3^.
shall bear upon my knees, which is, as if she had said, take her to wife,
and the children that she shall bear, will I take upon my lap, and make of
them as if they were mine own. These handmaydens or bond women, although by
marriage they were made wives, yet they had not this prerogative to rule in the
house, but were still underlings, and in subjection to their masters, and
were never called mothers of the household, maistresses, or dames of the house,
but are called sometimes wives, sometime concubines. The plurality of wives,
was by a special prerogative suffered to the fathers of the old Testament,
not for satisfiyng their carnal and fleshly lusts, but to have many children,
because every one of them hoped, and begged often times of God in their prayers,
that that blessed seed which God promised should come into the world to
break the serpents head, might come and be borne of his stock and kindred.

Now of those which take occasion of carnalitie and evil life, by hearing and
reading in Gods book, what God has suffered even in those men, whose
commendation is praised in the scripture. As that Noe, whom. S. Peter calls
the eight 2. Pet. 2.
preacher of righteousness, was so drunk with wine, that in his sleep he
uncovered his own priuities. The just man Lot was in like manner drunken, and
in his drunkenness lay with his Genesis 9. Genesis 19.
own daughters, contrary to the law of nature. Abraham, whose faith was so
great, that for the same he deserved to be called of Gods own Genesis 17. Romans 4.
mouth a father of many nations, the father of all beleuers, besides with Sara
his wife, had also carnal company with Agar, Saraes handemayde. The patriarche
Jacob had to his wives two sisters at one time. The Prophet David Genesis 16.
and king Solomon his son, had many wives and concubines. etc. Which things
we see plainly to be forbidden us by the law of God, and are now repugnaunt to
all public honesty. These Genesis 29
and such like in Gods book (good people) are not written that we should or
may do the like, following their examples, or that we ought to think that God
did allow every of these things in those men: But we ought rather to believe and
to judge that Noe in his drunkenness offended God highly. Lot lying with his
daughters, committed horrible incest. We ought then to learn by them this
profitable lesson, that if so godly men as they were, which otherwise felt
inwardly Gods holy spitite inflamyng in their hearts, with she fear and love
of God, could not by their own strength keep them selves from committyng
horrible sin, but did so greeuous^y fall, that without Gods great mercy they
had perished euerlastinglye: How much more ought we then miserable wretches,
which have no feeling of God within us at al, continually to fear, not only
that we may fall as they did, but also be overcome and drowned in sin, which
they were not? And so by consydering their fall, take the better occasion to
acknowledge our own infirmity and weakness, and therefore more earnestlye to
call unto almighty God with heartye prayer incessauntlye for his grace, to
strengthen us, and to defend us from all evil. And though through infirmity
we chance at any time to fall, yet we may by hearty repentance and true faith,
speedily rise again, and not sleep and continue in sin as the wicked does.

Thus good people, should we understand such matters expressed in the divine
scriptures, that this holy table of Gods word be not turned to us to be a
snare, a trappe, and a stumbling stone, to take hurt by the abuse of our
understanding: But let us esteem them in such a reverent humility, that we
may find our necessary food therein, to strengthen us, to comfort us, to
instruct us (as God of his great mercy has appointed them) in all necessary
works, so that we may be perfect before him in ye whole course of our life:
Which he grant us, who has redeemed us, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
to whom with the father, and the holy ghost be all honor and glory for
evermore.

Amen.
The second part of the information for them which take offense at certain
places of the holy scripture.
YE have heard (good people) in the Homilee last read unto you, the great
commodity of holy Scriptures, ye have heard how ignorant men, void of
godly understanding, seek quarrelles to discredit them: Some of their
reasons have ye heard answered. Now we will proceed and speak of such
politic wise men which be offended, for that Christ's precepts should seem
to destroy all order in governance, as they do allege for example such as
these be. If any man strike thee on the right Mat. ^. Mat. 18.
cheek, turn the other unto him also. If any man will contend to take thy
coat from thee, let him have cloak and all. Let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand does. If thine eye, thine hand, or thy foot offend thee, pull
out thine eye, cut of thine hand, thy foot, and cast it from thee. If thine
enemy (says saint Paul) be an hungered, give him meat, if he be thirsty,
Romans xii.
give him drink: so doing, thou shall heap hot burning coals upon his
head. These sentences (good people) unto a natural man seem mere absurdities,
contrary to all reason. For a natural man (as saint Paul says)
understands (...). Cor. ii.
not the things that belong to God, neither can he, so long as old Adam
dwells in him. Christ therefore means, that he would have his faithful
servant so far from vengeance and resisting wrong, that he would rather
have him ready to suffer an other wrong, then by resisting to break charity,
and to be out of patience. He would have our good deeds so far from al
carnal respects, that he would not have our nyest friends know of our well
doing, to win a vain glory. And though our friends and kynsfolkes be as
dear as our right eyes and our right hands: yet if they would pluck us from
God, we ought to renounce them, and forsake them.

Thus if ye will be profitable hearers and readers of the holy scriptures, ye
must first deny your selves, and keep under your carnal senses taken by the
outward words, and search the inward meaning: reason must give place to Gods
holy spirit, you must submit your worldly wisdom and judgment, unto his
divine wisdom and judgment. Consider that the scripture, in what strange
form soever it be pronounced, is the word of the living God. Let that always
come to your remembrance, which is so often repeated of the prophet Esaias: The
mouth of the Lord (says he) has spoken it, the almighty and everlasting God,
who with his only word created heaven and earth, has decreed it, the Lord
of hoastes, whose ways are in the Seas, whose paths are in the deep waters,
that Lord and God by whose word all things in heaven and in earth are
created, governed, and preserved, has so provided it. The God of Gods, and
Lord of all Lords, yea, God that is God alone, incomprehensible, almighty,
and everlasting, he has spoken it, it is his word. It can not therefore be
but truth, which proceeds from the God of all truth: it can not be but
wisely and prudently commanded, what almighty God has devised, how vaynely
soever through want of grace, we miserable wretches do imagine and judge of his
most holy word. The prophet David describing an happy man, says: Blessed
is the man that has not walked after the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand
in the Psalm. 1.
way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful. There are three
sorts of people, whose company the prophet would have him to flee and
avoid, which shall be an happy man, and partakers of Gods blessing. First, he
may not walk after the counsel of the ungodly. Secondlye, he may not stand
in the way of sinners. Thirdlye, he must not sit in the seat of the
scornful. By these three sorts of people, ungodly men, sinners, and
scorners, all impiety is signified and fully expressed. By the ungodly, he
understands those which have no regard of almightye God, being void of all
faith, whose hearts and minds are so set upon the world, that they study
only how to accomplish their worldly practices, their carnal imaginations,
their filthy lust and desire, without any fear of God. The second sort he
calls sinners, not such as do fall through ignorance, or of frailenesse, for
then who should be found free? What man ever lived upon earth (Christ only
excepted) but he has sinned? The just man falls seven times, and ryseth
again. Though the godly do fall, yet they walk not on Prou. 24.
purposely in sin, they stand not still to continue and tarry in sin, they
sit not down like careless men, without all fear of Gods just punishment for
sin: but defying sin, through Gods great grace and infinite mercy, they
rise again, and fight against sin. The Prophet then calls them sinners
whose hearts are clean turned from God, and whose whole conversation of life
is nothing but sin, they delight so much in the same, that they choose
continually to abide and dwell in sin. The third sort he calls scorners,
that is, a sort of men whose hearts are so stuffed with mallyce, that they
are not contented to dwell in sin, and to lead their lives in all kind of
wickedness: but also they do contempne and scorn in other, all godliness,
true religion, all honesty and virtue. Of the two first sorts of men, I will
not say but they may take repentance, and be converted unto God. Of the third
sort, I think I may without danger of gods judgment pronounce, that never
any yet converted unto God by repentance, but continued on still in their
abominable wickedness, heaping up to them selves damnation, against the day
of Gods inevitable judgment. Examples of such scorners, we read in the
second book of Chronicles: When the good king Ezechias, in the beginning of
his 2. Par. 30.
raygne, had destroyed idolatry, purged the temple, and reformed religion in
his Realm, he sent messengers into every City, to gather the people unto
Jerusalem, to solemnize the feast of Easter, in such sort as God had
appointed. The posts went from city to city, through the land of Ephraim and
Manasses, even unto Zabulon. And what did the people think ye? Did they laud
and praise the name of the Lord which had given them so good a king, so
zealous a Prince to abolish idolatry, and to restore again Gods true religion?
No, no. The scripture says, The people laughed them to scorn, and mocked the
kings messengers. And in the last Chapter of the same book it is written,
that almyghtie God, having compassion upon his people, sent his messengers the
Prophets unto them, to call them from their abominable idolatry and wicked
kind of living. But they mocked his messengers, they despised his words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
and till there was no remedy: For he gave them up into the hands of their
enemies, even unto Nabucodonozar king of Babylon, who spoiled the^ of their
goods, brent their city, and led them, their wives, and their children,
captives unto Babylon. The wicked people that were in the days of Noe, made
but a mock at the word of God, when Noe told them that God would take
vengeance upon them for their sins. The fludde therefore came suddenly
upon them, and drowned them with the whole world. Lot preached to the
Sodomites, that except they repented, both they and their City should be
destroyed. They thought his sayings impossible to be true, they scorned and
mocked his admonition, and reputed him as an old doting fool. But when God by
his holy angels had taken Lot, his wife and two daughters from among them, he
reigned down fire and brymstone from heaven, and brent up those scorners and
mockers of his holy word. And what estimation had Christ's doctrine among the
Scribes and Pharisees? What reward had he among them? The Gospel reports
thus: The Pharisees which were covetous did scorn him in his doctrine. O then
ye see that worldly rich men scorn the doctrine of their salvation. The
worldly wise men scorn the doctrine of Christ, as foolishenesse to their
understanding. These scorners have ever ben, and ever shall be to the worlds
end. For Saint Peter prophesied, that such scorners should be 2. Pet. 2.
in the world before the latter day. Take heed therefore (my brethren) take
heed, be ye not scorners of Gods most holy word, provoke him not to power out
his wrath now upon you, as he did then upon those gybers and mockers. Be not
wilful murderers of your own souls. Turn unto God while there is yet time
of mercy, ye shall else repent it in the world to come, when it shall be to
late, for there shall be judgment without mercy. This might suffice to
admonish us, and cause us henceforth to reverence Gods holy scriptures, but
all men have not faith. This therefore shall not satisfy and content al men's
minds: but as some are carnal, so they will still continue, and abuse the
scriptures carnally, to their greater dampnation. The unlearned and unstable
(says saint Peter) paruerte the holy scriptures to their own destruction.
Jesus Christ, as (saint Paul ii. Pet. ii.
says) is to the Jews an offense, to the Gentiles foolishness: But to Gods
children, as well i. Cor. i.
of the Jews as of the Gentiles, he is the power and wisdom of God. The holy
man Simeon says, Luke. ii.
that he is set forth for the fall and rising again of many in Israel. As
Christ Jesus is a fall to the reprobate, which yet perish through their own
default: So is his word, yea the whole book of God, a cause of dampnation
unto them, through their incredulity. And as he is a rising up to none other
then those which are Gods children by adoption: So is his word, yea the whole
scripture, the power of God to salvation to them only that do believe it.
Christ him self, the Prophets before him, the apostles after him, all the
true ministers of Gods holy word, yea every word in Gods book, is unto the
reprobate, the savor of death unto death. Christ Jesus, the prophets, the
apostles, and all the true ministers of his word, yea every jot and title in
the holy scripture, have been, is, and shall be for evermore, the savor of life
unto eternal life, unto all those whose hearts God has purified by true
faith. Let us earnestlye take heed, that we make no jesting stock of the
books of holy scriptures. The more obscure and dark the sayings be to our
understanding, the further let us think our selves to be from God and his
holy spirit, who was the aucthour of them. Let us with more reverence
endeavor our selves to search out the wisdom hidden in the outward bark of
the scripture. If we can not understand the sense and the reason of the saying,
yet let us not be scorners, iesters, and deryders, for that is the uttermost
token and show of a reprobate, of a plain enemy to God and his wisdom. They
be not idle fables to jest at, which God does seriouslye pronounce, and for
serious matters let us esteem them. And though in sundry places of the
scriptures, be set out diverse rites and ceremonies, oblations, and sacrifices:
let us not think strange of them, but refer them to the times and people
for whom they served, although yet to learned men they be not unprofitable to
be co^sydered, but to be expounded as figures and shadows of things and
persons, afterward openly revealed in the new Testament. Though the
rehearsal of the genealogies and petegrees of the fathers, be not to much
edification of the plain ignorant people: yet is there nothing so
impartinently uttered in all the whole book of the Bible, but may serve to
spiritual purpose in some respect, to all such as will bestow their labors
to search out the meanynges. These may not be condemned, because they serve
not to our understanding, nor make not to our edification. But let us turn our
labor to understand, and to carry away such sentences and stories as be more
fyt for our capacity and instruction. And whereas we read in diverse Psalms,
how David did wyshe to the adversaries of god sometimes shame, rebuke, and
confusion, sometime the decay of their ofspryng and issue, sometime that they
might peryshe and come suddenly to destruction, as he did wish to the
Captains of the Philistians: Cast forth (says he) thy lyghtening and tear
them, shoot out thine arrows and consume them, with such other manner Psalm.
144.
of imprecations: Yet ought we not to be offended at such prayers of David,
being a prophet as he was, singulerly beloved of God, and rapte in spirit,
with an ardent zeal to gods glory. He spoke them not of a private hatred, and
in a stomach against their persons: But wyshed spirituallye the destruction of
such corrupt errors and vices, which raygned in all diuilishe persons, set
against God. He was of like mind as saint Paul was, when he did deliver
Himeneus and Alexander, with the notorious fornicatour, to Satan, to their
temporal confusion, that their spirit might be saved against the day of the
Lord. And when David did profess in some places that he hated the wicked: yet
in other places of his Psalms he professes, that he hated them with a perfect
hate, not with a malicious hate, to the hurt of the soul. Which perfection of
spirit, because it can not be performed in us, so corrupted in affections as
we be, we ought not to use in our private causes the like words in form, for
that we cannot fulfill the like words in sense. Let us not therefore be
offended, but search out the reason of such words before we be offended, that
we may the more reuerentlye judge of such sayings, though strange to our
carnal understandings, yet to them that be spiritually minded, judged to be
zelously and godly pronounced. God therefore for his mercies sake, vouchsafe
to purify our minds through faith in his son Jesus Christ, and to instill
the heavenly drops of his grace into our hard stonye hearts to supple the
same, that we be not contemners and deriders of his infallible word: but that
with all humblenes of mind and Christian reverence, we may endeavor our selves
to hear and to read his sacred scriptures, and inwardly so to digest them, as
shall be to the comfort of our souls, and sanctification of his holy name, to
whom with the son and the holy ghost, three persons and one living God be al
laud, honor, and praise, for ever, and ever.

Amen.
An Homilee of Alms deeds, and mercifulnes toward the poor and needy.
AMongst the manifold duties that almighti god requires of his faithful
servants the true Christians, by the which he would that both his name should
be glorified, and the certainty of their vocation declared, there is none that
is either more acceptable unto him, or more profitable for the^, then are the
works of mercy and pity, showed upon ye poor, which be afflicted with any
kind of misery. And yet this not with standing, (such is the slothful
sluggishnesse of our dull nature, to that which is good and godly) that we
are almost in nothing more negligent and less careful then we are therein.
It is therefore a very necessary thing, that Gods people should awake their
sleepie minds, and consider their duty on this behalf. And meet it is,
that all true Christians should desyrously seek and learn what God by his holy
word does herein require of them: that first knowing their duty (whereof many
by their slacknes seem to be very ignorant) they may afterward diligently
endeavor to perform the same. By the which, both the godly charitable persons
may be encouraged to go forwards and continue in their merciful deeds of
alms giving to the poor, and also such as hitherto have either neglected or
contemned it, may yet now at the length (when they shall hear how much it
apparteyneth to them) advisedly consider it, and virtuously apply them selves
thereunto.

And to the intent that every one of you may the better understand that
which is taught, and also easylier bear away, and so take more fruit of
that shall be said, when several matters are severally handeled: I mind
particulerly, and in this order, to speak and entreat of these points.

First, I will show how earnestly almyghtie God in his holy word, does exact
the doing of alms deeds of us, and how acceptable they be unto him.

Secondlye, how profitable it is for us to use them, and what commodity and
fruit they will bring unto us.

Thyrdly and last, I will show out of Gods word, that who so is liberal to
the poor, and releeueth them plenteously, shall notwithstanding have sufficient
for himself, and evermore be without danger of penury and scarcity.

Concerning the first, which is the acceptance and dignity or price of alms
deeds before God: Know this, that to help and succor the poor in their
need and misery, pleases God so much, that as the holy scripture in sundry
places records, nothing can be more thankfullye taken or accepted of God. For
first we read, that almighty God does accounte that to be given and to be
bestowed upon himself, that is bestowed upon the poor. For so does the holy
ghost testify unto us by the wise man, saying, He that has pity upon the
poor, lends unto the lord Prou. 10.
him self. And Christ in the Gospel aduouche^^, and as a most certain
truth, byndeth it with an oath, that the alms bestowed upon the poor, was
bestowed upon him, and so shall be reckoned at the last day. For thus he says
to the charitable alms geuers, when he sits as judge in the doom, to give
sentence of every man according to his desartes: Uerylye I say unto you,
whatsoever good and merciful deed you did Mat. 25.
upon any of the least of these my brethren, ye did the same unto me. In
releeuing their hunger, ye relieved mine, in quenching their thirst, ye
quenched mine, in clothing them, ye clothed me, and when ye harbored them, ye
lodged me also, when ye visited them being sick or in prison, ye visited me.
For as he that receaueth a Princes imbassadours, and entertayneth them well,
does honor the Prince, from whom those imbassadours do come: So he that
receaueth the poor and needy, and helps them in their affliction and
distress, does thereby receive and honor Christ their master, who as he was
poor and needye him self, whylest he lived here amongst us, to work the
mystery of our salvation, so at his departure hence, he promised in his
steed, to send unto us those that were poor, by whose means his absence
should be supplied: and therefore that we would do unto him, we must do unto
them. And for this cause does almyghtye God say unto Moses, The land wherein
you dwell, shall never be without poor men: because he would Deuteronomy. 15.
have continual trial of his people, whether they loved him or no, that in
showing them selves obedient unto his will, they might certaynlye assure them
selves of his love and favor toward them, and nothing doubt, but that as
his law and ordinances (wherein he commanded them that they should open
their hand unto their brethren that were poor and needye in the land) were
accepted of them, and willingly performed: So he would on his part louyngly
accept them, and truly perform his promises that he had made unto them. The
holy Apostles and disciples of Christ, who by reason of his daily conversation,
saw by his deeds, and heard in his doctrine, how much he tendered the poor:
the godly fathers also, that were both before and since Christ, endued without
doubt with the holy ghost, and most certainly certified of Gods holy will: they
both do most earnestly exhort us, and in all their wrytinges almost,
continually admonish us, that we would remember the poor, and bestow our
charitable aims upon them. Saint Paul cries unto us after this sort, Comfort
i. These. v.
the feeble minded, lift up the weak, and be charitable toward all men. And
again, To do Heb. 13.
good to the poor, and to distribute aims gladly, see that thou do not
forget, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. Esai the Prophet teaches
Esai. liii.
on this wise, Deal thy bread to the hungrye, and bring the poor wandering,
home to thy house. When thou see the naked, see thou cloth him, and hyde not
thy face from thy poor neighbor, neither despise thou thine own flesh. And
the holy father Tobi gives this council, Tobi. iiii.
Give alms (says he) of thine own goods, and turn never thy face from the
poor, eat thy bread with the hungry, and cover the naked with thy clothes.
And the learned and godly doctor Chrysostom gives this admonition, Let Ad
pop. Anto. Hom. 35.
merciful alms be always with us, as a garment, that is, as mindful as we
will be to put our garments upon us, to cover our nakedness, to defend us from
the cold, and to show our selves comely: So mindful let us be at al times
and seasons, that we give alms to the poor, and show our selves merciful
toward them. But what mean these often admonitions and ernest exhortations
of the prophets, apostles, fathers, and holy doctors? Surely, as they were
faithful to Godwarde, and therefore discharged their duty truly, in telling
us what was Gods will: so of a singular love to us ward, they labored not only
to infourme us, but also to persuade with us, that to give alms, and to
succor the poor and needy, was a very acceptable thing, and an high
sacrifice to god, wherein he greatly delighted, and had a singular pleasure. For
so does the wise man the son of Syrach teach us, saying: Who Eccle. 33.
so is merciful and gives alms, he offers the right thank offering. And he
adds thereunto: The right thank offering, makes the altar fat, and a
sweet smell it is before the highest, it is acceptable before God, and shall
never be forgotten. And the truth of this doctrine is veryfied by the examples
of those holy and charitable fathers, of whom we read in the scriptures, that
they were given to merciful compassion toward the poor, and charitable
releeuing of their necessities. Such a one was Abraham, in whom God had so
great pleasure, that he vouchsafed to come unto him in form of an Angel, and
to be intertayned of him at his house. Such was his kinseman Lot, whom God so
favored for receiving his messengers into his house, which otherwise should
have layne in the street, that he saved him with his whole family, from the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorra. Such were the holy fathers Job and Toby,
with many others, who felt most sensible profes of Gods especial love
toward them. And as all these by their mercifulnes and tender compassion
which they showed to the miserable afflicted members of Christ, in the
releeuing, helpyng, and succouring them with their temporal goods in this
life, obtained gods favor, and were dear, acceptable, and pleasant in his
sight: so now they them selves take pleasure in the fruition of God, in the
pleasant joys of heaven, and are also in Gods eternal word set before us,
as perfect examples ever before our eyes, both how we shall please God in this
mortal life, and also how we may come to live in joy with them in everlasting
pleasure and felicity. For most true is that saying which. S. Augustine
has, that the giving of alms and releuing of the poor, is the right way to
heaven, Via coeli pauper est: The poor man (says he) is the way to heaven.
They used in times past, to set in hye ways sides, the picture of Mercury,
poyntyng with his finger, which was the right way to the town. And we use in
cross ways to set up a wodden or stone cross, to admonish the travailing
man which way he must turn when he comes thither, to direct his journey
aright. But Gods word (as. S. Augustine says) has set in the way to heaven
the poor man and his house, so that who so will go aryght thither, and not
turn out of the way, must go by the poor. The poor man is that Mercury that
shall set us the ready way? and if we look well to this mark, we shall not
wa^der much out of the right path. The manner of wise worldly men amongst us is,
that if they know a man of meaner estate then the^ selves to be in favor with
the prince, or any other noble man, whom they either fear or love, such a one
they will be glad to benefit and pleasure, that when they have need, they may
become their spokes man, either to obtain a commodity, or to escape a
displeasure. Now surely it ought to be a shame to us, that worldly men for
temporal things that last but for a season, should be more wise and provident
in procuring them, then we in heavenly. Our savior Christ testifies of poor
men, that they are dear unto him, and that he loves them especially: For he
calls them his little ones, by a name of tender love, he says they be his
brethren. And saint James says, that god has chosen them to be the heirs of
his kingdom. Has not God Jacob. 1.
(says he) chosen the poor of this world to him self, to make the^
hereafter the rich heirs of that kingdom which he has promised to them that
love him? And we know that the prayer which they make for us, shall be
acceptable and regarded of God, their complaynt shall be heard also. Thereof
does Jesus the son of Sirach certaynely assure us, saying: If the poor
complain Eccle. 4,
of thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard, even he that
made him shall hear him. Be courteous therefore unto the poor. We know also,
that he who acknowledges him self to be their master and patron, and
refuses not to take them for his servants, is both able to pleasure and
displeasure us, and that we stand every hour in need of his help. Why
should we then be either negligent or vnwylling to procure their friendship and
favor, by the which also we may be assured to get his favor that is both
able and wyllyng to do us all pleasures that are for our commodity and wealth?
Christ does declare by this, how much he accepts our charitable affection
toward the poor, in that he promises a reward unto them that give but a cup
of cold water in his name to them that have need thereof, and that reward is
the kingdom of heaven. No doubt is it therefore that god regards highly, that
which he rewards so liberallye. For he that promises a princely recompense,
for a beggarly benevolence, declares that he is more delighted with the
geuyng, then with the gift, and that he as much esteems the doing of the
thing, as the fruit and commodity that comes of it. Who so therefore has
hitherto neglected to give alms, let him know that God now requires it of
him, and he that has been liberal to the poor, let him know that his godly
doings are accepted, and thankfully taken at gods hands, which he will requite
with double and treble. For so says the wise man: He which shows mercy to
the poor, does lay his money in bank to the Lord, for a large interest and
gain. The gain being cheefely the possession of the life everlasting, through
the merits of our savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy
ghost, be al honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
The seonde part of the sermon of alms deeds.
YE have heard before (dearly beloved) that to give alms unto the poor, and
to help them in time of necessity, is so acceptable unto our savior Christ,
that he counts that to be done to him self, that we do for his sake unto
them. Ye have heard also how earnestly both the apostles, prophets, holy
fathers, and doctors, do exhort us unto the same. And ye see how well-beloved
and dear unto God they were, whom the scriptures report unto us to have been
good alms men. Wherefore if either their good examples, or the wholesome
counsel of godly fathers, or the love of Christ, whose especial favor we may
be assured by this means to obtain, may move us, or do any thing at all with
us: let us provide that from henceforth we she we unto Godward this thankful
service, to be myndfull and ready to help them that be poor and in misery.

Now will I this second time that I entreat of aims deeds, show unto you
how profitable it is for us to exercise them, and what fruit thereby shall
arise unto us, if we do them faithfully. Our savior Christ in the Gospel
teaches us, that it profits a man nothing to have in possession Mat. 16.
all the riches of the whole world, and the wealth or glory thereof, if in the
mean season he lose his soul, or do that thing whereby it should become
captive unto death, sin, and hell fire. By the which saying, he not only
instructs us how much the soul health is to be preferred before worldly
commodities: but also serves to stir up our minds, and to prick us
forwards to seek diligently and learn by what means we may preserve and
keep our souls ever in safety, that is, how we may recover our health, if it
be lost or impaired, and how it may be defended and maynteyned, if we once have
it. Yea, he teaches us also thereby to esteem that as a precious medicine and
an inestimable jewel, that has such strength and virtue in it, that can
either procure or preserve so incomparable a treasure. For if we greatly regard
that medicine or salve that is able to heal sundry and grievous diseases of
the body: much more will we esteem that which has like power over the
soul. And because we might be better assured, both to know and have in
redynesse that so profitable a remedy: he as a most faithful and loving
teacher, shows him self both what it is, and where we may find it, and how
we may use and apply it. For when Luke 11.
both he and his disciples were grievously accused of the Pharisees, to have
defiled their souls in breakyng the constitutions of the elders, because they
went to meat and washed not their hands before, according to the custom of
the Jews: Christ aunswering their superstitious complaynte, teaches them an
especial remedy how to keep clean their souls, notwithstanding the
breach of such superstitious orders. Give alms (says he) and behold all
things are clean unto you. He teaches them, that to be mercyful and
charitable in helping the poor, is the means to keep the soul pure and
clean in the sight of God. We are taught therefore by this, that merciful
alms dealyng, is profitable to purge the soul from the infection and filthy
spots of sin. The same lesson does the holy ghost also teach in sundry
places of the scripture, saying: Mercyfulnesse and alms giving Tobi. 4.
purges from all sins, and delyuereth from death, and suffers not the
soul to come into darkness. A great confidence may they have before the high
God, that show mercy and compassion to them that are afflicted. The wise
preacher the son of Sirach confirms the Eccle. 5.
same, when he says, That as water quenches burning fire, even so mercy and
alms resists and reconcileth sins. And sure it is, that mercifulness
quayleth the heat of sin so much, that they shall not take hold upon man
to hurt him, or if ye have by any infirmity and weakness ben touched and
annoyed with them, straightwayes shall mercyfulnesse wipe and wash them away,
as salues and remedies to heal their sores and grievous diseases. And thereupon
that holy father Ciprian takes good occasion to exhort earnestly to the
merciful work of geuyng alms and helpyng the poor, and there he admonishes
to consider how wholesome and profitable it is to relieve the needy and help the
afflicted, by the which we may purge our sins, and heal our wounded souls.

But here some will say unto me, If alms geuyng, and our charitable works
toward the poor, be able to wash away sins, to reconcile us to God, to
deliver us from the peril of damnation, and make us the sons and heirs of
Gods kingdom: then is Christ's merits defaced, and his blood shed in vain,
then are we justified by works, and by our deeds may we merit heaven, then
do we in vain believe that Christ dyed for to put away our sins, and that he
rose for our justification, as saint Paul teaches. But ye shall understand
(dearly beloved) that neither those places of scripture before alleged,
neither the doctrine of the blessed martyr Ciprian, neither any other godly and
learned man, when they in extolling the dignity, profit, fruit, and effect of
virtuous and liberal alms, do say that it washes away sins, and brings
us to the favor of God, do mean that our work and charitable deed, is the
original cause of our acception before God, or that for the dignity or
worthynesse thereof, our sins may be washed away, and we purged and cleansed
of all the spots of our iniquity: for that were in deed to deface Christ,
and to defraud him of his glory. But they mean this, and this is the
understanding of those and such like sayings: That God of his mercy and
especial favor toward them whom he has appointed to everlasting salvation,
has so offered his grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully,
that although by reason of their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before
to have been the children of wrath and perdition, yet now the spirit of God
mightily workyng in them, unto obedience to Gods will and commandments, they
declare by their outward deeds and life, in the showing of mercy, and
charity (which can not come but of the spirit of God and his especial grace)
that they are the undoubted children of God appointed to everlasting life. And
so, as by their wickedness and ungodly living, they showed them selves
according to the judgment of men, which follow the outward appearaunce, to be
reprobates and castawayes: So now by their obedience unto Gods holy will, and
by their mercyfulnesse and tender pity (wherein they show them selves to be
like unto God, who is the fou(...)yne and spryng of all mercy) they declare
openly and manyfestly unto the sight of men, that they are the sons of God,
and elect of him unto salvation. For as the good fruit is not the cause that
the tree is good, but the tree must first be good before it can bring forth
good fruit: so the good deeds of man are not the cause that makes man good,
but he is first made good by the spirit and grace of God that effectually
works in him, and afterward he brings forth good fruits. And then as the
good fruit does argue the goodness of the tree, so does the good and
merciful deed of the man, argue and certainly prove the goodness of him
that does it, according to Christ's sayings: Ye shall know them by their
fruits. And if any man will object, that evil and naughty men do sometimes by
their deeds appear to be very godly and virtuous: I will answer, so does
the crab and choke pear seem outwardly to have sometime as fair a red, and
as melow a color, as the fruit which is good in deed. But he that will byte
and take a taste, shall easily judge betwixt the sower bytternesse of the one,
and the sweet sauorines of the other. And as the true christian man, in
thankfulness of his heart, for the redemption of his soul purchased by
Christ's death, shows kyndly by the fruit of his faith, his obedience to
God: so the other, as a merchant with God, does all for his own gain,
thynking to win heaven by the merit of his works, and so defaceth and
obscureth the price of Christ's blood, who only wrought our purgation. The
meaning then of these sayings in the scriptures and other holy wrytinges:
Alms deeds do wash away our sins, and, mercy to the poor does blot out
our offenses, is, that we doing these things according to Gods will and our
duty, have our sins in deed washed away, and our offenses blotted out: not
for the worthiness of them, but by the grace of God which works al in all,
and that for the promise that God has made to them that are obedient unto his
commandment, that he which is the truth, might be justified in perfourming
the truth, due to his true promise. Alms deeds do wash away our sins,
because god does vouchsafe then to repute us as clean and pure, when we do
them for his sake, and not because they deserve or merit our purging, or for
that they have any such strength and virtue in them selves. I know that some
men, to much addict to the aduauncing of their good works, will not be
contented with this answer: and no marvel, for such men can no answer
content nor suffice. Wherefore leaving them to their own wylful sense, we will
rather have regard to the reasonable and godly, who as they most certainly
know and persuade them selves, that al goodness, al bounty, al mercy, al
benefits, al forgeuenes of sins, and whatsoever can be named good and
profitable, either for the body or for the soul, do come only of Gods mercy
and mere favor, and not of them selves: So though they do never so many and so
excellent good deeds, yet are they never pufte up with the vain confidence of
them. And though they hear and read in gods word, and other where in godly
men's works, that alms deeds, mercy, and charitablenes, does wash away sin,
and blot out iniquity: yet do they not arrogantly and proudly stick and trust
unto them, or brag them selves of them, as the proud Pharisee did, lest with
the Pharisee they should be condemned: but rather with the humble and poor
Publicane, confess them selves sinful wretches, unworthy to look up to
heaven, calling and crauyng for mercy, that with the Publicane they may be
pronounced of Christ to be justified. The godly do learn that when the
scriptures say, that by good and merciful works we are reconciled to Gods
favor: we are taught then to know what Christ by his intercession and
mediation obteyneth for us of his father when we be obedient to his will, yea
they learn in such manners of speaking a comfortable argument of Gods singular
favor and love, that attributes that unto us and to our doings, that he by
his spirit works in us, and through his grace procures for us. And yet this
notwithstanding, they cry out with saint Paul, Oh wretches that we are: and
acknowledge (as Christ teaches) that when they have all done, they are but
unprofitable servants: and with the blessed king David, in respect of the
just judgments of God, they do tremble, and say: Who shall be able to abide it
Lord, if thou wylt give sentence according to our deserts? Thus they humble
them selves, and are exalted of God: they count them selves vile, and of God
are counted pure and clean: they condemn them selves, and are justified of
God: they think them selves unworthy of the earth, and of God are thought
worthy of heaven. Thus of Gods word are they truly taught how to think
ryghtly of merciful dealyng of alms, and of Gods especial mercy and
goodness are made partakers of those fruits that his word has promised. Let
us then follow their examples, and both show obediently in our life those
works of mercy that we are commanded, and have that right opinion and
judgment of them that we are taught, and we shall in like manner as they, be
made partakers, and feel the fruits and rewards that follow such godly
living, so shall we know by proof what profit and commodity does come of
geuyng of alms, and succouring of the poor.

The third part of the Homilee of alms deeds.
YE have alredye heard two parts of this treatise of alms deeds. The first
how pleasant and acceptable before God the doing of them is, the second, how
much it behooves us, and how profitable it is to apply our selves unto them.
Now in the third part will I take away that let that hinders many from
doing them. There be many, that when they hear how acceptable a thing in the
sight of God the giving of alms is, and how much God extends his favor
toward them that are merciful, and what fruits and commodities does come to
them by it, they wish very gladly with them selves that they also might
obtain these benefits, and be counted such of God as whom he would love or
do for. But yet these men are with greedy covetousness, so pulde back that
they will not bestow one half penny, or one shiue of bread, that they might be
thought worthy of Gods benefits, and so to come into his favor. For they are
evermore fearful, and doubting, least by often giving, although it were but a
little at a time, they should consume their goods, and so impouerishe them
selves, that even them selves at the length should not be able to live, but
should be driven to beg, and live of other men's alms. And thus they seek
excuses to withhold them selves from the favor of God, and choose with
pinchyng covetousness, rather to lean unto the devil, then by charitable
mercyfulnesse, either to come unto Christ, or to suffer Christ to come unto
them. Oh that we had some cunning and skilful physician that were able to purge
them of this so pestilent an humor, that so sore infecteth, not their bodies,
but their minds, and so by corrupting their souls, brings their bodies and
souls into danger of hell fire. Now least there be any such among us
(dearly beloved) let us diligently search for that physician, which is Jesus
Christ, and earnestly labor that of his mercy he will truly instruct us,
and give us a present remedy against so perilous a disease. Hearken then,
whosoever thou art that fear least by geuyng to the poor thou should
bring thy self to beggary. That which thou take from thy self to bestow
upon Christ, can never be consumed and wasted away. Wherein thou shall not
believe me, but if thou have faith, and be a true Christian, believe the holy
ghost, give credit to the authority of Gods word that thus teaches. For
thus says the holy ghost by Solomon: He that gives unto the poor, shall never
want. Men suppose that by hoording and laying up still, they shall at length be
rich, and that by distributing and laying out, although it be for most
necessary and godly uses, they shall be brought to poverty. But the holy ghost,
which knows all truth, teaches us another lesson, contrary to this. He
teaches us that there is a kind of dispendyng that shall never diminishe the
stock, and a kind of saving that shall bring a man to extreme poverty. For
where he says, that the good alms man shall never have scarscitie, he adds:
But he that turns away his eyes from such as be in necessity, shall suffer
great poverty him self. How far different then is the judgment of man,
from the judgment of the holy ghost? The holy Apostle Paul, a man full of the
holy ghost, and made privy even of the secret will of God, teaches: that the
liberal alms geuer, shall not thereby be impouerished. He that ministers
(says he) seed unto the sower, 2. Cor. 9.
will minister also bread unto you for food, yea, he will multiply your seed
and increase the fruits of your righteousness. He is not content here to
advertise them that they shall not lack, but he shows them also after what
sort God will provide for them. Even as he provides seed for the sower in
multipliyng it and giving great increase: so he will multiply their goods, and
increase them that there shall be great abundance. And least we should think
his sayings to be but words and not truth, we have an example thereof in the
third book of kings, which does confirm and seal it up as a most certain
truth. The poor widow that received the banished prophet of God Elias, when
as she had but an handful of meal in a vessel, and a little oil in a cruse,
whereof she would make a cake for her self and her son, that after that they
had eaten that, they might dye, because in that great famine there was no more
food to be gotten: yet when she gave part thereof unto Elias, and defrauded
her own hungry belly, mercifully to relieve him, she was so blessed of God,
that neither the meal nor the oil was consumed all the time while that famine
did last, but thereof both the prophet Elias, she, and her son were
sufficiently norished and had enough. Oh consider this example ye unbelieving
and faithles covetous persons, who discredit Gods word, and think his power
diminished. This poor woman, in the time of an extreme and long dearth, had
but one handful of meal and a little cruse of oil, her only son was ready
to perish before her face for hunger, and she her self like to pyne away: and
yet when the poor prophet came and asked part, she was so myndfull of
mercyfulnesse, that she forgot her own misery, and rather then she would omit
the occasion given to give alms, and work a work of ryghteousnes, she was
content presentlye to hazard her own and her sons life. And you who have
great plenty of meats and drynkes, great store of motheaten apparel, yea,
many of you great heaps of gold and silver, and he that has least, has more
then sufficient, now in this time, when (thanks be to God) no great famine
does oppress you, your children being well clothed and well fed, and no danger
of death for famine to be feared: will rather cast doubts and perils of
unlikely penury, then you will part with any piece of your superfluities, to
help to feed and succor the poor, hungry, and naked Christ, that comes to
your doors a begging. This poor and seely wydowe never cast doubts in all her
misery what want she her self should have, she never distrusted the promise
that god made to her by the prophet, but straightway went about to relieve the
hungry prophet of god, yea preferring his necessity before her own. But we,
like unbelieving wretches, before we will give one mite, we will cast a thousand
doubts of danger, whether that will stand us in any stead that we give to the
poor, whether we should not have need of it at any other time, and whether
here it would not have be^ more profitably bestowed. So that it is more hard to
wrench a strong nail (as the proverb says) out of a post, then to wring a
farthyng out of our fyngers. There is neither the fear nor the love of God
before our eyes, we will more esteem a mite, then we either desire gods
kingdom, or fear the devils dungeon. Hearken therefore ye mercylesse misers,
what will be the end of this your vnmercyful dealyng. As certainly as God
norished this poor wydowe in the time of famine, and increased her little
store, so that she had enough, and felt no penury when other pyned away: so
certainly shall God plague you with poverty in the midst of plenty. Then
when other have abou^daunce and be fed at full, you shall utterly waste and
consume away your selves, your store shall be destroyed, your goods plucked from
you, all your glory and wealth shall perish: and that which when you had, you
might have enjoyed your self in peace, and might have bestowed upon other most
godly, ye shall seek with sorrow and sighs, and no where shall find it. For your
unmercifulness toward other, ye shall find no man that will show mercy
toward you. You that had stony hearts toward other, shall find all the
creatures of god to youward as hard as bras, and iron. Alas what fury and
madness does possess our minds, that in a matter of truth and certayntie,
we will not give credit to the truth, testifying unto that which is most
certain. Christ says, that if we will first seek the kingdom of God, and do
the works of righteousness thereof, we shall not be left destitute, al other
things shall be given to us plenteously. Nay say we, I will first look that I be
able to live my self, and be sure that I have enough for me and mine, and if I
have anything over, I will bestow it to get Gods favor, and the poor shall
then have part with me. See I pray you ye perverse judgment of men, we have
more care to norishe the carcass, then we have fear to see our soul perish.
And as Ciprian says, whylest we stand in doubt least our goods fail, in
Sermon. de Elemosina.
being over liberal, we put it out of doubt that our life and health fails,
in not being liberal at al. Whilst we are careful for diminishing of our
stock, we are altogether careless to diminishe our selves. We love Mammon,
and lose our souls. We fear least our patrimony should perish from us, but
we fear not lest we should perish for it. Thus do we peruersly love that we
should hate, and hate that we should love, we be negligent where we should be
careful, and careful where we need not. This vain fear to lack our selves if
we give to the poor, is much like the fear of children and fools, which
when they see the bright glimmering of a glass, they do imagine straight way
that it is the lightning, and yet the brightness of a glass never was ye
lightning. Even so, when we imagine that by spending upon the poor, a man
may come to poverty, we are cast into a vain fare, for we never heard or
knew that by that means any man came to misery, and was left destitute, and
not considered of god. Nay we read to the contrary in the scripture (as I have
before showed, and as by infinite testimonies and examples may be proved) that
whosoever serves God faithfully and unfeignedly in any vocation, god will not
suffer him to decay, much less to perish. The holy ghost teaches us by
Salomo^, Prou. 10.
that the Lord will not suffer the soul of the ryghteous to perish for
hunger. And therefore David says unto all them that are merciful: O fear the
Lord ye that be his saints, for they that fear him lack nothing. The Lions
do lack and suffer hunger: but they which seek the Lord shall want no manner of
thing that is good. When Elias was in the desert, god fed him by the ministry
of a Raven, that euenyng and morning brought him sufficient victuals. When
Daniel was shut up in the Lions den, God prepared meat for him, and sent it
thither to him. And there was the saying of David fulfilled: The Lions (...).
Reg. 17.
do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall want no good
thing. For while the Lions which should have been fed with his flesh, roared for
hunger and desire of their pray, whereof they had no power, although it were
present before them: he in the mean time was fresh fed from God, that should
with his flesh have filled the Lions. So mightily does God work to preserve
and maintain those whom he loves, so careful is he also to feed them who in
any state or vocation do unfeignedly serve him. And shall we now think that
he wylbe unmindful of us, if we be obedient to his word, and according to his
will have pity upon the poor? He gives us all wealth, before we do any
service for it: and will be see us lack necessaries when we do him true
service? Can a man think that he that feeds Christ, can be forsaken of
Christ, and left without food? Or will Christ deny earthly things, unto
them who^ he promises heavenly things for his true service? It can not be
therefore (dear brethren) that by giving of alms we should at any time want
our selves, or that we which relieve other men's need, should ourselves be
oppressed with penury. It is contrary to Gods word, it repugneth with his
promise, it is against Christ's property and nature to suffer it, it is the
crafty surmise of the devil to persuade us it. Wherefore stick not to give
alms freely, and trust not withstandyng, that Gods goodness will minister unto
us sufficiency and plenty, so long as we shall live in this transitory life,
and after our days here well spent in his service and the love of our brethren,
we shall be crowned with everlasting glory, to reign with Christ our savior in
heaven, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be al honor and glory for
ever.

Amen.
An Homilee or Sermon concerning the Nativity and birth of our Savior Jesus
Christ.
AMong all the creatures that god made in the beginning of the world most
excellent and wonderful in their kind, there was none (as the Scripture
bears witness) to be compared almost in any point unto manne, who as well in
body and in soul exceeded all other no less, then the Sun in brightness
and light exceeds every small and little star in the firmament. He was made
according to the image and similitude of GOD, he was endued with all kind of
heavenly gifts, he had no spot of uncleanness in him, he was sound and
perfect in all parts, both outwardly and inwardly, his reason was vncorrupt,
his understanding was pure and good, his will was obedient and godly, he was
made altogether like unto God, in righteousness, in holiness, in wisdom, in
truth, to be short, in all kind of perfection.

When he was thus created and made, almighty GOD, in token of his great love
toward him, chose out a special place of the earth for him, namely Paradise,
where he lived in all tranquillity and pleasure, having great abundance of
worldly goods, and lackt nothing that he might justly require or desire to
have. For as it is said, God made him Lord and ruler Psalm. 8.
over all the works of his hands, that he should have under his feet all
sheep and oxen, all beasts of the feelde, all fowls of the air, all fishes
of the sea, and use them always at his own pleasure, according as he should
have need. Was not this a mirror of perfection? Was not this a full perfect
and blessed estate? Could any thing else be well added hereunto, or greater
felicity desired in this world? But as the common nature of all men is, in
time of prosperity and wealth, to forget not only them selves, but also God:
Even so did this first man Adam, who having but one commandment at Gods
hand, namely that he should not eat of the fruit of knowledge of good and
ill, did not withstanding, most vnmindefully, or rather most wylfully break
it, in forgetting the straight charge of his maker, and giving ear to the
crafty suggestion of that wicked serpent the devil. Whereby it came to pass,
that as before he was blessed, so now he was accursed, as before he was loved,
so now he was abhorred, as before he was most beautiful and precious, so now
he was most vile and wretched in the sight of his Lord and maker. Insteade of
the image of God, he was now become the image of the devil. Insteade of the
citezin of heaven, he was become the bondslaue of hell, having in him self no
one part of his former purity and cleanness, but being altogether spotted and
defiled, insomuch that now he seemed to be nothing else but a lump of sin,
and therefore by the just judgment of god, was condemned to everlasting death.
This so great and miserable a plague, if it had only rested on Adam, who first
offended, it had been so much the easyer, and might the better have been borne.
But it fell not only on him, but also on his posterity and children for ever,
so that the whole brood of Adams flesh should sustain the self same fall and
punishment, which their forefather by his offense most justly had deserved.
Saint Paul in the fifth Chapter to the Romans says, By the offense of only
Adam, the fault came upon all men to condempnation, and by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners. By which words we are taught, that as in
Adam al men universally sinned: so in Adam all men universally received the
reward of sin, that is to say, became mortal and subject unto death, having
in them selves nothing but everlasting dampnation both of body and soul. They
became (as David says) corrupt and abominable, they went all out of the way,
there was none that did good, no not one. O what a miserable and woeful state
was this, that the sin of one man should destroy and condemn al men, that
nothing in all ye world might be looked for but only pangues of death, and
pains of hell? Had it ben any marvel if mankind had been utterly driven to
desperation, being thus fallen from life to death, from salvation to
destruction, from heaven to hell? But behold the great goodness and tender
mercy of god in this behalf: Albeit man's wickedness and sinful behavior was
such, that it deserved not in any part to be forgiven, yet to the intent he
might not be clean destitute of al hope and comfort in time to come, he
ordained a new covenant, and made a sure promise thereof, namely that he would
send a Messiah or mediator into the world, which should make intercession,
and put him self as a stay between both parties, to pacify ye wrath and
indignation conceived against sin, and to deliver man out of the miserable
curse and cursed misery wherinto he was fallen headlong by disobeying the will
and commandment of the only Lord and maker. This covenant and promise was
first made unto Adam him self immediately after his fall, as we read in the
third of Genesis, where God said to ye serpent on this wise: I will put
enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed. He shall
break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. After ward, the self same
covenant was also more amply and plainly renewed unto Abraham, where God
promised him, that in his seed all Genesis 10.
nations and families of the earth should be blessed. Again it was continued
and confirmed unto Isahac, in the same form of words, as it was Genesis 26.
before unto his father. And to the intent that mankind might not despair,
but always live in hope, almighty god never ceased to publishe, repeat,
confirm, and continue the same, by diverse and sundry testimonies of his
prophets, who for the better persuasion of the thing, prophesied the time, the
place, the manner and circumstaunce of his birth, the affliction of his life,
the kind of his death, the glory of his resurrection, the receiving of his
kingdom, the deliverance of his people, with all other circumstaunces
belonging thereunto. Esaias prophesied that he should be borne of a virgin, and
called Emanuel. Micheas prophesied, that he should be borne in Bethlehem a
place of Jurie. Ezechiel prophesied that he should come of the stock and
lynage of David. Daniel prophesied that all nations and languages should serve
him. Zachary prophesied that he should come in poverty, riding upon an Ass.
Malachie prophesied that he should send Elias before him, which was John the
Baptist. Hieremie prophesied that he should be sold for thirty pieces of
silver. etc. And all this was done, that the promise and covenant of God made
unto Abraham and his posterity concerning the redemption of the world, might
be credited and fully believed. Now, as the Apostle Paul says, when the
fullness of time was come, that is, the perfection and course of years,
appointed from the beginning, then God according to his former covenant and
promise, sent a Messiah, otherwise called a mediator, unto the world, not
such a one as Moses was, not such a one as Josua, Saul, or David was: but
such a one as should deliver mankind from the bitter curse of the law, and
make perfect satisfaction by his death, for the sins of all people, namely he
sent his dear and only son Jesus Christ, made (as the Apostle says) of a
woman, and made under the law, that he might redeem them that were in bondage
of the law, and make the^ the children of God by adoption. Was not this a
wonderful great love toward us that were his professed and open enemies,
toward us that were by nature the children of wrath, and fyrebrandes of hell
fire? In this (says Saint John) appeared the great love of God, that he sent
his only begotten son into the world to save us, when we were his extreme
enemies. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he loved us, and sent
his son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Saint Paul also says, Christ,
when we were yet of no strength, dyed for us being ungodly. Romans 5.
Doubtless a man will scarce dye for a ryghteous man. Peradventure some one
durst dye for him of whom they have received good. But god sets out his love
toward us, in that he sent Christ to dye for us when we were yet void of
all goodness. This and such other comparisons does the Apostle use, to
amplify and set forth the tender mercy and great goodness of God, declared
toward mankind, in sendyng down a savior from heaven, even Christ the
Lord. Which one benefit among all other, is so great and wonderful, that
neither tongue can well express it, neither heart think it, much less give
sufficient thanks to god for it. But here is a great controversy between us
and the Jews, whether the same Jesus which was borne of the virgin Marie, be
the true Messiah and true savior of the world, so long promised and
prophesied of before. They, as they are and have been always, proud and stiff
necked, would never acknowledge him until this day, but have looked and gaped
for another to come. They have this fond imagination in their heads, that
Messiah shall come, not as Christ did, like a poor pilgrim and simple soul
rydyng upon an Ass: But like a baliaunt and mighty king in great royalty
and honor. Not as Christ did, with a few fishermen, and men of small
estimation in the world: but with a great army of strong men, with a great
train of wise and noble me^, as knights, Lords, Earls, Dukes, Princes, and
so forth. Neither do they think that their Messiah shall slanderously suffer
death, as Christ did: but that he shall stoutly conquer and manfully subdue al
his enemies, and finally obtain such a kingdom on earth, as never was seen
from the beginning. While they faigne unto them selves after this sort a
Messiah of their own brain, they deceive them selves, and account Christ as
an abject and fool of the world. Therefore Christ crucified (as saint Paul
says) is unto the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishnes,
because they think it an absurd thing, and contrary to all reason, that a
redemer and savior of the whole world, should be handled after such a sort as
he was, namelye scorned, reviled, scourged, condemned, and last of al cruelly
hanged. This, I say, seemed in their eyes strange, and most absurd, and
therefore neither they would at that time, neither will they as yet,
acknowledge Christ to be their Messiah and savior. But we (dearly beloved)
that hope and look to be saved, must both steadfastly believe, and also boldly
confess, that the same Jesus, which was borne of the virgin Marie, was the
true Messiah and mediator between God and man, promised and prophesied of so
long before. For as the Apostle writes: With the heart Romans 10.
man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. Again in the same place: Whosoever believes in him, shall never be
ashamed nor confounded. Whereto agrees also the testimony of saint John,
written in the fourth Chapter of his first general Epistle, on this wise:
Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, he dwells in God, and
God in him.

There is no doubt, but in this point all Christian men are fully and perfectly
persuaded. Yet shall it not be a lost labor to instruct and furnish you with a
few places concerning this matter, that ye may be able to stop the
blasphemous mouths of all them, that most Jewishely, or rather diuelishly,
shall at any time go about to teach or maintain the contrary. First, ye have
the witness and testimony of the angel Gabriel, declared as well to Zachary
the high priest, as also to the blessed virgin. Secondly, ye have ye witness
and testimony of John the Baptist, poynting unto Christ, and saying, Behold
the lamb of God that takes away the sins of ye world. Thirdly, ye have the
witness and testimony of God the father, who thundered from heaven, and said,
This is my dearelye beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.
Fourthly, ye have the witness and testimony of the holy ghost, which came
down from heaven in manner of a white dove, and lighted upon him in time of his
baptism. To these might be added a great number more, namely the witness and
testimony of the wise men that came to Herod, the witness and testimony of
Simeon and Anna, the witness and testimony of Andrew and Philip, Nathanael,
and Peter, Nicodemus, and Martha, with diverse other: But it were to long to
repeat all, and a few places are sufficient in so plain a matter, specially
among them that are alredye persuaded. Therefore if the privy impes of
amechriste, and crafty instruments of the devil, shall attempt or go about to
withdraw you from this true Messiah, and persuade you to look for another that
is not yet come: let the^ not in any case seduce you, but confirm your selves
with these and such other testimonies of holy scripture, which are so sure and
certain, that all ye devils in hell shall never be able to withstand them. For
as truly as God lives, so truly was Jesus Christ the true messiah and
savior of the world, even the same Jesus which as this day was borne of the
virgin Marie, without all help of man, only by the power and operation of the
holy ghost.

Concerning whose nature and substance, because diverse and sundry heresies are
risen in these our days, through the motion and suggestion of Satan: therefore
it shall be needful and profitable for your instruction, to speak a word or
two also of this part. We are evidently taught in the scripture, that our Lord
and savior Christ consists of two several natures, of his manhood, being
thereby perfect man, and of his Godhead, being thereby perfect God. It is
written, The word, that is to say, the second person in Trinity, John. 1.
became flesh. GOD sendyng his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh,
fulfilled Romans 8.
those things which the law could not. Christ being in form of God, took
on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto man, being Phillip. 2.
found in shape as a man. GOD was showed in flesh, justified in spirit,
seen of angels, preached 1. Tim. 3.
to ye Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in glory. Also in
another place: There is one God, and one mediator between God and man, even
the man Jesus Christ.

These be plain places for the proof and declaration of both natures, united
and knitte together in one Christ. Let us diligently consider and waygh the
works that he did whiles he lived on earth, and we shall thereby also perceive
the self same thing to be most true. In that he did hunger and thirst, eat
and drink, sleep and wake, in that he preached his Gospel to the people, in
that he wept and sorowed for Jerusalem, in that he paid tribute for him self
and Peter, in that he dyed and suffered death, what other thing did he else
declare, but only this, that he was perfect man as we are? For which cause he
is called in holy scripture, sometime the son of David, sometime the son
of man, sometime the son of Marie, sometime the son of Joseph, and so
forth. Now in that he forgave sins, in that he wrought miracles, in that
he did cast out devils, in that he healed men with his only word, in that he
knew the thoughts of men's hearts, in that he had the seas at his
commandment; in that he walked on the water, in that he rose from death to
life, in that he ascended into heaven, and so forth: What other thing did he
show therein, but only that he was perfect god, coequal with the father as
touching his deity? Therefore he says, The father and I are all one, which is
to be understood of his godhead. For as touching his manhood, he says, The
father is greater the^ I am. Where are now those Marcionites, that deny
Christ to have been borne in the flesh, or to have been perfect man? Where are
now those Arians, which deny Christ to have been perfect God, of equal
substance with the father? If there be any such, ye may easyly reprove them
with these testimonies of Gods word, and such other. Whereunto I am most sure,
they shall never be able to answer. For the necessity of our salvation did
require such a mediator and savior, as under one person should be a partaker
of both natures: It was requisite he should be man, it was also requisite he
should be God. For as the transgression came by man, so was it meet the
satisfaction should be made by man. And because death, according to S. Paul,
is the just stipende and reward of sin: therefore to appease the wrath of
God, and to satisfy his justice, it was expedient that our mediator should
be such a one, as might take upon him the sins of mankind, and sustain the
due punishment thereof, namely death. Moreover he came in flesh, and in the
self same flesh ascended into heaven, to declare and testify unto us, that
all faithful people, which steadfastly believe in him, shall likewise come unto
the same mansion place, whereunto he being, our chief captain, is gone
before. Last of all, he became man, that we thereby might receive the greater
comfort, as well in our prayers, as also in our adversity, consydering with
our selves, that we have a mediator that is true man as we are, who also is
touched with our infirmities, and was tempted eue^ in like sort as we are. For
these and sundry other causes, it was most needful he should come, as he did,
in the flesh.

But because no creature, in that he is only a creature, has or may have
power to destroy death, and give life, to overcome hell, and purchase heaven,
to remit sins, and give righteousness: therefore it was needful, that our
Me^ssias, whose proper duty and office that was, should be not only full
and perfect man, but also full and perfect GOD, to the intent he might more
fully and perfectly make satisfaction for mankind. God says, This is my
well-beloved Matthew. 3.
son in whom I am well pleased. By which place we learn, that Christ appeased
and quenched the wrath of his father, not in that he was only the son of man:
But much more in that he was the son of God.

Thus ye have heard declared out of the scriptures, that Jesus Christ was the
true Messiah and savior of the world, that he was by nature and substance
perfect God, and perfect man, and for what cause it was expedient he should be
so. Now that we may be the more mindful and thankful unto God in this
behalf, let us briefly consider and call to mind, the manifold and great
benefits that we have received by the Nativity and birth of this our Messiah
and savior.

Before Christ's coming into the world, all men universally in Adam, were
nothing else but a wicked and crooked generation, rotten and corrupt trees,
stony ground full of brambles and briars, lost sheep, prodigal sons,
naughty and unprofitable servants, unrighteous stewardes, workers of
iniquity, the brood of Adders, blind guides, sitting in darkness and in the
shadow of death: to be short, nothing else but children of perdition, and
inheritours of hell fire. To this does saint Paul bear witness in diverse
places of his Epistles, and Christ also him self in sundry places of his
Gospel. But after he was once come down from heaven, and had taken our frail
nature upon him, he made all them that would receive him truly, and believe
his word, good trees, and good ground, fruitful and pleasant branches,
children of light, citezins of heaven, sheep of his fold, members of his
body, heirs of his kingdom, his true friends and brethren, sweet and lively
bread, the elect and chosen people of God. For as saint Peter says in his
first Epistle and second Chapter: He bare our sins in his body upon the
cross, he healed us, and made us whole by his stripes: and whereas before we
were sheep going astray, he by his coming brought us home again to the true
shephearde and Bishop of our souls, making us a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculier people of GOD, in that he dyed for our
offenses, and rose again for our justification. Saint Paul to Timothy the
third Chapter: We were (says he) in times past un wise, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in hatred, envy,
maliciousness, and so forth. But after the loving kindness of God our
Savior appeared toward mankind, not according to the righteousness that we
had done, but according to his great mercy, he saved us by the fountain of
the new birth, and by the renewyng of the holy ghost, which he powered upon us
aboundauntly, through Jesus Christ our savior, that we being once justified
by his grace, should be heirs of eterna^l life, through hope and faith in his
blood.

In these and such other places, is set out before our eyes as it were in a
glass, the aboundaunt grace of God, received in Christ Jesu, which is so
much the more wonderful, because it came not of any desert of ours, but of
his mere and tender mercy, even then when we were his extreme enemies. But for
the better understanding and consyderation of this thing, let us behold the
end of his coming, so shall we perceive what great commodity and profit his
Nativity has Matthew. 2. Matthew. 5. John. 18. Luke. 4. John. 8. Matthew. 9.
brought unto us miserable and sinful creatures. The end of his coming, was
to save and deliver his people, to fulfill the law for us, to bear witness
unto the truth, to teach and preach the words of his father, to give light
unto the world, to call sinners to repentance, the refreshe them that labor
and be heavy laden, to cast out Matthew. 11. John. 12.
the prince of this world, to reconcile us in the body of his flesh, to
desolue the works of the devil, last of all, to become a propitiation for our
Collos. 1. Hebru. 10 Romans 3.
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

These were the chief ends wherefore Christ became man, not for any profit
that should come to him self thereby, but only for our sakes, that we might
understand the will of God, be partakers of his heavenly light, be delivered
out of the devils claws, releassed from the burden of sin, justified
through faith in his blood, and finally, received up into everlasting glory,
there to reign with him forever. Was not this a great and singular love of
Christ toward mankind, that being the express and liuelye image of God, he
would notwithstanding humble him self, and take upon him the form of a
servant, and that only to save and redeem us? O how much are we bound to the
goodness of God in this behalf? How many thanks and praises do we owe unto
him for this our salvation wrought by his dear and only son Christ? who
became a pilgrim in earth, to make us citizens in heaven, who became the son
of man, to make us the sons of God, who became obedient to the law, to
deliver us from the curse of the law, who became poor, to make us rich,
vile, to make us precious, subject to death, to make us live for ever. What
greater love could we seelye creatures desire or wish to have at Gods hands?
Therefore dearelye beloved, let us not forget this exceeding love of our Lord
and savior, let us not show our selves vnmyndful or unthankful toward him:
but let us love him, fear him, obey him, and serve him. Let us confess him
with our mouths, praise him with our tongues, believe on him with our hearts,
and glorify him with our good works. Christ is the light, let us receive the
light. Christ is the truth, let us believe the truth. Christ is the way, let
us follow the way. And because he is our only master, our only teacher, our
only shepherd and chief captain: therefore let us become his servants, his
scholars, his sheep, and his soldiers. As for sin, the flesh, the world,
and the devil, whose servants and bondslaues we were before Christ's coming,
let us utterly cast them of, and defy them, as the chief and only enemies of
our soul. And seeing we are once delivered from their cruel tyranny by Christ,
let us never fall into their hands again, lest we chance to be in a worse case
then ever we were before. Happy are they, says the scripture, that continue to
the end. Be faithful (says God) until death, and I will give thee a crown of
life. Again he says in another place: He that puts his hand unto the
plough, and looks back, is not meet for the kingdom of God. Therefore let
us be strong, steadfast, and immovable, abounding always in the works of the
Lord. Let us receive Christ, not for a time, but for ever, let us believe his
word, not for a time, but for ever, let us become his servant, not for a
time, but for ever, in consyderation that he has redeemed and saved us, not
for a time, but for ever, and will receive us into his heavenly kingdom, there
to raygne with him; not for a time, but forever. To him therefore with the
father and the holy ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, forever and ever.

Amen.
An homilee for good Friday, concerning the death and passion of our savior
Jesus Christ.
IT should not become us (well-beloved in christ) being that people which he
redeemed from the devil, from sin and death, and from everlasting damnation,
by Christ, to suffer this time to pass forth without any meditation, and
remembrance of that excellent work of our redemption, wrought as about this
time, through the great mercy and charity of our savior Jesus Christ, for us
wretched sinners, and his mortal enemies. For if a mortal man's deed, done to
the behofe of ye common wealth, be had in remembrance of us, with thanks for
the benefit and profit which we receive thereby: How much more redily
should we have in memory this excellent act and benefit of Christ's death?
whereby he has purchased for us, the undoubted pardon and forgeuenes of our
sins, whereby he made at one the father of heaven with us, in such wise,
that he takes us now for his loving children, and for the true inheritours
with Christ his natural son, of the kingdom of heaven? And verily, so
much more does Christ's kindness appear unto us, in that it pleased him to
deliver him self of all his godly honor which he was equally in with his
father in heaven, and to come down into this vale of miserye, to be made
mortal man, and to be in the state of a most low servant, serving us for our
wealth and profit, us I say, which were his sworn enemies, which had
renounced his holy law and commandments, and followed the lusts and sinful
pleasures of our corrupt nature. And yet I say did Christ put him Collos. 2.
self between Gods deserved wrath, and our sin, and rent that obligation
wherein we were in danger to God, and paid our debt. Our debt was a great
deal to great for us to have paid. And without payment, God the father could
never be at one with us. Neither was it possible to be losed from this debt by
our own ability. It pleased him therefore to be the payer thereof, and to
discharge us quite. Who can now consider the grievous det of sin, which
could none otherwise be paid but by the death of an innocent, and will not
hate sin in his heart? If God hates sin so much, that he would allow
neither man nor Angel for the redemption thereof, but only the death of his
only and well-beloved son, who will not stand in fear thereof? If we (my
friends) consider this, that for our sins this most innocent lamb was
driven to death, we shall have much more cause to bewail our selves that we
were the cause of his death, then to cry out of the malice and cruelty of
the Jews, which pursued him to his death. We did the deeds wherefore he was
thus stricken and wounded, they were only the ministers of our wickedness. It
is meet then we should step low down into our hearts, and bewail our own
wretchedness and sinful living. Let us know for a certainetie, that if the most
dearly beloved son of God was thus punished and stricken for the sin which
he had not done him self: how much more ought we sore to be stricken for our
daily and manifold sins which we commit against God, if we earnestlye
repent us not, and be not sorye for them? No man can love sin, which God
hates so much, and be in his favor. No man can say that he loves Christ
truly, and have his great enemy (sin I mean, the aucthour of his death)
familiar and in friendship with him. So much do we love God and Christ, as we
hate sin. We ought therefore to take great heed, that we be not favorers
thereof, least we be found ennemies to God, and traitors to Christ. For not
only they which nailed Christ upon the cross, are his tormentours and
crucifiers: but all they (says saint Paul) crucify again the son of God,
as much as is in them, which do commit Heb. 6.
vice and sin, which brought him to his death. Romans 6.
If the wages of sin be death, and death everlasting: Surely it is no small
danger to be in service thereof. If we live after the flesh, and after the
sinful lusts thereof, saint Paul threatens, Romans 8.
yea almighty God in saint Paul threatens, that we shall surely dye. We can
none otherwise Romans 8.
live to God, but by dying to sin. If Christ be in us, then is sin dead in
us: and if the spirit of God be in us, which raised Christ from death to life,
so shall the same spirit raise us to the resurrection of everlasting life. But
if sin rule Romans i.
and reign us, then is God, which is the fountain of all grace and virtue,
departed from us: then has the devil and his ungracious spirit, rule and
dominion in us. And surely if in such miserable ^iate we dye, we shall not
rise to life, but fall down to death and dampnation, and that without end.
For Christ has not so redeemed us from sin, that we may safely return
thereto again: but he has redeemed us, that we should Christ has not redeemed
us from sin, that we should (...) in sin.
forsake the motions thereof, and live to righteousness. Yea, we be therefore
washed in our baptism from the filthynes of sin, that we should live
afterward in the pureness of life. In baptism we promised to renounce the
devil and his suggestions, we promised to be (as obedient children) always
following Gods will and pleasure. Then if he be our father in deed, let us
give him his due honor. If we be his children, let us show him our obedience,
like as Christ openly declared his obedience to his father, which (as saint
Paul Phil. 2.
writes) was obedient even to the very death, the death of the cross. And
this he did for us all that believe in him. For him self he was not punished,
for he was pure and undefiled of al manner of sin. He was wounded (says Esai)
for our Esai. 4.
wickedness, and striped for our sins: he suffered the penalty of them him
self, to deliver us from danger: he bare (says Esai) al our sores and
infirmities upon his own back. No pain did he refuse to suffer in his own
body, that he might deliver us from pain everlasting. His pleasure it was thus
to do for us, we deserved it not. Wherefore the more we see our selves bound
unto him, the more he ought to be thanked of us, yea, and the more hope may we
take, that we shall receive all other good things of his hand, in that we have
received the gift of his only son, through his liberality. For if God
(says Saint Romans 8.
Paul) has not spared his own son from pain and punishment, but delivered
him for us all unto the death: how should he not give us all other things with
him? If we want any thing, either John. 1.
for body or soul, we may lawfully and boldlye approach to God, as to our
merciful father, to ask that we desire, and we shall obtain it. For such
power is given to us, to be the children of God, so many as believe in Christ's
name. In his name whatsoever we ask, we shall have it Mat. 11.
granted us. For so well pleased is the father almighty God, with Christ his
son, that for his sake he favors us, and will deny us nothing. So
pleasant was this sacrifice and oblation of his sons death, which he so
obediently and innocently suffered, that he would take it for the only and
full amends for all the sins of the world. And such favor did he purchase
by his death of his heavenly father for us: that for the merit thereof (if we
be true Christians in deed, and not in word only) we be now fullye in Gods
grace again, and clearelye discharged from our sin. No tongue surely is
able to express the worthiness of this so precious a death. For in this
stands the continual pardon of our daily offenses, in this rests our
justification, in this we be allowed, in this is purchased the everlasting
health of al our souls. Yea, there is Act. iiii.
none other thing that can be named under heaven to save our souls, but this
only work of Christ's precious offering of his body upon the altar of the
cross. Certes there can be no work of any mortal man (be he never so holy)
that shall be coupled in merits with Christ's most holy act. For no doubt,
all our thoughts and deeds were of no value, if they were not allowed in the
merits of Christ's death. All our ryghteousnes is far imperfect, if it be
compared with Christ's ryghteousnes. For in his acts and deeds, there was no
spot of sin, or of any imperfectness. And for this cause they were the more
able to be the true amends of our unrighteous, where our Our (...) be full
of (...) perfection.
acts and deeds be full of imperfection, and infirmities, and therefore nothing
worthy of them selves to stir God to any favor, much less to challenge the
glory that is due to Christ's act and merit. For not to us (says David) not
to us, but Psalm. 11^.
to thy name give the glory, O Lord. Let us therefore (good friends) with all
reverence glorify his name, let us magnifye and praise him for ever. For he
has dealt with us according to his great mercy, by himself has he purchased
our redemtion. He thought it not enough to spare him Heb. 1.
self, and to send his Angel to do this deed, but he would do it him self,
that he might do it the better, and make it the more perfect redemption. He was
nothing moved with the intolerable pains that he suffered in the whole course
of his long passion, to repent him thus to do good to his enemies: but he
opened his heart for us, and bestowed him self wholly for the raunsomming of
us. Let us therefore now open our hearts again to him, and study in our
lives to be thankful to such a Lord, and evermore to be myndefull of so great
a benefit, yea let us take up our cross with Christ and follow him. His
passion is not only the ransom and whole amends for our sin, but it is
also a most perfect example of all patience and sufferaunce. For if it behooved
Act. ^.
Christ thus to suffer, and to enter into the glory of his father: how should
it not become us to bear patiently our small crosses of adversity, and the
troubles of this world? For surely (as says sayn^ Peter) Christ therefore
suffered, to leave us an example to follow his steps. And if we suffer with i.
Pet. 2. i. Tim. ii.
him, we shall be sure also to reign with him in heaven. Not that the
sufferaunce of this transitory life should be worthy of that glory to come,
Romans 8. Mat. 5.
but gladly should we be contented to suffer, to be like Christ in our life,
that so by our works we may glorify our father which is in heaven. And Heb.
11.
as it is paynefull and grievous to bear the cross of Christ in the greefes
and displeasures of this life: so it brings forth the joyful fruit of hope,
in all the^ that be exercised therewith. Let us not so much behold the pain,
as the reward that shall follow that labor. Nay, let us rather endeavor
Jacob. 1.
our selves in our sufferaunce, to endure innocentlye and gyltlesse, as our
savior Christ did. For if we suffer for our deseruinges, then has not
patience his perfect work in us: but if vndeseruinglye we suffer loss of
goods and life, i. Pet. 2.
if we suffer to be evil spoken of for the love of Christ, this is thankful
before God, for so did Christ suffer. He never did sin, neither was The
pa^ienc^ of Christ.
there any guyle found in his mouth. Yea, when he was reuyled with tauntes, he
reuyled not again. When he was wrongfullye dealt with, he threatened not
again, nor revenged his quarrel, but delivered his cause to him yt judges
rightlye. Perfect patience cares not what nor how Perfect (...).
much it suffers, nor of whom it suffers, whether offrende or foe: but
studyeth to suffer innocently, and without deserving. Yea, he in whom Mat. 5.
perfect charity is, cares so little to revenge, that he rather studieth to do
good for evil, to bless and say well of them that curse him, to pray for them
that pursue him, according to the example of our savior Christ, who is the
most perfect example The meekenes of Christ.
and pattern of all meekenes and sufferaunce, which hanging upon his cross,
in most seruent anguish bleeding in every part of his blessed body, being set
in the mids of his enemies and crucifiers: and he, notwithstanding the
intolerable pains which they saw in him, being of them mocked and scorned
despitefully without all favor and compassion, had yet toward them such
compassion in heart, that he prayed to his father of heaven for them, and said:
O father forgive them, for they Luke 2^^.
wot not what they do. What patience was it also which he showed, when one of
his own apostles and servant which was put in trust of him, came to betray
him unto his enemies to ye death? He said nothing worse to him, but, Friend
wherefore Mark. 26.
art thou come? Thus good people, should we call to mind the great examples
of charity which Christ showed in his passion, if we will fruitfully remember
his passion. Such charity and love should we bear one to another, if we
Mat. 5.
will be the true servants of Christ. For if we love but them which love and
say well by us, what great thing is it that we do, says Christ? Do not the
Panims and open sinners so? We must be more perfect in our charity then thus,
even as our father in heaven is perfect, which makes ye light of his sun to
rise upon the good and the bad, and sends his rain upon the kind and unkind.
After this manner should we show our charity indifferently, as well to one as
to another, as well to friend as foe, like obedient children, after the example
of our good father in heaven. For if Christ was obedient to his father even to
the death, and that the most shameful death (as the Jews esteemed it) the
death of the cross: Why should we not be obedient to God in lower points of
charity and patience? Let us forgive then our neighbors their small faults,
as God for Christ's sake has Eccle. 28.
forgeuen us our great. It is not meet that we should crave forgeuenes of our
great offenses at Gods hands, and yet will not forgive the small trespasses of
our neighbors against us. We do Mat. 28.
call for mercy in vain, if we will not show mercy to our neighbors. For if
we will not put wrath and displeasure forth of our hearts to our christian
brother, no more will God forgive the displeasure and wrath that our sins have
deserved before him. For under this condition does God forgive us, if we forgive
other. It becomes not Christian men to be hard one to another, nor yet to
think their neighbor unworthy to be forgeuen. For howsoever unworthy he is,
yet is Christ worthy to have thee do thus much for his sake, he has deserved
it of thee, that thou should forgive thy neighbor. And God is also to be
obeyed, which commands us to forgive, if we will have any part of the pardon
which our savior Christ purchased once of God the father by shedding of his
precious blood. Nothing becomes Christ's servants so much, as mercy Jacob. 5.
and compassion. Let us then be favorable one to another, and pray we one for
another, that we may be healed from all frailties of our life, the less to
offend one the other, and that we may be of one mind and one spirit,
agreeing together in brotherly love and concord, even like the dear children
of God. By these means shall we move God to be merciful to our sins, yea,
Ephesians. ^.
and we shall be hereby the more ready to receive our savior and maker in his
blessed sacrament, to our everlasting comfort and health of soul. Christ
delights to enter and dwell in that soul where love and charity rules, and
where peace and concord is seen. For thus writes saint John, 1. John. 4.
God is charity, he that abides in charity, abides in God, and God in him.
And by this (says he) we shall know that we be of God, if we love our
brethren. Yea, and by this shall we know, i. John. iii.
that we be shifted from death to life, if we love one another. But he which
hates his brother (says the same Apostle) abides in death, even i. John. 2.
in the danger of everlasting death, and is moreover the child of damnation
and of the devil, cursed of God, and hated (so long as he so remains) of God
and all his heavenly company. For as peace and charity make us the blessed
children of almighty God: so does hatred and envy make us the cursed children
of the devil. God give us all grace to follow Christ's example in peace and in
charity, in patience and sufferaunce, that we now may have him our ghest to
enter and dwell within us, so as we may be in full surety, having such a pledge
of our salvation. If we have him and Romans 8.
his favor, we may be sure that we have the favor of God by his means. For
he sits on the right hand of his father, as our proctour and attorney,
pleading and suing for us in all our needs and necessities, Wherefore, if we
want any gift of godly wisdom, we may ask it of God for Christ's sake, and
we shall have it. Let us consider and examine our self, in what want we be
concerning this virtue of charity and patience. If we see that our hearts be
nothing inclined thereunto, in forgeuing them that have offended against us,
then let us knowledge our want, and wish to God to have it. But if we want it,
and see in our self no desire thereunto, verily we be in a dangerous case
before God, and have need to make much earnest prayer to God, that we may have
such an heart changed, to the gra^^ing in of a new. For unless we forgive
other, we shall never be forgeuen of God. No, not all the prayers and merits
of other, can pacify God unto us, unless we be at peace, and at one with our
neighbor. Nor all our deeds and good works can move God to forgive us our
dettes to him, except we forgive to other. He sets more by mercy, then by
sacrifice. Mercy moved our savior Christ to suffer for his enemies: it
becomes us then to follow his example. For it shall little avail us to have
in meditation the fruits and price of his passion, to magnify them, and to
delyght or trust to them, except we have in mind his examples in passion to
follow them. If we thus therefore consider Christ's death, and will stick
thereto with fast faith for the merit and deserving thereof, and will also
frame our self in such wise to bestow our selves, and all that we have by
charity, to the behoof of our neighbor, as Christ spent him self whollye
for our profit, then do we truly remember Christ's death, and being thus
folowers of Christ's steps, we shall be sure to follow him thither where he
sits now with the father and the holy ghost, to whom be all honor and
glory.

Amen.
The second homilee concerning the death and passion of our savior Christ.
THat we may the better conceive the great mercy and goodness of our Savior
Christ in suffering death universally for all men: it behooves us to descend
into the bottom of our conscience, and deeply to consider the first and
principal cause wherefore he was compelled Genesis 5.
so to do. When our great graundfather Adam had broken Gods commandment, in
eating the apple forbidden him in paradise, at the motion and suggestion of his
wife, he purchased thereby, not only to him self, but also to his posterity
for ever, the just wrath and indignation of God, who according to his former
sentence pronounced at the giving of the commandment, condemned both him and
all his to everlasting death, both of body and soul. For it was said unto him,
Thou shall eat freely of every tree in ye garden: but Genesis 2.
as touching the tree of knowledge of good and ill, thou shall in no wise eat
of it. For in what hour soever thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death.
Now as the Lord had spoken, so it came to pass. Adam took upon him to eat
thereof, and in so doing he dyed the death, that is to say, he became mortal,
he lost the favor of God, he was cast out of paradise, he was no longer a
citizen of heaven: but a fyrebrand of hell, and a bond slave to the devil. To
this does our savior bear witness in the Gospel, calling us lost Luke. xv.
sheep, which have goue astray and wandered from the true shephearde of our
souls. To this also does saint Paul bear witness, saying, That by the
offense of only Adam, death came upon all Romans v.
men to condempnation. So that no we neither he, nor any of his, had any right
or interest at all in the kingdom of heaven, but were become plain reprobates
and castawayes, being perpetually dampened to the everlasting pains of hell
tire. In this so great misery and wretchedness, if mankind could have recovered
him self again, and obtained forgeuenes at Gods hands, then had his case ben
somewhat tolerable, because he might have attempted some way how to deliver him
self from eternal death. But there was no way left unto him, he could do
nothing that might pacify gods wrath, he was altogether unprofitable in that
behalf. There was none that Psalm. v.
did good, no not one. And how then could he work his own salvation? Should
he go about to pacify gods heavy displeasure by offering up brent sacrifices
according as it was ordained in the old law? by offering up the blood of
Oxen, the blood of calves, the blood of goats, the blood of lambs, and so
forth? O these things were Hebr. 9.
of no force nor strength to take away sins, they could not put away the
anger of God, they could not cool the heat of his wrath, nor yet bring
mankind into favor again, they were but only sigures and shadows of things
to come, and nothing else, Read the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. ^.
there shall you find this matter largely discussed, there shall you learn in
most plain words, that the blooddy sacrifice of the old law was imperfect,
and not able to deliver man from the state of dampnation by any means, so that
mankind in trusting thereunto, should trust to a broken staff, and in the
end deceive him self. What should he then do? Should he go about to observe
and keep the law of God divided into two tables, and so purchase to him self
eternal life? In deed, if Adam and his posterity had been able to satisfy
and fulfill the law perfectly, in loving God above all things, and their
neighbor as them selves: then should they have easily quenched the Lords
wrath, and escaped the terrible sentence of eternal death pronounced against
them by the mouth of almighty God. For it is Luke. 10.
written. Do this, and thou shall live, that is to say, fulfill my
commandments, keep thy self upright and perfect in them according to my
will, then shall thou live, and not dye. Here is eternal lyse promised with
this condition, so that they keep and observe the law. But such was the
frailty of mankind after his fall, such was his weakness and imbecilitie,
that he could not walk vpryghtly in Gods commandments though he would
never so feign, but daily and hourly fell from his bounden duty, offending
the Lord his God diverse ways, to the great increase of his condempnation,
insomuch that the prophet David cries out on this wise: All have gone Psalm.
5.
astray, all are become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one.
In this case what profit could he have by the law? None at all. For as saint
James says, He that shall observe Jacob. 2.
the whole law, and yet fails in one point, is become guilty of all. And in
the book of Deuteronomie it is written, Cursed be he (says God) Deuteronomy. 27.
which abides not in all things that are written in the book of the law to
do them. Behold, the law brings a curse with it, and makes us guilty, not
because it is of it self naught or unholy (God forbid we should so think) but
because the frailty of our sinful flesh is such, that we can never fulfill
it, according to the perfection that the Lord requires. Could Adam then
(think you) hope or trust to be saved by the law? No, he could not. But the
more he looked on the law, the more he saw his own dampnation set before his
eyes, as it were in a most clear glass. So that now of him self he was most
wretched and miserable, destitute of all hope, and never able to pacify Gods
heavy displeasure, nor yet to escape the terrible judgment of God, wherinto
he and all his posterity were fallen, by disobeying the straight commandment
of the Lord their God. But O the aboundaunt riches of Gods Romans 11.
great mercy. O the unspeakable goodness of his heavenly wysoome. When all hope
of righteousness was past on our part, when we had nothing in our selves,
whereby we might quench his burning wrath, and work ye salvation of our own
souls, and rise out of the miserable estate wherein we lay: Then, even then did
Christ the son of God, by the appointment of his father, come down from
heaven, to be wounded for our sakes, to be reputed with the wicked, to be
condemned unto death, to take upon him the reward of our sins, and to give
his body to be broken on the cross for our offenses. He (says ye prophet
Esai, Esai. 55.
meaning Christ) has borne our infirmities, and has carried our sorrows, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes are we made whole.
Saint Paul like wise says: God made 2. Cor. 5.
him a sacrifice for our sins, which knew not sin, that we should be made
the righteousness of God by him. And saint Peter most agreeably writing in
this behalf, says: Christ has once died and suffered for our sins, the
just for ye unjust, etc. To these might be added an infinite number of other
places to the same effect: but these few shall be sufficient for this time. Now
then (as it was said at ye beginning) let us ponder and weigh the cause of his
death, that thereby we may be the more moved to glorify him in our whole life.
Which if you will have comprehended briefelye in one word, it was nothing else
in our part, but only the transgression and sin of mankind. When the
angel came to warn Joseph, that he should not fear to take Mary to his wife:
Did he not therefore will ye childs name to he called Jesus, because, he
should save his people from their sins? When John the Baptist preached
Christ, and she wed him to the people with John. 1.
his finger: Did he not plainly say unto them, Behold the lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world? When the woman of Canaan besought Christ
to help her daughter Matthew. 15.
which was possessed with a devil: did he not openly confess that he was sent to
save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, by giving his life for their
sins? It was sin then, O man, eue^ thy sin that caused Christ the only
son of God to be crucified in the flesh, and to suffer the most vile and
slanderous death of the cross. If thou had kept thy self vyryght, if
thou had observed the commandments, if thou had not Romans 5.
presumed to transgress the will of God in thy first father Adam: then Christ
being in form of God, needed not to have taken upon him the shape of a
servant: being immortal in heaven, he needed not to become mortal on earth:
being the true bread of the soul, he needed not to hunger: being the
healthful water of life, he needed not to thirst: being life it self, he
needed not to have suffered death. But to these and many other such
extremities, was he driven by thy sin, which was so manifold and great, that
god could be only pleased in him, and none other. Can thou think of this; O
sinful man, and not tremble within thy self? Can thou hear it quietlye
without remorse of conscience, and sorrow of heart? Did Christ suffer his
passion for thee, and Matthew. 27.
wylt thou show no compassion toward him? While Christ was yet hangyng on
the Cross, and yelding up the ghost, the Scripture witnesses that ye vale of
the temple did rent in twain, and the earth did quake, that the stones claue
asunder, that the graves did open, and the dead bodies rise. And shall the
heart of man be nothing moved to remember how grievously and cruelly he was
handled of the Jews for our sins? Shall man show himself to be more hard
hearted then stones, to have less compassion the^ dead bodies? Call to mind,
O sinful creature, and set before thine eyes Christ crucified. Think thou
see his body stretched out in length upon the cross, his head crowned with
sharp thorn, his hands and his feet pearsed with nails, his heart opened
with a long spear, his flesh rent and torn with whippes, his brows
sweating water and blood. Think thou hear him now crying in an
intolerable agony to his father, and saying, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Could thou behold this woeful sight, or hear this mournful
voice without tears, consydering that he suffered all this, not for any desert
of his own, but only for the greeuousnes of thy sins? O that mankind
should put the everlasting son of God to such pains. O that we should be
the occasion of his death, and the only cause of his condempnation. May we not
justly cry woe worth the time that ever we sinned? O my brethren, let this
image of Christ crucified, be always printed in our hearts, let it stir us
up to the hatred of sin, and provoke our minds to the earnest love of
almighty God. For why? Is not sin think you, a grievous thing in his sight,
seeing for the transgressing of Gods precept in eating of one apple, he
condemned all the world to perpetual death, and would not be pacified, but
only with the blood of his own son? True, yea most true is that saying of
David: Thou O Lord, hate all them that work iniquity, neither shall the
wicked and evil man Psalm. 5.
dwell with thee. By the mouth of his prophet Esai, he cries mainely out
against sinners and says: ^o be unto you that draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as it were with cart Esai. 5.
ropes. Did not God give a plain token how greatly he hated and abhored
sin, when he drowned Genesis 7.
all the world save only eight persons, when he destroyed Sodom and Gomorra
with fire and brimstone, when in three days space he killed Genesis 19. 4. Reg.
29.
with pestilence threescore and ten thousand for David's offense, when he
drowned Pharao and al his host in the red sea, when he turned Nabuchodonozor
Exo. 14.
the king into the form of a brute beast, creeping upon all four, when he
suffered Daniel. 14.
Achitophel and Judas to hang them selves upon the remorse of sin, which was
so terrible to their 2. Reg. 17. Actes^.
eyes? A thousand such examples are to be found in scripture, if a man would
stand to seek them out. But what need we? This one example which we have now
in hand, is of more force, and ought more to move us, then all the rest.
Christ being the son of god, and perfect God him self, who never committed
sin; was compelled to come down from heaven, and to give his body to be
bruised and broken on the cross for our sins. Was not this a manifest token
of Gods great wrath and displeasure toward sin, that he could be pacified
by no other means, but only by ye sweet and precious blood of his dear
son? O sin, sin, that ever thou should drive Christ to such
extremity. Woe worth the time that ever thou came into the world. But what
booteth it now to bewail? Sin is come, and so come that it can not be
avoided. There is no Prou. 24.
man living, no not the iustest man on the earth? but he falls seven times a
day, as Solomon says. And our Savior Christ, although he has delivered us
from sin: yet not so that we shall be free from committing sin: But so that
it shall not be imputed to our condempnation. He Romans 6.
has taken upon him the just reward of sin, which was death, and by death
has overthrown death, that we believing in him, might live for ever, and not
dye. Ought not this to engender extreme hatred of sin in us, to consider that
it did violently, as it were, pluck God out of heaven, to make him feel the
horrors and pains of death? O that we would sometimes consider this in the
midst of our pompes and pleasures, it would bridle the outragiousnesse of the
flesh, it would abate and assuage our carnal affectes, it would restrain
our fleshly appetites, that we should not run at randon as we commonly do. To
commit sin wylfully and desperately without fear of god, is nothing else but
to crucify Christ a new, as we are expressly taught in the (...) H^bre. ^
to ye Hebrews. Which thing if it were denc^^ printed in all men's hearts, then
should not sin reign every where so much as it does, to ye great grief and
torment of Christ, now sittyng in heaven. Let us therefore remember, and
always bear in mind Christ crucified, that thereby we may be inwardly moved
both to abhor sin thoroughly, and also with an earnest and zealous heart to
love God. For this is another fruit which the memorial of Christ's death
ought to work in us, an earnest and unfeigned love toward God. So God loved
the world (says John. iii.
saint John) that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believed in
him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. If god declared so great
love toward us his seely creatures: how can we of right but love him again?
Was not this a sure pledge of his love, to give us his own son from heaven?
He might have given us an angel if he would, or some other creature, and yet
should his love have been far above our desartes. Now he gave us not an
angel, but his son. And what son? His only son, his natural son, his
well-beloved son, even that son whom he had made Lord and ruler of al
things. Was not this a singular token of great love? But to whom did he give
him? He gave him to the whole world, that is to say, to Adam and all that
should come after him. O lord what had Adam or any other man deserved at Gods
hands, that he should give us his own son? We are all miserable persons,
sinful persons, dampnable persons, justly driven out of paradise, justly
excluded from heaven, justly condemned to hell fire: And yet (see a wonderful
token of Gods love) he gave us his only be gotten son, us I say, that were
his extreme and deadly enemies, that we by virtue of his blood shed upon ye
cross, might be clean purged from our sins, and made righteous again in
his sight. Who can chose but marvel, to hear that god should she we such
unspeakable love toward us, that were his deadly enemies? Indeed, O mortal
man, thou ought of right to marueyle at it and to acknowledge therein Gods
great goodness and mercy toward mankind, which is so wonderful, that no
flesh, be it never so worldly wise, may well conceive it or express it. For as
Saint Paul testifies, God greatly commends and Romans v.
sets out his love toward us, in that he sent his son Christ to die for
us, when we were yet sinners, and open enemies of his name. If we had in any
manner of wise deserved it at his hands, then had it ben no marvel at all,
but there was no desert on our part wherefore he should do it. Therefore thou
sinful creature, when thou hear that GOD gave his son to dye for the
sins of the world, think not he did it for any desert or goodness that was
in thee, for thou wast then the bondslaue of the devil: But fall down upon
thy knees, and cry with the prophet David, O Lord, what is man, that thou
art so Psalm, viii.
mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou so regardest him? And seeing
he has so greatly loved thee, endeavor thy self to love him again, with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, that therein thou
may appear not to be unworthy of his love. I report me to thine own
conscience, whether thou would not think thy love ill bestowed upon him,
that could not find in his heart to love thee again? If this be true (as it
is most true) then think how greatly it behooves to thy duty to love God,
which has so greatly loved thee, that he has no^ spared his own only son
from so cruel and shameful a death for thy sake. And hitherto concerning the
cause of Christ's death and passion, which as yet was on our part most horrible
and grievous sin, so on the other side it was the free gift of God,
proceeding of his mere and tender love toward mankind, without any merit or
desert of our part. The Lord for his mercies sake grant that we never forget
this great benefit of our salvation in Christ Jesu, but that we always show
our selves thankful for it, abhorring all kind of wickedness and sin, and
applying our minds wholly to the service of God, and the diligent keeping of
his commandments.

Now rests to show unto you, how to apply Christ's death and passion to
our comfort, as a medicine to our wounds, so that it may work the same
effect in us wherefore it was given, namely the health and salvation of our
souls. For as it profits a man nothing to have salve, unless it be well
applied to the part affected: So the death of Christ shall stand us in no
force, unless we apply it to our selves in such sort as God has appointed.
Almighty God commonly works by means, and in this thing he has also
ordained a certain mean, whereby we may take fruit and profit to our souls
health. What mean is that? forsooth it is faith. Not an unconstant or wavering
faith: but a sure, steadfast, grounded, and unfeigned faith. GOD sent his son
into the world (says Saint John.) John. 3.
To what end? that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
life everlasting. Mark these words: that whosoever believes in him. Here is
the mean whereby we must apply the fruits of Christ's death unto our deadly
wound. Here is the mean whereby we must obtain eternal life, namely faith.
For (as saint Paul teaches in his Epistle to the Romans) Romans 10.
With the heart man believes unto ryghteousnes, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation. Paul being demanded of the keeper of yt prison what he
should do to be saved? made Acts. 16.
this answer. Believe in the Lord Jesus, so shall thou and thine house both
be saved. After the Evangelist had described and set forth unto John. 20.
us at large, the life and the death of ye Lord Jesus, in the end he
concludes with these words: These things are written, that we may believe
Jesus Christ to be the son of God, a through says obtain eternal life. To
conclude with the words of saint Paul which are these: Christ is the end of
the law unto salvation, for every Romans 10.
one that does believe. By this then, (...) well perceive, that the only mean
and instrument of salvation required of our parts, is faith, that is to say,
a sure trust and (...) in the mercies of God, Whereby we persuade our selves,
that God both has and (...) our sins, that he has accepted us again into
his savor, that he has released us from the bonds of dampnation, and
received us again into the number of his elect people, not for our merits or
desartes, but only and solely for the merits of Christ's death and passion,
who became man for our sakes, and humbled him self to sustain the reproach of
the cross, that we thereby might be saved, and made inheritours of the
kingdom of heaven. This faith is required at our hands. And this if we keep
steadfastly in our hearts, there is no doubt but we shall obtain salvation at
gods hands, as did Abraham, Isahac, and Jacob, of whom the scripture says,
that they believed, Genesis xv. Rom, vii.
and it was imputed unto them for righteousness. Was it imputed unto them
only? and shall it not be imputed unto us also? Yes, if we have the same faith
as they had, it shall be as truly imputed unto us for righteousness, as it was
unto them. For it is one faith that must save both us and them, even a sure and
steadfast faith in Christ Jesu, who as ye have heard, came into the world for
this end, that whosoever believe in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting. But here we must take heed, that we do John. iii.
not hault with God through an unconstant and wavering says, but that it be
strong and steadfast to our lives end. He that wauereth (says saint James) is
like a wave of the sea, neither let Jacob, (...).
that man think that he shall obtain any thing at Gods hands. Peter coming
to Christ upon the water, because he fainted in faith, was in danger of
drowning. So we, if we begin to Mat. xiiii.
waver or doubt, it is to be feared lest we shall sink as Peter did, not into
the water, but into the bottomless pit of hell fire. Therefore I say unto
you, that we must apprehende the merits of Christ's death and passion by
faith, and that with a strong and steadfast faith, nothing doubting, but that
Christ by his own oblation, and once offering of him self upon the cross,
has taken away our sins, and has restored us again into Gods favor so
fully and perfectly, that no other sacrifice for sin, shall hereafter be
requisite or needful in all the world. Thus have ye heard in few words,
the mean whereby we must apply the fruits and merits of Christ's death unto
us, so that it may work the salvation of our souls, namely a sure, steadfast,
perfect, and grounded faith. For as all they which beheld steadfastly the
brazen serpent, were healed and delivered Number. 21. John. 3.
at the very sight thereof, from their corporal diseases, and bodyly stinges:
even so all they which behold Christ crucified, with a true and lively faith,
shall undoubtedly be delivered from the grievous wounds of the soul, be they
never so deadly or many in number. Therefore (dearly beloved) if we chance at
any time through frailty of the flesh, to fall into sin (as it can not be
chosen, but we must needs fall often) and if we feel the heavy burden thereof
to press our souls, tormenting us with ye fear of death, hell, and
dampnation, let us then use that mean which God has appointed in his word, to
wit, the mean of faith, which is the only instrument of salvation now left
unto us. Let us steadfastly behold Christ crucified with the eyes of our
heart. Let us only trust to be saved by his death and passion, and to have our
sins clean washed away through his most precious blood, that in the end of
the world, when he shall come again to judge both the quick and the dead, he
may receive us into his heavenly kingdom, and place us in the number of his
elect and chosen people, there to be partakers of that immortal and everlasting
life, which he has purchased unto us by virtue of his bloddy wounds: To him
therefore, with the father, and the holy ghost, be al honor and glory, world
without end.

Amen.
An Homilee of the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ. For Easter day.
IF ever at any time ye greatness or excellency of any matter spiritual or
temporal, has stirred up your minds to give diligent ear (good Christian
people, and well-beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) I doubt not but
that I shall have you now at this present season most diligent and ready
hearers of the matter, which I have at this time to open unto you. For I come
to declare that great and most comfortable article of our Christian religion
and faith, the resurrection of our Lord Jesus. So great surely is the matter
of this article, and of so great wayght and importance, that it was thought
worthy to keep our said Savior still on earth forty days after he was
risen from death to life, to the confirmation and stablishment thereof in the
hearts of his disciples. So that (as Luke clearlye testifies in the first
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles) he was conuersaunt with his disciples by
the space of forty days continuallye together, to the intent he would in his
person being now glorified, teach and instruct them, which should be the
teachers of other, fullye and in most absolute and perfect wise, the truth of
this most Christian article, which is the ground and foundation of our whole
religion, before he would ascend up to his father into the heavens, there to
receive the glory of his most triumphant conquest and victory. Assuredly, so
highly comfortable is this article to our consciences, that it is even the very
lock and key of all our Christian religion and faith. If it were not true
(says the holy Apostle Paul) that Christ rose again: then our preaching were
in vain, 1. Cor. 15.
your faith which you have received were but void, ye were yet in the danger
of your sins. If Christ be not risen again (says the apostle) then are they
in very evil case, and utterly perished, that be entered their stepe in Christ,
then are we the most miserable of al men, which have our hope fixed in Christ,
if he be yet under the power of death, and (...) not restored to his bliss
again. But now is he risen again from death (says the Apostle Paul) to be
the first fruits of them that be a sleep, to the intent to raise them to
everlasting life again: Yea, if it were not true that Christ is risen again,
then were it neither true that he is ascended up to heaven, nor that he sent
down from heaven unto us the holy ghost, nor that he sits on the right hand
of his heavenly father, having the rule of heaven and earth, reigning (as the
prophet says) from sea to sea, nor Psalm. 17.
that he should after this world, be the judge as well of the living as of the
dead, to give reward to the good, and judgment to the evil. That these linkes
therefore of our faith should al hang together in steadfast establishment and
confirmation, it pleased our Savior not straight way to withdraw himself
from the bodyly presence and sight of his disciples, but he chose out-^l-dayes,
wherein he would declare unto them by manifold and most strong arguments and
tokens, that he had conquered death, and that he was also truly risen again
to life. He began says Luke) Luke, 24.
at Moses and all the prophets, and expounded unto them the prophesies that
were written in all the scriptures of him, to the intent to confirm the truth
of his resurrection, long before spoken of: which he verified in deed, as it
is declared very apparauntly and manifestlye, by his often appearaunce to sundry
persons at sundry times. First, he sent his angels to the sepulcher, who did
show unto certain women the Matthew. 18.
empty grave, saving that the burial linen remained therein. And by these
signs were these women fully instructed, that he was risen again, and so did
they testify it openly. After this John. 20.
Jesus himself appeared to Marie Magdalen, and after that to certain other
women, and straight afterward he appeared to Peter, then to the two disciples
which were going to Emaus. He 1. Cor. 1^. Luke 24.
appeared to the disciples also, as they were gathered together for fear of
the Jews, the doors shut. At another time he was seen at the sea of John. 21.
Tiberias of Peter and Thomas, and of other disciples, when they were fishyng.
He was seen of more then five hundred brethren in the mount of Galilee, where
Jesus appointed them to be by his angel, when he said: Behold, he shall go
before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him as he has said unto you.
After this, he appeared Act. ^
unto James, and last of all he was visibly seen of all the Apostles, at such
time as he was taken up into heaven* Thus at sundry times he showed himself
after he was risen again, to confyrme and stablish this article. And in these
revelations sometime he showed them his hands, his feet, and his side, and bad
them touch him, that they should not take him for a ghost or a spirit.
Sometime he also did eat with them, but ever he was talkyng with them of the
everlasting kingdom of God, to assure the truth of his resurrection. For then
he opened their understanding, that they might perceive the scriptures, and
Luke 24.
said unto them: Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer,
and to rise from death the third day, and that there should be preached openly
in his name, penance and remission of sins to all the nations of the world.
Ye see (good Christian people) how necessary this article of our faith is,
seeing it was proved of Christ him self by such evident reasons and tokens,
by so long time and space. Now therefore as our savior was diligent for our
comfort and instruction to declare it: so let us be as ready in our belief to
receive it to our comfort and instruction. As he dyed not for him self, no
more did he rise again for him self. He was dead (says Saint Paul) for our
sins, and rose again for our justification. O most comfortable word,
evermore to be borne in remembrance. He dyed (says he) to put away sin, he
arose again to endowe us with righteousness. His death took away sin and
maledictio^, his death was the rau^some of them both, his death destroyed
death, and overcame the devil, which had the power of death in his subjection,
his death destroyed hell, with all the damnation thereof. Thus is death
swallowed up by Christ's victory, thus is hell spoiled for ever. If any man
doubt of this victory, let Christ's glorious resurrection declare him the
thing. If death could i. Cor. xv.
not keep Christ under his dominion and power, but that he arose again, it is
manifest that his power was overcome. If death be conquered, then must it
follow that sin wherefore death was appointed as the wages, must be also
destroyed. If death and sin be vanished away, then is the deuilles tyranny
vanished, which had the power of death, and was the aucthour and brewer of
sin, and the ruler of hell. If Christ had the victory of them all by the power
of his death, and openly proved it by his most victorious and valiant
resurrection (as it was not possible for his great might to be subdued of them)
and then this true that Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: Why may not we that be his members by true faith, rejoice and
boldly say with the prophet Osee, and the Apostle Paul, Where is thy darte O
death? where is thy victory O hell? Thanks be unto God, say they, which has
given us the victory by our Lord Christ Jesus. This mighty conquest of his
resurrection, was not only signified before by diverse figures of the old
Testament, as by Sampson when he slew the Lion, out of whose mouth came
sweetenes and honey, and as David Luke xiiii.
bare his figure when he delivered the lamb out of the Lions mouth, and when
he overcame and slew the great gyaunt Goliath, and as when Jonas 3. Re. xvii,
was swall^wed up of the Whales mouth, Jonas. ii.
and cast up again on land alive: but was also most clearly prophesied by
the prophets of the old Testament, and in the new also confyrmed by the
apostles. He has spoiled, says saint Paul, rule and power, and all the
dominion of our spiritual enemies. He has made a show of them Coloss. ii.
openly, and has triumphed over them in his own person. This is the myghtie
power of the Lord, whom we believe on. By his death, has he wrought for us
this victory, and by his resurrection, has he purchased everlasting life and
righteousness for us. It has not ben enough to be delivered by his death from
sin, except by his resurrection we had been endowed with ryghteousnes. And it
should not avail us to be delivered from death, except he had risen again to
open for us the gates of heaven, to enter into life everlasting. And therefore
saint Peter thanketh God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ for 1. Pet. 1.
his aboundaunt mercy, because he has begotten us (says he) unto a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from death, to enjoy an inheritance
immortal, that never shall perish, which is laid up in heaven for them that be
kept by the power of God through faith. Thus has his resurrection wrought for
us life and righteousness. He passed through death and hell, to the intent to
put us in good hope, that by his strength we shall do the same. He paid the
ransom of sin, that it should not be laid to our charge. He destroyed the
devil and all his tyranny, and openly triumphed over him, and took away from
him all his captives, and has raised and set Ephesians. 2.
them with himself amongst the heavenly Citezins above. He dyed to destroy the
rule of the devil in us, and he rose again to send down his holy spirit to
rule in our hearts, to endowe us with perfect righteousness. Thus it is true
that David song: Veritas de terra orta est, et iustitia de Psalm. 84.
coelo prospexit, The truth of gods promise is in the earth to man declared,
or from the earth is the everlasting verity Gods son risen to life, and
Ephe. 4. Captinam duxit captinitatem*
the true righteousness of the holy ghost lookyng out of heaven, and is in
most liberal larges dealt upon all the world. Thus is glory and praise
rebounded upward to God above for his mercy and truth. And thus is peace
come down from heaven to men of good and faithful hearts. Thus is mercy and
truth as David writes Luke 2. Psalm. 84.
together met, thus is peace and righteousness imbrasing and kissing each
other. If thou doubtest of so great wealth and felicity that is wrought
Misericordia and veritas obuiauerunt sibi.
for thee O man, call to thy mind that therefore haste thou received into
thine own possession the everlasting verity our savior Jesus Christ, to
confyrme to thy conscience the truth of all this matter. Thou have received
him, yfin true faith and repentance of heart thou haste received him: if in
purpose of amendment, thou haste received him for an everlasting gage or
pledge of thy salvation. Thou have received his body which was once broken, and
his blood which was shed for the remission of thy sin. Thou have received
his body, to have within thee the father, the son, and the holy ghost, for to
dwell with thee, to endow thee with grace, to strength thee against thine
enemies, and to comfort thee with their presence. Thou have received his body
to endow thee with everlasting righteousness, to assue thee of everlasting
bliss, and life of thy soul. (...)r with Christ by true faith art thou
quickened again (says saint Paul) from death Ephesians. ^.
of sin, to life of grace, and in hope translated from corporal and
everlasting death, to the everlasting life of glory in heaven, where now thy
conversation should be, and thy heart and desire set. Doubt not of the truth
of this matter, how great and high soever these things be. It becomes God to
do no little deeds, how impossible so ever they seem to thee. Pray to God that
thou may have faith to perceive this great mystery of Christ's
resurrection: that by fayt^ thou may certaynely believe nothing to be
impossible with God. Only bring thou faith to Christ's holy word and
sacrament. Let thy repentance Luke 18.
show thy faith, let thy purpose of amendment and obedience of thy heart to
Gods law, hereafter declare thy true belief. Endeavor thy self to say with
Saint Paul, From henceforth our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
look for a savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile
bodies, that they may be fashioned like his glorious body, which he shall do by
the same power whereby Phil. 4.
he rose from death, and whereby he shall be able to subdue all things unto him
self. Thus (good Christian people) forasmuch as ye have heard these so great
and excellent benefits of Christ's myghtie and glorious resurrection, as how
that he has raunsomed sin, overcome the devil, death, and hell, and has
victoriouslye gotten the better hand of them all, to make us free and safe
from them, and knowing that we be by this benefit of his resurrection, risen
with him by our faith, unto life everlasting, being in full surety of our
hope, that we shall have our bodies likewise raised again from death, to have
them glorified in immortality, and joined to his glorious body, having in the
mean while his holy spirit within our hearts as a seal and pledge of our
everlasting inheritance. By whose assistence we be replenished with all
ryghteousnes, by whose power we shall be able to subdue all our evil affections,
rysyng against the pleasure of God. These things I say well considered, let us
now in the rest of our life declare our faith that we have to this most
fruitful article, by framyng our selves thereunto, in rysyng daily from sin,
to righteousness and holiness of life. For what shall it avail us (says saint
Peter) to be escaped and delivered from the 2. Pet. 2.
filthynesse of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and savior
Jesus Christ, if we be entangled again therewith, and be overcome again?
Certaynely it had been better (says he) never to have known the way of
righteousness, then after it is known and received, to turn backwarde again
from the holy commandment of God given unto us. For so shall the proverb
have place in us, where it is said: The dog is returned to his vomit
again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowyng in the mire again. What
a shame were it for us, being thus so clearly and freely washed from our
sin, to return to the filthynesse thereof again? What a folly were it,
thus endowed with righteousness, to lose it again? What madness were it, to
lose the inheritance that we be now set in, for the vile and transitory
pleasure of sin? And what an unkindness should it be, where our savior
Christ of his mercy is come to us, to dwell within us as our g^este, to drive
him from us, and to banishe him violently out of our souls, and in stead of
him in whom is all grace and virtue, to receive the ungracious spirit of the
deuyil, the founder of all naughtines and mischief. How can we find in our
hearts to show such extreme unkindness to Christ, which has now so
gently called us to mercy, and offered him self unto us, and he now entered
within us? yea, how dare we be so bold to renounce the presence of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost? (For where one is, there is God all
whole in majesty, together with all his power, wisdom, and goodness) and
fear not I say, the danger and peril of so traitorous a defiaunce and
departure? Good Christian brethren and sisters advise your selves, consider the
dignite that ye be now set in, let not folly lose the thing that grace has
so preciously offered and purchased, let not wylfulnesse and blindness put out
so great light that is now showed unto you. Only take good hearts unto Ephesians.
6.
you, and put upon you all the armor of God, that ye may stand against your
enemies, which would again subdue you, and bring you into their thraldom.
Remember ye be bought from your vain conversation, and that your freedom is
purchased neither with gold nor silver, but 1, Pet. 1.
with the price of the precious blood of that most innocent lamb Jesus
Christ, which was ordained to the same purpose before the world was made. But
he was so declared in the latter time of grace, for your sakes which by him
have your faith in God, who has raised him from death, and has given him
glory, that you should have your faith and hope toward God. Therefore as you
have hitherto followed the vain lusts of your minds, and so displeased God,
to the danger of your souls: So now like obedient children, thus purified by
faith, give your selves to walk that way which God moves you to, that ye may
receive the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls. And as ye have
given 1. Pet. 1.
your bodies to unrighteous, to sin after sin: so now give your self to
ryghteousnes, to be sanctified therein. If ye delyght in this article of your
faith, that Christ is risen again from death Romans 6.
to life: then follow you the example of his resurrection, as Saint Paul
exhorts us, saying: As we be buried with Christ by our baptism into death,
so let us daily dye to sin, mortifiyng Romans 6.
and kylling the evil desires and motions thereof. And as Christ was raised up
from death by the glory of the father, so let us rise to a new life, and
walk continually therein, that we may likewise as natural children live a
conversation to move men to glorify our father which is in heaven. If we then
be risen with Christ by our faith to the hope of everlasting life: let us rise
also Mat. 5.
with Christ, after his example, to a new life, and leave our old. We shall
then be truly risen, if we seek for things that be heavenly, if we have our
affection on things that be above, and not on things that be on the earth. If
ye desire to know what these earthly things be which ye should put of, and
what be the heavenly things above, that ye should seek and ensue: saint Paul
in the Epistle to the Collossians declares, when he exhorts us thus:
Mortify your Coloss. 3.
earthly members and old affections of sin, as fornication, uncleanness,
unnatural lust, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is worshipping
of idols, for the which things, the wrath of god is wont to fall on the
children of unbelief, in which things once ye walked, when ye lived in them.
But now put ye also away from you wrath, fiercenes, malitiousnes, cursed
speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouths. Lie not one to another, that
the old man with his works be put of, and the new be put on. These be the
earthly things which. S. Paul moves you to cast from you, and to pluck
your hearts from them: For in following these, ye declare your selves earthly
and worldly. These be the fruits of the earthly Adam. These should you daily
kill, by good diligence, in withstandyng the desires of them, that ye might rise
to righteousness. Let your affection from henceforth be set on heavenly
things, sue and search for mercy, kyndnesse, meekenes patience, forbearing
one another, and forgeuyng one another. If any man have any quarrel to
another, as Christ forgave you, even so doye. If these and such other
heavenly virtues ye ensue in the residue of your life, ye shall show plainly
that ye be risen with Christ, and that ye be the heavenly children of your
father in heaven, from whom, as from the geuer comes these graces and gifts.
Ye shall prove by this Jacob. 1.
manner, that your conversation is in heaven, where your hope is: and not on
earth* following the beastly appetites of the flesh. Ye must consider that ye
be therefore cleansed and renewed, that ye Phil. 3.
should from henceforth serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days
of your lives, that ye may reign with them in everlasting life. If ye refuse
so great grace whereto ye be called, what Luke 1.
other thing do ye, then heap to you damnation more and more, and so provoke
God to cast his displeasure unto you, and to revenge this mockage of his holy
sacraments in so great abusyng of them? Apply your selves (good friends) to
live in Christ, that Christ may still live in you, whose favor and assistence
if ye have, then have ye everlasting life alredye within you, then can nothing
hurt you. Whatsoever is hitherto done and committed, Christ ye se has offered
you pardon, and clearly received you to his favor again, in full surety
whereof, ye have him now inhabiting and dwelling John. 5.
within you. Only show yourselues thankful in your lives, determine with your
selves to refuse and avoid al such things in your conuersations Coloss. 3.
as should offend his eyes of mercy. Endeavor your selves that way to rise up
again, which way ye fell into the well or pit of sin. If by your tongue ye have
offended, now thereby rise again, and glorify God therewith, accustom it to
laud and praise the name of God, as ye have there with dishonored it. And as
ye have hurt the name of your neighbor, or otherwise hindered him, so now
intend to restore it to him again. For without restitution, God accepts not
your Restitution.
confession, nor yet your repentance It is not enough to forsake evil, except
you set your courage to do good. By what occasion soever you have offended,
turn now the occasion to the honoring Psalm 36.
of God, and profit of your neighbor. Truth it is that sin is strong, and
affections unruly. Hard it is to subdue and resist our nature, so corrupt and
leauened with the sour bitterness of the poison which we received by the
inheritance of our old father Adam. But yet take good courage Mat. 6.
says our savior Christ, for I have overcome the world, and all other
enemies for you. Sin shall not have power over you, for ye be now under grace
says saint Paul. Though your Romans 6.
power be weak, yet Christ is risen again to strength you in your battle,
his holy spirit shall help your infirmities. In trust of his mercy, take you
in hand to purge this old leaven Romans 8.
of sin, that corrupts and sowreth the sweetenes of your life before God,
that ye may be as new and fresh dowe, void of all sour leaven of
wickedness, so shall ye show your selves to be 1. Cor. 5.
sweet bread to God, that he may have his delyght in you. I say kill and
offer you up the worldly and earthly affections of your bodies. For Christ our
Easter lamb is offered up for us, to slay the power of sin, to deliver us
from the danger thereof, and to give us example to dye to sin in our life. As
the Jews did eat their Easter lamb, and kept their feast in remembrance of
their deliverance out of Egypt: Even so let us keep our Easter feast in the
thankful remembrance of Christ's benefits, which he has plentifully
wrought for us by his resurrection and passing to his father, whereby we be
delivered from the captivity and thraldom of all our enemies. Let us in like
manner pass over the affections of our old conversation, that we may be
delivered from the bondage thereof, and rise with Christ. The Jews kept their
feast in abstayning from leauened bread by the space of seven days. Let Exodus
7.
us Christian folk keep our holy day in spiritual manner, that is in
abstainyng, not from material leauened bread, but from the old leaven of sin,
the leaven of malitiousnes and wickedness. Let us cast from us the leaven of
corrupt doctrine, that will infect our souls. Let us keep our feast the whole
term of our life, with eating the bread of pureness of godly life, and truth
of Christ's doctrine. Thus shall we declare that Christ's gifts and graces have
their effect in us, and that we have the right belief and knowledge of his
holy resurrection: where truly if we apply our faith to the virtue thereof,
and in our life confourme us to the example and signification meant thereby, we
shall be sure to rise hereafter to everlasting glory, by the goodness and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be all
glory, thanks geuyng, and praise, in infinita seculorum secula.

Amen.
An homilee of the worthy receauyng and reverent esteeming of the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ.
THE great love of our Savior Christ toward mankind (good Christian people)
does not only appear in that dear bought benefit of our redemption and
salvation by his death and passion, but also in that he so kindlye provided,
that the same most mercyful work might be had in continual remembrance, to
take some place in us, and not be frustrate of his end and purpose. For as
tender parents are not content to procure for their children costly
possessions and liuelode, but take order that the same may be conserved and
come to their use: So our Lord and savior thought it not sufficient to
purchase for us his fathers favor again (which is that deep fountain of
all goodness and eternal life) but also invented the ways most wisely,
whereby they might redound to our commodity and profit. Amongst the which
means, is the public celebration of the memory of his precious death at the
Lords table. Which although it seem of small virtue to some, yet being
ryghtly done by the faithful, it does not only help their weakness (who be
by their poisoned nature redyer to remember injuries then benefits) but
strengthens and comfort their in ward man with peace and gladness, and
makes them thankful to their redeemer, with diligent care and godly
conversation. And as of old time God decreed his wondrous benefits of the
delyueraunce of his people Exodus xii.
to be kept in memory by the eating of the passover, with his rites and
ceremonies: So our loving Savior has ordained and establyshed the
remembrance of his great mercy expressed in his passion, in the institution
of his heavenly supper, where every one of us must be Mat. xxvi. i. Cor. xi.
ghestes and not gasers, eaters, and not lookers, seedyng our selves, and not
hiryng other to feed for us, that we may live by our own meat, and not
perish for hunger, whiles other devour all. To this his commandment forces
us, saying: Luke 22. i. Cor. xi. Mat. xxvi
Do ye thus, drink ye all of this. To this his promise enticeth: This is my
body which is given for you, this is my blood which is shed for you. So then
as of necessity we must be our selves partakers of this table, and not
beholders of other: So we must address our selves to frequent the same in
reverent and due manner, least as phisike provided for the body, being misused,
more hurts then profits: so this comfortable medicine of the soul
indecently received, tends to our greater harm and sorrow. And saint Paul i.
Cor. xi.
says: He that eats and drynketh unworthily, eats and drynketh his own
dampnation. Wherefore that it be not said to us, as it was to the ghest of
that great supper, Freende how came Mat. xxii.
thou in, not having the marriage garment? And that we may fruitfully use Saint
Paul's counsel, Let a man prove him self, and so eat i. Cor. xi.
of that bread, and drink of that cup: We must certaynelye know, that
three things be requisite in him which would seemly, as becomes such high
mysteries, resort to the Lords table. That is, First, a right and a worthy
estimation and understanding of this mystery. Secondely, to come in a sure
faith. And thirdely, to have newenesse or pureness of life to succeed the
receiving the same.

But before all other things, this we must be sure of especially, that this
Supper be in such wise done and ministered, as our Lord and savior did, and
commanded to be done, as his holy Apostles used it, and the good fathers in
the primative Church frequented it. For (as that worthy man saint Ambrose
says) he is unworthy of the Lord, that otherwise does celebrate that mystery,
then it was delivered by him. Neither can he be devout, that other ways does
presume the^ it was given by the aucthor. We must then take heed least of the
memory it be made a sacrifice, least of a communion it be made a private
eating, least of two parts we have but one, least applying it for the dead, we
lose the fruit that be alive. Let us rather in these matters follow the advice
of Ciprian in the like cases, that is, cleave fast to the first beginning,
hold fast the Lords tradition, do that in the Lords co^memoration which he
him self did, he him self commanded, and his apostles confirmed. This
caution or foresight if we use, then may we see to those things that be
requisite in the worthy receauer, whereof this was the first, that we have a
right understanding of the thing it self. As concerning which thing, this we
may assuredlye persuade our selves, that the ignorant man can neither
worthyly esteem, nor effectually use those marvelous graces and benefits
offered and exhibited in that Supper: but either will lightly regard them, to
no small offense, or utterly condemn them, to his utter destruction. So that
by his negligence he deserves the plagues of God to fall upon him, and by
contempt he deserves everlasting perdition. To avoid then these harms, use
the advice of the wise man, who wylleth thee when thou sit at an earthlye
kings table, Pro. xxiii.
to take diligent heed what things are set before thee: So now much more at
the king of kings table, thou must carefully: search and know what dainties
are provided for thy soul, whyther thou art come, not to feed thy senses and
belly to corruption, but thy in ward man to immortality and life, nor to
consider the earthlye creatures which thou see, but the heavenly graces
which thy, faith beholds. For this table is not (says Chrysostom) for
chattering Jayes, but for Egles, who flee thither where the dead body lies.
And if this advertisement of man can not persuade us to resort to the lords
table with understanding: see the counsel of GOD in the like matter, who
charged his people to teach their posterity, not only the rites and
ceremonies of the Passover, but the cause and end thereof. Whence we may
learn, that both more perfect knowledge is required at this time at our
hands, and that the ignorant can not with fruit and profit exercise him
self in the Lords Sacraments. But to come nygher to the matter, Saint Paul
blaming the Corinthians for the profaning of the Lords supper, concludes
that ignorance both of the thing it self; and the signification thereof, was
the cause of their abuse: for they came thither irreverently, not discerning
the Lords body. Ought not we then by the monition of the wise man, by the
wisdom of God, by the fearful example of the Corinthians, to take advised
heed, that we thrust not our selves to this table, with rude and vnreuerent
ignorance, the smart whereof Christ's Church has rued and lamented these
many days and years? For what has been the cause of the ruin of Gods
religion, but the ignorance hereof? What has been the cause of this gross
idolatry, but the ignorance hereof? What has been the cause of this mummishe
massyng, but the ignorance hereof? Yea what has been, and what is at this day
the cause of this want of love and charity, but the ignorance hereof? Let us
therefore so travail to understand the Lords Supper, that we be no cause of
the decay of Gods worship, of no idolatry, of no dumme massing, of no hate
and malice, so may we the boldlyer have access thither to our comfort.
Neither need we to think that such exact knowledge is required of every man,
that he be able to discuss al high points in the doctrine thereof: But this
much he must be sure to hold, that in the supper of the Lord there is no
vain i. Cor. xi.
ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent: But (as the
Scripture says) the Mat. xxvi.
table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the Lord, the memory of Christ,
the annuntiation i. Cor. x.
of his death, yea the Communion of the body and blood of the Lord, in a
marvelous incorporation, which by the operation of the holy ghost (the very
bond of our con^unction with Christ) is through faith wrought in the souls
of the faithful, whereby not only their souls live to eternal life, but
they surely trust to win to their bodies a resurrection to immortality. The
true understanding of this Irene. lib. 4. cap. 34.
fruition and union, which is the body and the head betwixt the true beleuers
and Christ: the ancient Catholic Fathers, both perceauing them selves, and
commendyng to their people, Igna. Epi. ad Ephe. Dionisi. Origin. Optat.
were not afraid to call this Supper, some of them, the salve of immortality
and sovereign preservative against death, other, a deificall Communion, other,
the sweet dainties of our Savior, the pledge of eternal health, the defense
of faith, the hope of the resurrection, Ciprian. De coena Domini. Athanas. de
pecca. in spiritu sancto.
other the food of immortality, the healthful grace, and the conseruatorie
to everlasting life. All which sayings, both of the holy Scripture and godly
men, truly attributed to this celestial banquet and feast, if we would often
call to mind, O how would they inflame our hearts to de(...)e the
participation of these mysteries, and oftentimes to covet after this bread,
continuallye to thirste for this food? Not as specially regarding the terrene
and earthly creatures which remain: but always holdyng fast and cleauyng by
faith to the rock whence we may suck the sweetness of everlasting
salvation? And to be brief, thus much more the faithful see, hear, and know
the favorable mercies of God sealed, the satisfaction by Christ toward us
confirmed, and the remission of sin established. Here they may feel wrought
the tranquillity of conscience, the increase of faith, the strengthening of
hope, the large spreadyng abroad of brotherly kindness, with many other sundry
graces of God. The taste whereof they can not attain unto, who be drowned in
the deep durtie lake of blyndnesse and ignorance. From the which (O beloved)
wash your selves with the living waters of Gods word, whence you may
perceive and know, both the spiritual food of this costly supper, and the
happy trustinges and effects that the same does bring with it.

Now it follows to have with this knowledge a sure and constant faith, not
only that the death of Christ is auayleable for the redemption of all the
world, for the remission of sins, and reconciliation with God the father: but
also that he has made upon his cross a full and sufficient sacrifice for
thee, a perfect clensyng of thy sins, so that thou acknowledgest no other
Savior, redeemer, mediator, advocate, intercessour, but Christ only, and
that thou may say with the Apostle, that he loved thee, and gave him self
for thee. For this is to stick fast to Christ's promise made in his
institution, to make Christ thine own, and to applicate his merits unto thy
self. Herein thou nedest no other man's help, no other sacrifice or oblation,
no sacrifisyng Priest, no mass, no means established by man's invention. That
faith is a necessary instrument in all these holy ceremonies, we may thus
assure our selves, for that as Saint Paul says, without faith it is impossible
to please god. When a great Hebr. xi.
number of the Israelites were overthrown in the wilderness, Moses, Aaron,
and Phinees did eat Manna, and pleased God, for that they understood (says
Saint Augustine) the visible In Johan. Hom. vi.
meat spiritually. Spiritually they hungered it, spiritually they tasted it,
that they might be spiritually satisfied. And truly as the bodily meat can
not feed the outward man, unless it be let into a stomach to be digested,
which is healthsome and sound: No more can thy inward man be fed, except his
meat bereceaued into his^oule, and heart sound and whole in faith. Therefore
(says De coena Domini.
Ciprian) when we do these things, we need not to whet our teethe: but with
sincere faith we break and divide that holy bread. It is well known, that the
meat we seek for in this supper, is spiritual food, the norishme^t of our
soul a heavenly refection, and not earthly, an invisible meat, and not
bodylye, a ghostly substance, and not carnal, so that to think that without
faith we may enjoy the eating and drynkyng thereof, or that that is the
fruition of it, is ^ut to dream a gross carnal feeding, basely obiecting and
byndyng our selves to the elements and creatures: Whereas by the advice of the
counsel of Nicene, we ought to lift up our minds by Conciliu Nicen.
faith, and leaving these inferior and earthly things, there seek it, where
the s^nne of righteousness ever shines. Take then this lesson (O thou that
art desirous of this table) of Emissenus a Eusebius. Emiss. Sermon de Eucha.
godly father, that when thou go up to the reverent Communion, to be
satisfied with spiritual meats, thou look up with faith upon the holy body
and blood of thy god, thou marvel with reverence, thou touch it with thy
mind, thou receive it with the hand of thy heart, and thou take it fully with
thy inward man.

Thus we see (beloved) that resortyng to this table, we must pluck up all the
roots of infidelity, al distrust in Gods promises, we must make our selves
living members of Christ's body. For the unbelievers and faithless, can not
feed upon that precious body: whereas the faithful have their life, their
abiding in him, their vnio^, and as it were their incorporation with him.
Wherefore let us prove and try our selves vufaignedly, without flattering our
selves, whether we be plants of that fruitful Olive, living branches of the
true vine, members in deed of Christ's mystical body, whether God has
purified our hearts by faith, to the sincere acknowledging of his Gospel, and
embracing of his mercies in Christ Jesu, that so at this his table we receive
not only the outward Sacrament, but the spiritual thing also, not the figure,
but the truth, not the shadow only, but the body, not to death, but to life,
not to destruction, but to salvation: which God grant us to do, through the
merits of our Lord and Savior, to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee, of the worthy receiving and reverent
esteeming of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.
IN the Homilee of late rehearsed unto you, ye have heard (good people) why it
pleased our savior Christ to institute that heavenly memory of his death and
passion, and that every one of us ought to celebrate the same at his table, in
our own persons, and not by other. You have heard also with what estimation
and knowledge of so high mysteries, we ought to resort thither. You have heard
with what constant faith we should clothe and deck our selves, that we might
be fit and decent partakers of that celestial food.

Now follows the third thing necessary in him that would not eat of this
bread, nor drink of this cup unworthily, which is, newness of life, and
godliness of conversation. For newenesse of life, as fruits of faith are
required in the partaker of this table. ^e may learn by the eating of the
tipicall lamb, whereunto no man was admitted, but he that was a Jewe, that was
circumcized, that was before sancti^^ed. Yea, Saint Paul testifies, that
although i. Cor. x.
the people were partakers of the Sacraments under Moses, yet for that some
of them were still worshippers of images, whoremongers, tempters of Christ,
murmurers, and coveting after evil things: God ouerthrewe those in the
wilderness, and that for our example, that is, that we Christians should take
heed we resort unto our Sacraments with holiness of life, not trustyng in
the outward receiving of them, and infected with corrupt and uncharitable
manners. For this sentence of GOD must always be justified: I will have mercy
and not sacrifice. Wherefore (^ayth Bas^l) De Bapt. lib. i. ca, iii*
it behooves him that comes to the body and blood of Christ in
commemoration of him that dyed and rose again, not only to be pure from all
filthynesse of the flesh and spirit, least he eat and drink to his
condempnation: but also to show out evidently, a memory of him that dyed and
rose again for us, in this point, that he be mortified to sin and the world,
to live now to God in Christ Jesu our Lord. So then we must show outward
testimony, in following the signification of Christ's death, amongst the which
this is not esteemed least, to render thanks to almighty God for all his
benefits, briefly comprised in the death, passion, and resurrection of his
dearly beloved son. The which thing, because we ought chiefly at this table
to solempnise, the godly fathers named it Eucharistia, that is, thankesgeuing.
As if they should have said, Now above all other times ye ought to laud and
praise God. Now may you behold the matter, the cause, the beginning and the
end of all thankesgeuing. Now if you stacke, ye show your selves most
unthankful, and that no other benefit can ever stir you to thank God, who
so little regard here so many, so wonderful, and so profitable benefits.
Seeing then that the Heb. xxiii
name and thing it self does monishe us of thanks, let us (as saint Paul
says) offer always to god, the host or sacrifice of praise by Christ, that
is, the fruit of the lips which confess his name. For as David sings: He
that offers to God Psalm. l.
thanks and praise, honors him. But how few be there of thankful
persons, in comparison Luke. xvii
to the unthankful? Lo ten Lepers in the Gospel were healed, and but one
only returned to give thanks for his health. Yea happy it were, if among
forty Communicantes, we could see two unfeignedly give thanks. So unkind
we be, so obliuious we be, so proud beggars we be, that partly we care not for
our own commodity, partlye we know not our duty to God, and chiefly we
will not confess all that we receive. Yea, and if we be forced by Gods power
to do it: yet we handle it so coldely, so drylye, that our lips praise him,
but our hearts disprayse him, our tongues bless him, but our life curses
him, our words worship him, but our works dishonor him. O let us therefore
learn to give God here thanks aright, and so to agnise his exceeding graces
powered upon us, that they being shut up in the treasure house of our heart,
may in due time and season in our life and conversation, appear to the
glorifying of his holy name. Furthermore, for newenesse of life, it is to be
noted that Saint Paul writes: that we being many, are one bread and one body.
For all be partakers of one bread. Declaring thereby, not only our Communion
with Christ, but that unity also, wherein they that eat at this table, should
be knitte together. For by discention, vaineglory, ambition, strise, envying,
contempt, hatred, or malice, they should not be disseuered: but so joined by
the bond of love, in one mystical body, as the corns of that bread in one
lofe. In respect of which strait knot of charity, the true Christians in the
tender time of Christ's Church, called this supper, love. As if they should
say, none ought to sit down there, that were out of love and charity, who
bore grudge and vengeance in his heart, who also did not profess his kind
affection by some charitable relief, for some part of ye congregation. And
this was their practice. O heavenly ^anket then so used. O godly ghestes, who
so esteemed this feast. But O wretched creatures that we be at these days, who
be without reconciliation of our brethren who^ we have offended, without
satisfying them whom we have caused to fall, without any kind of thought or
compassion toward them who^ we might easyly relieve, without any conscience of
slander, disdain, misr^poet, division, rancour, or inward bitterness. Yea,
being accombred with the cloked hatred of Caine, with the long covered malice
of Genesis iiii. Genesis xxvii ii. Sam. iii.
Esau, with the dissembled falsehood of Ioab, dare ye presume to come up to
these sacred and fearful mysteries? O man, whyther rushest thou unadvisedly?
It is a table of peace, and thou art ready to fight. It is a table of singlenes,
and thou art imagining mischief. It is a table of quietness, and thou art
given to debate. It is a table of pity, and thou art unmerciful. Do thou
neither fear GOD the maker of this feast? nor reverence his Christ the
refection and meat? nor regardest his spouse his beloved ghest? nor weighest
thine own conscience which is sometime thine inward accuser? Wherefore (O man)
tender thine own salvation, examine and try thygood will and love toward the
children of God, the members of Christ, the heirs of the heavenly heritage:
yea, toward the image of GOD, the excellent creature thine own soul. If
thou have offended, now be reconciled. If thou have caused any to stumble in
the way of God, now set them up again. If thou have disquieted thy brother,
now pacitie him. If thou have wronged him, now relief him. If thou have
defrauded him, now restore to him. If thou have nourished spite, now embrace
frendshippe. If thou have fostred hatred and malice, now openly show thy love
and charity, yea be ^^este and redye to procure thy neighbors health of
soul, wealth, commodity, and pleasure as thine own. Deserve not the heavy
and dreadful burden of Gods displeasure for thine evil will toward thy
neighbor, so irreverently to approach to this table of the Lord. Last of
all, as there is here the mystery of Chrisost. ad popu. Ant. Homi. 6.
peace, and the Sacrament of Christian society, whereby we understand what
sincere love ought to be betwixt the true communicantes: So here be the tokens
of pureness and innocence of life, whereby we may perceive that we ought to
purge our own soul from all uncleanness, iniquity, and wickedness, lest
when we receive the mystical bread (as Origin says) we eat it in an unclean
place, that is, in a soul defiled and polluted with sin. In Moses law, the
man In Leuit. Cap. xxiii i. Cor. xi. Luke. xvii Hom. xiiii
that did eat of the sacrifice of thankesgenyng, with his uncleanness upon
him, should be destroyed from his people. And shall we think that the wicked
and sinful person shall be excurable at the table of the Lord? ^e both ^eade in
S. Paul, that the Church at Corinth, was scourged of the Lord, for misusing
the Lords supper, and we may plainelye see Christ's Church these many years
miserably vexed and oppressed, for the horrible profanation of the same.
Wherefore let us al universal and singular, behold our own manners and lives,
to amend them. Yea now at the least, let us call our selves to an account,
that it may grieve us of our former evil conversation, that we may hate sin,
that we may sorrow and mourn for our offenses, that we may with tears power
them out before god, that we may with sure trust desire and crave the salve of
his mercy, bought and purchased with the blood of his dearelye beloved son
Jesus Christ, to heal our deadly wounds withal. Chrisost. ad popu. Ant.
Homi. 6.
For surely if we do not with earnest repentance cleanse the filthy stomach of
our soul, it must needs come to pass, that as wholesome meat received into a
raw stomach corrupts and marreth all, and is the cause of further
sickness: so shall we eat this healthsome bread, and drink this cup to our
eternal destruction. This we, and not other, must thoroughly examine, and not
lightly look over our selves, not other men, our own conscience, not other
men's lives: which we ought to do vpryghtly, truly, and with just correction.
O (says Chrysostom) let no Judas resort to this table, let no covetous
person approach. Ad popu. Ant. Homi. 6. Mat. xxvi.
If any be a disciple, let him be present. For Christ says, With my disciples
I make my Passover. Why cried the Deacon in the primative Church, If any be
holy, let him draw near? Why did they celebrate these mysteries, the quier
door being shut? Why were the public penitentes and learners in religion,
commanded at this time to avoid? Was it not because this table received no
unholy, unclean, or sinful ghestes? Wherefore, if servants dare not
presume to an earthly masters table, whom they have offended: Let us take
heed we come not with our sins unexamined, into this presence of our Lord
and judge? If they be worthy blame, which kiss the Princes hand with a filthy
and unclean mouth: shall thou be blameless which with a filthy stinking
soul, full of covetousness, fornication, drunkenness, pride, full of wretched
cogitations and thoughts, do breath out iniquity and uncleanness on the
bread and cup of the Lord. Thus have you heard, how you should Epilog.
come reverently and decentlye to the table of the Lord, having the knowledge
out of his word, of the thing it self, and the fruits thereof, bringing a
true and constant faith, ye root and welspring of all newnes of life, as well
in praising God, and loving our neighbor, as purging our own conscience from
filthiness. So that neither the ignorance of the thing shall cause us to
contempne it, nor unfaithfulness make us void of fruit, nor sin and
iniquity procure us Gods plagues: but shall by faith, in knowledge and
amendment of life in faith, be here so united to Christ our head in his
mysteries, to our comfort, that after we shall have full fruition of him
indeed, to our everlasting joy and eternal life, to the which he bring us,
that dyed for us, and redeemed us, Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom with
the father and the holy ghost, one true and eternal God, be al praise, honor,
and dominion for ever.

Amen.
An Homilee concerning the coming down of the holy ghost, and the manifold
gifts of the same. For Whitsunday.
BEfore we come to the declaration of the great and manifold gifts of the
holy ghost, wherewith the church of God has been evermore replenished: it shall
first be needful, briefly to expound unto you, whereof this feast of
Pentecoste or Whitsuntide had his first beginning. You shall therefore
understand, that the feast of Pentecoste, was always kept the fifty day
after Easter, a great and solemn feast among the Jews, wherein they did
celebrate the memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt, and also the
memorial of the publishing of the law, which was given unto them in ye mount
Sinai, upon that day. It was first ordained and commanded to be kept holy,
not by any mortal man, but by the mouth of the Lord him self, as we read
in Leuit. 23. and Deuteronomy. 16. The place appointed for the observation thereof,
was Jerusalem, where was great recourse of people from all parts of the
world, as may well appear in the second Chapter of the Acts, wherein mention
is made of Parthians, Medes, Elamites, inhabitours of Mesopotamia, inhabitours
of Jury, Capadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, and diverse other such
places, whereby we may also partly gather, what great and royal solempnitie was
commonly used in that feast. Now as this was given in commandment to the
Jews in the old law, so did our Savior Christ, as it Acts. l.
were, confirm the same in the time of the Gospel, ordeyning after a sort, a
new Pentecost for his disciples, namely when he sent down the holy ghost
visiblye in form of cloven tongues like fire, and gave them power to speak
in such sort, that every one might hear them, and also understand them in his
own language. Which miracle, that it might be had in perpetual remembrance,
the Church has thought good, to solemnize and keep holy this day, commonly
called Whitsunday. And here is to be noted, that as the law was given to the
Jews in the mount Sinai, the fifty day after Easter: so was the preaching of
the Gospel, through the myghtie power of the holy ghost, given to the Apostles
in the mount Sion, the fifty day after Easter.

And hereof this feast has his name to be called Pentecoste, even of the
number of the days. For (as Saint Luke writes in the acts of the Apostles.)
When fifty days were come to an end, the Disciples being altogether with one
accord in one place, the holy ghost came suddenly among them, and sat upon
each of them, like as it had been cloven tongues of fire. Which thing was
undoubtedly done, to teach the Apostles and all other men, that it is he
which gives eloquence and vtteraunce in preaching the Gospel, that it is he
which opens the mouth to declare the mighty works of God, that it is he
which engenders a burning zeal toward Gods word, and gives all men a
tongue, yea a fiery tongue, so that they may boldly and chearefullye profess
the truth in the face of the whole world, as Esai was endued with this
spirit. The Lord Esai. l.
(says Esai) gave me a learned and a skilful tongue, so that I might know to
raise up them that are fallen, with the word. The prophet David cries to
have this gift, saying, Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show
forth Psalm. l.
thy praise. For our savior Christ also in the Gospel says to his disciples,
It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your father which is within you.
Al which testimonies of holy scripture, do sufficiently declare, that the
mystery in the tongues, betokens the preaching of the Matthew. x.
Gospel, and the open confession of the Christian faith, in all them that are
possessed with the holy ghost. So that if any man be a dumb Christian, not
prosessing his faith openly, but clokyng and coloring him self for fear of
danger in time to come, he gives men occasion, justly and with good
conscience to doubt, least he have not the grace of the holy ghost within him,
because he is tongue tied, and does not speak. Thus then have ye heard the
first institution of this feast of Pentecoste or Whitsuntide, as well in the
old law among the Jews, as also in the time of the Gospel among the
Christians.

Now let us consider what the holy ghost is, and how consequently he works
his miraculous works toward mankind. The holy ghost is a spiritual and
divine substance, the third person in the deity, distinct from the father
and the son, and yet proceedyng from them both, which thing to be true, both
the Creed of Athanasius bears witness, and may be also easilye proved by
most plain testimonies of Gods holy word. When Christ was baptized of John
in the river Jordan, we read that the holy ghost Mat. 3.
came down infourme of a Dove, and that the father thundered from heaven,
saying: This is my dear and well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Where
note three diverse and distinct persons, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, which all notwithstanding are not three Gods, but one God. Likewise,
when Christ did Mat. 28.
first institute and ordeyne the sacrament of baptism, he sent his disciples
into the whole world, willing them to baptize al nations in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost. And in an other place he says: I will
pray unto my John. 4.
father, and he shall give you another comforter. Again, when the comforter
shall come whom I will send from my father. etc. These and such John. 25.
other places of the new Testament, do so plainly and evidently confirm the
distinction of the holy ghost, from the other persons in the trinity, that no
man possibly can doubt thereof, unless he will blaspheme the everlasting truth
of Gods word. As for his proper nature and substance, it is altogether one
with God the father, and God the son, that is to say, spiritual, eternal,
uncreated, incomprehensible, almyghtie, to be short, he is even God and Lord
everlasting. Therefore he is called the spirit of the father, therefore he is
said to proceed from the father, and the son, and therefore he was equally
joined with them in the commission that the Apostles had to baptize al nations.
But that this may appear more sensibly to the eyes of all men, it shall be
requisite to come to the other part, namely to the wonderful and heavenly
works of the holy ghost, which plainly declare unto the world his myghtie
and divine power. First it is evident, that he did wonderfully govern and
direct the hearts of the patriarchs and prophets in old time, illuminating
their minds with the knowledge of the true Messiah, and giving them vtteraunce
to prophecy of things that should come to pass long time after. For as
saint Peter witnesses, the prophecy came not in old 2. Pet. 1.
time by the will of man: But the holy men of God spoke as they were moved
iuwardly by the holy ghost. And of Zachary the high priest, it is said in the
Gospel, that he being full of the Luke 1.
holy ghost, prophesied and praised God. So did also Simeon, Anna, Marie, and
diverse other, to the great wonder and admiration of all men. Moreover, was not
the holy ghost a mighty worker in the conception and the nativity of Christ
our savior? Saint Matthewe says, Mat. 1.
that the blessed virgin was found with child of the holy ghost, before
Joseph and she came together. And the Angel Gabriell did expreslye tell her
that it should so come to pass, saying: Luke 1.
The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall
ouershadowe thee. A marvelous matter, that a woman should conceive and bear
a child, without the knowledge of man. But where the holy ghost works,
there nothing is impossible, as may further also appear by the inward
regeneration and sanctification of mankind. When Christ said to Nicodemus,
unless a man be borne a new, of water and the spirit, he can not enter into
the kingdom of God: he was greatly amazed in his mind, and began to reason
with Christ, demaundyng how a man might be borne which was old? Can he
enter (says he) John. 3.
into his mothers womb again, and so be borne a new? Behold a lively pattern
of a fleshely and carnal man. He had little or no intelligence of the holy
ghost, and therefore he goes bluntly to work, and asks how this thing were
possible to be true. Whereas otherwise, if he had known the great power of the
holy ghost in this behalf, that it is he which in wardlye works the
regeneration and new birth of mankind, he would never have marueyled at
Christ's words, but would have rather taken occasion thereby to praise and
glorify God. For as there are three several and sundry persons in the
deity: So have they three several and sundry offices proper unto each of
them. The father to create, the son to redeem, the holy ghost to sanctify
and regenerate. Whereof the last, the more it is hid from our understanding,
the more it ought to move all men to wonder at the secret and mighty workyng
of Gods holy spirit which is within us. For it is the holy ghost, and no
other thing, that does quicken the minds of men, stirring up good and godly
motions in their hearts, which are agreeable to the will and commandment of
God, such as otherwise of their own crooked and perverse nature they should
never have. That which is borne of the flesh (says Christ) is flesh, and
John. 5.
that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. As who should say: Man of
his own nature is fleshly and carnal, corrupt and naught, synnefull and
disobedient to God, without any spark of goodness in him, without any virtuous
or godly motion, only given to evil thoughts and wicked deeds. As for the
works of the spirit, the fruits of faith, charitable and godly motions, if
he have any at all in him, they proceed only of the holy ghost, who is the
only worker of our sanctification, and makes us new men in Christ Jesu. Did
not Gods holy spirit miraculously work in the child David, when of a poor
shephearde, he became a princelike prophet? Did not 1. Sa. 17.
Gods holy spirit miraculously work in Matthewe, sitting at the receipte of
custom, when of a proud Publicane, he became an humble and lowly Evangelist?
And who can choose but maruayle Mat. 9.
to consider, that Peter should become of a simple fisher, a chief and
mighty Apostle? Paul of a cruel and bloody persecutour, a faithful disciple
of Christ, to teach the Gentiles. Such is the power of the holy ghost, to
regenerate men, and as it were to bring them forth a new, so that they shall be
nothing like the men that they were before. Neither does he think it
sufficient inwardlye to work the spiritual and new birth of man, unless he
do also dwell and abide in him. Know ye not (says saint Paul) that (...).
Cor. 3.
ye are the temple of God, and that his spirit dwells in you? Know ye not
that your bodies are the temples of the holy ghost, which is within 1. Cor. 3.
you? Again he says, You are not in the flesh, but in the spirit. For why?
The spirit of God dwells in you. To this agrees the doctrine Romans 8.
of saint John, writing on this wise: The annoyntyng which ye have received
(he means 1. John. 2.
the holy ghost) dwells in you. And the doctrine of Peter says the same, who
has these words: The spirit of glory, and of God, rests 1. Pet. 4.
upon you. O what comfort is this to the heart of a true Christian, to think
that the holy ghost dwells within him. If God be with us (as the Romans 5.
Apostle says) who can be against us? O but how shall I know that the holy
ghost is within me, some man perchance will say? Forsooth, as the tree is
known by his fruit, so is also the holy ghost. The fruits of the holy ghost
(according Gala. 5.
to the mind of saint Paul) are these: Love, joy, peace, long sufferyng,
gentleness, goodness, faythfulnesse, meekenes, temperaunce, etc. Contrarywyse,
the deeds of the flesh are these: Adultrie, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, idolatry, witchcrafte, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath,
contention, sedition, heresy, envy, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, and
such like.

Here is now that glass wherein thou must behold thy self, and discern
whether thou have the holy ghost within thee, or the spirit of the flesh. If
thou see that thy works be virtuous and good, consonant to the prescript rule
of gods word, sauouring and tastyng not of the flesh, but of the spirit,
then assure thy self that thou art endued with the holy ghost. Otherwise in
thynkyng well of thy self, thou do nothing else but deceive thy self. The
holy ghost does always declare him self by his fruitful and gracious
gifts, namely by the word of wisdom, by the word of knowledge, which is
the understanding of the scriptures, by faith, in doing of miracles, by healyng
them that are diseased, 1. Cor. 12.
by prophecy, which is the declaration of Gods mysteries, by discerning of
spirits, diversities of tongues, interpretation of tongues, and so forth. All
which gifts, as they proceed from one spirit, and are severally given to
man, according to the measurable distribution of the holy ghost: Even so do
they bring men, and not without good cause, into a wonderful admiration of
Gods divine power. Who will not marueyle at that which is written in the Acts
of the Apostles, to hear their bold confession before the counsel at
Jerusalem? And to consider Acts. 5.
that they went away with joy and gladness, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer rebukes and checkes for the name and faith of Christ Jesus?
This was the myghtie work of the holy ghost, who because he gives patience
and ioyfulnesse of heart in temptation and affliction, has therefore worthyly
obtained this name in holy scripture, to be called a comforter. Who will not
also marueyle to read the learned and heavenly sermons of Peter, and the
disciples, consyderyng that they were never brought up in schole of learning,
but called even from their nets, to supply rooms of Apostles. This was
likewise the mighty work of the holy ghost, who because he does instruct the
hearts John. 14.
of the simple in the true knowledge of God and his holy word, is most justly
termed by this name and title, to be the spirit of truth. Eusebius Lib. 11.
cap. 3.
in his ecclesiastical history, tells a strange story of a certain
learned and subtle Philosopher, who being an extreme adversary to Christ and
his doctrine, could by no kind of learning be converted to the faith but was
able to withstand all the arguments that could be brought against him, with
little or no labor. At length there started up a poor simple man of small wit,
and less knowledge, one that was reputed among the learned as an ideote: And
he on Gods name would needs take in hand to dispute with this proud
Philosopher. The Bishops and other learned men standing by, were marvelously
abashed at the matter, thinking that by his doings they should be all
confounded and put to open shame. He notwithstanding goes on, and beginning in
the name of the Lord Jesus, brought the Philosopher to such point in the
end, contrary to all men's expectation, that he could not choose but
acknowledge the power of God in his words, and to give place to the truth.
Was not this a miraculous work, that one seely soul of no learning, should
do that which many bishops of great knowledge and understanding, were never
able to bring to pass? So true is the saying of Bid: Where the holy ghost
does instruct and Homi. 9. sup. Luca^.
teach, there is no delay at al in learning. Much more might here be spoken of
the manyfolde gifts and graces of the holy ghost, most excellent and
wonderful in our eyes. But to make a long discourse through all, the shortness
of time will not serve. And seeing ye have heard the cheifest, ye may easily
conceive and judge of the rest. Now were it expedient to discuss this
question: Whether all they which boaste and brag that they have the holy
ghost, do truly challenge this unto them selves, or no? Which doubt, because it
is necessary and profitable, shall (God wylling) be dissolved in the next part
of this Homilee. In the mean season, let us (as we are most bound) give
hearty thanks to God the father, and his son Jesus Christ, for sendyng
down this comforter into the world, humbly beseeching him, so to work in our
hearts by the power of this holy spirit, that we being regenerate and newely
borne again in all goodness, righteousness, sobriety and truth, may in the
end be made partakers of everlasting life in his heavenly kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and savior.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee concerning the holy ghost, dissoluing this
doubt: whether al men rightly challenge to them selves the holy ghost or no.
OUR savior Christ departing out of the world unto his father, promised his
disciples John. 14. 15
to send down another comforter, that should continue with the^ for ever,
and direct them into al truth. Which thing to be faithfully and truly
performed, the scriptures do sufficiently bear witness. Neither must we think
that this comforter was either promised, or else given, only to the Apostles,
but also to the universal Church of Christ, dispearsed through the whole
world. For unless the holy ghost had been always present, gouernyng and
preserving the Church from the beginning, it could never have sustained so
many and great bruntes of affliction and persecution, with so little damage and
harm as it has. And the words of Christ are most plain in this behalf,
saying, that the spirit of John. 24. Matthew. 21.
truth should abide with them for ever, that he would be with them always
(he means by grace, virtue, and power) even to the worlds end. Also in the
prayer that he made to his father a little before his death, he makes
intercession, John. 17.
not only for him self and his apostles, but indifferently for all them that
should believe in him through their words, that is to wit, for his whole
Church. Again saint Paul says: If any man have not the spirit of Christ,
the Romans 8.
same is not his. Also in the words following, We have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby Ibidem
we cry abba, father. Hereby then it is evident and plain to all men, that
the holy ghost was given, not only to the apostles, but also to the whole body
of christ's congregation, although not in like form and majesty as he came
down at the feast of Pentecost. But now herein stands the controversy:
Whether al men do justly arrogate to the^ selves the holy ghost, or no? The
Bishops of Rome have for a long time made a sore challenge thereunto, reasoning
for them seues after this sort. The holy ghost (say they) was promised to the
Church, and never forsakes the Church. But we are the chief heads, and the
principal part of the Church, therefore we have the holy ghost for ever, and
whatsoever things we decree, are undoubted verities, and oracles of the holy
ghost. That ye may perceive the weakness of this argument, it is needful to
teach you, first what the true Church of Christ is, and then to confer the
Church of Rome therewith, to discern how well they agree together. The true
Church is an universal congregation, or fellowship of Gods faithful and elect
people, buylt upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ
him self being the head corner Ephesians. 2.
stone. And it has always three notes or marks whereby it is known. Pure and
sound doctrine, the sacraments ministered according to Christ's holy
institution, and the right use of ecclesiastical discipline. This description
of the Church is agreeable both to the scriptures of God, and also to the
doctrine of the ancient fathers, so that none may justly find fault therewith.
Now if ye will compare this with the Church of Rome, not as it was in the
begynnnyg, but as it is presently, and has been for the space of nine hundred
years and odd: you shall well perceive the state thereof to be so far wide
from the nature of the true Church, that nothing can be more. For neither are
they buylt upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, retaynyng the
sound and pure doctrine of Christ Jesu, neither yet do they order either the
sacraments, or else the ecclesiastical keys, in such sort as he did first
institute and ordeyne them: But have so intermyngled their own traditions and
inventions, by choppyng and chaungyng, by addyng and pluckyng away, that now
they may seem to be converted into a new guyse. Christ commended to his
Church a sacrament of his body and blood: They have changed it into a sacrifice
for the quick and the dead. Christ did minister to his apostles, and the
apostles to other men, indifferently under both kinds: They have robbed the
lay people of the cup, saying that for them one kind is sufficient. Christ
ordained no other element to be used in baptism, but only water, whereunto when
the word is joined, it is made (as S. Augustine says) a full and perfect
Augusti.
sacrament: They being wyser in their own conceipte then Christ, think it is
not well nor orderly done, unless they use co^iuration, unless they halow the
water, unless there be oil, salt, spittle, tapers and such other dumb
ceremonies, serving to no use, contrary to the plain rule of. S. Paul, who
wylleth all things to be done in the Church unto edification. Christ
ordained the 1. Cor. 14.
authority of the keys to excommunicate notorious sinners, and to absolve
them which are truly penitent: They abuse this power at their own pleasure,
as well in cursyng the godly, with bell, book, and candles, as also in
absoluing the reprobate, which are known to be unworthy of any Christian
society. Whereof he that lust to see examples, let them search their lives.
To be short, look what our savior Christ pronounced of the Scribes and
Pharisees, in the Gospel, the same may we boldly and with safe conscience
pronounce of the bishops of Rome, namely that they have forsaken, and daily do
forsake the commandments of God, to erect and set up their own
constitutions. Which thing being true, as al they which have any light of Gods
word must needs confess, we may well conclude according to the rule of
Augustine: That the bishops of Rome and their adherents, are not the true
church of Christ, much less then to be taken as chief August. contra
Petiliani Donatistae Epi. ca. 4.
heads and rulers of the same. Whosoever (says he) do descent from the
scriptures concerning the head, although they be found in all places where the
Church is appointed, yet are they not in the Church. A plain place,
concluding directly against the Church of Rome. Where is now the holy ghost
which they so stoutly do claim to them selves? Where is now the spirit of
truth, that will not suffer them in any wise to err? If it be possible to be
there where the true Church is not, then is it at Rome: otherwise it is but a
vain brag, and nothing else. Saint Paul (as ye have heard before) says: If
any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. And by turnyng
the words, it may be as truly said: If any man be not of Christ, the same
has not his spirit. Now to discern who are truly his, and who not, we have
this rule given us, that his sheep do always hear John. x.
his voice. And saint John says: He that is of God, hears Gods word.
Whereof it follows, John. 8.
that the popes in not hearing Christ's voice, as they ought to do, but
preferring their own decrees before the express word of God, do plainly
argue to the world, that they are not of Christ, nor yet possessed with his
spirit. But here they will allege for them selves, that there are diverse
necessary points not expressed in holy scripture, which were left to the
revelation of the holy ghost. Who being given to the Church, according to
Christ's promise, has taught many things from time to time, which John. 16.
the apostles could not then bear. To this we may easily answer by the
plain words of Christ, teaching us that the proper office of the holy ghost
is, not to institute and bring in new ordinances, contrary to his doctrine
before taught: but to expound and declare those things which he had before
taught: so that they might be well and truly understood. When the holy ghost
John. 15.
(says he) shall come, he shall lead you into all truth. What truth does he
mean? Any other then he him self had before expressed in his word? No. For he
says: He shall take of mine, and show it unto you. Again, he shall bring you
in remembrance of all things that I have told John. 15.
you, it is not then the duty and part of any christian, under pretense of
the holy ghost, to bring in his own dreams and fantasies into the Church:
but he must diligently provide that his doctrine and decrees be agreeable to
Christ's holy testament. Otherwise in making the holy ghost the aucthour
thereof, he does blaspheme and belie the holy ghost, to his own condempnation.

Now to leave their doctrine, and come to other points. What shall we think
or judge of the popes intolerable pride? The scripture says, that God
resists the proud, and shows grace to the humble. Also it pronounces them
blessed, which are poor in spirit, promising that they which humble them
selves, shall be exalted. And Christ our savior, wylieth all his to learn of
Mat. 5.
him, because he is humble and meek. As for pride, saint Gregory says, it is
the root of all Mat. 24.
mischief. And saint Augustines judgment is this, that it makes men
deuilles. Can any man then, which either has or shall read the popes
Ecclesia.
lives, justly say that they had the holy ghost within them? First, as
touching that they will be termed universal bishops and heads of all
Christian Churches through the world, we have the judgment of Gregory expressly
against them, Lib. 3. Ep. 76. 78.
who writing to Maritius the Emperor, condemns John, bishop of
Constantinople, in that behalf, calling him the prince of pride, Lucifers
successor, and the forerunner of Antechriste. Saint Barnarde also agreeing
thereunto, says, Sermon. 3. de resur. dom.
What greater pride can there be, then that one man should prefer his own
judgment before the whole congregation, as though he only had the spirit of
God? And Chrysostom pronounces a terrible sentence against them, affyrming
Dialogorum. lib. 3.
plainly, that whosoever seeks to be chief in earth, shall find confusion
in heaven, and that he which strives for the supremacy, shall not be reputed
among the servants of Christ. Again he says: To desire a good work, it is
good, but to covet the chief degree of honor, it Chrisost. sup. Mat.
is mere vanity. Do not these places sufficiently convince their outrageous
pride, in usurping to them selves a superiority above all other, as well
ministers and bishops, as kings also and Emperors? But as the Lion is known
by his claws, so let us learn to know these men by their deeds. What shall
we say of him that Sabelli. Ennead. 9. Lib. 7.
made the noble king Dandalus to be tied by the neck with a chain, and to lie
flat down before his table, there to gnaw bones like a dog? Shall we think
that he had Gods holy spirit within him? and not rather the spirit of the
devil? Such a tyrant was pope Clement the sixth. What shall we say of him that
proudly and contemptuously trod Frederick the Emperor under his feet,
applying the vearse of the Psalm unto him self: Thou shall go upon the Lion
and Psalm. 60.
the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon thou shall tread under thy foot?
Shall we say that he had Gods holy spirit within him? and not rather the
spirit of the devil? Such a tyrant was pope Alexander the third. What
shall we say of him that armed and animated the son against the father,
causing him to be taken, and to be cruelly famished to death, contrary to the
law both God, and also of nature? Shall we say that he had Gods holy spirit
within him? and not rather the spirit of the devil? Such a tyrant was pope
Pascall the second. What shall we say of him that came into his popedom like
a fox, that reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a dog? Shall we say that he
had Gods holy spirit within him? and not rather the spirit of the devil?
Such a tyrant was pope Boniface the eight. What shall we say of him that made
Henrye the Emperor, with his wife and his young child, to stand at the gates
of the City in the rough winter, bare footed and bare legged, only clothed in
lincie wol^ie, eating nothing from morning to night, and that for the space of
three days? Shall we say that he had Gods holy spirit within him? and not
rather the spirit of the devil? Such a tyrant was pope Hildebrande, most
worthy to be called a fyrebrand, if we shall term him as he has best
deserved. Many other examples might here be alleged. As of pope Jone the
harlot, that was delivered of a child in the high streate, going solempnly in
procession. Of pope Julius the second, that wilfully cast Saint Peter's keys
into the river Tiberis. Ofpope Urban the sixte, that caused five Cardinals to
be put in sackes and cruelly drowned. Of pope Sergius the third, that
persecuted the dead body of Formosius his predecessor, when it had been buried
eight years. Of Pope John the. xiiii. of that name, who having his enemy
delivered into his hands, caused him first to be stripped stark naked, his
beard to be shaven, and to be hanged up a whole day by the here, then to be
set upon an Ass with his face backward toward the tail, to be carried round
about the City in dispite, to be miserablye beaten with rods, last of all,
to be thrust out of his country, and to be banished for ever. But to conclude
and make an end, ye shall breefly take this short lesson, Wheresoever ye
find the spirit of arrogancye and pride, the spirit of envy, hatred,
contention, cruelty, murder, extortion, witchcraft, necromancie. etc. Assure
your selves that there is the spirit of the devil, and not of God, albeit
they pretend outwardly to the world never so much holiness. For as the
Gospel teaches us, the spirit of Jesus is a good spirit, an holy spirit, a
sweet spirit, a lowely spirit, a merciful spirit, full of charity and
love, full of forgeuenes and pity, not rendering evil for evil, extremity for
extremity: but ouercomming evil with good, and remitting all offense even
from the heart. According to which rule, if any man live uprightly, of him it
may be safely pronounced that he has the holy ghost within him. If not, then
it is a plain token that he does usurp the name of the holy ghost in vain.
Therefore (dearly beloved) according to the good council of S. John, believe not
1. John. 4.
every spirit, but first try them whether they Matthew. 24.
be of God or no. Many shall come in my name (says Christ) and shall
transfourme them selves into Angels of light, deceauing (if it be possible) the
very elect. They shall come unto you in sheep clothing, being inwardlye
cruel and ravening Wolves. They shall have an outward show of great holiness
and innocence of Mat. 7.
life, so that ye shall hardly, or not at all discern them. But the rule that
ye must follow, is this, to judge them by their fruits. Which if they be
wicked and naught, then is it impossible that the tree of who^ they proceed
should be good. Such Luke. 6.
were all the popes and prelates of Rome for the most part, as does well
appear in the storye of their lives, and therefore they are worthylye
accounted among the number of false prophets, and false Christ's, which
deceived the world a long while. The Lord of heaven and earth de^fende us
from their tirannie and pride, that they never enter into his vineyarde again,
to the disturbaunce of his feely poor flock: but that they may be utterly
confounded and put to flight in all parts of the world. And he of his great
mercy so work in all men's hearts, by the mighty power of the holy ghost, that
the comfortable Gospel of his son Christ may be truly preached, truly
received, and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of sin,
death, the pope, the devil, and all the kingdom of Antichrist, that like
scattered and dispearsed sheep, being at length gathered into one fold, we
may in the end rest altogether in the bosom of ^braham, Isaac, and Jacob,
there to be partakers of eternal and everlasting life, through the merits and
death of Jesus Christ out savior.

Amen.
An Homilee for the days of rogation week.
That all good things comes from God.

I Am purposed this day (good devout Christian people) to declare unto you the
most deserved praise and commendation of almighty God, not only in the
consyderation of the marvelous creation of this world, or for conservation
and governance thereof, wherein his great power and wisdom might
excellentlye appear, to move us to honor and dread him: but most specially
in consyderation of his liberal and large goodness, which he daily bestows
on us his reasonable creatures, for whose sake he made the whole universal
world, with all the commodities and goods therein. Which his singular goodness
well and diligently remembered on our part, should move us (as duty is) again
with hartye affection to love him, and with word and deed to praise him, and
serve him all the days of our life. And to this matter, being so worthy to
entreat of, and so profitable for you to hear, I trust I shall not need with
much circumstaunce of words to stir you to give your attendance to hear what
shall be said. Only I would wish your affection inflamed in secret wise within
your self, to raise up some motion of thanks giving to the goodness of
almighty God, in every (...)che point as shall be opened by my declaration
particulerly unto you. For else what shall it avail us to hear and know the
great goodness of God toward us, to know that what soever is good proceeds
from him, as from the principal fountain and the only aucthour, or to know
that what soever is sent from him must needs be good and wholesome: if the
hearing of such matter moves us no further but to know it only? What
auayled it the wise men of the world to have a knowledge of the power and
divinity of God, by the secret inspiration of him: where they did not honor
and glorify him in their knowledges as God? What praise was it to them, by the
consyderation of the creation of the world, to behold his goodness: and yet
were not thankful to him again for his creatures? What other thing deserved
this blindness and forgetfulness of them at Gods hands, but utter forsaking of
him? and so forsaken of God, they could not but fall into extreme ignorance and
error. And although they much esteemed them selves in their wits and
knowledge, and gloried in their wisdom: yet vanished they away blyndly, in
their thoughts became fools, and perished in their folly. There can be none
other end of such as draws nygh to God by knowledge, and yet depart from
him in unthankfulness, but utter destruction. This experience saw David in his
days. For in his Psalm he says: Behold, they which withdraw them selves
from thee, shall perish, for thou have destroyed them all that are strayed
from thee. Psalm. 72.
This experience was perceived to be true, of that holy prophet Jeremie: O
Lord (says he) what Iere. 17.
soever they be that forsake thee, shall be confounded, they that depart from
thee, shall be written in the earth and soon forgotten. It profits not (good
people) to hear the goodness of God declared unto us, if our hearts be not
inflamed thereby to honor and thank him. It profited not the Jews which were
Gods elect people, to here much of God, seeing that he was not received in their
hearts by faith, nor thanked for his benefits bestowed upon them, their
unthankfulness was the cause of their destruction. Let us esche we the manner of
these before rehearsed, and follow rather the example of that holy Apostle
Saint Romans 11.
Paul, which when in a deep meditation he did behold the marvelous
proceedinges of almyghtie God, and considered his infinite goodness in the
ordering of his creatures, he brast out into this conclusion: Surely (says he)
of him, by him, and in him, be al things. And this once pronounced, he stacke
not still at this point, but forthwith thereupon joined to these words: To him
be glory and praise for ever, Amen. Upon the ground of which words of Saint
Paul (good audience) I purpose to build my exhortation of this day unto you.
Wherein I shall do my endeavor, first to prove unto you that al good things
comes down unto us from above from the father of light. Secondly, that Jesus
Christ his son, and our savior, is the mean by whom we receive his liberal
goodness. Thirdly, that in the power and virtue of the holy ghost, we be made
meet and able to receive his gifts and graces. Which things distinctly and
advisedly considered in our minds, must needs compel us in most low
reverence, after our bounden duty, always to render him thanks again, in
some testification of our good hearts, for his deserts unto us. And that the
entreating of this matter in hand may be to the glory of almighty God, let us
in one faith and charity call upon the father of mercy, from whom comes
every good gift, and every perfect gift, by the mediation of his well-beloved
son our savior, that we may be assisted with the presence of his holy
spirit, and holsomelye on both our parts, to demean our selves in speaking
and hearing, to the salvation of our souls. In the beginning of my speaking
unto you (good Christian people) suppose not that I do take upon me, to declare
unto you the excellent power, or the incomparable wisdom of almighty God, as
though I would have you believe that it might be expressed unto you by words.
Nay it may not be thought, that that thing may be comprehended by man's
words, that is incomprehensible. And too much arrogancy it were for dust and
ashes, to think that he could worthyly declare his maker. It passes far the
dark understanding of wisdom of a mortal man, to speak sufficiently of
that divine majesty which the Angels cannot understand. We shall therefore
lay apart to speak of that profounde and unsearchable nature of almighty
God, rather acknowledging our weakness, then rashely to attempt that is above
all man's capacity to compass. It shall better suffice us in low humility to
reverence and dread his majesty, which we can not comprise, then by overmuch
curious searchyng, to be ouercharged with the glory. We shall rather turn our
whole contemplation, to answer a while his goodness to wards us, wherein we
shall be much more profitably occupied, and more may we be bold to search. To
consider this great power he is of, can but make us dread and fear. To
consider his high wisdom, might utterly discomfort our frailty to have any
thing adoo with him. But in consyderation of his inestimable goodness, we take
good heart again to trust well unto him. By his goodness we be assured to take
him for our refuge, our hope and comfort, our merciful father, in all the
course of our lives. His power and wisdom, compels us to take him for God
omnipotent, invisible, having rule in heaven and earth, having all things in
his subjection, and will have none in counsel with him, nor any to ask the
reason of his doing. For he may do Daniel. xi.
what lyketh him, and none can resist him. For he works all things in his
secret judgment to his own pleasure, yea eue^ the wicked to damnation says
Solomon. By the reason of this nature, he is called in Scripture, consumyng
Prou. xvi. Heb. xi.
fire, he is called a terrible and fearful GOD* Of this behalf therefore, we
may have no familiarity, no access unto him, but his goodness again
tempereth the rigor of his high power, and makes us bold, and puts us in
hope that he will be conuersaunt with us, and easy unto us. It is his
goodness that moves him to say in scripture: It is my delyght to be with the
children of men. It is his goodness Prou. 8.
that moves him to call us unto him, to offer us his friendship and presence.
It is his goodness that patiently suffers our straying from him, and suffers
us long, to win us to repentance. It is of his goodness that we be created
reasonable creatures, where else he might have made us brute beasts. It was
his mercy to have us borne among the number of christian people, and thereby
in a much more nyghnes to salvation, where we might have been borne (if his
goodness had not ben) among the Panims, clean void from God, and the hope of
everlasting life. And what other thing does his loving and gentle voice spoken
in his word, where he calls us to his presence and friendship, but declare
his goodness, only without regard of our worthynes? And what other thing does
stir him to call us to him, when we be straied from him, to suffer us
patiently, to win us to repentance: but only his singular goodness, no whit
of our deseruyng? Let them all come together that be now glorified in heaven,
and let us hear what answer they will make in these points before rehearsed,
whether their first creation was in Gods goodness, or of them selves. Forsooth
David would make answer for them all and say: Know ye for surety, even the
Lord is God, he has made us, and not we our selves. If they were asked
again, who should be thanked for their regeneration? for their justification?
and for their salvation? whether their deserts? or Gods goodness only? Although
in this point, every one confess sufficiently the truth of this matter in his
own person: yet let David answer by the mouth of them all at this time, who
cannot choose but say: Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy name give all
the thank, for thy loving mercy, and for thy truethes sake. If we should ask
again, from whence came their glorious works and deeds, which they wrought
in their lives, wherewith God was so hyghly pleased and worshipped by them? Let
some other witness be brought in, to testify this matter, that in the mouth
of two or three may the truth be known. Ueryly that holy prophet Esai bears
record, Esai. 26.
and says: O Lord, it is thou of thy goodness that have wrought all our
works in us, not we our selves. And to uphold the truth of this matter,
against all iusticiaries and hipocrites, which rob almighty God of his honor,
and ascribe it to them selves, saint Paul brings in his i. Cor. 3.
belief: We be not (says he) sufficient of our selves, as of our selves once
to think any thing: but all our ablenes is of Gods goodness. For he it is in
whom we have all our being, our living, Act. 17.
and moving. If ye will know furthermore, where they had their gifts and
sacrifices, which they offered continually in their lives to almighty god, they
cannot but agree with David, where he says: Of thy liberal hand, O Lord, we
have received that we gave unto thee. If this holy company therefore confesses
so constantly, that all the goods and graces wherewith they were endued in
soul, came of the goodness of God only: what more can be said to prove that
all that is good, comes from almighty God? Is it meet to think that all
spiritual goodness comes from God above only: and that other good things,
either of nature or of fortune (as we call them) comes of any other cause?
Does God of his goodness adourne the soul, with all the powers thereof, as it
is: and comes the gifts of the body, wherewith it is endued, from any other?
If he does the more, can not he do the less? To justify a sinner, to new
create him from a wicked person to a ryghteous man, is a greater act (says S.
Augustine) then to make such a new heaven and earth as is already made. We must
needs agree, that whatsoever good thing is in us, of grace, of nature, or of
fortune, is of God only, as the only aucthour and worker. And yet it is not to
be thought, that God has created all this whole universal world as it is, and
thus once made, has given it up to be ruled and used after our own wits and
device, and so takes no more charge therefore. As we see the ship wright, after
he has brought his ship to a perfect end, then delyuereth he it to the
maryners, and takes no more cure thereof. Nay God has not so created the
world, that he is careless of it: but he still preserves it by his goodness,
he still stays it in his creation. For else without his special goodness, it
could not stand long in his condition. And therefore saint Paul says, that
he preserves all things, and Heb. i. Heb. iii.
bears them up still in his word, left they should fall without him to their
nothing again, whereof of they were made. If his special goodness were not
every where present, every creature should be out of order, and no creature
should have his property wherein he was first created. He is therefore
invisible every where, and in every creature, and fulfilleth both heaven and
earth with his presence. In the fire, to give heat, in the water, to give
moisture, in the earth, to give fruit, in the heart, to give his strength, yea
in our bread and drink he is, to give us norishment, where without him the
bread and drink cannot give sustinaunce, nor the herb health, as the wise
man plainly confesses it, saying: It is not the increase of fruits that
feeds men, but it is thy Sapi. 18.
word (O Lord) which preserves them that trust in thee. And Moses agrees
to the same, when he says: Man's life rests not in bread Deuteronomy. 8.
only, but in every word which proceeds out of Gods mouth. It is neither the
herb nor the plaster, that gives health of themselves, but thy word, O Lord
(says the wise man) which heals Sapi. 17.
all things. It is not therefore the power of the creatures which works
their effects, but the goodness of God which works in them. In his word
truly does al things consist. By that same word that heaven and earth were
made, by the same are they vpholden, maynteyned, and kept in order (says saint
Peter) and shall be till almighty i. Pet. 3.
God shall withdraw his power from them, and speak their dissolution. If it
were not thus, that the goodness of God were effectuallye in his ceratures to
rule them, how could it be that the maine sea, so ragyng and laboring to
ouerflowe the earth, could be kept within his bonds and banks as it is? That
holy man Job euidentlye spyed the goodness of God in this point, and confessed,
that if he had not a special goodness to the preservation of the earth, it
could not but shortly be ouerflowed of the sea. How could it be that the
elements, so diverse and contrary as they be among them selves, should yet
agree and abide together in a concord, without destruction one of another to
serve our use, if it came not only of Gods goodness so to temper them? How
could the fire not burn and consume al things, if it were left loose to go
whyther it would, and not stayed in his sphere by the goodness of God,
measurably to heat these inferior creatures to their ryping? Consider the
huge substance of the earth, so heavy and great as it is: How could it so
stand stablye in the place as it does, if Gods goodness reserved it not so for
us to travail on? It is thou O Lord (says David) Psalm. 103.
which haste founded the earth in his stabilitie, and during thy word, it
shall never reele or fall down. Consider the great strong beasts and fyshes,
far passing the strength of man, how fierce so ever they be and strong, yet
by the goodness of God they prevail not against us, but are under our
subjection, and serve our use. Of whom came the invention thus to subdue them,
and make them fit for our commodities? Was it by man's brain? Nay rather this
inue^tion came by the goodness of God, which inspyred man's understanding to have
his purpose of every creature. Who was it (says Job) that put will and Job.
33.
wisdom in man's head, but god only of his goodness? And as the same says
again, I perceive that every man has a mind: but it is the inspiration of
the almighty that gives understanding. It could not be verily (good Christian
people) that man of his own wit vnholpen, should invent so many and diverse
deuyses in all crafts and sciences, except the goodness of almyghtye God had been
present with men, and had stirred their wits and studies of purpose, to know
the natures and disposition of all his creatures, to serve us sufficiently in
our needs and necessities. Yea, not only to serve our necessities, but to serve
our pleasures and delight, more then necessity requires. So liberal is Gods
goodness to us, to provoke us to thank him, if any hearts we have. The wise
man in his contemplation by him self, could not but grant this thing to be
true that I reason unto you. In his hands (says he) be we and our words, and
al our wisdom, and al our sciences and works of knowledge. For it is he that
gave me the true instruction of his creatures Sapi. 7.
both to know the disposition of the world, and the virtues of the elements,
the beginning and end of times, the change and diversities of them, the course
of the year, the order of ye stars, the natures of beasts, and the powers of
them, the power of the winds, and thoughts of men, the differences of
planets, the virtue of roots, and what soever is hid and secret in nature, I
learned it. The artificer of all these taught me this wisdom. And further he
says: Who can Sapi. 9.
search out the things that be in heaven? for it is hard for us to search
such things as be on earth, and in daily sight before us. For our wits Sapi. 9.
and thoughts (says he) be imperfect, and our policies uncertain: No man
can therefore search out the meaning in these things, except thou geuest
wisdom, and sendest thy spirit from above. If the wise man thus confesses all
these things to be of God, why should not we acknowledge it? and by the
knowledge of it, consider our duty to Godward, and give him thanks for his
goodness? I perceive that I am far here ouercharged with the plenty and copye
of matter, that might be brought in for the proof of this cause. If I should
enter to show how the goodness of almighty god appeared every where in the
creatures of the world, how marvelous they be in their creation, how
beawtified in their order, how necessary they be to our use, all with one
voice must needs grant their aucthour to be none other but almighty God, his
goodness must they needs extol and magnify every where, to whom be all honor
and glory for evermore.

The second part of the Homilee, for rogation week.
IN the former part of this Homilee (good Christian people) I have declared to
your contemplation, the great goodness of almighty God, in the creation of this
world, with all ye furniture thereof, for the use and comfort of man, whereby
we might the rather be moved to acknowledge our duty again to his majesty.
And I trust it has wrought not only credit in you, but also it has moved
you to render your thanks secretly in your hearts to almighty God for his
loving kyndnes. But yet peradventure some will say, that they can agree to
this, that all that is good parteyning to the soul, or what soever is created
with us in body, should come from God, as from the aucthour of all goodness,
and from none other: But of such things as be without them both, I mean,
such good things which we call goods of fortune, as riches, authority,
promotion, and honor: some men may think, that they should come of our
industry and diligence, of our labor and travail, rather then
supernaturally. Now then consider, good people, if any aucthour there be of
such things concurraunt with man's labor and endeavor, were it meet to
ascribe them to any other then to God? as the Panim Philosophers and Poets did
err, which took Fortune, and made her a Goddess to be honored for such
things? God forbid (good Christian people) that this imagination should
earnestlye be received of us that be worshippers of the true God, whose works
and proceedings be expressed manifestly in his word. These be the opinions and
sayings of Infidels, not of true christians. For they indeed (as Job makes
mention) Job. 22.
believe and say, that God has his residence and resting place in the clouds,
and consider nothing of our matters. Epicures they be, that imagine that he
walks about the coasts of the heavens, and have no respect to these
inferior things, but that all these things should proceed either by
chance or at adventure, or else by disposition of fortune, and God to have no
stroke in them. What other thing is this to say, then as the fool supposes in
his heart, there is no God? Psalm. 14.
Whom we shall none otherwise reprove, then with Gods own words by the mouth
of David. Hear my people (says he) for I am thy God, thy very God. All the
beasts of the wood are Psalm. 99.
mine. Sheep and Oxen, that wandreth in the mountains. I have the knowledge
of all the (...)les of the air, the beawty of the feelde is my handy work,
mine is the whole circuit of the world, and all the plenty that is in it.
And again by the Prophet Hieremie: Think thou that I Iere. 23.
am a God of the place nigh me (says the Lord) and not a God far of? Can a
man hide him self in so secret a corner, that I shall not see him? Do not I
fulfill and replenishe both heaven and earth, says the Lord? which of these
two should be most believed? Fortune, whom they paynte to be blind of both
eyes, ever unstable and unconstant in her wheel, in whose hands they say
these things be? Or God, in whose hand and power these things be in deed, who
for his truth and constance was yet never reproved? For his sight looks
through heaven and earth, and sees all things presently with his eyes.
Nothing is to dark or hidden from his knowledge, not the privy thoughts of
men's minds. Truth it is, that of God is all riches, all power, all
authority, all health, wealth, and prosperity, of the which we should have
no part without his liberal distribution, and except it came from him above.
David first testifies of richesse and possesiions: If thou geuest, good luck
they shall gather, and Psalm. ciiii.
if thou openest thy hand, they shall be full of goodness: but if thou turnest
thy face, they shall be troubled. And Solomon says, It is the blessyng Prou. ^.
of the Lord that makes rich men. To this agrees that holy woman Anne, where
she says i, Reg. ii.
in her song: It is the Lord that makes ye poor, and makes the rich, it is
he that promoteth and pulls down, he can raise a needye man from his
misery, and from the dounghill, he can lift up a poor personage to sit with
princes, and have the seat of glory: for all the coasts of the earth be his.
Now if any man will ask, What shall it avail us to know that every good
gift, as of nature and fortune (so called) and every perfect gift, as of
grace, concerning the soul, to be of God, and that it is his gift only?
Forsoothe for many causes is it convenient for us to know it. For so shall we
know (if we confess the truth) who ought justly to be thanked for them. Our
pride shall be thereby abated, perceauing naught to come of our selves but sin
and vice: if any goodness be in us, to refer all laud and praise for the
same to almyghtie God. It shall make us not to advance our selves before our
neighbor, to despise him for that he has fewer gifts, seeing God gives his
gifts where he will. It shall make us by the consyderation of our gifts, not
to extol our selves before our neighbors. ^t Ierem. ^.
shall make the wise man not to glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich to glory in his riches, but in the living god which is
aucthour of all these: lest if we should do so, we might be rebuked with the
words of saint Paul, What have thou, that thou have not i. Cor. ix.
received? and if thou have received it, why gloriest in thy self, as though
thou had not received it? To confess that all good things comes from
almighty God, is a great point of wisdom my friends: For so confessing, we
know whyther to resort for to have them if we want, as saint James bid us,
saying, If any man wants Jacob. i.
the gift of wisdom, let him ask it of God that geues it, and it shall be given
him. As the wise man in the want of such a like gift, made his recourse to God
for it, as he testifies in his book. After I knew (says he) that otherwise I
could Sapi. x.
not be chaste, except God granted it, (and this was as he there writes, hye
wisdom to know whose gift it was) I made haste to the Lord, and earnestly
besought him, even from the roots of my heart, to have it. I would to God (my
friends) that in our wantes and necessities, we would go to God, as saint James
bids, and as the wise man teaches us that he did. I would we believed
steadfastly that God only geues them: If we did, we would not seek our want and
necessity of the devil and his ministers so often as we do, as daily experience
declares it. For if we stand in necessity of corporal health, whyther go the
common people, but to charms, witchcraftes, and other delusions of the devil?
If we knew that god were thaucthour of this gift, we would only use his means
appointed, and bide his leisure, till he thought it good for us to have it
given. If the merchant and worldly occupyer knew that God is the geuer of
riches, he would content himself with so much as by just means appproued of
God he could get to his living, and would be no rycher then truth would
suffer him, he would never procure his gain and ask his goods at the devils
hand. God forbid ye will say, that any man should take his riches of the
devil. Ueryly so many as increase them selves by usury, by extortion, by
perjury, by stealth, by deceytes and craft, they have their goods of the
devils gift. And all they that give them selves to such means, and have
renounced the true means that god has appointed, have forsaken him, and are
become worshippers of the devil, to have their lukers and aduauntages. They be
such as kneel down to the devil at his bidding, and worship him. For he
promises them for so doing, that he will give them the world, and the goods
therein. They can not otherwise better serve the devil, then to do his
pleasure and commandment. And his motion and will it is, to have us forsake
the truth, and betake us to falsehood, to lies and periuries. They therefore
which believes perfectly in their heart that God is to be honored, and
requested for the gift of all things necessary, would use no other means to
relieve their necessities but truth and verity, and would serve GOD to have
competencie of all things necessary. The man in his need would not relieve
his want by stealth. The woman would not relieve her necessity and poverty by
giving her body to other in adultery for gain. If God be the aucthour in
deed, of life, health, richesse, and welfare, let us make our recourse to him,
as the aucthour, and we shall have it, says Saint James. Yea it is hie wisdom
by the wise man therefore to know whose gift it is. For many other skilles it
is wisdom to know and believe that al goodness and graces be of god, as the
aucthour. Which thing well considered, must needs make us think that we
shall make account for that which God gives us to occupy, and therefore
shall make us to be more diligent well to spend them to gods glory, and to
the profit of our neighbor, that we may make a good account at the last, and
be praised for good stewardes, that we may hear these words of our judge:
Well done good servant and faithful, Mat. xxiiii
thou have ben faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much, go in into
thy masters joy. Besides, to believe certaynely god to be the aucthour of all
the gifts that we have, shall make us to be in scilence and patience when they
be taken again from us. For as God of his mercy does grant us them to use:
So other whiles he does iustlye take them again from us, to prove our
patience, to exercise our faith, and by the means of the taking away of a few,
to bestow the more warely those that remain, to teach us to use them the more
to his glory, after he gives them to us again. Many there be that with mouth
can say that they believe that God is the aucthour of every good gift that they
have: but in the time of temptation they go back from this belief. They say
it in word, but deny it in deed. Consider me the usage of the world, and see
whether it be not true. Behold the rich man that is endued with substance,
if by any adversity his goods be taken from him, how fumeth and fretteth
he? how murmureth he and dispaireth? He that has the gift of good reputation,
if his name be any thing touched by the detractour, how unquiet is he? how
busy to revenge his despite? If a man has the gift of wisdom, and fortune to
be taken of some evil wyller for a fool, and is so reported: how much does
it grieve him to be so esteemed? Think ye that these believe constantly that
God is the aucthour of these gifts? If they believe it verily, why should they
not patiently suffer God to take away his gifts again, which he gave them
freely, and lent for a time? But ye will say, I could be content to resign to
God such gifts, if he took them again from me: But now are they taken from
me by evil chances and false shrewes, by naughtye wretches, how should I take
this thing patientlye? To this may be answered, that almightye God is of his
nature invisible, and comes to no man visiblye after the manner of man, to
take away his gifts that he lent. But in this point whatsoever God does, he
brings it about by his instruments ordained thereto. He has good angels, he
has evil angels, he has good men, and he has evil men, he has hayle and
rain, he has wind and thunder, he has heat and cold. Innumerable
instruments has he, and messengers, by whom again he asks such gifts as
he commits to our trust, as the wise man confesses, The creature must
needs wait to serve his maker, to be fierce against unjust Sapi. xvii.
men to their punishment. For as the same aucthour says, He armeth the
creature, to revenge his enemies. And otherwhiles to the probation of our
faith, styrreth he up such storms. And therefore by what mean and instrument
soever God takes from us his gifts, we must patiently take gods judgment in
worth, and acknowledge him to be the taker and geuer, as Job says: The Lord
gave, and the Lord took, when yet Job. i.
his enemies drove his cattle away, and when the devil slew his children, and
afflicted his body with a grievous sickness. Such meekness was in that holy
king and prophet David, when he was reuyled of Semei, in the presence of all
his host, he took it patiently, and reuyled not again. But as confessing God
to be the aucthour of his innocence and good name, and offering it to be at
his pleasure: Let him alone (says he to one of (...). Reg. xvi.
his knights that would have revenged such despite) for God has commanded
him to curse David, and peradventure God intends thereby to render me some
good turn for this curse of him to day. And though ye minister otherwhyses
does evil in his act, proceedyng of malice, yet forasmuch as God turns his
evil act to a proof of our patience, we should rather submit our self in
patience, then to have indignation at gods rod, which peradventure when he has
corrected us to our nurture, he will cast it into the fire as it deserves. Let
us in like manner truly acknowledge all our gifts and prerogatives, to be so
gods gifts, that we shall be ready to resign them up at his will and pleasure
again. Let us throughout our whole lives confess all good things to come of
God, of what name and nature soever they be, not of these corruptible things
only, whereof I have now last spoken, but much more of all spiritual graces
behoueable for our soul, without whose goodness no man is called to faith, or
stayed therein, as I shall hereafter in the next part of this Homilee declare
to you. In the mean season forget not what has already ben spoken to you,
forget not to be conformable in your judgments to the truth of this
doctrine, and forget not to practice the same in the whole state of your life,
whereby ye shall obtain ye blessing promised by our savior Christ: Blessed be
they which hear the word of God, and fulfilleth it in life. Which blessing he
grant to us all, who reigns over all, one God in Trinity, the father, the
son, and the holy ghost, to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
The third part of the Homilee for Rogation week.
I Promised to you to declare that all spiritual gifts and graces comes
specially from God. Let us consider ye truth of this matter, and hear what is
testified first of the gift of faith, the first entry into the Christian
life, without the which no man can please God. For S. Paul confesses it
plainly to be Gods gift, saying, Ephesians. ii.
Faith is the gift of God. And again saint Peter says, It is of Gods power
that ye be kept i. Pet. i.
through faith to salvation. It is of the goodness of god that we faulter not in
our hope unto him. It is verily gods work in us, the charity wherewith we love
our brethren. If after our fall we repent, it is by him that we repent, which
reaches forth his merciful hand to raise us up. If any will we have to
rise, it is he that preuenteth our will, and disposes us thereto. If after
contrition we feel our conscience at peace with god, through remission of our
sin, and so be reconciled again to his favor, and hope to be his children
and inheritours of everlasting life: who works these great miracles in us,
our worthynesse, our deseruinges and endeavors, our wits, and virtue? Nay
verily. Saint Paul will not suffer flesh and clay to presume to such
arrogancy, and therefore says, All is of God, which has reconciled us to him
self by Jesus Christ. For God was in Christ when he reconciled ye world unto
him self. GOD the father of all mercy, wrought this high benefit unto us,
not by his own person: but by a mean, by no less mean then his only beloved
son, whom he spared not from any pain and travail that might do us good.
For upon him he put our sins, upon him he made our ransom, him he made the
mean betwixt us and him self, whose mediation was so acceptable to GOD the
father, through his profound and perfect obedience, that he took his act for a
full satisfaction of all our disobedience and rebellion, whose righteousness
he took to way against our sins, whose redemption he would have stand
against our dampnation. In this point, what have we to muse within our selves
good friends? I think no less then that which saint Paul said, in the
remembrance of this wonderful goodness of God, Thanks be to almighty Romans
vii.
God, through Christ Jesus our Lord: for it is he for whose sake we received
this high gift of grace. For as by him (being the everlasting Ephesians. i.
wisdom) he wrought all the world and that is contained therein: So by him
only, and wholly would he have all things restored again in heaven and in
earth. By this our heavenly mediator therefore, do we know the favor and
mercy of God the father, by him know Hebr. i.
we his will and pleasure toward us, for he is the brightness of his fathers
glory, and a very Mat. iii.
clear image and pattern of his substance. It is he whom the father in heaven
delyghteth to have for his well-beloved son, whom he aucthorised to be our
teacher, whom he charged us to hear, saying, Hear him. It is he by whom ye
Ephesians. i.
father of heaven does bless us with all spiritual and heavenly gifts, for
whose sake and favor (writes saint John) we have received grace and John. i.
favor. To this our savior and mediator has God the father given the power
of heaven and earth, and the whole jurisdiction and authority, to distribute
his goods and gifts committed to him. For so writes the apostle: To every
one of us is grace given, according to the measure of Ephesians. iiii.
Christ's giving. And thereupon to execute his authority committed, after
that he had brought sin and the devil to captivity, to be no more hurtful
to his members, he ascended up to his father again, and from thence sent
liberal gifts to his well-beloved servants, and has still the power to the
worlds end to distribute his fathers gifts continually in his Church, to
the establishment and comfort thereof. And by him has almyghtie God decreed to
dissolve ye world, to call al before him, to judge both the quick and the
dead, and finally by him shall he condemn the wicked to eternal fire in
hell, and give the good eternal life, and set them assuredly in presence with
him in heaven for evermore. Thus ye see how all is of God, by his son Christ
our Lord and savior. Remember I say once again your duty of thanks, let
the^ be never to want, still join your self to continue in thanks geuyng, ye
can offer to God ne better sacrifice. For he says him self: It is the
sacrifice of praise and thanks that shall honor me. Which thing was well
perceived of that holy prophet David, when he so earnestly spoke to him self
thus: O my soul bless thou the Lord, and all that is Psalm. l.
within me bless his holy name. I say once again O my soul bless thou the
Lord, and never forget Psalm. ciii.
his manifold rewards. God give us grace (good people) to know these things,
and to feel the^ in our hearts. This knowledge and feeling is not in our
self, by our self it is not possible to come by it, a great pity it were
that we should lose so profitable knowledge. Let us therefore meekely call upon
that bountiful spirit the holy ghost, which proceeds from our father of
mercy, and from our mediator Christ, that he would assist us, and inspire us
with his presence, that in him we may be able to hear the goodness of god
declared unto us to our salvation. For without his lively and secret
inspiration, can we not once so much as speak ye name of our mediator, as
saint Paul plainly testifies: No man can once name our Lord Jesus Christ,
but in the holy ghost. Much less should we be able to believe and know these
great mysteries that be opened to us by Christ. Saint Paul says, that no man
i. Cor. xii.
can know what is of god, but the spirit of god. As for us (says he) we have
received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of god, i. Cor.
ii.
for this purpose: that in that holy spirit we might know the things that
be given us by Christ. The wise man says, that in the power and virtue of the
holy ghost, rests al wisdom, and al ability to know God, and to please
him. For he writes thus: Be know that it is not in man's power to guide his
goinges. No man can know thy pleasure except thou geuest wisdom, and sendest
thy holy spirit from above. Send him down Sapi. ix.
therefore (prays he to God) from thy holy heavens, and from the trone of thy
majesty, that he may be with me and labor with me, that so I may know what
is acceptable before thee. Let us with so good heart pray, as he did, and we
shall not fail but to have his assistance. For he is sone seen of them that
love him, he will be found of them that seek him: For very liberal and
gentle is the spirit of wisdom. In his power shall we have sufficient
ability to know our duty to God, in him shall we be comforted and couraged
to walk in our duty, in him shall we be meet vessels to receive the grace
of almighty God: for it is he that purges and purifieth the mind by his
secret working. And he only is present every where by his invisible power and
contains all things in his dominion. He lyghtneth the heart to conceive
worthy thoughts to almyghtie God, he sits in the tongue of man to stir
him to speak his honor, no language is hyd from him, for he has ye knowledge
of al speech, he only ministers spiritual strength to the powers of our soul
and body. To hold the way which God had prepared for us, to walk ryghtly in
our journey, we must acknowledge that it is in the power of his spirit which
helps our infirmity. That we may boldly come in prayer, and call upon
almyghtie God as our father, it is by this holy spirit, which makes
intercession for us with continual sighs. If any gift we have Galat. iiii.
Romans viii.
wherewith we may work to the glory of God, and profit of our neighbor, all
is wrought by his own and self same spirit, which makes his distributions
peculierly to every man as he will. i. Cor. xii.
If any wisdom we have, it is not of our selves, we can not glory therein as
begun of our selves, but we ought to glory in God from who^ it came to us, as
the prophet Jeremie writes: Let him Ierem. ix.
that rejoices, rejoice in this, that he understands and knows me, for I
am the lord which shows mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the earth, for
in these things I delight says the Lord. This wisdom can not be attained,
but by the direction of the spirit of God, and therefore it is called
spiritual wisdom. And no where can we more certainly search for the
knowledge of this will of God (by the which we must direct al our works and
deeds) but in the holy scriptures, for they be they that testify of him,
says our savior Christ. It may be called knowledge and John. v.
learning that is other where gotten out of the word: but the wise man
plainly testifies, that Sap. xiii.
they al be but vain which have not in them the wisdom of God. We see to what
vanity the old Philosophers came, which were destitute of this science,
gotten and searched for in his word. We see what vanity the schole doctrine
is mixed with, for that in this world they sought not the will of God, but
rather the will of reason, the trade of custom, the path of the fathers, the
practice of the Church. Let us therefore read and reuolue the holy scripture
both day and night: for blessed is he Psalm. i. Psalm. cxix.
that has his whole meditation therein. It is that that gives light to our
feet to walk by. It is that which gives wisdom to the simple and Psalm. xix.
ignorant. In it may we find eternal life. In the holy scriptures find we
Christ, in Christ find John. v.
we God: for he it is that is the express image of the father. He that sees
Christ, sees the father. Hebre. i. John. xiiii Hierome.
And contrary wise, as Saint Hierome says, ye ignorance of scripture, is the
ignorance of Christ. Not to know Christ, is to be in darkness, in the mids
of our worldly and carnal light of reason and philosophy. To be without
Christ, is to be Colloss. ii.
in foolishnes: For he is the only wisdom of the father, in whom it pleased
him that all fullness and perfection should dwell. With who^ whosoever is
endued in heart by faith, and rooted fast in charity, has laid a sure
foundation to build on, whereby he may be able to comprehend with all saints
what is the breadth, length, and deapth, and Ephesians. iii.
to know the love of Christ. This universal and absolute knowledge, is that
wisdom which S. Paul wishes these Ephesians to have, as under heaven the
greatest treasure that can be obtained. For of this wisdom the wise man
writes thus of his experience. All good things came to Sapi. vii.
me together with her, and innumerable riches through her hands. And adds
moreover in that same place: She is the mother of all these things. For she is
an infinite treasure unto men, which who so use, become partakers of the love
of God. I might with many words move some of this audience to search for this
wisdom, to sequester their reason, to follow gods commandment, to cast from
them ye wits of their brains, to favor this wisdom, to renounce the
wisdom and policy of this fond world, to taste and savor that whereunto
the favor and will of god has called them, and wills us finally to enjoy by
his favor, if we would give ear: But I will haste to the third part of my
text, wherein is expressed further in sapience, how God gives his elect an
understanding of the motions of the heavens, of the alterations and
circumstaunces of time. Which as it follows in words more plentiful in the
text which I have last cited unto you: So it must needs follow in them that be
endued with this spiritual wisdom. For as they can search where to find this
wisdom, and know of whom to ask it: So know they again that in time it is
found, and can therefore attemper them selves to the occasion of the time, to
suffer no time to pass away, wherein they may labor for this wisdom. And to
increase therein, they know how God of his infinite mercy and lenity gives
all men here time and place of repentance. And they see how the wicked (as Job
Job. xxiiii
writes) abuse the same to their pride, and therefore do the godly take the
better hold of the time, to redeem it out of such use as it is spoiled in by
ye wicked. They which have this wisdom of God, can gather by the diligent and
earnest study of the worldlinges of this present life, how they wait their
times, and apply them selves to every occasion of time to get riches, to
increase their lands and patrimony. They see the time pass away, and
therefore take hold on it, in such wise, that otherwhyles they will with loss
of their sleep and ease, with suffering many pains, catch the offer of their
time, knowing that that which is once past, can not be returned again,
repentance may follow, but remedy is none. Why should not they then that be
spiritually wise in their generation, wait their time to increase as fast in
their state, to win and gain euerlastinglye? They reason what a brute
forgetfulness it were in man endued with reason, to he ignorant of their times
and tides, when they see the Turtle dove, the Storke, and the Swallowe to wait
their times as Jeremie says: The Storke in the Iere. viii.
air knows her appointed times, the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallowe
observe ye time of their coming: but my people knows not the Ephesians. ii.
judgment of the Lord. Saint Paul wylleth us to redeem the time, because the
days are evil. It is not the counsel of Saint Paul only, but of all other
that ever gave precepts of wisdom. There is no precept more seriously given
and commanded, then to know the time. Yea christian men for that they hear
how grievously God complains, and threatens in the scriptures them which
will not know the time of his visitations, are learned thereby, the rather
earnestly to apply them selves thereunto. After our savior Christ had
prophesied with weeping Luke. xix.
tears of the destruction of Jerusalem, at the last he puts the cause: For
that thou have not known the time of thy visitation. O England, ponder the
time of Gods merciful visitation, which is showed thee from day to day, and
yet wylt not regard it, neither wylt thou with his punishment be driven to thy
duty, nor with his benefits be provoked to thanks. If thou knew what may
fall upon thee for thine unthankfulness, thou would provide for thy peace.
Brethren, howsoever the world in generality is forgetful of God, let us
particulerly attend to our time, and win the time with diligence, and apply
our selves to that light and grace that is offered us, let us, if gods favor
and judgments which he works in our time, can not stir us to call home to
our self to do that belong to our salvation: At the least way, let the malice
of the devil, the naughtines of the world which we see exercised in these
perilous and last times, wherein we see our days so daungerously set, provoke
us to watch diligently to our vocation, to walk and go forward therein. Let
the misery and short transitory joys, spyed in the casualtie of our days,
move us, while we have them in our hands, and seriously stir us to be wise,
and to expend the gracious good will of God to us ward, which all the day long
stretches out his hands (as the Esai. 65.
prophet says) unto us, for the most part his merciful hands, sometime his
heavy hands, that we being learned thereby, may escape the danger that must
needs fall on the unjust, who lead their days in felicity and pleasure,
without the knowing of Gods will toward them, but suddenly they go down into
hell. Let us be found watchers, found in the peace of the Lord, that at the
last day we may be found without spot, and blameles: yea let us endeavor our
selves (good Job. 22.
Christian people) diligently to keep the presence of his holy spirit. Let us
renounce all uncleanness, for he is the spirit of purity. Let us avoid all
hypocrisy, for this holy spirit will flee from that which is feigned. Cast we
of all malice and all Sapi. 1.
evil will, for this spirit will never enter into an evil willing soul. Let
us cast away all the whole lump of sin that stands about us, for he will
never dwell in that body that is subdued Hebr. 12.
to sin. We can not be seen thankful to almighty God, and work such
dispite to the spirit of grace, by whom we be sanctified. If we do our
endeavor, we shall not need to fear, we Hebr. 10.
shall be able to overcome all our enemies that light against us. Only let us
apply our self to accept that grace that is offered us. Of almighty God we
have comfort by his goodness, of our savior Christ's mediation we may be sure.
And this holy spirit will suggest unto us that shall be wholesome, and confirm
us in all things. Therefore it cannot be but true that saint Paul affirms:
Of him, by him, and in him, be al things, and in him (after this transitory
life well passed) shall we have all things. For saint Paul says: When the
son of God shall subdue all things unto him, then shall God be all in all.
If ye will know how God shall be all in all, verily after 1. Cor. 15.
this sense may ye understand it: In this world ye see that we be feign to
borowe many things to our necessity, of many creatures: there is no one
thing that suffiseth all our necessities. If we be an hungered, we lust for
bread. If we be a thirst, we seek to be refreshed with ale or wine. If we be
cold, we seek for cloth. If we be sick, we seek to the physician. If we be
in heaviness, we seek for comfort of our friends, or of company, so that there
is no one creature by it self that can content al our wantes and desires. But
in the world to come, in that everlasting felicity, we shall no more beg
and seek our particular comfortes and commodities of diverse creatures: but we
shall possess all that we can ask and desire, in God. And God shall be to us
all things. He shall be to us both father and mother, he shall be bread and
drink, cloth, physicians comfort, he shall be all things to us, and that of
much more blessed fassion and more sufficient contentation, then ever these
creatures were unto us, with much more declaration then ever man's reason is
able to conceive. The eye of man is not able to 1. Cor. 2.
behold, nor his ear can hear, nor it can be compassed in the heart of man,
what joy it is that God has prepared for them that love him.

Let us all conclude then with one voice with the words of saint Paul: To him
which is able to do aboundauntlye beyond our desires and Ephe. 3.
thoughts, according to the power workyng in us, be glory and praise in his
Church, by Christ Jesus for ever, world without end.

Amen.
An exhortation to be spoken to such parisshes where they use their
perambulation in rogation week for the oversight of the bonds and limits of
their Town.
ALthough we be now assembled together (good Christian people) most
pryncipallye to laud and thank almighty GOD for his great benefytes, by
beholding the feeldes replenished with all manner fruit, to the maynteynaunce
of our corporal necessities, for our food and sustenaunce, and partelye also
to make our humble suytes in prayers to his Fatherlye providence to conserve
the same fruits, in sending us seasonable weather, whereby we may gather in
the said fruits, to that end for which his fatherly goodness has provided
the^: Yet have we occasion secondarilye given us in our walks on these days,
to consider the old ancient bonds and limittes belongyng to our own
Towneship, and to other our neighbors bordering about us, to the intent that
we should be content with our own, and not contentiously strive for others, to
the breach of charity, by any incroching one upon another, or clayming one
of the other, further then that in ancient right and custom our forefathers
have peaceablye laid out unto us for our commodity and comfort. Surely a
great oversight it were in us, which be christian men in one profession of
faith, daily looking for that heavenly inheritance which is bought for every
one of us by the bloodshedding of our savior Jesus Christ, to strive and fall
to variaunce for the earthly bounds of our towns, to the dis^uyet of our life
betwixt our selves, to the wasting of our goods by vain expenses and costs
in the law. We ought to remember, that our habitation is but transitory and
short in this mortal life. The more shame it were to fall out into immortal
hatred among our selves, for so brittle possessions, and so to loose our
eternal inheritance in heaven. It may stand well with charity, for a
Christian man quietlye to maynteyne his right and just title. And it is the
part of every good towns man, to preserve as much as lies in him, the
libertyes, franchises, bounds, and limittes of his town and country. But yet
so to strive for our very ryghtes and duties with the breach of love and
charity, which is the only livery of a Christian man, or with the hurt of
godly peace and quiet, by the which we be knit together in one general
fellowship of Christ's family, in one common household of God, that is utterly
forbidden. That does God abhor and detest, which provoke almighty Gods
wrath other while to deprive us quite of our commodities and liberties, because
we do so abuse them for matters of strife, discord, and discention. Saint
Paul blamed the Corinthians for such contentious suing among them selves, to
the slander of their profession, before the enemies 1. Cor. 9.
of Christ's religion, saying thus unto them: Now there is utterly a fault
among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why rather suffer ye not
wrong? Why rather suffer ye not harm? If Saint Paul blames the Christian
men, whereof some of them for their own right, went conten iouslye so to law,
commending thereby the profession of patience in a Christian man: If Christ
our Savior would have us rather Mat. 5.
to suffer wrong, and to turn our left cheek to him which has smitten the
right, to suffer one wrong after another, rather then by breach of charity to
defend our own: In what state be they before God, who do the wrong? What
curses do they fall into, which by false witness defraude either their
neighbor or towneship of his due right and just possession? which will not let
to take an oath by the holy name of God, the aucthour of all truth, to set out
a falshoode and a wrong? Know ye not (says saint Paul) that 1. Cor. 6.
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? What shall we then
win to increase a little the bounds and possessions of the earth, and loose
the possession of the inheritance everlasting? Let us therefore take such heed
in mainteyning of our bounds and possessions, that we commit not wrong by
encroching upon other. Let us beware of sudden verdite in things of doubt.
Let us well advise our selves to aduouch that certainly, whereof either we have
no good knowledge or remembrance, or to claim that we have no just title to.
Thou shall not (commands almyghtie God in his law) remove thy neighbors
mark, which they of old time Deuteronomy. 19.
have set in thine inheritance. Thou shall not (says Solomon) remove the
ancient bounds Prou. 22.
which thy fathers have laid. And lest we should esteem it to be but a light
offense so to do, we shall understand, that it is reckoned among the curses of
God pronounced upon sinners. Accursed be he (says almyghtye God by Moses) who
remoueth his neighbors doles and marks, Deuteronomy. 27.
and all the people shall say, aunswering Amen thereto, as ratifying that
curse upon whom it does light. They do much provoke the wrath of God upon
them selves, which use to grynde up the doles and marks, which of ancient
time were laid for division of meeres and balkes in the feeldes, to bring the
owners to their right. They do wickedlye which do turn up the ancient
terries of the feeldes, that old men before times with great pains did tread
out, whereby the Lords records (which be the tenauntes evidences) be
perverted and translated, sometime to the disheriting of the right owner, to
the oppression of the poor fatherless, or the poor wyddowe. These covetous
men know not what inconveniences they be aucthours of. Sometime by such craft
and deceit, be committed great discordes and ryottes in the challenge of their
lands, yea sometimes murders and bloodshed, whereof thou art gyltye whosoever
thou be that geuest the occasion thereof. This covetous practisyng therefore
with thy neighbors lands and goods, is hateful to almyghtie God. Let no man
subtillye compass or defraude his neighbor (bids saint Paul) 1 Thessalonians. 4.
in any manner of cause. For God (says he) is a revenger of all such. God is
the God of all equity and righteousness, and therefore forbids all such
deceit and subtlety in his law, by these words, Ye shall not do unjustly
in judgment, Deuteronomy. 19.
in line, in wayght, or measure. You shall have just ballaunces, true
wayghtes, and true measures. False ballaunce (says Solomon) are an Pro. 11. 20.
abomination unto the Lord. Remember what Saint Paul says, God is the
revenger of all wrong and in justice, as we see by daily experience, how ever
it thriueth vngratiouslye which is gotten by falshoode and craft. We be taught
by experience, how almighty God never suffers the third heir to enjoy his
fathers wrong possessions, yea, many a time they are taken from him self, in
his own life time. God is not bound to defend such possessions as be gotten by
the devil and his counsel. God will defend all such men's goods and
possessions, which by him are obtained and possessed, and will defend them
against the violent oppressor. So witnesses Solomon, The Lord will destroy
the Prou. 25.
house of the proud man: But he will stablishe the borders of the widow. No
doubt of it (says David) better is a little truly gotten to the ryghteous
man, then the innumerable riches of Psalm. 36.
the wrongful man. Let us flee therefore (good people) all wrong practices in
getting, mainteining, and defending our possessions, lands, and liue^odes, our
bounds and liberties, remembering that such possessions be all under Gods
reuengeaunce. But what do we speak of house and land? Nay it is said in
scripture, that God in his ire does root up whole kingdoms for wrongs and
oppressions, and does transtate kingdoms from one nation to another, for
unrighteous dealing, for wrongs and riches gotten by deceit. This is the
practyse of the holy one (says Daniel) to the intent that living men may
know, that the most hie has power on the kingdoms Daniel. 4.
of men, and gives them to whom soever he will. Furthermore, what is the cause
of penury and scarceness, of dearth and famine? any other thing but a token
of Gods ire, reuengyng our wrongs and injuries one done to another? Ye have
sown much (obraydeth God by his prophet Aggei) and yet bring in little, ye
eat, but ye be not satisfied, ye drink, but ye be Agges. 1.
not filled, ye cloth your selves, but ye be not warm, and he that earneth his
wages, puts it in a bottomless purse: ye look for much increase, but lo,
it came to little, and when ye brought it home (into your barnes) I did blow it
away, says the Lord. O consider therefore the ire of God against gleaners,
gatherers, and incrochers upon other men's lands and possessions. It is
lamentable to see in some places, how greedy men use to plowe and grate upon
their neighbors land, that lies next them, how covetous men now a days
plowe up so nyghe the common balkes and walks, which good men before time
made the greater and brother, partlye for the commodious walk of his neighbor,
partlye for the better shacke in harvest time, to the more comfort of his poor
neighbors cattle. It is a shame to behold the insaciablenes of some covetous
persons in their doings: that where their auncetours left of their land a
broad and sufficient beer balke, to carry the corpse to the Christian
sepulture, how men pinche at such beer balkes, which by long use and custom
ought to be inuiolablye kept for that purpose. And now they either quite ere
them up, and turn the dead body to be borne farther about in the hye
streates, or else if they leave any such mere, it is to strayte for two to
walk on. These strange encrochementes (good neighbors) should be looked upon.
These should be considered in these days of our perambulations. And afterward
the parties admonished, and charitablye reformed, who be the doers of such
private gainyng, to the staunder of the towneship, and to the hinderaunce of
the poor. Your hye ways should be considered in your walks, to understand
where to bestow your days works, according to the good Statutes provided for
the same. It is a good deed of mercy, to amend the dangerous and noisome
ways, whereby thy poor neighbor sitting on his seely weak beast foundereth
not in the deep thereof, and so the market the worse served, for discouraging
of poor vittailers to resort thither for the same cause. If now therefore ye
will have your prayers heard before almyghtie God, for the increase of your
corn and cattle, and for the defense thereof, from unseasonable mistes and
blastes, from hail and other such tempests, love equity, and ryghteousnes,
ensue mercy and charity, which God most requires at our hands. Which
almighty God respected chiefly, in making his civil laws Leui. 19. Deuteronomy. 24.
for his people the Israelites, in chargyng the owners not to gather up their
corn to nigh at harvest season, nor the Grapes and Olives in gatheryng time,
but to leave behynd some ears 1. Cor. 9.
of corn for the poor gleaners. By this he meant to induce them to pity the
poor, to relieve the needye, to show mercy and kyndnes. It can not be lost,
which for his sake is distributed to the poor. For he which ministers seed
to the sower, and bread to the hungrye, which sends down the early and
latter rain upon your feeldes, so to fill up the barnes with corn, and the
wine presses with wine and oil, he I say, who recompenseth all kind of
benefits in the resurrection Joel. 8.
of the just, he will assuredly recompense all merciful deeds showed to the
needy, howsoever unable the poor is, upon whom it is bestowed. O Prou. 3.
(says Solomon) let not mercy and truth forsake thee. Bind them about thy
neck (says he) and write them on the table of thy heart, so shall thou find
favor at Gods hand. Thus honor thou the Lord with thy rytches, and with the
first fruits of thine increase: So shall thy barnes be filled with
abundance, and thy presses shall brust with new wine. Nay, God has promised
to open the windows of heaven, upon the liberal ryghteous man, that he shall
want nothing. He will repress the deuouryng Caterpiller, which should devour
your fruits. He will give you peace and quyete to gather in your provision,
that ye may sit every man under 1. Match. 4.
his own vine quyetly, without fear of the forrayne enemies to invade you. He
will give you not only food to feed on, but stomachs and good appetites to
take comfort of your fruits, whereby in all things ye may have sufficiency.
Finally he will bless you with all manner abundance in this transitorye life,
and endue you with all manner benediction in the next world, in the kingdom
of heaven, through the merits of our Lord and Savior, to whom with the
father and the holy ghost, be all honor euerlastyngly.

Amen.
An Homilee of the state of Matrimony.
THe word of almyghtie god does testify and declare, whence the original
beginning of matrimony comes, and why it is ordained. It is instituted of
God, to ye intent that man and woman should live lawfully in a perpetual
friendly fellowship, to bring forth fruit, and to avoid fornication. By which
means a good conscience might be preserved on both parties, in brideling the
corrupt inclinations of the flesh, within ye limits of honesty. For God has
straightly forbidden all whoredom and uncleanness, and has from time to time
taken grievous punishments of this inordinate lust, as al stories and ages has
declared. Furthermore it is also ordained, that the church of God and his
kingdom might by this kind of life be conserved and enlarged, not only in that
God gives children by his blessing, but also in that they be brought up by ye
parents godly, in the knowledge of Gods word, that thus the knowledge of God
and true religion might be delivered by succession from one to another, that
finally many might enjoy that everlasting immortality. Wherefore, forasmuch
as Matrimony serves as well to avoid sin and offense, as to increase the
kingdom of God: you, as al other which enter yt state, must acknowledge this
benefit of God, with pure and thankeful minds, for that he has so ruled our
hearts, that ye follow not the example of the wicked world, who set their
delyght in filthynesse of sin, where both of you stand in the fear of God,
and abhor all filthynesse. For that is surely the singular gift of God,
where the common example of the world declares how the devil has their
hearts bound and entangled in diverse snares, so that they in their wyuelesse
state run into open abominations, without any grudge of their conscience.
Which sort of men that lives so desperately and filthylye, what dampnation
taryeth for them, saint Paul descrybeth it to them, saying: Neither
whoremongers, neither adulterers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. i. Cor. 5.
This horrible judgment of God ye be escaped through his mercy, if so be that
ye live inseparately, according to Gods ordinance. But yet I would not have
you careless without watching. For the devil will assaye to attempt all
things to interrupte and hinder your hearts and godly purpose, if ye will
give him any entrye. For he will either labor to break this godly knot once
begun betwixt you, or else at the least he will labor to encumber it with
diverse greefes and displeasures.

And this is his principal craft, to work dissension of hearts of the one
from the other: That whereas now there is pleasant and sweet love betwixt
you, he will in the steed thereof, bring in most bitter and unpleasant
dyscorde. And surely that same aduersarye of ours, does as it were from above,
assault man's nature and condition. For this folly is ever from our tender age
grown up with us, to have a desire to rule, to think hyghlye by our self, so
that none thinks it meet to give place to another. That wicked vice of
stubburne will and self love, is more meet to break and to disseuer the love
of heart, then to preserve concord. Wherefore married persons must apply their
minds in most earnest wise to concord, and must crave continually of God the
help of his holy spirit, so to rule their hearts, and to knit their minds
together, that they be not disseuered by any division of discord. This
necessity of prayer, must be often in the occupying and using of married persons,
that often times the one should pray for the other, lest hate and debate do
arise betwixt them. And because few do consider this thing, but more few do
perform it (I say to pray diligently) we see how wonderful the devil
deludeth and scorneth this state, how few matrimonies there be without
chydinges, brawlings, tauntinges, repentinges, bitter cursinges, and
fyghtinges. Which things whosoever do commit, they do not consider that it is
the instigation of the ghostly enemy, who takes great delyght therein: For
else they would with all earnest endeavor, strive against these mischeefes, not
only with prayer, but also with all possible diligence. Yea they would not
give place to the provocation of wrath, which stirs them either to such
rowgh and sharp words, or stripes, which is surely compassed by the devil,
whose temptation, if it be followed, must needs begin and weaue the web of all
miseries and sorrows. For this is most certainly true, that of such
beginninges must needs ensue the breach of true concord in heart, whereby
all love must needs shortly be banished. Then can it not be but a miserable
thing to behold, that yet they are of necessity compelled to live together,
which yet cannot be in quiet together. And this is most customably every where
to be seen. But what is the cause thereof? Forsooth, because they will not
consider the crafty traynes of the devil, and therefore gives not them
selves to pray to God, that he would vouchsafe to repress his power.
Moreover they do not consider how they promote the purpose of the devil, in
that they follow the wrath of their hearts, while they threate one another,
while they in their follye turn all vpsyde down, while they will never give
over their right as they esteem it, yea, while many times they will not give
over the wrong part in deed. Learn thou therefore, if thou desyrest to be
void of all these miseries, if thou desyrest to live peaceably and
comfortablye in wedlock, how to make thy earnest prayer to God, that he would
govern both your hearts by his holy spirit, to restrain the devils power,
whereby your concord may remain perpetuallye. But to this prayer, must be
joined a singular diligence, whereof saint Peter gives this precept, saying:
You husbands deal with your wives i. Pet. 3.
according to knowledge, giving honor to the wife, as unto the weaker vessel,
and as unto them that are heirs also of the grace of life, that your prayers
be not hyndered. This precept does particulerly parteyne to the husband. For he
ought to be the leader and aucthour of love, in cherishing and increasing
concord, which then shall take place, if he will use measurablenesse and not
tirannie, and if he yield some things to the woman. For the woman is a weak
creature, not endued with like strength and constancy of mind, therefore they
be the sooner disquieted, and they be the more prone to all weak affections
and dispositions of mind, more then men be, and lighter they be, and more
vain in their fantasies and opinions. These things must be considered of the
man, that he be not to stiff, so that he ought to wink at some things, and
must gentlye expound all things, and to forbear. Howbeit the common sort of
men does judge, that such moderation should not become a man. For they say
that it is a token of womanishe cowardnesse, and therefore they think that it
is a man's part to fume in anger, to fight with fiste and staff. Howbeit,
howsoever they imagine, undoubtedly Saint Peter does better judge what should
be seeming to a man, and what he should most reasonablye perform. For he
says, reasoning should be used, and not fyghting. Yea he says more, that the
woman ought to have a certain honor attributed to her, that is to say, she
must be spared and borne with, the rather for that she is the weaker vessel,
of a frail heart, inconstant, and with a word soon stirred to wrath. And
therefore consydering these her frayleties, she is to be the rather spared. By
this means, thou shall not only norishe concord: but shall have her heart in
thy power and will. For honest natures will sooner be retained to do their
duty, rather by gentle words, then by stripes. But he which will do al
things with extremity and severity, and does use always rigor in words
and stripes, what will that avail in the conclusion? Ueryly nothing, but that
he thereby sets forward the deuilles work, he banisheth away concord,
charity, and sweet amity, and brings in discention, hatred, and
yrkesomnes, the greatest greefes that can be in the mutual love and fellowship
of man's life. Beyond all this, it brings another evil therewith: For it is
the destruction and interruption of prayer. For in the time that the mind is
occupied with discention and discord, there can be no true prayer used. For the
Lords prayer has not only a respect to particular persons, but to the whole
universal. In the which we openly pronounce, that we will forgive them which
has offended against us, even as we ask forgeuenes of our sins of God.
Which thing how can it be done ryghtly, when their hearts be at discention?
How can they pray each for other, when they be at hate betwixt them selves?
Now, if the aid of prayer be taken away, by what means can they sustain them
selves in any comfort? For they can not otherwise either resist the devil, or
yet have their hearts stayed in stable comfort in all perilles and necessities,
but by prayer. Thus all discommodities, as well worldly as ghostly, follow this
froward testiness, and cumbrous fiercenes, in manners, which be more meet for
brute beasts, then for reasonable creatures. Saint Peter does not allow these
things, but the devil desires them gladly. Wherefore take the more heed. And
yet a man may be a man, although he does not use such extremity, yea though he
should dissemble some things in his wives manners. And this is the part of a
Christian man, which both pleases God, and serves also in good use to the
comfort of their marriage state. Now as concerning the wives duty. What shall
become her? shall she abuse the gentleness and humanity of her husband? and at
her pleasure, turn all things vpsyde down? No surely. For that is far
repugnaunt against gods commandment. For thus does Saint Peter preach to
them: Ye wives, be (...). Pet. 3.
ye in subjection to obey your own husband. To obey, is another thing then to
comptrole or command. Which yet they may do to their children, and to their
family. But as for their husbands, them must they obey, and cease from
commaundyng, and perform subjection. For this surely does norish concord
very much, when the wife is ready at hand, at her husbands commandment, when
she will apply her self to his will, when she endeavors her self to seek
his contentation, and to do him pleasure, when she will esche we all things
that might offend him. For thus will most truly be verified the saying of the
Poet: A good wife by obeying her husband, shall bear the rule, so that he
shall have a delyght and a gladness, the sooner at al times to return home to
her. But on the contrary part, when the wives be stubborn, froward, and
malapert, their husbands are compelled thereby to abhor and flee from their
own houses, even as they should have battle with their enemies. Howbeit, it
can scantly be, but that some offenses shall sometime chance betwixt them: For
no man does live without fault, specially for that the woman is the more frail
party. Therefore let them beware that they stand not in their faults and
wylfulnesse: but rather let them acknowledge their follies, and say: My
husband, so it is, that by my anger I was compelled to do this or that, forgive
it me, and hereafter I will take better heed. Thus ought the women the more
redily to do, the more they be ready to offend. And they shall not do this only
to avoid strife and debate: but rather in the respect of the commandment of
God, as Saint Paul expresses it in this form of words: Let women be
subject to their husbands, as to the Lord. For the husband Ephesians. 5.
is the head of the woman, as Christ is the head of the Church. Here you
understand, that God has commanded that ye should acknowledge the
authority of the husband, and refer to him the honor of obedience. And
Saint Peter 1. Pet. 3.
says in that place before rehearsed, that holy matrones did sometime deck
themselves, not with gold and silver, but in putting their whole hope in God,
and in obeying their husbands, as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose
daughters ye be (says he) if ye follow her example. This sentence is very
meet for woman to print in their remembrance. Truth it is, that they must
specially feel the grief and pains of their matrimony, in that they
relinquish the liberty of their own rule, in the pain of their traueling, in
the bryngyng up of their children: In which offices they be in great perils
and be grieved with great afflictions, which they might be without if they lived
out of matrimony. But saint Peter says, that this is the chief ornament of
holy matrones, in that they set their hope and trust in God, that is to say, in
that they refused not from marriage for the busynes thereof, for the greefes and
perils thereof: but committed al such adventures to God, in most sure trust of
help, after that they have called upon his aid. O woman, do thou the like,
and so shall thou be most excellently beautified before God and al his angels
and saints, and thou need not to seek further for doing any better works.
For obey thy husband, take regard of his requests, and give heed unto him,
to perceive what he requires of thee, and so shall thou honor God, and live
peaceably in thy house. And beyond all this, God shall follow thee with his
benediction, that all things shall well prosper, both to thee and to thy
husband, as the Psalm says: Blessed is the man which fears God, and
walks in his ways, thou shall have the fruit of thine own hands, happy
shall thou be, and well it shall go with thee. Thy wife shall be as a vine,
plentifully spreadyng about thy house. Thy children shall be as the young
sprynges of the Olives about thy table. ^othus shall that man be blessed (says
David) that fears the Lord. This let the wife have ever in mind, the rather
admonyshed thereto by the apparel of her head, whereby is signified, that she
is under covert and obedience of her husband. And as that apparel is of
nature so appointed to declare her subjection: So bids saint Paul that all
other of her raiment should express both shame fastnes and sobriety. For if
it be not lawful for the woman to have her head bare, but to bear thereon the
sign of her power wheresoever she goes: more is it required that she declare
the thing that is meant thereby. And therefore these ancient women of the old
world called their husbands lords, and showed them reverence in obeying them.
But peradventure she will say, that those men loved their wives in deed. I know
that well enough, and bear it well in mind. But when I do admonish you of your
duties, then call not to consideration what their duties be. For when we our
selves do teach our children to obey us as their parents, or when we refourme
our servants, and tell them that they should obey their masters, not only
at the eye, but as to the Lord: If they should tell us again our duties, we
would not think it well done. For when we be admonished al our duties and
faults, we ought not then to seek what other men's duties be. For though a
man had a companion in his fault, yet should not he thereby he without his
fault. But this must be only looked on, by what means thou may make thy
self without blame. For Adam did lay the blame upon the woman, and she turned
it unto the serpent: but yet neither of them was thus excused. And therefore
bring not such excuses to me at this time: but apply al thy diligence to
hear thine obedience to thy husband. For when I take in hand to admonyshe
thy husband to love thee, and to cherishe thee: yet will I not cease to set
out the law that is appointed for the woman, as well as I would require of
the man what is written for his law. Go thou therefore about such things as
becomes thee only, and show thy self tractable to thy husband. Or rather if
thou wylt obey thy husband for gods precept, the^ allege such things as be in
his duty to do, but perform thou diligently those things which the
lawmaker has charged thee to do. For thus is it most reasonable to obey God,
if thou wylt not suffer thy self to transgress his law. He that loves his
freende, seems to do no great thing: but he that honoreth him that is hurtful
and hateful to him, this man is worthy much commendation: Even so think thou,
if thou can suffer an extreme husband, thou shall have a great reward
therefore. But if thou love him only because he is gentle and curtesse, what
reward will God give thee therefore? Yet I speak not these things that I
would wish the husbands to be sharp toward their wives: But I exhort the
women that they would patiently bear the sharpness of their husbands. For
when either parts do their best to perform their duties the one to the
other, then follows thereon great profit to their neighbors for their
examples sake. For when the woman is ready to suffer a sharp band, and the man
will not extremely entreat his stubborn and troublesome wife, then be al
things in quiet, as in a most sure haue^. Even thus was it done in old time,
that every one did their own duty and office, and was not busy to require
the duty of their neighbors. Consider I pray thee that Abraham took to him
his brothers son his wife did not blame him therefore. He commanded him to
go with him a long journey ^he did not gaynesay it, but obeyed his precept.
Again, after all those great miseries, labors, and pains of that journey,
when Abraham was made as lord over al, yet did he give place to Lot of his
superiority: which matter Sara took so little to grief, that she never once
suffered her tongue to speak such words as the common manner of women is wont to
do in these days, when they see their husbands in such rooms, to be made
vnderlyngs, and to be put under their youngers, then they vpbrayde them with
combrous talk, and call them fools, dastardes and cowardes for so doing. But
Sara was so far from speaking any such thing, that it came never into her
mind and thought so to say, but allowed the wisdom and will of her husband.
Yea, besides all this, after the said Lot had thus his will, and left to his
uncle the lesser portion of land, he chances to fall into extreme peril.
Which chance when it came to the knowledge of this said Patriarche, he
incontinently put al his men in harnes, and prepared him self with all his
family and friends, against the host of the Persians. In which case, Sara did
not counsel him to the contrary, nor did say, as then might have been said:
My husband, whither go thou so unadvisedly? Why runnest thou thus on head?
Why do thou offer thy self to so great perils, and art thus ready to
ieopard thine own life, and to peril the lives of all thine, for such a man
as has done thee such wrong? At the least way, if thou regardest not thy
self, yet have compassion on me, which for thy love have forsaken my kynred
and my country, and have the want both of my friends and kynsfolkes, and am
thus come into so far countries with thee, have pity on me, and make me not
here a wydowe, to cast me to such cares and troubles. Thus might she have
said. But Sara neither said nor thought such words, but she kept her self in
scilence in all things. Furthermore, all that time when she was baren, and took
no pains as other women did, by bringing forth fruit in his house? What did
he? He complained not to his wife, but to almyghtie God. And consider how
either of them did their duties as became them. For neither did he despise
Sara because she was baren, nor never did cast it in her teeth. Consider again
how? Abraham expelled the handmayde out of the house when she required it: So
that by this I may truly prove, that the one was pleased and contented with
the other in all things. But yet set not your eyes only on this matter, but
look further what was done before this, that Agar used her maistresse
despitefully, and that Abraham him self was somewhat provoked against her,
which must needs be an intolerable matter and a payneful, to a free hearted
woman and a chaste. Let not therefore the woman be to busy to call for the
duty of her husband, where she should be ready to perform her own, for
that is not worthy any great commendation. And even so again, let not the man
only consider what longs to the woman, and to stand to earnestly gasing
thereon, for that is not his part or duty: But as I have said, let either
party be ready and willing to perform that which belongs specially to them
self. For if we be bound to hold out our left cheek to strangers which
will smite us on the right cheek: how much more ought we to suffer an extreme
and unkind husband? But yet I mean not that a man should beat his wife, God
forbid that, for that is the greatest shame that can be, not so much to her
that is beaten, as to him that does the deed, but if by such fortune thou
chauncest upon such an husband, take it not to heavily, but suppose thou, that
thereby is laid up no small reward hereafter, and in this life time no small
commendation to thee, if thou can be quiet. But yet to you that be men, thus
I speak, Let there be none so grievous fault to compel you to beat your
wives. But what say I your wives, no, it is not to be borne with, that an
honest man should lay hands on his may^ servant to beat her. Wherefore if it
be a great shame for a man to beat his bond servant, much more rebuke it
is, to lay vyolent hands upon his tree woman. And this thing may be well
understand by the laws which the painims has made, which does discharge
her any longer to dwell with such an husband, as unworthy to have any further
pany with her that does smite her. For it is an extreme point, thus so vile to
entreat her like a slave, that is fellow to thee of thy life, and so joined
unto thee before time in the necessary matters of thy living. And therefore a
man may well lyken such a man (if he may be called a man, rather then a wild
beast) to a kyller of his father or his mother. And whereas we be commanded
to forsake our father and mother, for our wives sake, and yet thereby do work
them none injury, but do fulfill the law of God. How can it not appear then
to be a point of extreme madness, to entreat her despitefully, for whose
sake God has commanded thee to leave parents? Yea, who can suffer such
despite? Who can worthi^y express the inconvenience that is, to see what
weepynges and waylinges be made in the open streates, when neighbors run
together to the house of so unruly an husband, as to a bedlem man, who goes
about to ouerturne all that he has at home? Who would not think that it were
better for such a man to wish the ground to open, and to swallowe him in, then
once ever after to be seen in the market? But peradventure thou will object,
that the woman provoke thee to this point. But consider thou again that the
woman is a frail vessel, and thou art therefore made the ruler and head over
her, to bear the weakness of her in this her subjection. And therefore study
thou to declare the honest commendation of thine authority, which thou can
no way better do, then to forbear to utter her in her weakness and subjection.
For even as the king appears so much the more noble, the more excellent and
noble he makes his officers and leefetenauntes, whom if he should dishonor,
and despise the aucthority of their dignity, he should deprive him self of a
great part of his own honor: Even so, if thou do despise her that is set in
the next room beside thee, thou do much derogate and decay the excellency
and virtue of thine own aucthorite. Recount all these things in thy mind,
and be gentle and quiet. Understand that God has given thee children with her,
and art made a father, and by such reason appease thy self. Do not thou see
the husbandmen what diligence they use to till that ground which once they
have taken to farm, though it be never so full of faults? As for an example,
though it be dry, though it brings forth weeds, though the soil can not
bear to much wette, yet he tylleth it, and so wins fruit thereof: Even in
like manner, if thou would use like diligence to instruct and order the mind
of thy spouse, if thou would diligently apply thy self to weed out by
little and little the noisome weeds of uncomely manners out of her mind, with
wholesome precepts, it could not be, but in time thou should feel the
pleasant fruit thereof to both your comfortes. Therefore that this thing
chance not so, perform this thing that I do here counsel thee: Whenever
any displeasaunt matter rises at home, if thy wife has done ought amiss,
comfort her, and increase not the heaviness. For though thou should be
grieved with never so many things, yet shall thou find nothing more grievous
then to want the benevolence of thy wife at home. What offense soever thou
can name, yet shall thou find none more intolerable, then to be at debate
with thy wife. And for this cause most of all ought thou to have this love
in reverence. And if reason moves thee to bear any burden at any other men's
hands, much more at thy wives. For if she be poor, vpbrayde her not, if she
be simple, taunt her not, but be the more courteous. For she is thy body, and
made one flesh with thee. But thou peradventure wylt say that she is a
wrathful woman, a drunkarde, and beastly, without wit and reason. For this
cause bewail her the more. Chafe not in anger, but pray to almyghtie God. Let
her be admonished and helped with good counsel, and do thou thy best
endeavor, that she may be delivered of al these affections. But if thou
should beat her, thou shall increase her evil affections. For frowardnes and
sharpnes, is not amended with frowardnes: but with softnes and gentleness.
Furthermore, consider what reward thou shall have at Gods hand: For where thou
myghtest beat her, and yet for the respect of the fear of God, thou will
abstain and bear patiently her great offenses, the rather in respect of that
law which forbids that a man should cast out his wife what fault soever
she be combred with, thou shall have a very great reward, and before the
receipt of that reward, thou shall feel many commodities: For by this means
she shall be made the more obedient, and thou for her sake shall be made the more
meek. It is written in a storye of a certain strange Philosopher, which had
a cursed wife, a froward, and a drunkarde. When he was asked for what
consyderation he did so bear her evil manners? He made answer. By this
means (said he) I have at home a Scholemaister, and an example how I should
behave myself abroad. For I shall (says he) be the more quiet with other,
being thus daily exercised and taught in the forbearyng of her. Surely it is a
shame that painims should be wyser then we, we I say, that be commanded to
counterfayte angels, or rather God him self through meekness. And for the
love of virtue, this said Philosopher Socrates would not expel his wife out
of his house. Yea some say that he did therefore marrye his wife, to learn
this virtue by that occasion. Wherefore, seeing many men be far behynd the
wisdom of this man, my counsel is, that first and before all things, that
man do his best endeavor to get him a good wife, endued with all honesty and
virtue. But if it so chance that he is deceived, that he has chosen such a
wife as is neither good nor tolerable, then let the husband follow this
Philosopher, and let him instruct his wife in every condition, and never lay
these matters to sight. For the merchant man, except he first be at
composition with his factour to use his interaffayres quietly, he will neither
stir his ship to sail, nor yet will lay hands upon his marchaundize. Even
so, let us do all things, that we may have the fellowship of our wives, which
is the factour of all our doings at home, in great quiet and rest. And by
these means all things shall prosper quyetly, and so shall we pass through
the dangers of the troublous sea of this world. For this state of life will
be more honorable and comfortable then our houses, then servants, then money,
then lands and possessious, then all things that can be told. As all these
with sedition and discord, can never work us any comfort: So shall all things
turn to our commodity and pleasure, if we draw this yoke in one concord of
heart and mind Whereupon do your best endeavor, that after this sort ye use
your matrimony, and so shall ye be armed on every side. Ye have escaped the
snares of the devil, and the unlawful lusts of the flesh. Ye have the
quietness of conscience by this institution of matrimony ordained by God.
Therefore use often prayer to him, that he would be present by you, that he
would continue concord and charity betwixt you. Do the best ye can of your
parts, to custom your selves to softness and meeknes, and bear well in
worth such ouersightes as chance. And thus shall your conversation be most
pleasant and comfortable. And although (which can no otherwise be) some
adversities shall follow, and otherwhiles now one discommoditie, now another
shall appear: yet in this common trouble and adversity, lift up both your
hands unto heaven, call upon the help and assistaunce of God, the aucthour
of your marriage, and surely the promise of relief is at hand. For Christ
affyrmeth in his gospel: Where two or three be gathered together in my name,
and be agreed, what matter soever they pray for, it shall be granted them of my
heavenly father. Why therefore should thou be afraid of the danger, where
thou have so ready a promise, and so nigh an help? Furthermore you must
understand, how necessary it is for Christian folk to bear Christ's cross:
For else we shall never feel how comfortable Gods help is unto us. Therefore
give thanks to God for his great benefit, in that ye have taken upon you this
state of wedlock, and pray you instauntly, that almyghtie God may luckely
defend and maynteyne you therein, that neither ye be ouercommed with any
temptation, nor with any adversity. But before all things, take good heed
that ye give no occasion to the devil to let and hinder your prayers by
discord and discention. For there is no stronger defense and stay in all our
life, then is prayer, in the which we may call for the help of God and obtain
it, whereby we may win his blessyng, his grace, his defense and protection,
so to continue therein to a better life to come. Which grant us he that died
for us all, to whom be all honor and praise, for ever and ever.

Amen.
An Homilee against Idleness.
Forasmuch as man, being not borne to ease and rest, but to labor and
travel, is by corruption of nature through sin, so far degenerated and
grown out of kind, that he takes idleness to be no evil at all, but rather
a commendable thing, seemly for those that be wealthy, and therefore is
greedyly embraced of most part of men, as agreeable to their sensual
affection, and all labor and travail is diligently avoided, as a thing
paynful and repugnaunt to the pleasure of the flesh: It is necessary to be
declared unto you, that by the ordinance of God, which he has set in the
nature of man, every one ought in his lawful vocation and calling, to give
himself to labor: And that idleness, being repugnaunt to the same ordinance,
is a grievous sin, and also for the great inconveniences and mischeefes which
spryng thereof, an intolerable evil: to the intent that when ye understand the
same, ye may diligently flee from it, and on the other part earnestlye apply
your selves, every man in his vocation, to honest labor and busynes, which as
it is enjoined unto man by Gods appointment, so it wants not his manyfold
bleslynges and sundry benefits. Almyghtie God, after that he had created man,
put him into paradise, that he might dress and keep it: But when he had
transgressed gods commandment, eating the fruit of the tree which was
forbidden him, almyghtie God forth with Genesis iii.
did cast him out of paradise into this woeful vale of misery, enioyning him
to labor the ground that he was taken out of, and to eat his bread in the
sweat of his face all the days of his life. It is the appointment and will of
God, that every man, during the time of this mortal and transitory life,
should give himself to some honest and godly exercise and labor, and every one
to do his own business, and to walk vpryghtly in his own Job. v. Eccle. vii.
calling. Man (says Job) is borne to labor. And we are commanded by Jesus
Syrach, not to hate painful works, neither husbandry, or other such
mysteries of travail, which the highest has created. The wise man also
exhorts us Prou. v.
to drink the waters of our own cesterne, and of the rivers that run out of
the mids of our own well: meaning thereby, that we should live of our
ownelabours, and not devour the labors of other. Saint Paul hearing that
among the ii. The. iii.
Thessalonia^s there were certain that lived dissolutely and out of order,
that is to say, which did not work, but were busybodyes, not getting their
own living with their own travail, but eating other men's bread of free
cost, did command ye said Thessalonians, not only to withdraw them selves,
and abstain from the familier company of such inordinate persons, but also
that if there were any such among them that would not labor, the same should
not eat, nor have any living at other men's hands. Which doctrine of S. Paul
(no doubt) is grounded upon the general ordinance of God, which is, that
every man should labor: And therefore it is to be obeyed of al men, and no man
can justly exempt him self from the same. But when it is said, al men should
labor, it is not so straightly meant, that all men should use handye labor.
But as there be diverse sorts of labor, some of the mind, and some of the
body, and some of both: So every one (except by reason of age, debilitie of
body, or want of health, he be unapt to labor at all) ought both for the
getting of his own living honestly, and for to profit others, in some kind of
labor to exercise him self, according as the vocation whereunto God has
called him, shall require. So that whosoever does good to the common weal and
society of men with his industry and labor, whether it be by governing the
common weal publicly, or by bearing public office or ministry, or by
doing any common necessary affairs of his country, or by geuyng counsel, or
by teaching and instructing others, or by what other means soever he be
occupied, so that a profit and benefit redound thereof unto others, the same
person is not to be accounted idle, though he work no bodyly labor, nor is to
be denied his living (if he attend his vocation) though he work not with his
hands. Bodyly labor is not required of them which by reason of their vocation
and office, are occupied in the labor of the mind, to the profit and help
of others. Saint Paul exhorts Timothy, to esche i. Tim. v.
we and refuse idle widows, which go about from house to house, because they
are not only idle, but pratlers also and busybodyes, speaking things which
are not comely. The prophet Ezechiel declaring what the sins of the city of
Ezec. xvi.
Sodom were, reckeneth idleness to be one of the principal. The sins
(says he) of Sodom were these: Pride, fulness of meat, abundance, and
idleness. These things had Sodom and her daughters, meaning the cities
subject to her. The horrible and strange kind of destruction of that city,
and all the country about the same, (which was fire and brimstone reigning from
heaven) most manifestly declares, what a grievous sin idleness is, and
ought to admonish us to flee from the same, and embrace honest and godly
labor. But if we give our selves to idleness and sloth, to lurking and
loitering, to wylful wandering, and wastefull spending, never settling our
selves to honest labor, but living like drone bees by the labors of other
men, then do we break the Lords commandment, we go astray from our
vocation, and incur the danger of Gods wrath and heavy displeasure to our
endless destruction, except by repentance we turn again unfeignedly unto
God. The inconveniences and mischeefes that come of idleness, as well to man's
body, as to his soul, are more then can in short time be well rehearsed. Some
we shall declare and open unto you, that by consyderyng them, ye may the better
with your selves gather the rest. An idle hand (says Solomon) makes Prou. x.
poor, but a quick laboring hand makes rich. Again, he that tillleth his
land, shall have plenteousnesse of bread, but he that flows in idleness, is
a very fool, and shall have poverty Pro. 11. 28.
enough. Again, a slothful body will not go to plowe for cold of the winter,
therefore shall he go Prou. x.
a beggyng in summer, and have nothing. But what shall we need to stand much
about the proving of this, that poverty follows idleness? We have to much
experience thereof (the thing is the more to be lamented) in this Realm. For a
great part of the beggary that is among the poor, can be imputed to nothing so
much, as to idleness, and to the negligence of parents, which do not bring up
their children, either in good learning, honest labor, or some commendable
occupation or trade, whereby when they come to age, they might get their living.
Daily experience also teaches, that nothing is more enemy or pernicious to
the health of man's body, then is idleness, to much ease and sleep, and want
of exercise. But these and such like incommodities, albeit they be great and
noisome, yet because they concern chiefly the body and external goods, they
are not to be compared with the mischeefes and inconveniences, which through
idleness happen to the soul, whereof we will recite some. Idleness is never
alone, but has always a long tail of other vices hanging on, which corrupt
and infect the whole man, after such sort, that he is made at length nothing
else but a lump of sin. Idleness (says Jesus Syrach) brings Eccle. 33.
much evil and mischief. Saint Barnarde calls it the mother of al euyls,
and stepdame of all virtues, addyng moreover, that it does prepare and as it
were tread the way to hell fire. Where idleness is once received, there the
devil is always ready to set in his foot, and to plant al kind of wickedness
and sin, to the everlasting destruction of man's soul. Which thing to be
most true, we are plainly taught in the. xiii. of Matthewe, where it is said:
That the enemy Mat. xiii.
came while men were a sleep, and sowed naughty tares among the good wheat.
In very deed the best time that the devil can have to work his feate, is
when men be a sleep, that is to say, idle. Then is he most busy in his
work, then does he soonest catch men in the snare of perdition, then does he
fill them with all iniquity, to bring them (without Gods special favor) unto
utter destruction. Hereof we have two notable ii. Reg. xi.
examples most lively set before our eyes. The one in king David, who tarying
at home idelly (as the scripture says) at such times as other kings go
forth to battle, was quicklye seduced of Satan to forsake the Lord his God,
and to commit two grievous and abominable sins in his sight: adultrie and
murder. The plagues ii. Reg. xii
that ensued these offenses, were horrible and grievous, as it may easyly
appear to them that will read the story. Another example of Sampson, Judge. xvi.
who so long as be warred with the Philistines, enemies to the people of God,
could never be taken or overcome: But after that he gave him self to ease and
idleness, he not only committed fornication with the strumpet Dalila, but
also was taken of his enemies, and had his eyes miserably put out, was put in
prison, and compelled to grind in a myl, and at length was made the laughing
stock of his enemies. If these two who were so excellent men, so well-beloved of
God, so endued with singular and divine gifts, the one namelye of prophecy,
and the other of strength, and such men as never could by vexation, labor, or
trouble, be overcome, were overthrown and fell into grievous sins, by giving
them selves for a short time to ease and idleness, and so consequently
incurred miserable plagues at the hands of God: What sin, what mischief,
what inconvenience and plague is not to be feared of them which all their life
long give them selves wholye to idleness and ease? Let us not deceive our
selves, thynkyng little hurt to come of doing nothing. For it is a true saying:
When one does nothing, he learneth to do evil. Let us therefore always be
doing of some honest work, that the devil may find us occupied. He him
self is ever occupied, never idle, but walks continually seeking to devour
us. Let us resist him with our diligent watching, in labor, and in well doing.
For he that diligently exercises him self in honest business, is not easily
catched in the devils snare. When man through idleness, or for default of some
honest occupation or trade to live upon, is brought to poverty, and want of
things necessary, we see how easyly such a man is induced for his gain, to
lie, to practice how he may deceive his neighbor, to foresweare him self,
to bear false witness, and oftentimes to steal and murder, or to use some
other ungodly mean to live withal. Whereby not only his good name, honest
reputation, and a good conscience, yea his life is utterly lost, but also the
great displeasure and wrath of God, with diverse and sundry grievous plagues, are
procured. Lo here the end of the idle and sluggishe bodies, whose hands can
not away with honest labor: loss of name, fame, reputation, and life here in
this world, and without the great mercy of god, the purchasyng of everlasting
destruction in the world to come. Have not al men then good cause to beware
and take heed of idleness, seeing they that embrace and follow it, have
commonly of their pleasant idleness, sharp and sour displeasures? Doubtless
good and godly men waying the great and manifold harm that come by idleness
to a common weal, have from time to time provided with all diligence, that
sharp and severe laws might be made, for the correction and amendment of
this evil. The Egyptians had a law, Herodotus.
that every man should weekly bring his name to the chief rulers of the
province, and there withal declare what trade of life he occupied, to the intent
that idleness might be worthyly punished, and diligent labor duly rewarded.
The Athenians did chastise sluggishe and slouthful people, no less then they
did heinous and grievous offenders, consydering (as the truth is) that
idleness causes much mischief. The Arreopagites called every man to a
straight account how he lived. And if they found any loyterers that did not
profit the common weal by one means or other, they were driven out and
banished as unprofitable members, that did only hurt and corrupt the body. And
in this Realm of England, good and godly laws have been diverse times made,
that no idle vagaboundes and loytring runnagates, should be suffered to go from
town to town, from place to place, without punishment, which neither serve
God nor their prince, but devour the sweet fruits of other men's labor,
being common liers, drunkardes, swearers, thieves, whoremaisters, and
murderers, refusing all honest labor, and give them selves to nothing else,
but to invent and do mischief, whereof they are more desirous and greedy, then
is any Lion of his pray. To remedy this inconueniencie, let al parents and
others, which have the care and governance of youth, so bring them up either
in good learning, labor, or some honest occupation or trade, whereby they may
be able in time to come, not only to sustain them selves competently, but also
to relieve and supply the necessity and want of others. And saint Paul says:
Let him that has stolen, steal no more, and he that has deceived others
Ephe. iiii.
or used unlawful ways to get his living, leave of the same, and labor
rather, workyng with his hands that thing which is good, that he may have
that which is necessary for him self, and also be able to give unto others
that stand in need of his help. The prophet David thinks Psalm. 128
him happy that lives upon his labor, saying, When thou eatest the labors of
thine hands, happy art thou, and well is thee. This happiness or blessing
consists in these and such like points. First it is the gift of God (as
Solomon says) Eccle. iii.
when one eats and drinks, and receaueth good of his labor. Secondaryly,
when one lives of his own labor (so it be honest and good) he lives of it
with a good conscience. And an vpryght conscience is a treasure inestimable.
Thirdly, he eats his bread not with brawling and chiding, but with peace and
quietness: when he quietly labors for the same, according to saint Paul's
admonition. Fourthly, he is no man's bondsman for his meat sake, nor needs not
for that, to hang upon the good will of other men: but so lives of his own,
that he is able to give part to others. And to conclude, the labouryng man and
his family, whiles they are busily occupied in their labor, be free from
many temptations and occasions of sin, which they that live in idleness, are
subject unto. And here ought Artificers and Laboring men, who be at wages for
their work and labor, to consider their conscience to God, and their duty
to their neighbor, least they abuse their time in idleness, so defraudyng
them which be at charge both with great wages, and dear commons. They be
worse then idle men in deed, for that they seek to have wages for their
loytring. It is less danger to God to be idle for no gain, then by idleness
to win out of their neighbors purses, wages for that which is not deserved. It
is true that almyghtie God is angry with such as do defraude the hired man of
his wages. The cry of that injury ascends up to Gods ear for vengeance.
And as true it is, that the hired man, who uses deceit in his labor is a
thief i. These. iiii
before God. Let no man (says saint Paul to the Thessalonians) subtly
beguile his brother, let him not defraud him in his business: For the lord is
revenger of such deceiptes. Whereupon he that will have a good conscience to
God, that laboring man, I say, which depends wholye upon Gods benediction,
ministering all things sufficient for his living, let him use his time in
faithful labor, and when his labor by sickness or other misfortune does
cease, yet let him think for that in his health he served GOD and his
neighbor truly, he shall not want in time of necessity. God upon respect of
his fidelity in health, will recompense his indigence, to move the hearts of
good men, to relieve such decayed men in sickness. Where otherwise,
whatsoever is gotten by idleness, shall have no foyson to help in time of
need. Let the labouryng man therefore eschew for his part, this vice of
idleness and deceit, remembering that saint Paul exhorts Ephesians. iiii.
every man to lay away al deceit, dissimulation and lying, and to use truth
and plainness to his neighbor, because (says he) we be members together in
one body, under one head Christ our savior. And here might be charged the
serving men of this Realm, who spend their time in much idleness of life,
nothing regardyng the opportunity of their time, forgetting how service is no
heritage, how age will creep upon them: where wisdom were, they should
expende their idle time in some good business, whereby they might increase in
knowledge, and so the more worthy to be ready for every man's service. It is a
great rebuke to them, that they study not either to write fair, to keep a
book of account, to study the tongues, and so to get wisdom and knowledge in
such books and works, as be now plentifully set out in print of all manner
languages. Let young men consider the precious value of their time, and wast it
not in idleness, in iolitie, in gaming, in banqueting, in ruffians company.
Youth is but vanity, and must be accounted for before God. How merry and glad
soever thou be in thy youth, O young man (says the preacher) how glad soever
thy heartbe in thy Eccle. xi.
young days, how fast and freely soever thou follow the ways of thine own
heart, and the lust of thine own eyes, yet be thou sure that God shall bring
thee into judgment for all these things. God of his mercy put it into the
hearts and minds of all them that have the sword of punishment in their
hands, or have families under their governance, to labor to redres this great
enormitie, of al such as live idelly and unprofitably in the common weal, to
the great dishonor of God, and the grievous plague of his seely people. To
leave sin unpunished, and to neglect the good bryngyng up of youth, is
nothing else but to kindle the Lords wrath against us, and to heap plagues
upon our own heads. As long as the adulterous people were suffered to live
licenciously without reformation: so long did the plague continue and increase
in Israel, as ye may see in the book of Numbers. But when Number. 25.
due correction was done upon them, the Lords anger was straightway pacified,
and the plague ceased. Let al officers therefore look straightly to their
charge. Let all masters of housholdes refourme this abuse in their families.
Let them use the authority that God has given them. Let them not mainteyne
vagaboundes and idle persons, but deliver the Realm and their householdes from
such noisome loyterers, that idleness, the mother of al mischief, being
clean taken away, almyghtie God may turn his dreadful anger away from us, and
confirm the covenant of peace upon us for ever, through the merits of Jesus
Christ our only Lord and savior, to whom with the father and the holy ghost,
be all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
An Homilee of repentance, and of true reconciliation unto God.
THere is nothing that the holy ghost does so much labor in all the scriptures
to beat into men's heads, as repentance, amendment of life, and speedye
returnyng unto the lord God of hoastes. And no maruayle why. For we do daily
and hourly by our wickedness and stubburne disobedience, horriblye fall away
from God, thereby purchasing unto our selves (if he should deal with us
according to his justice) eternal dampnation. So that no doctrine is so
necessary in the Church of God, as is the The doctrine of repentance is most
necessary.
doctrine of repentance and amendment of life. And verily the true preachers
of the Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, and of the glad and joyful tidinges
of salvation, have always in their godly sermons and preachinges unto the
people, joined these two together, I mean repentance and forgeuenes of sins,
even as our Savior Jesus Christ did appoint him self, saying, So it behooved
Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day, and that repentance and
forgeuenes Luke xiiii.
of sins should be preached in his name among all nations. And therefore the
holy Apostle does in the acts speak after this manner: I have witnessed both
to the Jews and to the Gentiles, that Acts. xx.
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesu Christ. Did not
John Baptist, Zacharias son, begin his ministry with the Matthew. iii.
doctrine of repentance, saying, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand?
The like doctrine Matthew. iiii
did our savior Jesus Christ preach him self, and commanded his Apostles
to preach ye same. I might here allege very many places out of ye prophets,
in the which this most wholesome doctrine of repentance, is very earnestly
urged, as most needful for all degrees and orders of men, but one shall be
sufficient at this present time. These are the words of Joel the prophet.
Therefore also now the Lord says, Return unto Joel. ii.
me with all your heart, with fasting, weepyng, and mournyng, rent your hearts
and not your clothes, and return unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great compassion, and ready to pardon (...)
perpetual ^ule which all ^ust follow.
wickedness. Whereby it is given us to understand, that we have here a perpetual
rule appointed unto us, which ought to be observed and kept at all times, and
that there is none other way whereby the wrath of god may be pacified, and his
anger assuaged, that the fiercenes of his fury, and the plagues or
destruction, which by his ryghteous judgment he had determined to bring upon
us, may depart, be removed and taken away. Where he says, But now therefore,
says the Lord, return unto me: It is not without great importance, that the
prophet speaks so. For he had before set forth at large unto them, the
horrible vengeance of god, which no man was able to abide, and therefore he
does move them to repentance, to obtain mercy, as if he should say: I will
not have these things to be so taken, as though there were no hope of grace
left. For although ye do by your sins deserve to be utterly destroyed, and
God by his righteous judgments has determined to bring no small destruction
upon you, yet now that ye are in a manner on the very edge of the sword, if
ye will spedyly return unto him, he will most gently and most mercifully
receive you into favor again. Whereby we are admonished, that repentance is
never to late, so that it be true and earnest. For since that God in the
scriptures wylbe called our father, doubtless he does follow the nature and
property of gentle and merciful fathers, which Luke. xv.
seek nothing so much, as the returning again, and amendment of their
children, as Christ does aboundauntly teach in the parable of the prodigal
son. Does not the Lord him self Ezec. 18. Esai. i.
say by the prophet: I will not the death of the wicked, but that he turn
from his wicked ways and live? And in another place: If we confess i. John.
ii.
our sin, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to
make us clean from all wickedness. Which most comfortable promises are
confyrmed by many examples of the scriptures. When the Jews did wyllingly
receive and embrace the wholesome counsel of the prophet Esai, God by and by
did reach his helping hand unto them, and by his angel, did in Esai. 37.
one night slay the most worthy and valiant soldiers of Sennacheribs camp.
Whereunto may king Manasses be added, who after al manner of dampnable
wickedness, returned unto the ii. Par. 33.
Lord, and therefore was heard of him, and restored again into his kingdom.
The same grace and favor did the sinful woman Magdalene, Zacheus, the poor
thief, and many other feel. Luke 7. 16.
All which things ought to serve for our comfort against the temptations of
our consciences, whereby the devil goes about to shake, or rather to
overthrow our faith. For every one of us ought to apply the same unto him
self, and say: yet now return unto the Lord, neither let the remembrance
of thy former life discourage thee, yea the more wicked that it has been, the
more fervent and earnest let thy repentance or returnyng be, and forth with
thou shall feel the ears of the Lord wide open unto thy prayers. But let us
more narowly look upon the commandment of the Lord touching this matter.
Turn unto me (says he by his prophet Joel) with all your hearts, with
fasting, weping and mourning. Rent your hearts and not your garments. etc. In
which words, he comprehends al manner of things that can be spoken of
repentance, which is a returning again of the whole man unto God, from whom
we be fallen away by sin. But that ye whole discourse thereof may the better
be borne away, we shall first consider in order four principal points, that
is, from what we must return, to whom we must return, by whom we may be able
to convert, and the manner how to turn to GOD.

First, from whence, or from what things we must return. Truly we must
return from From whence we must return.
those things, whereby we have been withdrawe^, plucked, and led away from God.
And these generally are our sins, which as the holy prophet Esai does
testify, do separate God and us, and Esai. lix.
hide his face, that he will not hear us. But under ye name of sin, not only
those gross words and deeds, which by the common judgment of men are
counted to be filthy and unlawful, and so consequently abominable sins: but
also the filthy lusts and inward concupiscences of the flesh, which as
(saint Paul testifies) do resist the will and spirit of God, and therefore
ought Galat. v.
earnestly to be brydled and kept under. We must repent of the false and
erroneous opinions that we have had of god, and the wicked superstition that
does breed of the same, the unlawful worshipping and service of God, and
other like. All these things must they forsake, that will truly turn unto
the Lord and repent aryght. For since that for such things the wrath of God
comes upon the children of disobedience, no end of punishment Ephe. 5.
ought to be looked for, as long as we continue in such things. Therefore they
be here condemned, which will seem to be repentaunt sinners, and yet will not
forsake their Idolatry and superstition. Secondlye, we must see unto whom we
ought to return. Reuertimini vsque ad me, says the Lord: that is, Return as
far as unto me. We must then return unto the unto who(...) we ought to
return.
Lord, yea we must return unto him alone: for he alone is the truth, and the
fountain of all goodness: But we must labor that we do return as far as
unto him, and that we do never cease nor rest till we have apprehended and
taken hold upon him. But this must be done by faith. For sith that God is a
spirit, he can by no other mean be apprehended and taken hold upon.
Therefore, first they do greatly err, which do not turn unto God, but unto
the creatures, or unto ye inventions of men, or unto their own merits.
Secondly, they that do begin to return unto the Lord, and do faint in the myd
way, before they come to the mark that is appointed unto By whom (...) must
return v^^o (...).
them. Thirdly, because we have of our own selves nothing to present us to
God, and do no less flee from him after our fall then our first parent Adam
did, which when he had sinned, did seek to hyde him self from the sight of
God, we have need of a mediator for to bring and reconcile us unto him, who
for our sins is angry with us. The same is Jesus Christ, who being true and
natural God, equal and of one substance with the father, did at the time
appointed take upon him our frail nature, in the blessed virgins womb, and
that of her undefiled substance, that so he might be a mediator betwixt God
and us, and pacify his wrath. Of him does the father him self speak from
heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved son, in Mat. 3.
whom I am well pleased. And he him self in his Gospel does cry out and say:
I am the way, Ioh. xiiii.
the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the father but by me. For he
alone did with the sacrifice John. i. i. Pet. i.
of his body and blood, make satisfaction unto the justice of God for our
sins. The Apostles do testify, that he was exalted for to give Act. v. Luke.
24.
repentance and remission of sins unto Israel. Both which things he him
self did command to be preached in his name. Therefore they are greatly
deceived that preach repentance without Christ, and teach the simple and
ignorant that it consists only in the works of men. They may in deed
speak many things of good works, and of amendment of life and John. xv.
manners: but without Christ they be all vain and unprofitable. They that
think that they have done much of them selves toward repentance, are so
much more the farther from God, because that they do seek those things in
their own works and merits, which ought only to be sought in our savior
Jesus Christ, and in the merits of his death, passion, and bloodshedding.
Fourthly, this holy prophet Joel does lyuelye express the manner of this our
returning or repentance, comprehendyng all the inward and outward The manner
o^ o^^ returning.
things that may be here observed. First, he will have us to return unto God
with our whole heart, whereby he does remove and put away all hypocrisy, lest
the same might justly be said unto us: This people draws near unto Esaias.
29. Mat. xv.
me with their mouth, and worshippeth me with their lips, but their heart is
far of from me. Secondlye, he requires a sincere and pure love of godlynes,
and of the true worshipping and service of God, that is to say, that forsakyng
al manner of things that are repugnaunt and contrary unto Gods will, we do give
our hearts unto him, and all the whole strength of our bodies and souls,
according to that which is written in the law: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy Deuteronomy. 6.
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Here therefore nothing
is left unto us, that we may give unto the world, and unto the lusts of the
flesh. For since that the heart is the fountain of al our works, as many as do
with their whole heart turn unto the Lord, do live unto him only. Neither do
they yet repent truly, that haltyng Haltyng on both sides.
on both sides, do otherwhiles obey god, but by and by do thynk, that laying
him aside, it is lawful for them to serve the world and the flesh. And
because that we are let by the natural corruption of our own flesh, and
the wicked affections of the same, he does bid us also to return with
fasting, not thereby understanding a superstitious abstinence and chosing of
meats: but a true discipline or tamyng of the flesh, whereby the norishmentes
of filthy lusts, and of stubborn contumacie and pride, may be withdrawn and
plucked away from it. Whereunto he does add weeping and mourning, which do
contain an outward profession of repentance, which is very needful and
necessary, that so we may partly set forth the ryghteousnes of God, when by
such means we do testifye that we deserved punishments at his hands, and
partly stop the offense that was openly given unto the weak. This did David
see, who being not content to have be wept and be wailed his sins privately,
Psalm. 25.
would publiquelye in his Psalms declare and set forth the ryghteousnes of
God, in punishing sin, and also stay them that might have abused his example
to sin the more boldly. Therefore they are farthest from true repentance,
that will not confess and acknowledge their sins, nor yet bewail them, but
rather do most ungodly glory and rejoice in them. Now least any man should
think that repentance does consist in outward weeping and mourning only, he
does rehearse that wherein ye chief of the whole matter does lie, when he
says: Rent your hearts, Psalm. 52.
and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God. For the people of
the East part of the world were wont to rent their garments, if any thing
had happened unto them that seemed intolerable. This thing did hypocrites
sometime counterfaite and follow, as though the whole repentance did stand
in such outward Hypocrites do counterfeit all manner of ^hinges.
gesture. He teaches then, that an other manner of thing is required, that is,
that they be contrite in their hearts, that they must utterly detest and
abhor sins, and being at defyaunce with them, return unto the Lord their
God, from whom they went away before. For God has no pleasure in the outward
ceremony, but requires a contrite and humble heart, which Psalm. 51.
he will never dispyse, as David does testify. There is therefore none other
use to these outward ceremonies, but as far forth as we are stirred up by
them, and do serve to the glory of God, and to the edifying of other.

Now does he add unto this doctrine or exhortation, ^ow repentance is (...)
vnprost^able.
certain godly reasons, which he does ground upon the nature and property
of God, and whereby he does teach, that true repentance can never be
unprofitable or unfruitful. For as in all other things men's hearts do quail
and faint, if they once perceive that they travail in vain: Even so most
specially in this matter, must we take heed and beware that we suffer not our
selves to be persuaded that all that we do is but labor lost. For thereof
either sudden desperation does arise, or a licentious boldness to sin,
which at length brings unto desperation. Least any such thing then should
happen unto them, he does certify them of the grace and goodness of God, who is
always most redye to receive them into favor again, that turn speedylye
unto him. Which thing he does prove with the same titles whorwith god does
discribe and set forth himself unto Moses, speaking Exodus 34.
on this manner: For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, of great
kyndnesse, and repents him of the eui^^, thatis, such a one as is sorye for
your afflictious. First he calls him gentle and gracious, as he who of his
own nature is more prompt and redye to do good, then to punyshe. Whereunto this
saying of Esaias the Prophet Esaias. 55.
seems to parteyne, where he says: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he will have
pity on him, and to our God, for he is very redye to forgive. Secondly, he
does attribute unto him mercy, or rather (according Psalm. 103.
to the Hebrewe word) the bowels of mercies, whereby he signified the natural
affections of parents toward their children. Which thing David does set
forth goodlye, saying: As a father has compassion on his children, so has
the Lord compassion on them that fear him, for he knows whereof we be made,
he remembers that we are but duste. Thyrdlye, he says, that he is slow to
anger, that is to say, long sufferyng, and which is not lightly provoked to
wrath. Fourthly, that he is of much kindness, for he is that bottomless well
of all goodness, who rejoices to do good unto us. Therefore did he create and
make men, that he might have whom he should do good unto, and make partakers
of his heavenly riches. Fifthlye, he repents of the evil, that is to say,
he does call back again, and revoke the punishment which he had threatened,
when he sees men repent, turn, and amend. Whereupon we do not without a just
cause, detest and abhor the dampnable (...) the (...)
oppinion of them which do most wickedlye go about to persuade the simple and
ignoras^t people, that if we chance after we be once come to God, and graffed
in his son Jesu Christ, to fall into some ho^rible sin, repentance shall
be unprofitable unto us, there is no more hope of reconciliation, or to be
received again into the favor and mercy of God. And that they may give the
better color unto their pestilent and pernicious error, they do commonly
bring in the sixth and tenth Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
second Chapter of the second Epistle of Peter, not consyderyng that in those
places the holy Apostles do not speak of the daily falls, that we as long as
we carry about this body of sin are subject unto: but of the final falling
away from Christ and his Gospel, which Mat. 12. Mark. 3. The sin against the
holy ghost.
is a sin against the holy ghost that shall never he forgeuen, because that
they that do utterly forsake the known truth, do hate Christ and his word,
they do crucify and mock him (but to their utter destruction) and therefore
fall into desperation, and cannot repent. And that this is the true meaning of
the holy spirit of God, it appears by many other places of the Scriptures,
which promises unto all true repentaunt sinners, and to them that with their
whole heart do return unto the Lord their God, free pardon and remission of
their sins. For the probation hereof, we read this: O Israel (says Hiere.
4.
the holy prophet Hieremie) if thou return, return unto me says the Lord,
and if thou put away thine abominations out of any sight, then shalt thou not
be moved. Again, these are Esaias words: Let the wicked forsake his own
ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, Esaias. 55.
and turn again unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for he is redye to forgive. And in the prophet Ozee, Ozee. 6.
the godly do exhort one another after this manner: Come and let us turn
again unto the lord, for he has smitten us, and he will heal us, he has
wounded us, and he will bind us up again. It is most evident and plain, that
these (...).
things ought to be understood of them that were with the Lord before, and
by their sins and wickedness were gone away from him. For we do not turn
again unto him with whom we were never before, but we come unto him. Now,
unto all them that will return unfeignedly unto the Lord their God, the
favor and mercy of God unto forgiveness of sins, is liberally offered.
Whereby it follows necessarilye, Eccle. 7. i. John. i.
that although we do, after we be once come to God and graffed in his son
Jesus Christ, fall into great sins (for there is no ryghteous man upon the
earth that sins not, and if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us) yet if we rise again by repentance, and with a
full purpose of amendment of life do flee unto the mercy of God, taking sure
hold thereupon, through faith in his son Jesu Christ, there is an assured
and infallible hope of pardon and remission of the same, and that we shall be
received again into the favor of our heavenly father. It is written of David:
Act. 13.
I have found a man according to mine own heart, or, I have found David the
son of Jesse, a man according to mine own heart, who will do all things
that I will. This is a godly commendation of David. It is also most certain,
2. Sam. 7.
that he did steadfastly believe the promise that was made him, touching the
Messiah, who should come of him touching the flesh, and that by the same
faith he was justified, and graffed in our savior Jesu Christ to come, and yet
afterward he fell horribly, committing most detestable adultrye 2. Sam. 11.
and damnable murder, and yet as soon as he cried peccaui, I have sinned unto
the Lord, his sin being forgeuen, he was received into favor again. Now
will we come unto Peter, 2. Sam. 12. Peter.
of whom no man can doubt but that he was graffed in our savior Jesus
Christ, long before his denial. Which thing may easylye be proved by the
answer which he did in his name, and in the name of his fellow Apostles,
make unto our savior Jesu Christ, when he said unto the^: Will ye also go
away? Master (says he) to who^ John. 6.
shall we go? Thou haste the words of eternal life, and we believe and know
that thou art the Christ the son of the living God. Whereunto may be added
the like confession of Peter, where Christ does give this most infallible
testimony: Thou art blessed Simon the son of Jonas, for neither flesh nor
blood has revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. These
words are sufficient to prove that Peter was alredye justified, through this
his lyuelye faith in the only begotten son of god, whereof he made so notable
and so solemyne a confession. But did not he afterward most cowardlye deny
his master, although he had heard of him: Whosoever denies me before men, I
will deny him before my father? Nevertheless, as soon as with Mat. 26. Mat. 10.
weeping eyes and with a sobbyng heart he did acknowledge his offense, and with
earnest repentance did flee unto the mercy of God, taking sure hold thereupon,
through faith in him whom he had so shamefullye denied, his sin was forgeuen
him, and for a certificate and assurance thereof, the room of his Apostleship
was not denied unto him. But now mark what does follow. After the same holy
Apostle had on Whitsondaye Act. 2.
with the rest of the Disciples received the gift of the holy ghost most
aboundauntly, he committed no small offense in Antiochia, by brynging the
consciences of the faithful into doubt by his example, Galath. 2.
so that Paul was feign to rebuke him to his face, because that he walked not
vprightlye, or went not the right way in the Gospel. Shall we now say, that
after this grievous offense, he was utterly excluded and shut out from the
grace and mercy of God, and that this his trespass, whereby he was a stumbling
block unto many, was unpardonable? God defend we should say so. But as
these examples are not brought in, to the end that we should thereby take a
boldness to sin, presuming on the mercy and goodness of God, but to the
end that if through the fraylenesse of our own flesh and the temptation of
the Devil we fall into the like sins, we should in no wise despair of the
mercy and goodness of God: Even so must we beware and take heed, that we do in
no wise think in our hearts, imagine, What we (...) be more of.
or believe, that we are able to repent aright, or to turn effectuallye unto
the Lord by our own might and strength. For this must be verifyed in all men:
Without me ye can do nothing. John. 15. 2. Cor. 3.
Again: Of our selves we are not able as much as to think a good thought. And
in another place: It is God that works in us both the will Phillip. 2.
and the deed. For this cause, although Hieremie had said before, If thou
return, O Israel, Hiere. 4.
return unto me, says the Lord: Yet afterward he says, Turn thou me, O
Lord, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. And therefore that
holy writer and ancient father Ambrose does plainly affirm, that Ambros. de
vocat. gentium. lib. 1. ca. 9.
the turnyng of the heart unto God, is of God, as the Lord him self does
testify by his prophet, saying: And I will give thee an heart to know me,
that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, for
they shall return unto me with their whole heart. These things being
considered, let us earnestlye pray unto the living God our heavenly father,
that he will vouchsafe by his holy spirit, to work a true and unfeigned
repentance in us, that after the paynefull labors and trauayles of this life,
we may live eternally with his son Jesus Christ, to whom be all praise and
glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee of Repentance.
HJtherto have ye heard (well beloved) how needeful and necessary the doctrine
of repentance is, and how earnestly it is throughout all the scriptures of God
urged and set forth, both by the ancient prophets, by our Savior Jesu
Christ, and his Apostles, and that forasmuch as it is the conuertion or
turning again of the whole man unto God, from whom we go away by sin, these
four points ought to be observed, That is, from whence or from what things we
must return, unto whom this our returnyng must be made, by whose means it
ought to be done that it may be effectual, and last of all, after what sort we
ought to behave our selves in the same, that it may be profitable unto us, and
attain unto the thing that we do seek by it. Ye have also learned, that as
the opinion of them that deny the benefit of repentance unto those that
after they be come to God and graffed in our savior Jesu Christ, do through
the fraylenesse of their flesh, and the temptation of the devil, fall into
some grievous and detestable sin, is most pestilent and pernicious: So we
must beware, that we do in no wise think that we are able of our own selves
and of our own strength to return unto the Lord our God, from whom we are
gone away by our wickedness and sin. Now it shall be declared unto you,
what be the true parts of repentance; and what things ought to move us to
repent, and to return unto the Lord our God with all speed. Repentance (as
it is said before) is a true returning unto God, whereby men, forsakyng
utterly their idolatry and wickedness, do with a lyuelye faith embrace, love,
and worship the true living God only, and give them selves to all manner of
good works, which by Gods word they know to be acceptable unto him. Now
there be four parts of repentance, which being There be four parts of
repentance
set together, may be lykened to an easy and short ladder, whereby we may
clymbe from the bottomless pit of perdition, that we cast our selves into by
our daily offenses and grievous sins, up into the castle or to wre of
eternal and endelesse salvation. The first is the contrition of the heart. For
we must be earnestly sorye for our sins, and unfeignedly lament and be wayle
that we have by them so grievously offended our most bounteous and merciful
God, who so tenderlye loved us, that he gave his only begotten son to dye a
most bitter death, and to shed his dear heart blood for our redemption and
deliverance. And verily this inward sorrow and grief being conceived in the
heart for the haynousnesse of sin, if it be earnest and unfeigned, is as a
sacrifice to God, as the holy prophet David does testifye, saying: A sacrifyce
to God is a troubled spyrite, Psalm. 51.
a contrite and broken heart, O Lord thou wylt not dispyse. But that this may
take place in us, we must be diligent to read and hear the scriptures and
word of God, which most lively do paynt out before your eyes our natural
vncleanlynesse, and the enormitie of our sinful life. For unless we have a
through feeling of our sins, how can it be that we should earnestly be
sorye for them? Before David did hear the word of the Lord by the mouth of
the prophet Nathan, ii. Sa. xii.
what heaviness I pray you was in him for the adultrie and murder that he
had committed? So that it might be said right well, that he slept in his own
sin. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that when the people had heard
the Act. iiii.
Sermon of Peter, they were compunct and pricked in their hearts. Which thing
would never have been, if they had not heard that wholesome Sermon of Peter. They
therefore that have no mind at all neither to read, nor yet to hear Gods
word, there is but small hope of them that they will as much as once set their
feet, or take hold upon the first staff or step of this ladder: but rather
will sink deeper and deeper into the bottomless pit of perdition. For if at
any time through the remorse of their conscience, which accuses them, they
feel any inward grief, sorrow, or heaviness for their sins, forasmuch as
they want the salve and comfort of Gods word, which they do dispyse, it will
be unto them rather a mean to bring them to utter desperation then otherwise.
The second is, an unfeigned confession and acknowledgyng of our sins unto
God, whom by them we have so greeuouslye offended, that if he should deal
with us according to his justice, we do deserve a thousand helles, if there
could be so many. Yet if we will with a sorrowful and contrite heart make an
unfeigned confession of them unto God, Ezech. 18.
he will freely and frankly forgive them, and so put all our wickedness out of
remembrance before the sight of his majesty, that they shall no more be
thought upon. Hereunto does parteyne the golden saying of the holy prophet
David, where he says on this manner: Then I acknowledged Psalm. xxxi.
my sin unto thee, neither did I hyde mine iniquity: I said, I will
confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
ungodliness of my sin. These are also the words of John the Evangelist: If we
confess i. John. i.
our sins, God is faithful and ryghteous to forgive us our sins, and to
make us clean from all our wickedness. Which ought to be understood of the
confession that is made unto God. For these are saint Augustines words: That
confession In Epist. ad Iulian^ comitem. 30.
which is made unto God, is required by Gods law, whereof John the apostle
speaks, saying: If we confess our sins, God is faithful and ryghteous to
forgive us our sins, and to make us clean from all our wickedness. For
without this confession, sin is not forgeuen. This is then the cheifest and
most principal confession that in the scriptures and word of God we are bydden
to make, and without the which we shall never obtain pardon and forgiveness
of our sins. In deed, besides this there is another kind of confession,
which is needful and necessary. And of the same does Saint James speak
after this manner, saying: Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray
one for another, that ye may be saved. As if he should say: Open that which
greeueth you, that a remedy may be found. And this is commanded both for
him that complayneth, and for him that hears, that the one should show his
grief to the other. The true meaning of it is, that the faithful ought to
acknowledge their offenses, whereby some hatred, rancour, grudge, or malice,
having risen or grown among them one to another, that a brotherlye
reconciliation may be had, without the which nothing that we do can be
acceptable unto God, as our savior Jesus Christ does witness Mat. 5.
himself, saying: When thou offerest thine offering at the altar, if thou
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offryng,
and go and be reconciled, and when thou art reconciled, come and offer thine
offering. It may also be thus taken, that we ought to confess our weakness
and infirmities one to another, to the end that knowing each others
frailnesse, we may the more earnestly pray together unto almyghtye God our
heavenly father, that he will vouchsafe to pardon us our infirmities, for his
son Jesus Christ's sake, and not to impute them unto us, when he shall render
to every man according to his works. And where as the adversaries go about to
wrest this place for to maynteyne their auriculer confession withal, they are
greatly deceived themselves, and do Answer to the adversaries, which
mainteyne auriculer confession.
shame fullye deceive others. For if this text ought to be understood of
auriculer confession: then the Priests are as much bound to confess them
selves unto the lay people, as the lay people are bound to confess them
selves to them. And if to pray, is to absolve: then the laytie by this place
has as great authority to absolve the priests, as the priests have to
absolve the laytie. This did Johannes Scotus, otherwise Johannes Scotus. li. 4.
senten. distinc. 17. quest. 1.
called Duns, well perceive, who upon this place writes on this manner,
Neither does it seem unto me that James did give this commandment, or that
he did set it forth as being received of Christ. For first and foremoste
whence had he authority to bind the whole Church, sith that he was only
Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem? except thou wylt say that the same
Church was at the beginning the head Church, and consequently that he was the
head Bishop, which thing the sea of Rome will never grant. The understanding
of it then, is as in these words: Confess your sins one to another. A
persuasion to humility, whereby he wylleth us to confess our selves generally
unto our neighbors that we are sinners, according to this saying: If we say we
have no sin, we Math. 8.
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And where that they do
allege this saying of our savior Jesu Christ unto the Leaper, to prove
auriculer confession to stand on Gods word, Go thy way and show thy self
unto the priest: Do they not see that the Leaper was cleansed from his
leprosy before he was by Christ sent unto the priest for to show him self
unto him? By the same reason we must be cleansed from our spiritual leprosy,
I mean, our sins must be forgeuen us before that we come to confession. What
need we then to tell forth our sins into the ear of the priest, since that
they be already taken away? Therefore holy Ambrose in his second sermon upon
the hundred and nyneteenth Ambrose
Psalm, does say full well: Go show thy self unto the priest. Who is the
true priest, but he which is the priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech? Whereby this holy father does understand, that both the
priesthood and the law being changed, we ought to acknowledge none other
priest for delyueraunce from our sins but our Savior Jesus Christ, who
being our sovereign Bishop, does with the sacrifice of his body and blood,
offered once for ever upon the altar of the cross, most effectuallye
cleanse the spiritual leprosy, and wash away the sins of all those that
with true confession of the same do flee unto him. It is most evident and
plain, that this auriculer confession has not his warraunt of Gods word, else
it had not ben lawful for Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, upon a just
occasion to have put it down. For when any thing ordained of Nectarius
soromenus ecclesiast. histo. li. 7. cap. 16. Lib. 10. confessionum. ca. 3.
God, is by the lewdenes of men abused, the abuse ought to be taken away, and
the thing it self suffered to remain. Moreover, these are Saint Augustines
words: What have I to do with men, that they should hear my confession, as
though they were able to heal all my diseases? A curious sort of men to know
another man's life, and slothful to correct and amend their own. Why do they
seek to hear of me what I am, which will not hear of thee what they are?
And how can they tell when they hear by me of my self, whether I tell the
truth or not, sith that no mortal man knows what is in man, but the spirit
of man which is in him? Augustine would not have written thus, if auriculer
confession had been used in his time. Being therefore not led with the conscience
thereof, let us with fear and tremblyng, and with a true contrite heart, use
that kind of confession, that God does command in his word, and then
doubtless, as he is faithful and ryghteous, he will forgive us our sins,
and make us clean from all wickedness. I do not say, but that if any do
find them selves troubled in conscience, they may repair to their learned
Curate or Pastor, or to some other godly learned man, and show the trouble
and doubt of their conscience to them, that they may receive at their hand the
comfortable salve of Gods word: but it is against the true Christian liberty,
that any man should be bound to the numbryng of his sins, as it has been
used heretofore in the time of blindness and ignorance.

The third part of repentance, is faith, whereby we do apprehende and take
hold upon the promises of God, touching the free pardon and forgeuenes of our
sins. Which promises are sealed up unto us, with the death and bloodsheddyng
of his son Jesu Christ. For what should avail and profit us to be sorye
for our sins, to lament and bewail that we have offended our most bounteous
and merciful father, or to confess and acknowledge our offenses and
trespasses, though it be done never so earnestly, unless we do steadfastly
believe, and be fully persuaded, that God for his son Jesu Christ's sake, will
forgive us al our sins, and put them out of remembrance, and from his sight?
Therefore they that teach repentance without a liuelye faith in our savior
Jesu Christ, do teach none other but Judas repentance, as all the The
repentance of the (...)ole men.
Schole men do, which do only allow these three parts of repentance: the
contrition of the heart, the confession of the mouth, and the satisfaction of
the work. But all these things we find in Judas repentance, which in
outward appearaunce did far exceed and pass Judas and his repentance.
the repentance of Peter. For first and foremost we read in the gospel, that
Judas was so sorrowful and heavy, yea that he was filled with such Mat. 27.
anguishe and vexation of mind, for that which he had done, that he could not
abide to live any longer. Did not he also before he hanged him self, make an
open confession of his fault, when he said, I have sinned, betraying the
innocent blood? And verily this was a very bold confession, which might have
brought him to great trouble. For by it he did lay to the high priests and
elders charge, the sheddyng of innocent blood, and that they were most
abominable murderers. He did also make a certain kind of satisfaction, when
he did cast their money unto them again. No such thing do we read of Peter,
although he had committed a very heinous sin, and most grievous offense, in
denying of his master. Peter and his repentance.
We find that he went out and wept bytterlye, whereof Ambrose speaks on this
manner: Peter was sorry and wept, because he erred as a Depenitentia distin. 1.
cap. petrus
man. I do not find what he said, I know that he wept. I read of his tears,
but not of his satisfaction. But how chance that the one was received into
favor again with God, and the other cast away, but because that the one did
by a lively faith in him whom he had denied, take hold upon the mercy of God,
and the other wanted faith, whereby he did despair of the goodness and mercy
of God? It is evident and plain then, that although we be never so earnestly
sorye for our sins, acknowledge and confess them: yet all these things
shall be but means to bring us to utter desperation, except we do steadfastly
believe, that God our heavenly father will for his son Jesu Christ's sake,
pardon and forgive us our offenses and trespasses, and utterly put them out of
remembrance in his sight. Therefore, as we said before, they that teach
repentance without Christ, and a lively faith in the mercy of God, do only
teach Cains or Judas repentance. The fourth is, an amendment of life, or a
new life in bryngyng forth fruits worthy of repentance. For they that do
truly repent, must be clean altered and changed, they must become new
creatures, they must be no more the same that they were before. And therefore
thus said John Baptist unto the Pharisees and Saduces that came Matthew. 3.
unto his baptism: O generation of vypers, who has forewarned you to flee
from the anger to come? bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance.
Whereby we do learn, that if we will have the wrath of God to be pacified, we
must in no wise dissemble, but turn unto him again with a true and sound
repentance, which may be known and declared by good fruits, as by most
sure and infallible signs thereof. They that do from the bottom of their
hearts acknowledge their sins, and are unfeignedly sorry for their offenses,
will cast of al hypocrisy, and put on true humility, and lowlynesse of heart.
They will not only receive the Physician of the soul, but also with a most
fervent desire long for him. They will not only abstain from the sins of
their former life, and from all other filthy vices, but also flee, exchew, and
abhor all the occasions of them. And as they did before give them selves to
uncleanness of life, so will they from henceforwardes with all diligence, give
them selves to innocence, pureness of life, and true godliness. We have the
Ninevites for an example, which at the preaching of Jonas did not only
proclayme Jonas. 3.
a general fast, and that they should every one put on sackloth: but they all
did turn from their evil ways, and from the wickedness that was in their
hands. But above all other, the Luke 19.
history of Zacheus is most notable. For being come unto our savior Jesu
Christ, he did say: Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor,
and if I have defrauded any man, or taken ought away by extortion or fraud, I
do restore him four fold. Here we see that after his repentance, he was no
more the man that he was before, but was clean changed and altered. It was so
far of, that he would continue and bide still in his insatiable
covetousness, or take ought away fraudulentlye from any man, that rather he
was most wylling and redye to give away his own, and to make satisfaction unto
all them that he had done injury and wrong unto. Hear may we right well Luke
7.
add the sinful woman, which when she came to our savior Jesu Christ, did
power down such abundance of tears out of those wanton eyes of hers
wherewith she had allured many unto folly, that she did with them wash his
feet, wypyng them with the here is of her head, which she was wont most
gloriously to set out, making of them a net of the devil. Hereby we do
learn, what is the satisfaction that God does require of us, which is, that we
cease from evil, and do good, and if we have done any man wrong, to endeavor
our selves to make him true amends to the vttermoste of our power, following in
this the example of Zacheus, and of this sin^ull woman, and also that goodly
lesson that John Baytist Zacharies son John. 5.
did give unto them that came to ask counsel of him. This was commonly the
penance that Christ enjoined sinners: Go thy way, and sin no more. Which
penance we John. 15.
shall never be able to fulfill, without the special grace of him that does
say, Without me ye can do nothing. It is therefore our parts, if at least we
be desirous of the health and salvation of our own selves, most earnestly to
pray unto our heavenly father, to assist us with his holy spirit, that we
may be able to hearken unto the voice of the true shephearde, and with due
obedience to follow the same. Let us hearken to the voice of almighty God,
when he calls us to repentance, let us not harden our hearts, as such
Infidels do, who abuse the time given them of God to repent, and turn it to
continue their pride and contempt against God and man, which know not how
much they heap Gods wrath upon them selves, for the hardness of their
hearts, which can not repent, at the day of vengeance. Where we have
offended the law of God, let us repent us of our straying from so good a Lord.
Let us confess our unworthiness before him, but yet let us trust in Gods free
mercy for Christ's sake for the pardon of the same. And from henceforth let us
endeavor our selves to walk in a new life, as new borne babes, whereby we
may glorify our father which is in heaven, and thereby to bear in our
consciences a good testimony of our faith. So at the last, to obtain the
fruition of everlasting life, through the merits of our savior, to whom be al
praise and honor for ever.

Amen.
The third part of the Homilee of repentance.
IN the Nomilee last spoken unto you (right well-beloved people in our savior
Christ) ye heard of the true parts and tokens of repentance, that is, hearty
contrition and sorowfulnes of our hearts, unfeigned confession in word of
mouth for our unworthy living before God, a steadfast faith to the merits of
our savior Christ for pardon, and a purpose of our selves by Gods grace to
renounce our former wicked life, and a full conversion to God in a new life,
to glorify his name, and to live orderly and charitably, to the comfort of our
neighbor, in all righteousness, and to live soberly and modestly to our selves,
by using abstinence, and temperance in word and in deed, in mortifying our
earthly members here upon earth. Now for a further persuasion to move you to
those parts of repentance, I will declare unto you some causes, which should ye
rather move you to repentance. The causes that should move us to repent. Esai.
31.


First, the commandment of God, who in so many places of the holy and sacred
Scriptures, does bid us return unto him. O ye children of Israel (says he)
turn again from your infidelity, wherein ye drowned your selves, Again,
Turn you, turn you from your evil ways: Ezech. 33
For why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? And in an other place, thus does he
speak by his holy Ozee. 14
prophet Ozee: O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God: For thou have taken a
great fall by thine iniquity. Take unto you these words with you, when you
turn unto the Lord and say unto him: Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, so will we offer the calves of our lips unto thee. In all these
places we have an express commandment given unto us of God for to return
unto him. Therefore we must take good heed unto our selves, least whereas we
have already by our manyfolde sins and transgressions, provoked and kindeled
the wrath of God against us, we do by breakyng this his commandment, double
our offenses, and so heap still dampnation upon our own heads by our daily
offenses and trespasses, whereby we provoke the eyes of his majesty, we do
well deserve (if he should deal with us according to his justice) to be put
away for ever from the fruition of his glory. Now much more then are we
worthy of the endless torments of hell, if when we be so gently called again
after our rebellion, and commanded to return, we will in no wise hearken unto
the voice of our heavenly father, but walk still after the stubbornnes of our
own hearts?

Secondely, the most comfortable and sweet promise, that the Lord our God
did of his mere mercy and goodness, join unto his commandment. For he does
not only say, Return unto me O Israel: but also, If thou wylt return, and put
Hier. 4.
away all thine abominations out of my sight, thou shall never be moved. These
words also have we in the Prophet Ezechiel: At what time Ezech. ^8.
soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, from the bottom of his heart, I
will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance (says the Lord) so that
they shall be no more thought upon. Thus are we sufficiently instructed, that God
will according to his promise, freely pardon, forgive, and forget al our
sins, so that we shall never be cast in the teeth with them, if, obeying his
commandment, and allured by his sweet promises, we will unfeignedly return
unto him.

Thirdly, the filthiness of sin which is such, that as long as we do abide
in it, God can not but detest and abhor us, neither can there be any hope,
that we shall enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, except we be first made
clean and purged from it. But this will never be, unless forsakyng our former
life, we do with our whole heart return unto the Lord our God, and with a
full purpose of amendment of life, flee unto his mercy, taking sure hold
thereupon through faith in the blood of his son Jesu Christ. If we should
suspect any uncleanness to be in us, wherefore the Similitude.
earthly prince should loathe and abhor the sight of us, what pains would we
take to remove and put it away? How much more ought we with all diligence and
speed that may be, to put away that unclean filthynesse that does separate
and Esai. 59.
make a division betwixt us and our God, and that hides his face from us, that
he will not hear us? And verily herein does appear how filthy a thing sin
is, sith that it can by no other means be washed away, but by the blood of the
only begotten son of God. And shall we not from the bottom of our hearts
detest and abhor, and with all earnestness flee from it, sith that it did
cost the dear heart blood of the only begotten son of God our savior and
redeemer, to purge us from it? Plato does in a certain place write, that if
virtue could be seen with bodily eyes, all men would wonderfully be enflamed
and kyndeled with the love of it: Even so on the contrary, if we might with our
bodily eyes behold the filthynesse of sin, and the uncleanness thereof, we
could in no wise abide it, but as most present and deadly poison, hate and
eschew it. We have a common experience of the same in them which when they
have committed any heinous offense, or some filthy and abominable sin, if it
once come to light, or if they chance to have a through feelyng of it, they be
so ashamed (their own conscience puttyng before their eyes the filthynes of
their act) that they dare look no man in the face, much less that they
should be able to stand in the sight of God.

Fourthly, the uncertainty and brittlenesse of our own lives, which is such,
that we can not assure our selves, that we shall live one hour, or one half
quarter of it. Which by experience we do find daily to be true, in them that
being now merry and lustye, and sometimes feastyng and banquettyng with their
friends, do fall suddenly dead in the streets, and otherwhyles under the
boarde when they are yet at meat. These daily examples, as they are most
terrible and dreadful, so ought they to move us to seek for to be at one with
our heavenly judge, that we may with a good conscience appear before him,
whenever it shall please him for to call us, whether it be suddenly or
otherwise, for we have no more charter of our life, then they have. But as we
are most certain that we shall dye, so are we most uncertain when we shall
dye. For our life does lie in the hand of God, who will take it away when it
pleases him. And verily Death the Lords (...).
when the highest somner of all, which is death, shall come, he will not be
said nay: but we must forth with be packyng, to be present before the
judgment seat of God, as he does find us according as it is written: Whereas
the tree falls, Eccle. 11.
whether it be toward the South, or toward the North, there it shall lie.
Whereunto agrees the saying of the holy martyr of God S. Ciprian, Contra
Demetrianum. Eccle. 5.
saying: As God does find thee when he does call, so does he judge thee. Let
us therefore follow the counsel of the wise man, where he says: Make no
tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not of from day to day. For suddenly
shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security shall thou be
destroyed, and shall perish in time of vengeance. Which words I desire you
to mark diligently, because they do most lively put before our eyes, the
fondness of many men, which abusyng the long sufferyng and goodness of God,
do never think on repentance or amendment of life. Follow not (says he)
thine own mind and thy strength, to walk in the ways of thy heart, neither
say thou, who will bring me under for my works: For God the revenger, will
revenge the wrong done by thee. And say not, I have sinned, and what evil
has come unto me? For the almyghtie is a patient rewarder, but he will not
leave thee unpunished. Because thy sins are forgeuen thee, be not without
fear to heap sin upon sin. Say not neither, The mercy of god is great, he
will forgive my manifold sins: For mercy and wrath come from him, and his
indignation comes upon unrepentant sinners. As if he should say? Art thou
strong and myghtie? Art thou lustye and young? Haste thou the wealth and riches
of the world? Or when thou have sinned, have thou received no punishment for
it? Let none of all these things make thee to be the slower to repent, and to
return with speed unto the Lord. For in the day of punishment and of his
sudden vengeance, they shall not be able to help thee. And specially when
thou art either by the preaching of Gods word, or by some inward motion of
his holy spirit, or else by some other means called unto repentance, neglect
not the good occasion that is ministered unto thee, least when thou would
repent, thou have not the grace for to do it. For to repent, is a good gift of
God, which he will never grant unto them, which living in carnal security,
do make a mock of his threatenings, or seek to rule his spirits as they
list, as though his workyng and gifts were tied unto their will. Fifthly, the
auoydyng of the plagues of God, and the utter destruction that by his ryghteous
judgment does hang over the heads of them all that will in no wise return
unto the Lord: I will (says the Lord) give them for a terrible plague Iere.
24.
to all the kingdoms of the earth, and for a reproach, and for aprouerbe, and
for a curse in all places where I shall cast them, and will send the sword of
famine, and the pestilence among them, till they be consumed out of the land.
And wherefore is this? Because they hardened their hearts, and would in no wise
return from their evil ways, nor yet forsake the wickedness that was in
their own hands, that the fierceness of the Lords fury might depart from
them. But yet Romans 2.
this is nothing in comparison of the intolerable and endless torments of
hell fire, which they shall be feign to suffer, who after their hardness of
heart that can not repent, do heap unto them selves wrath, against the day of
anger, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God: Whereas if we will
repent, and be earnestly sorry for our sins, and with a full purpose of
amendment of life, flee unto the mercy of our god, and taking sure hold
thereuppon through faith in our savior Jesus Christ, do bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance: he will not only power his manifold blessings upon us
here in this world, but also at the last, after the paynefull trauayles of this
life, reward us with the inheritance of his children, which is the kingdom
of heaven, purchased unto us with the death of his son Jesu Christ our
Lord, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be all praise, glory, and
honor, world without end.

Amen.
An Homilee against disobedience and wylful rebellion. The first part.
AS GOD the creator and Lord of al things, appointed his angels and heavenly
creatures in all obedience Psalm. 96. b. 8. and. 102 d. 20. and 148. a. 2.
Dani. 3. c. 58. and. 7. c. 10. Mat. ^6 c. 55 Coloss. 1. b 16. Heb. 1. b. 4. c.
14. Apoca. 19. b. 10. Genesis 2. c. 17. Genesis 1. d. 28.
to serve and to honor his majesty: so was it his will that man, his chief
creature upon the earth, should live under the obedience of his creator and
Lord: and for that cause, God, as soon as he had created man, gave unto him a
certain precept and law, which he (being yet in the state of innocence, and
remaynyng in paradise) should observe as a pledge and token of his due and
bounden obedience, with denuntiation of death if he did transgress and break
the said law and commandment. And as God would have man to be his obedient
subject, so did he make al earthly creatures subject unto man, who kept their
due obedience unto man so long as man remained in his obedience unto god: in
the which obedience if man had continued still, there had been no poverty, no
diseases, no sickness, no death, nor other miseries wherewith mankind is now
infinitely and most miserably afflicted and oppressed. So here appears the
original kingdom of God over angels and man, and universally over all
things, and of man over earthly creatures which God had made subject unto
him, and withal the felicity and blessed state, which angels, man, and all
creatures had remained in, had they continued in due obedience unto GOD their
king. For as long as in this first kingdom the subjects continued in due
obedience to God their king, so long did God embrace all his subjects with his
love, favor, and grace, which to enjoy, is perfect felicity, whereby it is
evident, that obedience is the principal virtue of all virtues, and in deed
the very root of all virtues, and the cause of all felicity. But as all
felicity and blessedness should have continued with the continuance of
obedience, so with the breach of obedience, and breaking in of rebellion, all
vices and miseries did withal break in, and ouerwhelme the world. The first
aucthour of which rebellion, the root of all vices, and mother of all
mischeefes, was Lucifer, first Gods most excellent creature, and most bounden
subject, Mat. 4. b. 9. Mat. 25. d. 43 Ioh. 8. f. 44. 2. Pet. 2. a. 4. Epi. Iud.
a. 6 Apo. 12. b. 7.
who by rebelling against the majesty of God, of the bryghtest and most
glorious angel, is become the blackest and most foulest feende and devil:
and from the heyght of heaven, is fallen into the pit and bottom of hell.

Here you may see the first aucthour and founder of rebellion, and the reward
thereof, here Gene. 3. a. 1. etc. Sap. 2. d. 24. Genesis 3. b. 8. 9 etc. c. 17.
and. d. 23. 24.
you may see the graunde captain and father of all rebels, who perswadyng the
following of his rebellion against GOD their creator and Lord, unto our first
parents Adam and Eve, brought them in high displeasure with GOD, wrought their
exile and vanishment out of paradise, a place of all pleasure and goodness,
into this wretched earth and vale of all misery, procured unto them sorrows of
their minds, mischeefes, sickness, diseases, death of their bodies, and
which is far more horrible then all worldly and bodyly mischeefes, he had
wrought thereby their eternal and everlasting death and dampnation, had not
GOD by the obedience Romans 5. c. 12. etc. and. d 19. etc.
of his son Jesus Christ repaired that, which man by disobedience and
rebellion had destroyed, and so of his mercy, had pardoned and forgeuen him:
of which all and singular the premises, the holy scriptures do bear record
in sundry places. Thus you do see, that neither heaven nor paradise could
suffer any rebellion in them, neither be places for any rebels to remain in.
Thus became rebellion, as you see, both the first and greatest, and the very
root of all other sins, and the first and principal cause both of all
worldly and bodyly miseries, sorrows, diseases, sicknesses, and deaths, and
which is infinitely worse then all these, as is said, the very cause of death
and dampnation eternal also. After this breach of obedience to God, and
rebellion against his majesty, all mischeefes and miseries breaking in
therewith, and ouerflowyng the world, lest all things should come unto
confusion and utter ruin. GOD Genesis 3. d. 17.
forthwith by laws given unto mankind, repaired again the rule and order of
obedience thus by rebellion overthrown, and besides the obedience due unto his
majesty, he not only Gene. 3. c. 16.
ordained that in families and housholdes, the wife should be obedient unto
her husband, the children unto their parents, the servants unto their
masters: but also when mankind increased, and spread it self more largely
over Job. 34. d. 30. and. 36. a. 7. Eccl. 8. a. 2. and. 10. c. 16. 17. and. d.
20. Psalm. 18. g. 50. and. 20. b 6. and. 21. a. 1. and. 144. a. 1. Pro. 8. b. 15
the world, he by his holy word did constitute and ordain in Cities and
Countries several and special governors and rulers, unto whom the residue of
his people should be obedient.

As in readyng of the holy scriptures, we shall find in very many and almost
infinite places, as well of the old Testament, as of the new, that kings and
princes, as well the evil as the good, do reign by Gods ordinance, and that
subjects are bounden to obey them: that God does give princes wisdom, great
power, and authority: that God defends them against their enemies, and
destroys their enemies horribly: that the anger and displeasure of the prince
is as the roaring of a Lion, and the very messenger of death: and that the
subject that provoke him to displeasure, sins against his own soul: With
many other things, concerning both the aucihoritie of princes, and the duty
of subjects. But here let us rehearse two special places out of the new
Testament, which may stand in stead of all other. The first out of saint
Paul's Epistle to the Romans and the. 1^. Romans xiii.
Chapter, where he writes thus unto all subjects, Let every soul be subject
unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers that
be are ordained of GOD. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to them selves
dampnation. For princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil.
Wylt thou then be without fear of the power? Do well, so shall thou have
praise of the same: For he is the minister of GOD for thy wealth: but if thou
do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword for naught, for he is the
minister of God to take vengeance upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye
must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake: for,
for this cause ye pay also tribute, for they are Gods ministers, seruyng for
the same purpose. Give to every man therefore his duty: tribute, to whom
tribute belongs: custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to whom fear
belongs: honor, to whom ye owe honor. Thus far are saint Paul's words.
The second place is in saint Peter's first Epistle, and the second chapter,
whose words are these, Submit you^r selves i. Pet. ii.
unto all manner ordinance of man for the lords sake, whether it be unto the
king, as unto the chief head, either unto rulers, as unto them that are sent
of him for the punishment of evil doers, but for the cheryshing of them that
do well. For so is the will of GOD, that with well doing ye may stop the
mouths of ignorant and foolish men: as free, and not as having the liberty
for a cloak of malitiousnesse, but even as the servants of GOD. Honor all
men, love brotherly fellowship, fear GOD, honor the king. Servants obey your
masters with fear, not only if they be good and courteous, but also though
they be froward. Thus far out of Saint Peter. By these two places of the
holy scriptures, it is most evident, that Kings, Queens, and other Princes
(for he speaks of authority and power, be it in men or women) are ordained
of God, are to be obeyed and honored of their subjects: that such subjects
as are disobedient or rebellious against their princes, disobey GOD, and
procure their own damnation: that the government of princes is a great
blessing of God, given for the common wealth, specially of the good and godly:
for the comfort and cherishing of whom God gives and sets up princes: and
on the contrary part, to the fear and for the punishment of the evil and
wicked. Finally, that if servants ought to obey their masters, not only
being gentle, but such as be froward: as well and much more ought subjects
to be obedient, not only to their good and courteous, but also to their sharp
and rigorous princes. It comes therefore neither of chance and fortune (as
they term it) nor of thambition of mortal men and women climing up of their
own accord to dominion, that there be Kings, Queens, Princes, and other
governors over men being their subjects: but al Kings, Queens, and other
governors are specially appointed by the ordinance of GOD. And as GOD him
self, being of an Psalm. 10. b. 16. and. 45. a. 6. etc. and. 47. a. 2.
infinite majesty, power, and wisdom, rules and governs all things in
heaven and in earth, as the universal Monarche and only King and Emperor over
all, as being only able to take and bear the charge of all: so has he
constituted, Eccle. 17. c
ordained, and set earthly princes over particular kingdoms and dominions in
earth, both for the auoydyng of all confusion, which else would be in the
world if it should be without such governors, and for the great quiet and
benefit of earthly men their subjects, and also that the princes them selves
in authority, power, wisdom, providence, and ryghteousnes in government of
people and countries committed to their charge, should resemble his heavenly
governance, as the majesty of heavenly Mat. 18. c. 23. and. 22. a. 2 Psalm.
x. b 16. and. 45. a. b. and. 47. a. 2. etc. Mat. 22. b. 13. and. 25. c. 34.
things may by the bacenes of earthly things be shadowed and resembled: And
for that similitude that is between the heavenly Monarchy, and earthly
kingdoms well governed, our savior Christ in sundry parables, says that the
kingdom of heaven is resembled unto a man a king, and as the name of the king
is very often attributed and given unto GOD in the holy scriptures, so does GOD
him self in the same scriptures sometime vouchsafe to communicate his name
with earthly princes, tearming Psalm. 82. b. 6.
them gods: Doubtless for that similitude of government which they have or
should have not unlike unto GOD their king. Unto the which similitude of
heaueuly government, the nearer and nearer that an earthly prince does come in
his regiment, the greater blessing of Gods mercy is he unto that country and
people over whom he reigns: and the further and further that an earthlye
prince does swerve from the example of the heavenly government, the greater
plague he is of Gods wrath, and punishment by Gods justice, unto that country
and people, over whom God for their sins has placed such a prince and
governor. For it is in deed evident both by the scriptures, and by daily
experience, that the maintenance of all virtue and godliness, and
consequently of the wealth and prosperity of a kingdom and people, both stand
and rest more in a wise and good prince on the one part, then in great
multitudes of other men being subjects: and on the contrary part, the
overthrow of all virtue and godliness, and consequently the decay and utter
ruin of a Realm and people does grow and come more by an indiscreet and
evil governor, then by many thousands of other men being subjects: thus say
the holy scriptures, Well is thee O Eccle. 10. d. 1^
thou land (says the preacher) whose king is come of nobles, and whose
princes eat in due season, for necessity, and not for lust. Again, a wise
and ryghteous king makes his Realm and people wealthye: and a good,
merciful, and Pro. 16. and. 29. Eccle. x. Esai. 32. a.
gracious prince, is as a shadow in heat, as a defense in storms, as deawe,
as sweet showers, as fresh water springes in great drougthes.

Again, the scriptures of indiscreet and evil princes speak thus, ^o be to
thee (O thou land) whose king is but a child, and whose Eccle. x. d xvi.
princes are early at their bankettes. Again, When the wicked do reign, then
men go to ruin. And again, A foolish prince destroye^^ Prou. 28. and. 29.
the people, and a covetous king undoes his subjects. Thus speak the
scriptures, thus experience testifies of good and evil princes.

What shall subjects do then? shall they obey valiant, stout, wise, and good
Princes, and contempne, disobey, and rebel against children being their
Princes, or against indiscreet and evil governors: GOD forbid. For first what
a perilous thing were it to commit unto the subjects the judgment which
Prince is wise and godly, and his government good, and which is otherwyfe: as
though the foot must judge of the head: an enterprise very heinous, and must
needs breed rebellion. For who else be they that are most inclined to
rebellion, but such hautie spirits? From whom springs such foul ruin of
Realms? Is not rebellion the greatest of all mischeefes? And who are most
redye to the greatest mischeefes, but the worste men? Rebels therefore the
worst of all subjects are most redye to rebellion, as being the worst of all
vices, and furthest from the duty of a good subject: as on the contrary part,
the best subjects are most firm and constant in obedience, as in the
special and peculier virtue of good subjects. What an unworthy matter were it
then to make the naughtiest subjects, and most inclined to rebellion and all
evil, judges over their princes, over their government, and over their
counselors, to determine which of them be good or tolerable, and which be
evil, and so intolerable that they must needs be removed by rebels, being
ever ready as the naughtiest subjects, soonest to rebel against the best
Princes, specially if they be young in age, women in sex, or gentle and
courteous in government, as trusting by their wicked boldness, easilye to
overthrow their weakness and gentleness, or at the least so to fear the
minds of such princes that they may have impunitie of their mischeuous
doings. But whereas in deed a rebel is worse then the worst Prince, and
rebellion worse then the worste government of the worst prince that hitherto
has been: both are rebels unmeet ministers, and rebellion an unfit and
unwholesome medicine to refourme any small lackes in a prince, or to cure any
little greefes in government, such leude remedies being far worse then any
other maladyes and disorders that can be in the body of a common wealth. But
whatsoever the prince be, or his government, it is evident that for the most
part those princes whom some subjects do think to be very godly, and under
whose government they rejoice to live: some other subjects do take the same to
be evil and ungodly, and do wish for a change. If therefore all subjects
that mislike of their prince, should rebel, no Realm should ever be without
rebellion. It were more meet that rebels should hear the advice of wise men,
and give place unto their judgment, and follow the example of obedient
subjects, as reason is that they whose understanding is blinded with so evil
an affection, should give place to them that be of sound judgment, and that
the worse should give place to the better: and so might Realms continue in
long obedience, peace, and quietness. But what if the prince be indiscreet,
and evil in deed, and it also evident to all men's eyes, that he so is? I ask
again, what if it be long of the wickedness of the subjects, that the prince
is indiscreet and evil? Shall the subjects both by their wickedness provoke
God for their deserved punishment to give them an indiscreet or evil prince,
and also rebel against him, and withal against God, who for the punishment of
their sins did give them such a prince? Will you hear the scriptures
concerning this point? God (say the holy scriptures) makes a Job. 34. d. 30.
wicked man to reign for the sins of the people. Again, God gives a prince
in his anger O see. 13. a. 6.
(meaning an evil one) and takes away a prince in his displeasure, meaning
specially when he takes away a good prince, for the sins of the people: as
in our memory he took away our good Josias king Edward in his young and good
years for our wickedness. And contrarilye the scriptures do teach that 2.
Par. 2. and. 9. Prou. xvi.
God gives wisdom unto princes, and makes a wise and good king to reign
over that people whom he loves, and who loves him. Again, if the people obey
God, both they and their king shall prosper and be safe, else both shall 1. Reg.
12. c
perish, says God by the mouth of Samuel.

Here you see, that GOD places as well evil princes as good, and for what
cause he does both. If we therefore will have a good prince, either to be given
us, or to continue, now we have such a one, let us by our obedience to God
and to our prince, move God thereunto. If we will have an evil prince (when
God shall send such a one) taken away, and a good in his place, let us take
away our wickedness which provoke God to place such a one over us, and God
will either displace him, or of an evil prince, make him a good prince: so
that we first will change our evil into good. For will you hear the
scriptures? Pro. xxi. a Esdr. 7. d.
The heart of the prince is in Gods hand, which way soever it shall please
him, he turns it. Thus say the scriptures, wherefore let us turn from our
sins unto the Lord with all our hearts, and he will turn the heart of the
prince unto our quiet and wealth: Else for subjects to deserve through their
sins to have an evil prince, and then to rebel against him, were double and
treble evil, by prouokyng GOD more to plague them: Nay let us either deserve
to have a good prince, or let us patiently suffer and obey such as we deserve.
And whether the prince be good or evil, let us according to the counsel of the
holy scriptures, pray for the prince, for his continuance and increase in
goodness if he be good, and for his amendment if he be evil.

Will you hear the scriptures concerning this most necessary point? I exhort
therefore says saint Paul, that above all things, prayers, supplications, 1.
Tim. 2. a,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be had for all men, for kings, and all
that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life with all
godliness: for that is good and acceptable in the sight of GOD our savior.
etc. This is Saint Paul's council. And who I pray you was prince over the most
part of Christians, when Gods holy spirit by saint Paul's pen gave them this
lesson? Forsoothe, Caligula, Clodius, or Nero? who were not only no
Christians, but Pagans, and also either foolish rulers, or most cruel
tyrauntes. Will you yet hear the word of God to the Jews, when they were
prisoners under Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, after he had slain their king,
nobles, parents, children, and kynsfolkes, burned their country, cities, yea
Jerusalem it self, and the holy temple, and had carried the residue remaining
alive captives with him unto Babylon? Will you hear yet what the prophet
Baruch says unto Gods people being in this captivity? Pray you, says the
prophet, for the life of Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, and for the life of
Balthaser his son, that their days may be as the days of heaven upon the
earth, that God also may give us strength, and lighten our eyes, that we may
live under the defense of Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, and under the
protection of Balthaser Baruc. 1. b. ^.
his son, that we may long do them service, and find favor in their sight.
Pray for us also unto the Lord our God, for we have sinned against the Lord
our God. Thus far the prophet Baruch his words: which are spoken by him
unto the people of God, of that king who was an heathen, a tyrant, and cruel
oppressor of them, and had been a murderer of many thousands of their nation,
and a destroyer of their country, with a confession that their sins had
deserved such a prince to reign over them. And shall the old Christians, by
saint Paul's exhortation, pray for Caligula, Clodius, or Nero? Shall the Jews
pray for Nabuchodonozor? these Emperors and kings being strangers unto them,
being Pagans and Infidels, being murderers, tyrauntes, and cruel oppressors
of them, and the destroyers of their country, countrymen, and kinsmen, the
burners of their villages, towns, cities, and temples? And shall not we pray
for the long, prosperous, and godly reign of our natural prince? No stranger
(which is observed Deu. 17. c. 15.
as a great blessing in the scriptures) of our Christian, our most gracious
Sovereign, no heathen, nor Pagan prince? Shall we not pray for the health of
our most merciful, most loving Sovereign, the preserver of us and our
country, in so long peace, quietness, and security, no cruel person, no
tyrant, no spoyler of our goods, no shedder of our blooddes, no burner and
destroyer of our Towns, Cities, and Country, as were those, for whom yet as
ye have heard, Christians being their subjects ought to pray? Let us not
commit so great ingratitude against GOD and our Sovereign, as not continually
to thank GOD for this government, and for his great and continual benefits
and blessings powered upon us by such government. Let us not commit so great a
sin against God, against our selves, and our country, as not to pray
continuallye unto GOD for the long continuance of so gracious a ruler unto us,
and our country. Else shall we be unworthy any longer to enjoy those benefits
and blessings of God, which hitherto we have had by her: and shall be most
worthy to fall into all those mischeefes and miseries, which we and our
country have by Gods grace through her government hitherto escaped.

What shall we say of those subjects? may we call them by the name of
subjects? Who neither be thankful, nor make any prayer to GOD for so gracious
a Sovereign: but also them selves take armor wickedly, assemble companies and
bands of rebels, to break the public peace so long continued, and to make,
not war, but rebellion, to endaunger the person of such a gracious
Sovereign, to hazard the estate of their country (for whose defense they
should be redye to spend their lives) and being Englishemen, to rob, spoil,
destroy and burn in England Englishemen, to kill and murder their own
neighbors and kinsfolk, their own countrymen, to do all evil and
mischief, yea and more to then foreign enemies would, or could do? What
shall we say of these men, who use them selves thus rebelliously against their
gracious Sovereign? Who, if GOD for their wickedness had given them an
heathen tyrant to reign over them, were by Gods word bound to obey him, and to
pray for him? What may be spoken of them? so far does their unkindness,
unnaturalness, wickedness, mischeuousnesse in their doings, pass and excel
any thing, and all things that can be expressed or uttered by words. Only
let us wish unto all such most speedy repentance, and with so grievous
sorrow of heart, as such so horrible sins against the majesty of God do
require, who in most extreme unthankfulness do rise not only against their
gracious prince, against their natural country, but against all their
countrymen, women, and children, against them selves, their wives, children,
and kinsfolks, and by so wicked an example against all Christendom, and
against whole mankind of all manner of people throughout the wide world, such
repentance, I say, such sorrow of heart GOD grant unto all such whosoever
rise of private and malicious purpose, as is meet for such mischeeues
attempted, and wrought by them. And unto us and all other subjects, God of his
mercy grant, that we may be most unlike to all such, and most like to good,
natural, loving, and obedient subjects: nay, that we may be such in deed,
not only showing all obedience ourselves, but as many of us as be able, to
the uttermost of our power, ability and understanding, to stay and repress
all rebels, and rebellions against God, our gracious prince, and natural
country, at every occasion that is offered unto us. And that which we all are
able to do, unless we do it, we shall be most wicked and most worthy to feel
in the end such extreme plagues, as GOD has ever powered upon rebels. Let us
all make continual prayers unto almyghtie God, even from the bottom of our
hearts, that he will give his grace, power, and strength unto our gracious
Queen Elizabeth, to vanquishe and subdue all, as well rebels at home, as
foreign enemies, that all domestical rebellions being suppressed and
pacified, and all outward invasions repulled and abandoned, we may not only
be sure, and long continue in all obedience unto our gracious Sovereign, and
in that peaceable and quiet life which hitherto we have led under her Majesty,
with all security: but also that both our gracious Queen Elizabeth, and we
her subjects, may altogether in all obedience unto God the king of all kings,
and unto his holy laws, lead our lives so in this world, in all virtue and
godliness, that in the world to come, we may enjoy his everlasting kingdom:
which I beseech God to grant, as well to our gracious Sovereign, as unto us
all, for his son our savior Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the father and
the holy ghost, one God and king immortal, be all glory, praise, and thanks
giving world without end. Amen.

Thus have you heard the first part of this Homilee, now good people let us
pray.

The prayer.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of hoastes, the governor of all creatures, the
only geuer of all victories, who alone art able to strengthen the weak
against the myghtie, and to vanquishe infinite multitudes of thine enemies with
the countenance of a few of thy servants calling upon thy name, and
trusting in thee: Defend O Lord, thy servant and our governor under thee,
our Queen Elizabeth, and all thy people committed to her charge. O Lord
withstand the cruelty of all those which be common enemies as well to the
truth of thy eternal word, as to their own natural Prince and country,
and manifestlye to this crown and Realm of England, which thou haste of thy
divine providence assigned in these our days to the government of thy
servant, our Sovereign and gracious Queen. O most merciful father (if it
be thy holy will) make soft and tender the stony hearts of al those that
exalte themselves against thy truth, and seek either to trouble the quiet of
this realm of England, or to oppress the crown of the same, and convert them
to the knowledge of thy son the only savior of the world Jesus Christ, that
we and they may ioyntlye glorify thy mercies. Lyghten we beseech thee their
ignorant hearts, to embrace the truth of thy word, or else so abate their
cruelty (O most mighty Lord) that this our Christian region, with others
that confess thy holy Gospel, may obtain by thine aid and strength,
surety from all enemies, without shedding of christian blood, whereby al they
which be oppressed with their tyranny, may be relieved, and they which be in
fear of their cruelty, may be comforted: and finally that all christian
realms, and specially this realm of England, may by thy defense and
protection continue in the truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect peace,
quietness, and security: and that we for these thy mercies, jointly altogether
with one consonant heart and voice, may thankfully render to thee al laud and
praise, that we knit in one godly concord and unity amongst our selves, may
continuallye magnify thy glorious name, who with thy son our savior Jesus
Christ, and the holy ghost, art one eternal, almyghtye, and most merciful
God: To whom be all laud and praise world without end.

Amen.
The second part of the Homilee against disobedience and wilful Rebellion.
AS in the first part of this treaty of obedience of subjects to their
Princes, and against disobedience and rebellion, I have alleged diverse
sentences out of ye holy scriptures for proof: so shall it be good for the
better declaration and confirmation of the said wholesome doctrine, to allege
one example or two out of the same holy scriptures, of the obedience of
subjects, not only unto their good and gracious governors, 1. Reg. 25. c.
11. and. e. 22. and. g. 35.
but also unto their evil and unkind princes. As king Saul was not of the
best, but rather of the worst sort of Princes, as being out of Gods favor for
his disobedience against God in sparyng (in a wrong pity) the king Agag, whom
almyghtye God commanded to be stayne, according to the justice of God against
his sworn enemy: and although Saul of a devotion meant to sacrifice such
things as he spared of the Amalechites to the honor and service of God: yet
Saul was reproved for his wrong mercy and devotion, and was told that
obedience would have more pleased him then such lenity, which sinful
humanity (says holy Chrysostom) is more cruel Chriso. 10. 1. Home. 1.
aduersus. Iudeos. 1. Reg. 18. c. 10. 12. 1. Reg. 16. c. 14. and. c. 15. 1. Re.
19. b. 9, and. c. 20. 1. Reg. 17. d. 26. etc. 1. Reg. 18. g. 27. 1. Reg. 19. a.
5. and. b. 8. 1. Reg. 23. 1. Reg. 27. 1. Reg. 16. d 25. 1. Reg. 19. a. 4. 1.
Re. 24. b. 9^ 1. Re. 18. c. 9. and. f. 25. g. 29. 1. Re. 19. b. 19. 1. Reg. 21.
1. Reg. 22. 1. Re 24. a. 5. 2. Re ^4. b. 8 1. Re. 26 a. 6. 1. Re. 26. b. 9.
before God, then any murder or shedding of blood when it is commanded of God.
But yet how evil soever Saul the king was, and out of Gods favor, yet was he
obeyed of his subject David, the very best of all subjects, and most
valiant in the service of his Prince and country in the wars, the most
obedient and loving in peace, and always most true and faithful to his
soueraygne and Lord, and furthest of from all manner rebellion. For the which
his most painful, true, and faithful service, King Saul yet rewarded him not
only with great unkindness, but also sought his destruction and death by all
means possible: so that David was feign to save his life, not by rebellion,
nor any resistaunce, but by flight and hyding him self from the kings sight.
Which notwithstanding, when king Saul upon a time came alone into the cave
where David was, so yt David might easily have slain him, yet would he
neither hurt him, him self, neither suffer any of his men to lay hands upon
him. Another time also David entering by night with one Abisai a valiaunte and a
fierce man, into the tent where King Saul did lie a sleep, where also he
might yet more easylye have slain him, yet would he neither hurt him, him
self, nor suffer Abisai (who was wyllyng and redye to slay King Saul) once to
touch him. Thus did David deal with Saul his prince, notwithstanding that
King Saul continuallye sought his death and destruction. It shall not be
amiss unto these deeds of David to add his words, and to show you what he
spoke unto such as encouraged 1. Re 24. a. 5.
him to take his opportunity and advantage to slaye king Saul, as his mortal
enemy, when he might. The Lord keep me, says David, from doing that thing,
and from laying hands 1. Reg. 24. b. 7. and. c. 1. Reg. 26. b. 9. and. b. 10
etc.
upon my Lord, Gods anointed. For who can lay his hand upon the Lords
anointed, and be gyltlesse? As truly as the Lord lives, except that the
Lord do smite him, or his days shall come to dye, or that he go down to
war, and be slain in battle: the Lord be merciful unto me, that I lay
not my hand upon the Lords anointed.

These be David's words, spoken at sundry times to diverse his servants
prouokyng him to stea king Saul, when opportunity served him thereunto. Neither
is it to be omitted and left out, how 2. Reg. 24 a. 5
when an Amalechite had slain king Saul, even at Saul's own bidding and
commandment (for 1. Reg. 1 b. 7. and. b. 9.
he would live no longer now, for that he had lost the feeld against his
enemies the Philistines) the said Amalechite making great have to bring first
word and news thereof unto David, as joyous unto him for the death of his
mortal enemy, bringing 2. Reg. 1. b. 10
withal the crown that was upon King Saules head, and the bracelet that was
upon his arm, both as a proof of the truth of his news, and also as fit
and pleasant presents unto David, being by God appointed to be king Saul his
successor in the kingdom: Yet was that faithful and godly David so far
from rejoicing at these news, that he rent his clothes, wept, and mourned, and
fasted: and so far of from thankesfeuing to the messenger, either for 2. Reg.
i.c.13*
his deed in killing the king, though his deadly enemy, or for his message and
news, or for his presents that he brought, that he said unto him, How
happened it that thou wast not afraid to lay thy hands upon the Lords
anointed to slay him? Whereupon, immediatelye he commanded 2. Reg. 1. c.^^.
and. c. 15.
one of his servants to kill the messenger, and said, Thy blood be upon thine
own head, for thine own mouth has wytnessed against thy self, in confessyng
that thou haste slain the Lords anointed. This example dearly beloved is
notable, and the circumstances thereof are well to be considered, for the
better instruction of all Subjects in their bounden duty of obedience, and
perpetual fearyng of them from attemptyng of any rebellion, or hurt against
their Prince. On the one part, David was not only a good and true Subject, but
also such a Subject, as both in peace and war had served and saved his
Princes honor and life, and delivered his country and countrymen from great
danger of Infidels, foreign and most cruel enemies, horribly inuading the
1. Reg. 8. d. 18. and, g. 30.
king, and his country: for the which David was in singular favor with all
the people, so that he might have had great numbers of them at his
commandment, if he would have attempted any thing. Besides this David was no
common or absolute subject, but heir aparant to the crown and kingdom, by
God appointed i. Reg. 16. c. ^. etc.
to raygne after Saul: which as it increased the favor of the people that
knew it, toward David, so did it make David's cause and case much differing
from the case of common and absolute subjects. And which is most of all, David
was i. Reg. 18. c. 11
hyghly and singulerly in the favor of God: On the contrary part, king Saul
was out of Gods i. Reg. 15. c. 11 i. Reg. 18. c. ^0. 12.
favor, (for that cause which is before rehearsed) and he as it were Gods
enemy, and therefore like in war and peace to be hurtful and pernicious unto
the common wealth, and that was known to many of his subjects, for that he
was openly rebuked of Samuel for his disobedience unto i. Reg. 15. and. 22.
and. f. 26
God, which might make the people the less to esteem him. King Saul was also
unto David a mortal and deadlye enemy, though without David's deserving, who
by his faithful, paynefull, profitable, yea most necessary service, had well
deserved, as of his country, so of his prince, but king Saul far otherwise:
the more was his unkindness, hatred, and cruelty toward such a good
subject, both odious and detestable. Yet would David neither him self s^ea,
nor hurt such an enemy, for that he was his prince and Lord, nor would suffer
any other to kill, hurt, or lay hand upon him, when he might have been slain
without any stir, tumult, or danger of any man's life. Now let David answer
to such demaundes, as men desirous of rebellion do use to make. Shall not we,
specially being so good The demand
men as we are, rise and rebel against a Prince, hated of God and Gods enemy:
and therefore like not to prosper either in war or peace, but to be hurtful
and pernicious to the common wealth? No says good and godly David, Gods and
such The answe(...).
a kings faithful subject: and so conuicting such subjects as attempt any
rebellion against such a king, to be neither good subjects nor good men. But
say they, shall we not rise and rebel against The demand.
so unkind a Prince, nothing consyderyng or regarding our true, faithful, and
payneful service, The answe(...).
or the safegarde of our posterity? No says good David, whom no such
unkindness could cause to forsake his due obedience to his Sovereign. Shall
we not, say they, rise and rebel against The demand.
our known, mortal, and deadly enemy, that seeks our lives? No says godly
David, who had The answe(...).
learned the lesson that our Savior afterward playnelye taught, that we
should do no hurt to our fellow subjects, though they hate us, and be our
enemies: much less unto our prince, though he were our enemy. Shall we not
assemble an The de(...).
army of such good fellows as we are, and by hazarding of our lives, and the
lives of such as shall withstand us, and withal hazarding the whole estate of
our country, remove so naughty a Prince? No says godly David, for I, when I
might The answ(...).
without assembling force, or number of men, without tumult or hazard of any
man's life, or shedding of any drop of blood, have delivered my self and my
country of an evil Prince, yet would I not do it. Are not they (say some)
lusty and courageous captains, valiant men of stomach, and The demand.
good men's bodies, that do venture by force to kill and depose their king,
being a naughtye Prince, The a(...)swear.
and their mortal enemy? They may be as lusty, as courageous as they list, yet
says godly David, they can be no good nor godly men that so do: for I not
only have rebuked, but also commanded him to be slain as a wicked man, which
slew king Saul mine enemy, though he being weery of his life for the loss of
the victory against his enemies, desired that man to slay him. What shall we
then do to an evil, to an unkind prince, The demand.
an enemy to us, hated of God, hurtful to the common wealth. etc. Lay no
violent hand upon The answer.
him, says good David, but let him live until God appoint and work his end,
either by natural death, or in war by lawful enemies, not by traiterous
subjects. Thus would godly David make answer: And Saint Paul as ye heard
before, wylleth us to pray also for such a prince. If king David would make
these aunsweres, as by his deeds and words recorded in the holy scriptures,
in deed he does make unto al such demaundes concerning rebelling against evil
Princes, unkind princes, cruel princes, princes that be to their good
subjects mortal enemies, princes that are out of Gods favor, and so
hurtful, or like to be hurtful to the common wealth: what answer think
you, would he make to those that demand, whether they (being naughty and
unkind subjects) may not, to the great hazard of the life of many thousands,
(...) unnatural and wicked Question
and the utter danger of the state of the common wealth, and whole realm,
assemble a sort of Rebels, or to depose, to put in fear, or to destroy their
natural and loving princes, enemy to none, good to al, even to them the worst
of al other, the mainteiner of perpetual peace, quietness, and security, most
beneficial to the common wealth, most necessary for the safegarde of the
whole Realm? What answer would David make to their demand, whether they
may not attempt cruelly and unnaturally to destroy so peaceable and merciful a
Princes, what I say would David so reverently speaking of Saul, and so
patiently suffering so evil a king, what would he answer and say to such
demaundes? What would he say, nay what would he do to such hye attempters, who
so said and did as you before have heard, unto him that slew the king his
master, though a most wicked prince? If he punished with death as a wicked
doer, such a man? With what reproaches of words would he revile such, yea with
what torments of most shameful deaths would he destroy such hell hounds
rather then evil men, such rebels I mean, as I last spoke of? For if they
who do disobey an evil and unkind prince, be most unlike unto David that good
subject: what be they, who do rebel against a most natural and loving Prince?
And if David being so good a subject, that he obeyed so evil a king, was
worthy of a subject to be made a king him self: What be they, who are so evil
subjects that they will rebel against their gracious prince, worthy of? Surely
no mortal man can express worth words, nor conceive in mind the horrible
and most dreadful dampnation that such be worthy of: who disdaining to be the
quiet and happy subjects of their good prince, are most worthy to be the
miserable captives and vile slaves of that infernal tyrant Satan, with him to
suffer eternal slavery and torments. This one example of the good subject
David out of the old Testamen may suffice, and for the notablenesse of it serve
for all. In the new Testament the excellent example of the blessed birgin
Marie the mother of our savior Christ, does at the first offer it self. When
proclamation or commandment was sent into Jurie from Augustus the Luke 2. a.
^. etc.
Emperor of Rome, that the people there should repair unto their own cities
and dwelling places, there to be taxed: neither did the blessed virgin, though
both highly in Gods favor, and also being of the royal blood of the ancient
natural kings of Jurie, disdain to obey the commandment of an heathen and
foreign prince, when GOD had placed such a one o(...)r them: Neither did she
allege for an excuse, that she was great with child, and most near her time
of deliverance: Neither grudged she at the length and tediousnes of the
journey from Nazareth to Bethlehem, from whence and whyther she must go to be
taxed: Neither repined she at the sharpness of the dead time of winter, being
the latter end of December, an unhandsome time to travail in, specially a
long journey for a woman being in her case: but all excuses set apart, she
obeyed, and came to the appointed place, where at her coming she found such
great resort and thronge of people, that fyndyng no place in any Inn, she was
feign after Luke 2. a. 7.
her long paynefull and tedious journey, to take up her lodging in a stable,
where also she was delivered of her blessed child: and this also declares how
near her time she took that journey. This obedience of this most noble, and
most virtuous Lady, to a foreign and Pagan Prince, does well teach us (who
in comparison to her are most base and vile) what redye obedience we do owe to
our natural and gracious Sovereign. Howbeit, in this case the obedience of
the whole Luke. 2. a. ^.
Jewyshe nation (being otherwise a stubburne people) unto the commandment of
the same foreign heathen prince, does prove, that such Christians as do not
most redyly obey their natural gracious sovereign, are far worfe then the
stuburne Jews, whom yet we account as the worst of all people. But no example
ought to be of more force with us christians, then the example of Christ our
master and savior, who though he were the son of GOD, yet did always
behave him self most reverently to such men as were in authority in the
world in his time, and he not rebelliously behaved him self, but openly did
teach the Jews to pay tribute unto the Roman Emperor, Mat. 17. d 2^ etc.
Man. 12. b. 17. Luke 20. d. 2^ Mat. 27. a. 2. Luke 23. a. 1. Ioh. 19. b. 20.
Mat 27. c. 26 Luke 23. d. 24.
though a foreign and a Pagan Prince, yea, him self with his apostles paid
tribute unto him: and finally, being brought before Pontius Pilate a stranger
borne, and an heathen man, being Lord president of Jury, he atknowledged his
authority and power to be given him from GOD, and obeyed patiently the
sentence of most painful and shameful death, which the said Judge pronounced
and gave most unjustly against him, without any grudge, murmuring, or evil
word once geuyng. There be many other examples of the obedience to Princes,
even such as be evil, in the new Testament, to the utter confusion of
disobedient and rebellious people, but this one may be an eternal example,
which the son of GOD, and so the Lord of all, Jesus Christ, has given to us
his Christians and servants, and such as may serve for all, to teach us to
obey Princes, though strangers, wicked, and wrongful, when God for our sins
shall place such over us. Whereby it follows unavoidably, that such as do
disobey or rebel against their own natural gracious sovereigns, howsoever
they call them selves, or be named of others, yet are they in deed no true
Christians, but worse then Jews, worse then Heathens, and such as shall never
enjoy the kingdom of heaven, which Christ by his obedience purchased for true
Christians, being obedient to him the king of all kings, and to their Prince
whom he has placed over them: the which kingdom the peculier place of all
such obedient subjects, I beseech God our heavenly father, for the same our
savior Jesus Christ's sake to grant unto us, to whom with the holy ghost be
all laud, honor, and glory, now and forever.

Amen.
Thus have you heard the second part of this Homilee, now good people let us
pray.

The prayer as before.



The third part of the Homilee against disobedience and wilful Rebellion.
AS I have in the first part of this treatise showed unto you the doctrine of
the holy scriptures as concerning ye obience of true subjects to their
princes, even as well to such as be evil, as unto the good: and in the
second part of the same treaty confyrmed the same doctrine by notable
examples likewise taken out of the holy scriptures: so remains it now that I
partlye do declare unto you in this third part, what an abominable sin
against god and man rebellion is, and how dreadfullye the wrath of God is
kindled and inflamed against all Rebels, and what horrible plagues,
punyshmentes, and deaths, and finally eternal dampnation does hang over
their heads: as how on the contrary part good and obedient subjects are in
Gods favor, and be partakers of peace, quietness, and security, with other
Gods manifold blessings in this world, and by his mercies through our savior
Christ, of life everlasting also in the world to come. How horrible a sin
against God and man rebellion is, cannot possible be expressed according unto
the greatness thereof. For he that names rebellion, names not a singular, or
one only sin, as is theft, robbery, murder, and such like: but he names
the whole puddle and sink of all sins against God and man, against his
prince, his country, his countrymen, his parents, his children, his
kinsfolks, his friends, and against all men universally, all sins I say
against God and al men heaped together names he, that names rebellion. For
concerning the offense of Gods majesty, who sees not that rebellion Romans 13.
The first table of Gods law broken by rebellion and the ^innes of rebels
agayns^ God.
ryseth first by contempt of God and of his holy ordinances and laws, wherein
he so straightly commands obedience, forbids disobedience and rebellion?
And besides the dishonor done by rebels unto Gods holy name, by their
breakyng of their oath made to their prince with the attestation of Gods name,
and calling of his majesty to witness, who hears not the horrible oaths,
and blasphemies of Gods holy name, that are used daily amongst rebels, that is
either amongst them, or hears the truth of their behavior? Who knows not
that rebels do not only them selves leave all works necessary to be done
upon workedayes, undone, whiles they accomplish their abominable work of
rebellion, and to compel others that would gladly be well occupied, to do the
same: but also how rebels do not only leave the Sabbath day of the Lord
unsanctified, the Temple and Church of the Lord vnresorted unto, but also do
by their works of wickedness most horriblye profane and pollute the sabbath
day, serving satan, and by doing of his work, making it the devils day, in
steed of the Lords day? Besides that they compel good men that would gladly
serve the lord assembling in his Temple and Church upon his day, as becomes
the Lords servants, to assemble and meet armed in the feelde, to resist the
furye of such rebels. Yea, and many rebels, least they should leave any part
of Gods commandments in the first table of his law unbroken, or any sin
against God undone, do make rebellion for the maynteynaunce of their Images and
Idols, and of their idolatrye committed, or to be committed by them: and in
dispite of God, cut and tear in sunder his holy word, and tread it under
their feet, as of late ye know was done. As concerning the second table of
Gods law, and all sins that may be committed against man, who sees not that
they be not contained in rebellion? For The ^^fth commandment.
first the rebels do not only dishonor their prince, the parent of their
country, but also do dishonor and shame their natural parents, if they have
any, do shame their kindred and friends, do disherite and undo for ever their
children and heirs. Theftes, robberies, and murders, which of all The syxt
and eight commandment.
sins are most lothed of most men, are in no men so much nor so pernitiously
and mischeuously, as in rebels. For the most errant thieves and cruellest
murderers that ever were, so long as they refrain form rebellion, as they are
not many in number, so spreads their wickedness and damnation unto a few,
they spoil but a few, they shed the blood but of few in comparison. But
rebels are the cause of infinite robberies, and murders of great multitudes,
and of those also whom they should defend from the spoil and violence of
other: and as rebels are many in number, so does their wickedness and
damnation spread it self unto many. And if whoredom and adultry amongst
such persons as are agreeable to such The seventh commandment.
wickedness, are (as they in deed be most damnable:) what are the forceable
oppressions of matrones and men's wives, and the violating and deflowring of
virgins and maids, which are most ryfe with rebels, how horrible and
damnable think you are they? Now besides that, rebels The nynth commandment.
by breach of their faith given, and oath made to their Prince, be guilty of
most damnable perjury, it is wondrous to see what false colors and feigned
causes, by slanderous lies made upon their prince, and the councellers,
rebels will devise to cloak their rebellion withal, which is the worst and
most damnable of all false witness bearyng that may be possible. For what
should The tenth com maundement.
I speak of couetyng or desyryng of other men's wives, houses, lands, goods,
and servants in rebels, who by their wylles would leave unto no man any thing
of his own? Thus you see that al gods laws are by rebels violated and broken,
and that all sins possible to be committed against God or man, be contained
in rebellion: which sins if a man list to name by the accustomed names of the
seven capital or deadly sins, as pride, envy, wrath, covetousness, sloth,
gluttony, and letcherie, he shall find them all in rebellion, and amongst
rebels. For first, as ambition and desire to be aloft, which is the property
of pride, styrreth up many men's minds to rebellion: so comes it of a
luciferian pride and presumption, that a few rebellious subjects should set
themselves up against the majesty of their prince, against the wisdom of the
counselors, against the power and force of all nobility, and the faithful
subjects and people of the whole realm. As for envy, wrath, murder, and
desire of blood, and covetousness of other men's goods, lands and lyuynges,
they are the inseparable accidents of all rebels, and peculier properties
that do usually stir up wicked men unto rebellion. Now such as by
riotousnesse, gluttonye, drunkenness, excess of apparel, and unthrifty
games, have wasted their own goods unthriftily, the same are most apt unto
and most desirous of rebellion, whereby they trust to come by other men's
goods, unlawfully and vyolentlye. And where other gluttons and drunkardes take
to much of such meats and drynkes as are served to tables, rebels waste
and consume in short space al corn in barnes, feeldes, orels where, whole
garners, whole storehouses, whole cellers, devour whole flocks of sheep,
whole droues of oxen and kyne. And as rebels that are married, leauyng their
own wives at home, do most vngratiously: so much more do unmarried men worse
then any stallandes or horses, being now by rebellion set at liberty from
correction of laws which brydeled them before, which abuse by force other
men's wives, and daughters, and rauishe virgins, and maidens, most shamefully,
abhominably and damnably. Thus all sins by all names that sins may be
named, and by all means that all sins may be committted and wrought, do all
wholly upon heaps follow rebellion, and are to be found altogether amongst
rebels. Now whereas pestilence, famine and war, are by the holy scriptures
declared to be the greatest worldly plagues and miseries that lightly can be,
it is evident, 2. Reg. 24. c. 14.
that all the miseries that all these plagues have in them, do wholly
altogether follow rebellion, wherein as all their miseries be, so is there much
more mischief then in them al. For it is known that in the resortyng of great
companyes of men together, which in rebellion happens both upon the part
of true subjects, and of the rebels, by their close lying together, and
corruption of the air and place where they do lie, with ordure and much
fylth, in the hoatte weather: and by unwholesome lodging, and lying often upon
the ground, specially in cold and wette wethers in Winter, by their unwholesome
diet, and feedyng at all times, and often by famine and lack of meat and
drink in due time, and again by taking to much at other times: It is well
known I say, that as well plagues and pestilences, as all other kinds of
sickness and maladies by these means grow upon and amongst men, whereby mo
men are consumed at the length, then are by dint of sword suddenly slain in
the feelde. So that not only pestilences, but also all other sickness,
diseases, and maladies, do follow rebellion, which are much more horrible then
plagues, pestilences, and diseases sent directlye from god, as hereafter shall
appear more plainelye.

And as for hunger and famine, they are the peculier companions of rebellion:
for whiles rebels do in short time spoil and consume al corn and necessary
provision, which men with their labors had gotten and appointed upon, for
their fyndyng the whole year after, and also do let all other men, husbandmen,
and others, from their husbandry, and other necessary works, whereby
provision should be made for times to come, who sees not that extreme famine
and hunger must needs shortly ensue and follow rebellion? Now whereas the wise
king and godly prophet David judged war to be worse then either famine 2.
Reg. 24. c. 14.
or pestilence, for that these two are often suffered by God, for man's
amendment, and be not sins of them selves: but wars have always the sins
and mischeefes of men upon the one side or other joined with them, and therefore
is war the greatest of these worldly mischeefes: but of all wars, civil
war is the worst, and far more abominable yet is rebellion then any
civil war being un worthy the name of any war, so far it exceeds all
wars in all naughtynesse, in all mischief, and in all abomination. And
therefore our savior Christ denounces desolation Mat. 12. b.
and destruction to that Realm, that by sedition and rebellion is divided in
it self. Now as I have showed before, that pestilence and famine, so is it
yet more evident that all the calamities, miseries, and mischeefes of war, be
more grievous, and do more follow rebellion then any other war, as being
far worse then all other wars. For not only those ordinarye and usual
mischief and miseseries of other wars, do follow rebellion, as corn and
other things necessary to man's use to be spoiled, houses, villages, towns,
cities to be taken, sacked, burned, and destroyed, not only many very wealthy
men, but whole countries to be impouerished, and utterly beggered, many
thousands of men to be slain and murdered, women and maids to be vyolated
and deflowred: which things when they are done by foreign enemies, we do
much mourn, as we have great causes, yet are al these miseries without any
wickedness wrought by any our countrymen. But when these mischeefes are
wrought in rebellion by them that should be friends, by countrymen, by
kynsmen, by those that should defend their country, and countrymen from
such miseries, the misery is nothing so great, as is the mischief and
wickedness when the subjects unnaturally do rebel against their prince, whose
honor and life they should defend, though it were with the loss of their
own lives: countrymen to disturb the public peace, and quietness of their
country, for defense of whose quietness they should spend their lives: the
brother to seek, and often to work the death of his brother, the son of the
father, the father to seek or procure the death of his sons, being at man's
age, and by their faults to disherite their innocent children and kynsmen
their heirs for ever, for whom they might purchase lyuynges and lands, as
natural parents do take care and pains, and be at great costs and charges:
and universally in stead of all quietness, joy, and felicity, which do follow
blessed peace and due obedience, to bring in all trouble, sorrow, disquietnesse
of minds and bodies, and al mischief and calamities, to turn al good order
vpsyde down, to bring all good laws in contempt, and to tread them under
feet, to oppress all virtue and honesty, and all virtuous and honest
persons, and to set al vice and wickedness, and all vicious and wicked men at
liberty, to work their wicked wylles, which were before brydeled by wholesome
laws, to weaken, to overthrow, and to consume the strength of the Realm
their natural country, as well by the spendyng and wastyng of the money and
treasure of the prince and Realm, as by murdering of the people of the same,
their own countrymen, who should defend the honor of their Pro. 14.
prince, and liberty of their country against the invasion of foreign
enemies: and so finallye to make their country thus by their mischief
weakened, ready to be a pray and spoil to al outward enemies that will invade
it, to the utter and perpetual captivity, slavery, and destruction of all
their countrymen, their children, their friends, their kynsfolkes left alive,
whom by their wicked rebellion they procure to be delivered into the hands of
foreign enemies, as much as in them does lie. In foreign wars our
countrymen in obteynyng the victory win the praise of valiantness, yea and
though they were ouercommed and slain, yet wine they an honest commendation in
this world, and dye in a good conscience, for serving God, their prince, and
their country, and be children of eternal salvation: But in rebellion how
desperate and strong so ever they be, yet win they shame here in fyghtyng
against God, their prince, and country, and therefore justly do fall headlong
into hell if they dye, and live in shame and fearful conscience, though they
escape. But commonly they be rewarded with shamful deaths, their heads and
carkases set upon poles, or hanged in chains, eaten with kytes and crows,
judged unworthy the honor of buryall, and so their souls, if they repent not
(as commonly they do not) the devil harryeth them into hell, in the myddest of
their mischief. For which dreadful execution Saint Paul shows the cause
of obedience, not only for fear of death, but also in conscience to Godwarde,
for fear of eternal dampnation in the Romans 13.
world to come.

Wherefore good people, let us as the children of obedience, fear the dreadful
execution of God, and live in quiet obedience, to be the children of
everlasting salvation. For as heaven is the place of good obedient subjects,
and hell the prison and dungeon of rebels against God and their prince: so is
that Realm happy where most obedience of subjects does appear, being the
very figure of heaven: and contrarywyse, where most rebellions and rebels be,
there is the express similitude of hell, and the rebels them selves are the
very figures of feendes and deuyls, and their captain the vngartious pattern
of Luciser and Satan, the prince of darkness, of whose rebellion as they be
folowers, so shall they of his damnation in hell undoubtedly be partakers, and as
undoubtedly children of peace the inheritours of heaven with God the father,
God the son, and God the holy ghost: To whom be al honor and glory for ever
and ever.

Amen.
Thus have you heard the third part of this Homilee, now good people let us
pray.

The prayer as before.



The fourth part of the Homilee against disobedience and wilful Rebellion.
FOR your further instruction (good people) to show unto you how much
almyghtie God does abhor disobedience and wylfull rebellion, specially when
rebels advance them selves so hie, that they arm them selves with weapon,
and stand in feelde to fight against God, their prince, and their country: it
shall not be out of the way to show some examples set out in Scriptures,
written for our eternal erudition. We may soon know (good people) how
heinous offense the treachery of rebellion is, if we call to remembrance the
heavy wrath and dreadful indignation of almyghtie God against such subjects
as do only but inwardely grudge, mutter, and murmr against their governors,
though their inward treason so privily hatched in their breasts, come not to
open declaration of their doings, as hard it is whom the devil has so far
entised against Gods word to keep them selves there: no he means still to
blow the cole, to kindle their rebellious hearts to flame into open deeds,
if he be not with grace speedily withstanded.

Some of the children of Israel being murmurers against their magistrates
appointed over Number. 11. a. Number. 12. c 10. Number. 16. Psalm. 77.
them by God, were stricken with foul leprosy: many were burnt up with fire
suddenly sent from the Lord: sometime a great sort of thousands were consumed
with the pestilence: sometime they were stinged to death with a strange kind
of fiery serpents: and (which is most horrible) some of the captains with
their band of murmurers, not dying by any usual or natural death of men, but
the earth openyng, they with their Number. 16.
wives, children, and families were swalowed quick down into hell. Which
horrible destructions of such Israelites as were murmurers against Moses,
appointed by God to be their head and chief magistrate, are recorded in the
book of Numbers, and other places of the scriptures for perpetual memory and
warnyng to al subjects, how hyghly God is displeased with the murmuring and
evil speaking of subjects against their princes, for that as the scripture
records, Exo. 16. b. 7. etc.
their murmr was not against their prince only, being a mortal creature, but
against God him self also. Now if such strange and horrible plagues, did
fall upon such subjects as did only murmr and speak evil against their
heads: what shall become of those most wicked impes of the devil that do
conspire, arm the^ selves, assemble great numbers of armed rebels, and lead
them with them against their prince and country, spoylyng and robbyng,
kyllyng, and murtheryng al good subjects that do withstand them, as many as
they may prevail against? But those examples are written to stay us, not only
from such mischeefes, but also from murmuring, or speaking once an evil word
against our prince, which though any should do never so secretly, yet do the
holy scriptures show that the very birds of the air will bewray them: and
these so many examples before noted out of the Eccl. 10. d.
same holy scriptures do declare, that they shall not escape horrible punishment
therefore. Now concerning actual rebellion, amongst many examples thereof set
forth in the holy scriptures, the example of Absolon is notable: who entryng
into conspiracy against king David his father, both used the advice of very
witty men, and assembled 2. Re. 15. c. 12. and. 17. a. 1. etc. 11. and. 18. b.
7. 81.
a very great and huge company of rebels: the which Absolon though he were
most goodly of person, of great nobility, being the kings son, in great
favor of the people, and so dearly beloved of the king him self, so much
that he gave commandment that (notwithstanding his rebellion) his life
should be saved: when for these consyderations, most men were 2. Reg. 18. b.
5.
afraid to lay their hands upon him, a great tree stretchyng out his arm,
as it were for that purpose, caught him by the great and long bush of his
goodly here, lappyng about it as he fled hastily bareheaded under the said
tree, and so 2 Reg. 18. b. 9.
hanged him up by the here of his head in the air, to give an eternal
document, that neither comelynes of personage, neither nobility, nor favor of
the people, no nor the favor of the king him self, can save a rebel from due
punishment: God the king of al kings being so offended with him, that rather
then he should lack due execution for his treason, every tree by the way will
be a gallous or gybbet unto him, and the here of his own head will be unto him
insteade of an haulter to hang him up with, rather then he should lack one: A
fearful example of Gods punishment (good people) to consider. Now Achitophel,
Achitophel.
though otherwise an exceedyng wise man, yet the mischeeuous counselor of
Absolon, in this wicked rebellion, for lack of an hangman, a convenient
seruitour for such a traitor, went 2. Re. 15. c. 12. and. 16. d. 21. 23. and
17. f 23.
and hanged up him self, a worthy end of al false rebels, who rather then
they should lack due execution, will by Gods just judgment, become hangmen
unto them selves. Thus happened it to the captains of that rebellion: beside
forty thousand of rascal rebels slain in the feelde, and in the chase.
Likewise is it to be seen in the holy scriptures, how that great rebellion
which 2. Reg. 18. c. 7. 8. 9.
the traitor Seba moved in Israel, was suddenly appeased, the head of the
captain traitor (by the means of a seely woman) being cut of. And as the holy
scriptures do show, so does daily experience 2. Reg. 20.
prove, that the counsels, conspiracies, and attemptes of rebels, never took
effect, neither Psalm. 20. 12. b.
came to good, but to most horrible end. For though God does often times
prosper just and lawefull enemies, which be no subjects, against their
foreign enemies, yet did he never long prosper rebellious subjects against
their prince, were they never so great in aucthority, or so many in number.
Five princes or kings (for so the Genesis 14.
scripture terms them) with all their multitudes, could not prevail
against Chodorlaomor, unto whom they had promised loyalty and obedience, and
had continued in the same certain years, but they were all overthrown and
taken prisoners by him: but Abraham with his family and kynsfolkes, an
handefull of men in respect, owyng no subjection unto Chodorlaomor, ouerthre^we
him and all his host in battle, and recovered the prisoners, and delivered
them. So that though war be so dreadful and cruel a thing, as it is, yet
does God often prosper a few in lawefull wars with foreign enemies
against many thousands: but never yet prospered he subjects being rebels
against their natural sovereign, were they never so great or noble, so many,
so stout, so witty, and politic, but always they came by the overthrow, and
to a shameful end: so much does God abhor rebellion, more then other
wars, though otherwise being so dreadful, and so great a destruction to
mankind. Though not only great multitudes of the rude and rascal commons,
but sometime also men of great wit, nobility, and authority, have moved
rebellions against their lawefull princes (whereas true nobility should most
abhor such vilanous, and true wisdom should most detest such frantike
rebellion) though they would pretend sundry causes, as the redress of the
common wealth (which rebellion of all other mischeefes does most destroy) or
reformation of religion (whereas rebellion is most against all true religion)
though they have made a great show of holy meaning by beginning their
rebellions with a counterfeit service of God, (as did wicked Absolon begin his
rebellion 2. Reg. 15. c. 12.
with sacrificing unto God) though they display, and bear about ensigns, and
banners, which are acceptable unto the rude ignorant common people, great
multitudes of whom by such false pretenses and shows they do deceive, and draw
unto them: yet were the multitudes of the rebels never so huge and great, the
captains never so noble, politic, and witty, the pretenses feigned to be
never so good and holy, yet the speedy overthrow of all rebels, of what
number, state, or condition so ever they were, or what color or cause soever
they pretended, is, and ever has been such, that God thereby does show that
he allows neither the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any
people, nor the weight of any cause, as sufficient for the which the subjects
may move rebellion against their princes. Turn over and read the histories
of all nations, look over the Chronicles of our own country, call to mind
so many rebellions of old time., and some yet fresh in memory, ye shall not
find that God ever prospered any rebellion against their natural and
lawefull prince, but contrarywyse that the rebels were overthrown and
slain, and such as were taken prisoners dreadfullye executed. Consider the
great and noble families of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and other Lords, whose
names ye shall read in our Chronicles, now clean extinguished and gone, and
seek out the causes of the decay, you shall find that not lack of issue and
heirs male, has so much wrought that decay, and waste of noble blooddes and
houses, as has rebellion. And for so much as the redress of the common
wealth has of old ben the usual feigned pretense of rebels, and religion now
of late begins to be a color of rebellion: let all godly and discreet
subjects consider well of both, and first concerning religion. If peaceable
king Solomon was judged of God to be more meet to build his Temple (whereby
the orderyng of religion is meant) then his father king David, though otherwise
a most godly king, for that David was a great warryer, and had shead much
blood, though it were in his wars against the enemies of God: of this may
all godly and reasonable subjects consider, that a peaceable prince, specially
our most peaceable and merciful Queen, who has hitherto shed no blood at
all, no not of her most deadly enemies, is more like and far meeter either to
set up, or to mainteyne true religion, then are bloody rebels, who have not
shead the blood of Gods enemies, as king David had done, but do seek to shead
the blood of Gods friends, of their own countrymen, and of their own most
dear friends and kynsfolke, yea the destruction of their most gracious
prince and natural country, for defense of whom they ought to be ready to
shed their blood, if need should so require. What a religion it is that such
men and by such means would restore, may easily be judged: even as good a
religion surely, as rebels be good men and obedient subjects, and as rebellion
is a good mean of redress and reformation, being it self the greatest
deformation of all that may possible be. But as the truth of the Gospel of our
savior Christ, being quietly and soberly taught, though it do cost them
their lives that do teach it, is able to maynteyne the true religion: so has
a frantike religion need of such furious maintenances as is rebellion, and of
such patrones as are rebels, being ready not to dye for the true religion, but
to kill all that shall or dare speak against their false superstition and
wicked idolatry. Now concerning pretenses of any redress of the common
wealth, made by rebels, every man that has but half an eye, may see how
vain they be, rebellion being as I have before declared, the greatest ruin
and destruction of all common wealths that may be possible. And who so looks
on the one part upon the persons and government of the Queens most honorable
counselors, by the experiment of so many years proved honorable to her
Majesty, and most profitable and beneficial unto our country and
countrymen, and on the other part, considers the persons, state, and
conditions of the rebels the^ selves, the refourmers, as they take upon them,
of the present government, he shall find that the most rash and harebrayned
men, the most greatest unthriftiness, that have most lewdely wasted their own
goods and lands, those that are over the ears in debt, and such as for
their theftes, robberies, and murders, dare not in any well governed common
wealth, where good laws are in force, show their faces, such as are of most
lewd and wicked behavior and life, and all such as will not, or can not live
in peace, are always most redye to move rebellion, or to take part with
rebels. And are not these meet men trow you, to restore the common wealth
decayed, who have so spoiled and consumed all their own wealth and thrifte?
and very like to mende other men's manners, who have so vile vices, and
abominable conditions them selves? Surely that which they falsely call
reformation, is in deed not only a defacyng or a deformation, but also an
utter destruction of al common wealth, as would well appear, might the
rebels have their wylles, and does right well and to well appear by their
doing in such places of the country where rebels do route, where though
they tarry but a very little while, they make such reformation, that they
destroy al places, and undo al men where they come, that the child yet unborn
may rue it, and shall many years hereafter curse them. Let no good and
discreet subjects therefore follow the flagge or banner displayed to
rebellion, and borne by rebels, though it have the image of the plough
painted therein, with God speed the plough, written under in great letters,
knowing that none hinder the plough more then rebels, who will neither go to
the plough them selves, nor suffer other that would go unto it. And though some
rebels bear the picture of the five wounds painted against those who put
their only hope of salvation in the wounds of Christ, not those wounds
which are painted in a clout by some leude painter, but in those wounds which
Christ him self bare in his precious body: though they little knowing what the
cross of Christ means, which neither caruer nor paynter can make, do bear
the image of the cross painted in a ragge, against those that have the cross
of Christ painted in their hearts, yet though they paynt withal in their
flagges, Hoc signo vinces, By this sign thou shall get the victory: by a most
fond imitation of the posie of Constantinus magnus, that noble Christian
Emperor, and great conqueror of Gods enemies, a most unmeet ensign for
rebels the enemies of God, their prince and country: or what other banner
soever they shall bear, yet let no good and godly subject upon any hope of
victory or good success, follow such standarde bearers of rebellion. For as
examples of such practices are to be found as well in the histories of old,
as also of latter rebellions in our fathers and our fresh memory: so not
withstandyng these pretenses made, and banners borne, are recorded withal unto
perpetual memory, the great and horrible murders of infinite multitudes and
thousands of the common people slain in rebellion, the dreadful executions
of the aucthours and captains, the pitiful undoing of their wives and
children, and disheriting of the heirs of the rebels for ever, the spoiling,
wasting, and destruction of the people and country where rebellion was first
begun, that the child then yet unborn might rue and lament it, with the
final overthrow, and shameful deaths of all rebels, set forth as well in
the histories of foreign nations, as in the Chronicles of our own country,
some thereof being yet in fresh memory, which if they were collected
together, would make many vollumes and books: But on the contrary part, al
good luck, success, and prosperity that ever happened unto any rebels of any
age, time, or country, may be contained in a very few lines, or words.

Wherefore to conclude, let all good subjects consydering how horrible a sin
against God, their prince, their country, and countrymen, against all Gods
and man's laws rebellion is, being in deed not one several sin, but all
sins against God and man heaped together, consydering the mischeuous life and
deeds, and the shameful ends and deaths of all rebels hitherto, and the
pitiful undoing of their wives, children, and families, and disheriting of
their heirs for ever, and above all things consydering the eternal
dampnation that is prepared for all impenitent rebels in hell with Satan the
first founder of rebellion, and graunde captain of all rebels, let all good
subjects I say, consyderyng these things, avoid and flee all rebellion, as
the greatest of all mischeefes, and embrace due obedience to God and our
prince, as the greatest of all virtues, that we may both escape all evils and
miseries that do follow rebellion in this world, and eternal dampnation in
the world to come, and enjoy peace, quietness, and security, with all other
Gods benefits and blessings, which follow obedience in this life, and finally
may enjoy the kingdom of heaven the peculier place of all obedient subjects
to God and their prince, in the world to come: which I beseech God the king of
all kings, grant unto us for the obedience of his son our Savior Jesus
Christ, unto whom with the father and the holy ghost, one God and king
immortal, all honor, service, and obedience of all his creatures is due
forever and ever.

Amen.
Thus have you heard the fourth part of this Homilee, now good people let us
pray.

The prayer as before.



The fifth part of the Homilee against disobedience and wylfull rebellion.
WHereas after both doctrine and examples of due obedience of subjects to
their princes, I declared lastly unto you what an abominable sin against God
and man rebellion is, and what horrible plagues, punishments, and deaths,
with death everlasting finally does hang over the heads of all rebels: it
shall not be either impertinent, or unprofitable now to declare who they be,
whom the devil the first aucthour and founder of rebellion, does cheefely use
to the stirring up of subjects to rebel against their lawful princes: that
knowing them, ye may flee them and their dampnable suggestions, avoid all
rebellion, and so escape the horrible plagues, and dreadful deaths, and
dampnation eternal finally due to all rebels.

Though many causes of rebellion may be reckened, and almost as many as there
be vices in men and women, as has been before noted: yet in this place I will
only touch the principal and most usual causes, as specially ambition and
ignorance. By ambition, I mean the unlawful and restles desire in men to be
of higher estate then God has given or appointed unto them. By ignorance, I
mean no unskillfulness in arts or sciences, but the lack of knowledge of
Gods blessed will declared in his holy word, which teaches both extremely
to abhor all rebellion as the root of all mischief, and specially to
delyght in obedience as the beginning and foundation of all goodness, as has been also before specified. And as these are the two cheese causes of rebellion:
so are there specially two sorts of men in whom these vices do reign, by whom
the devil the aucthour of al evil does cheefely stir up all disobedience
and rebellion.

The restless ambitious having once determined by one means or other to
atcheeue to their intended purpose, when they can not by lawful and peaceable
means clime so high as they do desire, they attempt the same by force and
violence: wherein when they can not prevail against the ordinary authority
and power of lawful princes and governors them selves alone, they do seek
the aid and help of the ignorant multitude, abusing them to their wicked
purpose. Wherefore seeing a few ambitious and malicious are the aucthours and
heads, and multitudes of ignorant men are the ministers and furtherers of
rebellion, the chief point of this part shall be as well to notify to the simple
and ignorant men, who they be, that have been and be the usual aucthours of
rebellion, that they may know them: and also to admonish them to beware of
the subtle suggestions of such restles ambitious persons, and so to flee
them: that rebellions (though attempted by a few ambitious) through the lack
of mayntenaunce by any multitudes, may speedyly and easyly without any great
labor, danger, or damage, be repressed and clearly extinguished. It is well
known as well by all histories, as by daily experience, that none have either
more ambitiously aspired above Emperors, Kings, and Princes, nor have more
pernitiously moved the ignorant people to rebellion against their Princes,
then certain persons which falsely challenge to them selves to be only
counted and called spiritual. I must therefore hear yet once again breefely
put you good people, in remembrance out of Gods holy word, how our Savior
Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles the heads and chief of all true
spiritual and ecclesiastical men, behaved them selves toward the princes and
rulers of their time, though not the best governors that ever were, that you
be not ignorant whether they be the true disciples and folowers of Christ and
his Apostles, and so true spiritual men, that either by ambition do so highly
aspyre, or do most maliciously teach, or most pernitiously do execute rebellion
against their lawful princes, being the worst of all carnal Mat. 17. d. 25.
Mar. 12. b. 14. Lnk. 20. d. 25. Mat. 27. Luke. 23. To. 13. a. 1. etc. i. Ti. 2.
a. 1. i. Pe. 2. c. 13 Ioh. 6. b. 15 and. 18. f. 36. Mat. 20. d 25 Mar. x. f.
xlii. Luke 22. c. xxv. Mat. 23. a. 8 Luke ix. f. xlvi. ii. Cor. i. d xxiiii. i.
Pet. 5. a. ^
works, and mischeuous deeds. The holy scriptures do teach most expressly
that our savior Christ him self, and his apostle saint Paul, saint Peter,
with others, were unto the magistrates and higher powers, which ruled at their
being upon the earth, both obed^^nt them selves, and did also diligently and
earnestly exhort all other Christians to the like obedience unto their princes
and governors: whereby it is evident that men of the Clergy, and
ecclesiastical ministers, as their successors, ought both them selves
specially and before others to be obedient unto their princes, and also to
exhort all others unto the same. Our savior Christ like wise teaching by his
doctrine that his kingdom was not of this world, did by his example in
fleeing from those that would have made him king, confirm the same: expressly
also forbidding his Apostles, and by them the whole Clergy, all princely
dominion over people and nations, and he and his holy Apostles like wise,
namely Peter and Paul, did forbid unto all ecclesiastical ministers dominion
over the Church of Christ. And in deed whiles that ecclesiastical ministers
continued in Christ's Church in that order that is in Christ's word prescribed
unto them, and in Christian kingdoms kept them selves obedient to their own
princes, as the holy scripture do teach them: both was Christ's Church more
clear from ambitious emulations and contentions, and the state of Christian
kingdoms, less subject unto tumultes and rebellions. But after that ambition
and desire of dominion entered once into ecclesiastical ministers, whose
greatness after the doctrine and example Mat. 18. a 4 and. 20. d. 28. Luke 9. f.
48. and. 22. c 27.
of our savior, should cheefely stand in humbling of them selves: and that
the Bishop of Rome being by the order of Gods word none other then the bishop
of that one see and diocese, and never yet well able to govern the same, did
by intolerable ambition challenge not only to be the head of all the Church
dispersed throughout the world, but also to be Lord of all the kingdoms
Sext. decree. lib. 3. tit. 16. cap. vnico. and lib. 5. tit. 9. cap. 5. in
glossa.
of the world, as is expressly set forth in the book of his own Cannon
laws, most contrary to the doctrine and example of our savior Christ, whose
Uicar, and of his holy apostles, namely Peter, whose successor he pretends
to be: after his ambition entered, and this challenge once made by the Bishop of
Rome, he became at once the spoyler and destroyer both of the Church, which is
the kingdom of our savior Christ, and of the Christian Empire, and all
Christian kingdoms, as an universal tyrant over all. And whereas before that
challenge made, there was great amity and love amongst the Christians of al
countries, hereupon began emulation, and much hatred between the Bishop of
Rome and his Clergy and friends on the one part, and the Grecian Clergy
and Christians of the East on the other part, for that they refused to
acknowledge any such supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome over them: the
Bishop of Rome for this cause amongst other, not only namyng them, and taking
them for schismatikes, but also never ceassing to persecute them, and the
Emperors who had their see and continuance in Greece, by stirring of the
subjects to rebellion against their sovereign lords, and by raysyng deadly
hatred and most cruel wars between them and other Christian princes. And
when the Bishops of Rome had translated the title of the Emperor, and as much
as in them did lie, the Empire it self from their lord the Emperor of Greece,
and of Rome also by right, unto the Christian princes of the West, they became
in short space no better unto the West Emperors, then they were before unto
the Emperors of Greece: For the usual discharging of subjects from their oath
of fidelity made unto the Emperors of the West their sovereign lords, by
the Bishops of Rome: the unnatural stirring up of the subjects unto rebellion
against their princes, yea of the son against the father, by the Bishop of
Rome: the most cruel and blooddy wars raised amongst Christian princes of
all kingdoms: the horrible murder of infinite thousands of Christian men
being slain by Christians: and which ensued thereupon, the pitiful losses,
of so many goodlye Cities, countries, dominions, and kingdoms, sometime
possessed by Christians in Asia, Africa, and Europa: the miserable fall of the
Empire and Church of Greece, sometime the most florishyng part of Christendom
into ye hands of Turks: the lamentable diminishing, decay, and ruin of
Christian religion: the dreadful increase of Paganitie, and power of the
Infidelles and miscreantes, and al by the practice and procurement of the
Bishop of Rome cheefely, is in the histories and chronicles written by the
Bishop of Romes own favorers and friends, to be seen, and is well known
unto all such as are acquainted with the said histories. The ambitious intent
and most subtle driftes of the Bishops of Rome in these their practices,
appeared evidently by their bold attempt in spoiling and robbing the Emperors
of their Towns, Cities, Dominions, and kingdoms in Italy, Lumbardie, and
Cicilie, of ancient right belonging unto the Empire, and by the joining of
them unto their Byshoprike of Rome, or else giving them unto strangers to hold
them of the Church and Bishops of Rome as in capite, and as of the chief
lords thereof: in which tenure they hold the most part thereof even at this
day. By these ambitious and in deed traiterous means, and spoylyng of their
sovereign lords, the Bishops of Rome of Priests, and none other by right
then the Bishops of one city and diocese, are by false usurpation become
great lords of many dominions, myghtie Princes, yea or Emperors rather, as
claymyng to have diverse princes and kings to their vassals, liege men, and
subjects: as in the same histories written by their own familiers and
courtiers is to be seen. And in deed since the time that the Bishops of Rome
by ambition, treason, and usurpation atcheued and atteined to this height and
greatness, they behaved them selves more like princes, kings, and Emperors
in all things, then remained like priests, bishops and ecclesiastical, or (as
they would be called) spiritual persons in any one thing at al. For after this
rate they have handled other kings and princes of other Realms throughout
Christendom, as well as their Sovereign lords the Emperors, usually
dischargyng their subjects of their oath of fidelity, and so stirring them up
to rebellion against their natural princes, whereof some examples shall in the
last part hereof be notified unto you.

Wherefore let al good subjects, knowing these the special instruments, and
ministers of the devil, to the stirring up of al rebellions, avoid and flee
them, and the pestilent suggestions of such foreign usurpers, and their
adherentes, and embrace al obedience to God, and their natural princes and
Sovereigns, that they may enjoy gods blessings, and their princes favor, in
all peace, quietness, and security in this world, and finally attain through
Christ our savior, life everlasting in ye world to come: which God the father
for ye same our savior Jesus Christ his sake grant unto us al, to who^ with
ye holy ghost, be al honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
Thus have you heard the sixth part of this Homilee, now good people let us pray.

The prayer as before.



The sixth and last part of the Homilee against disobedience and wylfull
rebellion.
NOw whereas the injuries, oppressions, rauenie, and tyranny of ye bishop of
Rome, usurping as well against their natural lords the Emperors, as against al
other Christian kings, and kingdoms, and their continual stirring of
subjects unto rebellions against their sovereign lords, whereof I have
partlye admonished you before, were intolerable: and it may seem more then
marvel, that any subjects would after such sort hold with unnatural
foreign usurpers against their own sovereign lords, and natural country:
It remains that I do declare ye mean whereby they compassed these matters,
and so to conclude this whole treaty of due obedience, and against
disobedience, and wylfull rebellion.

You shall understand, that by ignorance of Of ignorance of the simple
people, the latter part.
Gods word, wherein they kept all men, specially the common people, they
wrought and brought to pass all these things, making them believe that all
they said was true, all that they did was good and godly: and that to hold
with them in all things, against father, mother, prince, country, and all
men, was most meritorious. And in deed what mischief will not blind
ignorance lead simple men unto?

By ignorance the Juishe Clergy induced the common people to ask the
delivery of Barabbas Matthew. 27. Luke. 23.
the seditious murderer, and to sue for the cruel crucifiyng of our savior
Christ, for that he rebuked the ambition, suberstion, and other vices of the
hie priests and clergy. For as our Luke. 23. e. 34. 1. Cor. 2. b. 8.
savior Christ testifies, that those who crucified him wist not what they
did: so does the holy apostle saint Paul say, If they had known, if they had
not ben ignorant, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory: but
they knew not what they did. Our savior Christ him self John. 15. d 21. and.
16, c. 23.
also foreshewed that it should come to pass by ignorance, that those who
should persecute and murder his true apostles and disciples, should think
they did God acceptable sacrifice, and good service: as it also is verified
even at this day. And in this ignorance have the Bishops of Rome kept the
people of God, specially the common sort, by no means so much, as by
withdrawyng of the word of God from them, and by keeping it under ye vale of an
unknown strange tongue. For as it served the ambitious humor of the Bishops
of Rome, to compel all nations to use the natural language of the city of
Rome, where they were Bishops, which showed a certain acknowledging of
subjection unto them: so yet served it much more their crafty purpose,
thereby to keep all people so blind, that they not knowing what they prayed,
what they believed, what they were commanded by God, might take all their
commandments for Gods. For as they would not suffer the holy scriptures or
Church service to be used or had in any other language then the latin: so
were very few even of the most simple people, taught the Lords prayer, the
articles of the faith, and the ten commandments, otherwise then in latin,
which they vnsterstoode not: by which universal ignorance, al men were ready
to believe whatsoever they said, and to do whatsoever they commanded. For to
imitate the apostles phrase: If the Emperors subjects had known out of Si
cognouissent.
Gods word their duty to their prince, they would not have suffered the
Bishop of Rome to persuade them to forsake their Sovereign lord Gregorius. 2.
and. 3. Anno. do. 726. etc.
the Emperor against their oath of fidelity, and to rebel against him, only
for that he cast images (unto the which idolatry was committed) out of the
Churches, which the Bishop of Rome bare them in hand to be heresy. If they
had known of Gods word but as much as the ten commandments, In the second
commandment.
they should have found that the Bishop of Rome was not only a traitor to
the Emperor his liege Lord, but to God also, and an horrible blasphemer of
his majesty, in calling his holy word and commandment heresye: and that
which the Bishop of Rome took for a just cause to rebel against his lawful
prince, they might have known to be a doubling and tripling of his most
heinous wickedness, heaped with horrible impiety and blasphemy. But lest the
poor people should know to much, he would not let them have as much of
Gods word, as the ten commandments wholye and perfectly, withdrawyng from
them the commandment, that bewrays his impiety, by a subtle sacrilege.
Had the Emperors subjects likewise known, and ben of any understanding in
Gods word, would they at other times have rebelled against their Sovereign
Lord, and by their rebellion have helped to depose him, only for that the
bishop of Rome Henri. 4. Gregorius. 7. Anno domini. 1076 Paschalis. 2. An. 1099.
did bear them in hand, that it was symonie and heresye to, for the Emperor
to give any ecclesiastical dignities, or promotions to his learned Chaplains,
or other of his learned clergy, which all Christian Emperors before him had
done without controulement? would they, I say, for that the Bishop of Rome
bare them so in hand, have rebelled by the space of more then forty years
together against him, with so much shedding of Christian blood, and murder of
so many thousands of Christians, and finally have deposed their Sovereign
Lord, had they known, and had in Gods word any understanding at all?
Specially had they known that they did all this to pluck from their Sovereign
Lord, and his successors for ever their ancient right of the Empire, to give
it unto the Romish Clergy, and to the Bishop of Rome, that he might for the
confirmation of one Archbishop, and for a Romish ragge, which he calls a
Paul, scarce worth twelve pence, receive many thousand crowns of gold, and
of other Bishops likewise great sums of money for their bulls, which is
symonie in deed: would, I say, Christian men and subjects by rebellion have
spent so much Christian blood, and have deposed their natural, most noble, and
most valiant prince, to bring the matter finally to this pass, had they
known what they did, or had any understanding in Gods word at all? And as
these ambitious usurpers the bishops of Rome have ouerflowed all Italy and
Germany with streams of Christian blood, shed by the rebellions of ignorant
subjects agayng their natural lords the Emperous, whom they have stirred
there unto by such false pretenses: so is there no country in Christendom,
which by their like means and false pretenses, has not ben oursprinkled with
the blood of subjects by rebellion against their natural Sovereigns, styrred
up by the same Bishops of Rome.

And to use one example of our own country: The Bishop of Rome did pike a
quarrel to king John of England, about the election of Steven King John.
Langton to the Byshoprike of Canterbury, wherein the king had ancient right,
being used by his progenitors, all Christian Kings of England before him,
the Bishops of Rome having no right, but had begun then to usurp upon the
kings of England, and al other Christian kings, as they had before done
against their Sovereign Lords the Emperors: proceeding even by the same
ways and means, and like wise cursing king John, and discharging his
subjects of their oath of fidelity unto their sovereign Lord. Now had
Englishmen at that time known their duty to their prince set forth in gods
word, would a great many of the nobles, and other Englishmen, natural
subjects, for this foreign and unnatural usurper his vain curse
Innocentius. 3.
of the king, and for his fained discharging of them of their oath of fidelity
to their natural Lord, upon so sclender or no ground at all, have rebelled
against their sovereign lord ye king? Would English subjects have taken
part against the king of England, and against Englishmen, with Philip French
King. Jews Dolphin of France.
the French king and Frenchmen, being incensed against this Realm by the
Bishop of Rome? Would they have sent for, and received the Dolphin of France
with a great army of Frenchmen into the Realm of England? Would they have
sworn fidelity to ye Dolphin of France, breaking their oath of fidelity to
their natural Lord the king of England, and have stand under the Dolphins
banner displaied against the king of England? would they have expelled their
sovereign lord the king of England out of London the chief city of England,
and out of the greatest part of England, upon the Southside of Trent, even
unto Lincoln, and out of Lincoln it self also, and have delivered the
possession thereof unto the Dolphin of France, whereof he kept the possession
a great while? Would they being Englishmen have procured so great shedding of
English blood, and other infinite mischeefes and miseries unto England their
natural country, as did follow those cruel wars and traiterous rebellion,
ye fruits of the Bishop of Romes blessings? would they have driven their
natural sovereign lord the king of England to such extremity, that he was
enforced to submit him self unto that foreign false usurper the Bishop of
Rome, who compelled him to surrender up the crown of England into the hands
of his Legate, who in token of possession Pandolphus.
kept it in his hands diverse days, and then delivered it again to king John
upon that condition, that the king and his successors kings of England,
should hold the crown and kingdom of England of the Bishop of Rome and his
successors, as the vassalles of the said Bishops of Rome for ever: in token
whereof, the kings of England should also pay an yearly tribute to the
said Bishop of Rome as his vassals and liege men? would Englishemen have
brought their Sovereign lord, and natural country into this thraldom and
subjection to a false foreign usurper, had they known and had any
understanding in Gods word at all? Out of the which most lamentable case, and
most miserable tyranny, rauenye, and spoil of the most greedy Romish wolves
ensuing here upon, the kings and realm of England could not rid them
selves by the space of many years after: the Bishop of Rome by his ministers
continually not only spoling the realm and kings of England of infinite
treasure, but also with Be the acts of Parliament in king Edward the third
his days.
the same monye hyring and maynteyning foreign enemies against the realm and
kings of England, to keep them in such his subjection, that they should not
refuse to pay whatsoever those insatiable wolves did greedely gape for, and
suffer whatsoever those most cruel tyrants would lay upon them. Would
Englishmen have suffered this? would they by rebellion have caused this trow
you, and all for the Bishop of Romes causeless curse, had they in those days
known, and understood, that God does curse the blessings, and bless the
cursinges of such wicked usurping bishops and tyrants? as it appeared Mala. 2.
afterward in king Henrye the eight his days, and king Edward the sixth, and
in our gracious Sovereigns days that now is, where neither the Popes curses,
nor Gods manifold blessings are wanting. But in king John's time the Bishop of
Rome understanding the brute blyndnes, ignorance of Gods word, and
superstition of Englishmen, and how much they were inclined to worship the
Babilonicall beast of Rome, and to fear all his threatenings, and causeless
curses, he abused them thus, and by their rebellion brought this noble realm,
and kings of England under his most cruel tyranny, and to be a spoil of his
most vile and insatiable covetousness and rauenye, for a long, and a great deal
to long a time. And to join unto the reports of Histories, matters of latter
memory, could the Bishop of Rome have raised the late rebellions in the North
and Weste countries in the times of King Henry, and King Edward, our gracious
Sovereigns father and brother, but by abusing of the ignorant people? Or is
it not most evident that the Bishop of Rome has of late attempted by his Irish
Patriarchs and Bishops sent from Rome with his bulls, (whereof some were
apprehended) to break down the bars and hedges of the publibue peace in
Ireland, only upon confidence easyly to abuse the ignorance of the wild
Irish men? Or who sees not that upon like confidence, yet more latelye he
has likewise procured the breach of the public peace in England, (with the
long and blessed continuance whereof he is sore grieved) by the ministry of
his disguised Chaplains, creeping in lay men's apparel into the houses, and
whispering in the ears of certain Northen borderers, being men most ignorant
of their duty to God and their prince of all people of the Realm, whom
therefore as most meet and ready to execute his intended purpose, he has by the
said ignorant mass priests, as blind guides leading the blind, brought those
seely blind subjects into the deep ditche of horrible rebellion, damnable to
them selves, and very dangerous to the state of the Realm, had not GOD of his
mercy miraculouslye calmed that ragyng tempest, not only without any ship
wrack of the common wealth, but almost without any shedding of christian and
English blood at al. And it is yet much more to be lamented, that not only
common people, by some other youthful or unskillful Princes also, suffer them
selves to be abused by the bishop of Rome, his Cardinals and bishops, to
oppressing of christian men their faithful subjects, either them selves, or
else by procuring the force and strength of christian men, to be conveyed out of
one country, to oppress true Christians in another country, and by these
means open an entry unto Moors and Infidels, into the possession of
christian Realms and countries: other Christian Princes in the mean time, by
the Bishop of Romes procuring also, being so occupied in cinill wars, or
troubled with rebellions, that they have neither leisure nor ability to
confer their common forces to the defense of their fellow christians against
such invasions of the common enemies of Christendom, the infidels and
miscreantes. Would to God we might only read and hear out of histories of
the old, and not also see and feel these new and present oppressions of
Christians, rebellions of subjects, effusion of christian blood, destruction
of christian men, decay and ruin of Christendom, increase of paganitie, most
lamentable and pitiful to behold, being procured in these our days, as well
as in times past, by the bishop of Rome and his ministers, abusing the
ignorance of Gods word, yet remaining in some Chirstian Princes and people. By
which so wre and bitter fruits of ignorance, all men ought to be moved to give
ear and credit to Gods word, she wing as most truly, so most plainly, how
great a mischief ignorance is, and again how great and how good a gift of
God knowledge in Gods word is. And to begin with the romish Clergy, who
though they do brag now, as did sometime the Jewishe Clergy, that they can
not lack knowledge: yet Ier. 18. c. 18
does God by his holy prophets both charge them with ignorance, and threaten
them also, for that Eze. 7. g. 26. Osee. 4. b. 6. Psalm. 2.
they have repelled ye knowledge of Gods word and law from them selves, and
from his people, that he will repel them, yt they shall be no more his priests.
God like wise charge princes as well as priests, that they should endeavor
them selves to get understanding Psalm. 2.
and knowledge in his word, threatening his heavy wrath and destruction unto
them, if they fail thereof. And the wise man says Proverb. 19
to all men universally, Princes, Priests, and people: where is no knowledge,
there is no good Sapience 13. Proverb. 17. Ephesians. 4. John. 12. Esai. 5. c. 13.
nor health to the soul: and that almen be vain in whom is not the knowledge
of God and his holy word: That they who walk in darkness, wot not whyther
they go: and that the people that will not learn, shall fall into great
mischeefes, as did the people of Israel, who for their Luke 19. g. 44. and. 23.
c. 34. Acts. multis locis. John. 16. a. 2.
ignorance in Gods word, were first led into captivity, and when by
ignorance afterward they would not know the time of their visitation, but
crucified Christ our savior, persecuted his holy Apostles, and were so
ignorant and blind, that when they did most wickedlye and cruellye, they
thought they did God good and acceptable service (as do many by ignorance
think even at this day:) finally through their ignorance and blyndnes, their
country, towns, cities, Jerusalem it self, and the holy temple of God, were
all most horiblye destroyed, the most cheifest part of their people slain,
and the rest led into most miserable captivity. For he that made them, had
no pity upon them, Esai. 27. Osee. 4. Baruch. 3. Esai 6. c. 9. Math. 13. b.
14. 15.
neither would spare them, and al for their ignorance. And the holy
scriptures do teach that the people that will not see with their eyes, nor
hear with their ears, to learn, and to understand with their hearts, can
not be converted, and saved. And the wicked them selves, Ioh. 12. f. 40.
Sapience. 5.
being damned in hell, shall confess ignorance in Gods word to have brought
them thereunto, saying. We have erred from the way of the truth, and the light
of righteousness has not shyned unto us, and the sun of understanding has
not risen unto us: we have weeried our selves in the way of wickedness and
perdition, and have walked cumberous and crooked ways: but the way of the Lord
have we not known. And as well our savior him self, as his apostle s. Paul
Mat. 13. c. 19. 2. Cor. 4. 8. 3. 4.
do teach, that the ignorance of Gods word comes of the devil, is the cause
of all error, and misiudging (as falls out with ignorant subjects, who can
rather espy a little mote in Mat. 7.
the eye of the Prince, or a cou^celler, then a great beam in their own) and
universally it is the cause of all evil, and finally of eternal damnation: Gods
judgment being severe toward those, who John. 3.
when the light of Christ's Gospel is come into the world, do delyght more in
darkness of ignorance, then in the light of knowledge in Gods word. For all are
commanded to read, or hear, Mat. 11. b. 15, and. 13. a. 9 f. 43. Luke 8. a.
8. Ioh. 5. f. 39. Psalm. 1. Mat. 7. b. 7 Luke 11. b. 9 Luke 16. g. 30. 31. Gal.
1. b. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. d. 32.
to fearche and study the holy scriptures: and are promised understanding to
be given them from God, if they so do: all are charged not to believe either any
dead man, nor if an Angel should speak from heaven, much less if the Pope
do speak from Rome against or contrary to the word of GOD, from the which
we may not declyne, neither to the right hand nor to the left. In Gods word
Princes must learn how to obey GOD, and to govern men: in Gods word
subjects must learn obedience, both to God and their princes. Old men and
young, rich Deuteronomy. 17. c. 14. 15. etc. Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 18.
and. 118. Ephesians. 5. c. 14 1. These. 5. a 4. 5.
and poor, all men and women, all estates, sexes and ages, are taught their
several duties in the word of God. For the word of God is bright, giving
light unto al men's eyes: the shyning lamp directing al men's paths, and steps.
Let us therefore awake from the sleep and darkness of ignorance, and open our
eyes that we may see the light, let us rise from the works of darkness, that
we may escape eternal darkness, the due reward thereof: and let us walk in
the light of Gods word whiles we have light, as becomes the children of
light, so directing the steps of our Ioh. 12. e. 35. 36.
lives in that way which leads to light and life everlasting, that we may
finally obtain and enjoy the same: which God the father of lights, Jacob. 1.
c. 17. i. Tim. 6. d 16. John. 3.
who dwells in light incomprehensible, and inaccessable, grant unto us
through the light of the world our savior Jesus Christ, Unto whom with the
holy ghost, one most glorious God, be all honor, praise, and thanks giving
for ever and ever.

AMEN.
Thus have you heard the sixth part of this Homilee, now good people let us
pray.

The prayer as before.



A thanks giving for the suppression of the last rebellion.
OHeauenly and most merciful father, the defendour of those that put their
trust in thee, the sure fortress of al them that flee to thee for succor: who
of thy most just judgments for our disobedience and rebellion against thy
holy word, and for our sinful and wicked living nothing answering to our holy
profession, whereby we have given an occasion that thy holy name has been
blasphemed amongst the ignorant, have of late both sore abashed the whole
Realm, and people of England with the terror and danger of rebellion,
thereby to awake us out of our dead sleep of careless security: and haste yet
by the miseries following the same rebellion more sharply punished part of our
countrymen, and Christian brethren, who have more nearly felt the same: and
most dreadfully have scourged some of the seditious persons with terrible
executions, justly inflicted for their disobedience to thee, and to thy
servant their Sovereign, to the example of us all, and to the warnyng,
correction and amendment of thy servants, of thine accustomed goodness,
turnyng always the wickedness of evil men to the profit of them that fear
thee: who in thy judgments remembryng thy mercy, have by thy assistaunce
given the victory to thy servant our Queen, her true Nobility, an
faithful subjects, with so little, or rather no effusion of Christian blood,
as also might justly have ensued, to the exceeding comfort of all sorrowful
Christian hearts, and that of thy fatherly pity, and merciful goodness only,
and even for thine own names sake, without any our desert at all. Wherefore we
render unto thee most humble and hearty thanks for these thy great mercies
showed unto us, who had deserved sharper punishment, most humblye beseching
thee to grant unto all us that confess thy holy name, and profess the true
and perfect religion of thy holy Gospel, thy heavenly grace to show our selves
in our living according to our profession: that we truly knowing thee in thy
blessed word, may obediently walk in thy holy commandments, and that we
being warned by this thy fatherly correction, do provoke thy just wrath against
us no more: but may enjoy the continuance of thy great mercies toward us, thy
right hand, as in this so in all other invasions, rebellions, and dangers,
continuallye saving and defending our Church, our Realm, our Queen and
people of England, that al our posterities ensuing, confessing thy holy name,
professing thy holy Gospel, and leading an holy life may perpetually praise and
magnify thee, with thy only son Jesus Christ our savior, and the holy
ghost, to whom be allaud, praise, glory, and Empire, for ever, and ever.

Amen.
Imprinted at London in Poules Churchyard, by Richard Jugge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.


