the CROWN of all HOMERS WORKS Batrachomyomachia Or the (Battle of Frogs
and Mise. His Hymn's -- and -- Epigrams Translated according to ye. Original
By George Chapman.

London, Printed by John Bill, his MAJESTY'S Printer.

TO MY EVER MOST-WORTHIE-TO-BE-MOST HONORED LORD, THE EARL OF SOMERSET, etc.
NOt forced by fortune; but since your free mind
(Made by affliction) rests in choice resigned
To calm Retreat; laid quite beneath the wind
Of Grace, and Glory: I well know, my Lord,
You would not be entitled to a word
That might a thought remove from your Repose,
To thunder and spit Flames, as Greatness does;
For all the Trumps, that still tell where he goes.
Of which Trumps, Dedication being One,
Me thinks I see you start to hear it blown.
But this is no such Trump as summons Lords,
Against Enuies steel, to draw their leaden swords,
Or against Hare-lipt Detraction, Contempt,
All which, from all Resistance stand exempt,
It being as hard to sever Wrong from Merit,
As meate-indude, from blood; or blood from spirit.
Nor in the spirits Chariot rides the soul
In bodies chaste, with more divine control;
Nor virtue shines more in a lovely Face;
Then true desert, is stuck off with Disgrace.
And therefore truth it self that had to bless
The merit of it all, Almightinesse;
Would not protect it, from the Bane and Ban
Of all Moodes most distraught, and Stygian;
As counting it the Crown of all Desert,
Borne to Heaven, to take of Earth, no part
Of false Joy here, for Ioyes-there-endlesse troth,
Nor sell his Birthright for a mess of Broth.
But stay and still sustain, and his Bliss bring,
Like to the hatching of the Black-thornes spring,
With bitter frosts, and smarting haile-stormes forth;
Fates love Bees labors; only Pain crowns Worth.
This Dedication calls no Greatness then,
To patron this Greatnes-creating Penn;
Nor you to add to your dead calm a breath;
For those armed Angels, that in spite of death
Inspired those flowrs that wrought this poets wreath
Shall keep it ever, Poesies steepest Starr,
As, in Earths flaming walls, Heavens seuenfold Carr,
(From all the winds of Neptunes watrie sphere)
For ever guards the Erymanthian Bear.
Since then your Lordship, settles in your shade
A life retired; and no Retreat is made
But to some strength; (for else, it is no Retreat,
But rudely running from your Battles heat)
I give this, as your strength: your strength, my Lord,
In Counsels and Examples, that afford
More Guard, then whole Hosts of corporeal power,
And more deliverance, teach the fatal Hour.
Turn not your medcine then, to your disease,
By your too set, and slight repulse of these,
The Adjuncts of your matchless Odyss^s;
Since on that wisest mind of Man, relies
Refuge from all Lives Infelicities.
Nor sing these, such division from them;
But that these spinn the thread of the same stream,
From one self Distaffs stuff: for Poesies Pen
(Through al theames) is t'informe the lives of Men:
All whose Retreates, need strengths of all degrees;
Without which; (had you even Herculean knees;)
Your foes fresh Charges, would, at length prevail,
To leave your Noblest suff'rance, no least sail.
Strength then, the Object is of all Retreates;
Strength needs no friends trust; strength, your foes defeates.
Retire to strength then, of eternal things,
And you are eternal; for our knowing Spring's
Flow into those things that we truly know;
Which (being Eternal) we are rendered so.
And though your high-fixt Light pass infinite far
Th'aduicefull Guide, of my still-trembling Starr;
Yet hear what my dischardg'd Piece must foretell,
Standing your Poor, and Perdue Sentinel.
Kings may perhaps wish, even your Beggars Voice
To their Eternities; how skorn'd a choice
Soever, now it lies; And (dead I) may
Extend your life to lights extremest Raie.
If not; your Homer yet, past doubt shall make,
Immortal, like himself, your Bounties stake
Put in my hands, to propagate your Fame,
Such virtue reigns in such united Name.
Retire to him then, for advice, and skill
To know, things called worst, Best; and Best most ill.
A fimile illustrating the most renownd service of General Noris in his
Retreat before Gant, never before made sacred to Memory.
Which known; truths best choose; and retire to still.
And as our English General, (whose Name
Shall equal interest find in T'House of Fame,
With all Earths great'st Commanders) in Retreat
To Belgian Gant, stood all Spaines Armies heat,
By Parma led; though but one thousand strong:
Three miles together thrusting through the throng
Of Th'Enimies Horse, (still pouring on their Fall
Twixt him and home) and thunderd through them al:
The Gallick Monsiour standing on the wall,
And wondering at his dreadful Discipline;
Fired with a Valor, that spit spirit Divine:
In five Battaillons randging all his Men;
Bristl'd with Pikes, and flanck't with Flanckers ten;
Gave fire still in his Rere, retired and wrought,
Down to his fixed strength still: retired and ^ought;
All the Battaillons of the Enemies Horse
Storming upon him still, their fieriest Force;
Charge upon Charge laid fresh: he fresh as day
Repulsing all; and forcing glorious way
Into the Gates; that gaspt (as swounes for Air)
And took their life in, with untouched Repair:
So fight out (sweet Earl) your Retreat in Peace;
No ope-warr equals that, where privy Prease
Of neuer-numberd odds of Enemy
Armed all by Envy, in blind Ambush lie,
To rush out, like an open threatening sky,
Broke al in Meteors round about your ears.
Against which, (though far from hence) through al your Reres
Have fires prepared; wisdom, with wisdom flanck,
And all your forces randge in present rank;
Retiring as you now fought in your strength,
From all the Force laid, in times utmost length,
To charge, and basely, come on you behind.
The Doctrine of all which, you here shall find,
And, in the true Glass of a humane Mind.
Your Odysses; the Body letting see
All his life past, through Infelicitie,
And manage of it all. In which to friend,
The full Muse brings you both the prime and end
Of all Arts ambient in the Orb of Man;
Which never darkness most Cimmerian
Can give Eclipse; since (blind) He all things saw
And to all, ever since, lived Lord, and Law.
And though our mere-learn'd me^; and Modern wise
Taste not poor Poesies Ingenuities,
Being crusted with their covetous Leprosies;
But hold her pains, worse then the spiders work,
And lighter then the shadow of a Cork;
Yet the ancient learned; heat with celestial fire,
Affirms her flames so sacred and entire;
Vt non fine Maximo fa^^re Dei comparari n^queat. Pla. in Jove.
That, not without Gods greatest grace she can
Fall in the wid'st Capacity of Man.
If yet, the vile Soul of this Verminous time;
Love more the Sale-Muse; and the Squirrels chime,
Then this full sphere of Poesies sweetest Prime;
Give them vnenuied, their vain vein, and vent;
And rest your wings, in his approved ascent
That yet was never reached; nor ever fell
Into affections bought with things that sell
Being the Sunns Flower; and wrapped so in his sky,
He cannot yield to every Candles eye.
Whosemost worthy Discoueries, to your Lordships Judicial Perspectiue in most
subdude Humility submits, George Chapman.

The occasion of this Imposed CROWN.
AFter this not only Prince of Poets, but Philosophers, had written his two
great Poems, of Iliads and Odysses; which (for their first Lights borne before
all Learning) were worthily called the Sun and Moon of the Earth; (finding
no compensation) he writ, in contempt of Men, this ridiculous Poem of Vermin,
giving them Nobility of Birth, valorous elocution not inferior to his Heroes.
At which the Gods themselves put in amaze, called Counsels about their
assistance of either Army, and the justice of their Quarrels, even to the
mounting of ^oues Artillery against them, and discharge of his three-forckt
flashes: and all for the devouring of a Mouse. After which slight and only
recreatiue touch, he betook him seriously to the honor of the Gods; in Hymn's
resounding all their peculiar Titles, Jurisdiction, and Dignities; which he
illustrates at all parts, as he had been continually conversant amongst them:
and whatsoever autentique Poe^ie he omitted in the Episods, contained in his
Iliads and Odysses; he comprehends and concludes in his Hym'ns and Epigrams. Al
his observance and honor of the Gods, rather moved their enuies against him,
then their rewards, or respects of his endeauours. And so like a Man verecundi
ingenij (which he witnesses of himself) he lived vnhonord and needy till his
death; yet notwithstanding all men's servile and manacled Miseries, to his most
absolute and neuer-equall'd Merit; yea even bursten profusion to Imposture and
Impiety; ^eare our-euer-the Same intranced, and neuer-sleeping Master of the
Muses, to his last accent, incomparably singing.

BATRAXOMYOMAXIA.
Entering the fields, first let my Vows call on
The Muses whole Quire out of Helicon
Into my Heart; for such a Poems sake,
As lately I did in my Tables take,
And put into report, upon my knees.
A fight so fierce, as might in all degrees
Fit Mars himself, and his tumultuous hand,
Glorying to dart to the ears of every land
Of all the Intending Men: being divided from all other creatures, by the
voice, (...) being a pe^^phrasis signifying v^ce di^isus, of (...) diuido, and
(...) vox.
voice-deuided; And to show
How bravely did both Froggs and Mise bestow
In glorious fight their forces; even the deeds
Daring to imitate of earths Giant-seedes.
Thus then, men talked; this seed the strife begat:
The Mouse, once dry; and escaped the dangerous Cat;
Drench't in the neighbor lake, her tender berde,
To taste the sweetness of the wave it rer'de.
The farre-fam'de Fen-affecter (seeing him) said;
Ho? Stranger? what are you? And whence, that tred
This shore of ours? who brought you forth? reply,
What truth may witness, lest I find, you lie.
If worth fruition of my love, and me;
I Will have thee home; and Hospitality
Of feast, and gift; good and magnificent
Bestow on thee: For all this Confluent
Resounds my Royalty; my Name, the great
In blowne-vp count'nances; and looks of threat,
(...), Genas and buccas infl^n^.
Physignathus; adored of all Frogs here
All their days durance; And the Empire bear
Of all their Beings. Mine own Being, begot
By royal (...), qui ex luto nascitu^.
Peleus; mixed in nuptial knot,
With fair (...). Aquarum Regina.
Hydromedusa; On the Bounds
Nere which The river Po, in Italy.
Eridanus, his Race resounds.
And Thee, mine Eye, makes my Conceit enclinde
To reckon powerful, both in form, and Mind:
A Scepter-bearer; And past others far,
Advanced in all the fiery Fights of war.
Come then, Thy race, to my renown commend.
The Mouse made answer; why enquires my friend?
For what so well, know men and Deities,
And all the winged affecters of the skies?
(...). Gather-crum, or rauish-crum.
Psycharpax, I am called; Sheare-crust.
Troxartes seed;
Surnam'de the Mighty-Minded: She that freed
Mine eyes from darkness; was Lick-mill.
Lichomyle,
King Bacon-flitch-deuourer, or gnawer.
Pternotroctes Daughter; showing me
Within an aged houell, the young light:
Fed me with figs, and nuts; and all the height
Of varied viands. But unfold the cause,
Why, against similitudes most equal laws
(Observed in friendship) thou makst me thy friend?
Thy life, the waters only help t'extend.
Mine, whatsoever, men are used to eat,
Takes part with them, at shore: their purest cheat,
Thrice boulted, kneaded, and subdued in past,
In clean round kymnels; cannot be so fast
From my approches kept; but in I eat:
Nor Cheesecakes full, of finest Indian wheat,
That (...). Extenso and promisso Peplo amictus.

A metaphor taken from ladies veiles, or trains, and therefore their names are
here added.


Crustie-weedes wear, large as Ladies trains:
(...) Liuering puddings white skind.
Lyurings, (white-skind as Ladies:) nor the strains
Of pressed milk, renneted; Nor collups cut,
Fresh from the flitch: Nor iunkets such as put
Palats divine in Appetite: nor any
Of all men's delicates; thought never so many
Their Cooks devise them, who each dish see decked
With all the dainties (...) Whose common exposition is only Varijs, when it
properly signifies, Ex omni solo.
all strange soiles affect.
Yet am I not so sensual, to fly
Of fields embattaild, the most fiery cry:
But rush out strait; and with the first in sight,
Mix in adventure: No man with affright
Can daunt my forces; though his body be
Of never so immense a quantity.
But making up, even to his bed, access;
His fingers ends dare with my teeth compresse:
His feet taint likewise; and so soft sease both,
They shall not taste The Impression of a tooth.
Sweet sleep shall hold his own, in every eye
Where my tooth takes his tartest liberty:
But two there are, that always, far and near
Extremely still, control my force with fear;
(The Cat, and Night-Hawke) who much skathe confer
On all the Outraies, where for food I err.
Together with the (...), of (...), Angustus.
streights-still-keeping Trap;
Where lurkes deceiptfull and set-spleend Mishap.
But most of all the Cat constraines my fear;
Being ever apt t'assault me every where:
For by that hole, that hope says, I shall escape,
At that hole ever, she commits my Rape.
The best is yet, I eat no pot-herb grass,
Nor Raddishes; nor Coloquintida's:
Nor Still-greene; Beetes, nor Parsley: which you make
Your dainties still, that live upon the lake.
The Frog replide: Stranger? your boasts creep all
Upon their bellies; though to our lives fall;
Much more miraculous meats, by lake and land:
Jove tendering our lives with a twofold hand;
Enabling us to leap ashore for food,
And hide us strait in our retreatfull flood:
Which if your will serve; you may prove with ease.
I Will take you on my shoulders: which fast sease,
If safe arrival at my house y'intend.
He stoopt; and thither spritelie did ascend,
Clasping his golden neck, that easy seat
Gave to his sallie: who was iocund yet;
Seeing the safe harbors of the King so nere;
And he, a swimmer so exempt from Pere.
But when he sunk into the purple wave;
He mournd extremely; and did much deprave
Unprofitable penitence: His hair*
Tore by the roots up, labord for the air,
With his feet fetched up to his belly, close:
His heart within him, panted out repose,
For th'insolent plight, in which his state did stand:
Sighed bitterly, and longed to greet the land,
Forced by the dire Need, of his freezing fear.
First on the waters, he his tail did stere
Like to a Stern: then drew it like an ore,
Still praying the Gods to set him safe ashore:
Yet sunk he midst the red waves, more and more,
And laid a throat out, to his utmost height:
Yet in forced speech, he made his peril slight;
And thus his glory with his grieuance strove;
Not in such choice state was the charge of love
Borne by the Bull; when to the Cretane shore
He swumme Europa through the wauie rore;
As this Frog ferries me; His pallid breast
Bravely advancing; and his verdant crest
(Submitted to my seat) made my support,
Through his white waters, to his royal Court.
But on the sudden did appearance make
An horrid spectacle; a water-snake
Thrusting his freckeld neck above the lake.
Which (seen to both) away Physignathus
Diu'd to his deepes; as no way conscious
Of whom, he left to perish in his lake;
But shunned black fate himself; and let him take
The blackest of it: who amids the Fenn
Swumme with his breast up; hands held up in vain,
Cried Peep, and perished: sunk the waters often,
And often with his sprawlings, came aloft;
Yet no way kept down deaths relentlesse force:
But (full of water) made an heavy Corse.
Before he perished yet, he threatened thus;
Thou lurk'st not yet from heaven ( Physignathus)
Though yet thou hid'st here, that have cast from thee
(As from a Rock,) the shipwrackt life of me.
Though thou thy self, no better was than I
(O worst of things) at any faculty;
Wrestling or race: but for thy perfidie
In this my wrack; Jove bears a wreakefull eye:
And to the Host of Mise, thou pains shall pay
Past all evasion. This, his life let say,
And left him to the waters. Him beheld,
Lick-dish.
Lichopinax; placed in the pleasing field:
Who shrick't extremely; ran and told the Mise;
Who, having heard his watery destinies;
Pernicious anger pierst the hearts of all;
And then their Heralds, forth they sent to call
A council early, at Troxartes house,
Sad father of this fatal shipwrack't Mouse:
Whose dead Corpse, upwards swum along the lake;
Nor yet (poor wretch) could be enforced to make
The shore, his harbor; but the mid-Maine swum:
When now (all haste made) with first morn did come
All to set council; in which, first raised head,
Troxartes, angry for his son; and said;
O Friends, though I alone may seem to bear
All the infortune; yet may all met here
Account it their case. But it is true, I am
In chief unhappy; that a triple flame
Of life, feel put forth, in three famous sons;
The first, the chief in our confusions
(The Cat) made rape of; caught without his hole:
The second; Man, made with a cruel soul,
Brought to his ruin, with a newfound slight;
And a most wooden engine of deceit,
They term a Trap; mere (...). Interfectrix. Perditrix.
Murthresse of our Mise.
The last that in my love held special prise,
And his rare mothers; this Physignathus
(With false pretext of wafting to his house;)
Strange l'd in chief deepes, of his bloody stream.
Come then; haste all, and issue out on them,
Our bodies decked, in our Dedalean arms.
This said; his words thrust all up in alarmes;
And Mars himself, that serves the cure of war;
Made all in their Appropriats circular.
First on each leg, the green shales of a Bean,
They closed for Boots; that sat (...), ab (...), Elaborate concinno.
exceeding clean:
The shales they broke open, Bootehaling by night,
And eat the beans: Their Iacks; Art exquisite
Had shown in them; being Cats-skins, every where
Quilted with quills: Their fencefull bucklers were,
The middle rounds of Can'sticks; but their spear
A huge long Needle was; that could not bear
The brain of any; but be Mars his own
Mortal invention. Their heads arming Crown
Was vessel to the kirnell of a nut:
And thus the Mise, their powers in armor put.
This, the frogs hearing; From the water, all
Issue to one place; and a council call
Of wicked war; consulting what should be
Cause to this murmr, and strange mutiny.
While this was questioned; near them made his stand
An Herald with a Scepter in his hand,
( Enter-pot, or Serch-pot.
Embasichytrus called) that fetched his kind,
From Cheese-miner. Qui caseum rodendo cauat.
Tyroglyphus, with the mighty mind;
Denouncing ill-nam'd war, in these high terms;
O Frogs? the Mise, sends threats to you of arms
And bid me bid ye Battle; and fixed fight;
Their eyes all wounded with Psycharpax sight,
Floting your waters, whom your king has killed.
And therefore all prepare for force of field,
You that are best borne, whosoever held.
This said; he seuer'd; his speech firing the ears
Of all the Mise; but frees'd the Frogs with fears,
Themselves conceiting guilty; whom the King
Thus answered (rising.) Friends? I did not bring
Psycharpax to his end; He, wantoning
Upon our waters, practicing to swim,
(...) Aping or imitating us.
Ap'te us, and drowned; without my sight of him.
And yet these worst of Vermin, accuse me
Though no way guilty. Come, consider we
How we may ruin these deceiptfull Mise.
For my part; I give voice to this advise;
As seeming fittest to direct our deeds.
Our bodies decking with our arming weeds;
Let all our Powr's stand raised in steep'st repose
Of all our shore; that when they charge us close;
We may the helms snatch off, from all so decked,
Daring our onset; and them all direct
Down to our waters. Who not knowing the slight
To diue our soft deeps, may be strangled straight;
And we triumphing, may a Trophey rere,
Of all the Mise, that we have slaughtered here.
These words put all in arms; and mallow leaves
They drew upon their legs, for arming Boot's of war.
Greaues.
Their Curets; broad green Beetes; their bucklers were
Good thick-leau'd Cabbadge; proof against any spe're.
Their spears, sharp Bullrushes; of which, were all
Fitted with long ones. Their parts Capital
They hid in subtle Cockleshels from blows.
And thus, all armed; the steepest shores they chose,
T'encamp themselves; where lance with lance, they lined;
And brandisht bravely; each Frogg full of Mind.
Then Jove called all Gods, in his flaming Throne
And showed all, all this preparation
For resolute war. These able soldiers,
Many, and great; all shaking lengthfull spe'res:
In show like Centaures; or the Giants Host.
When (sweetly smiling,) he inquired who, most
Of all th'Immortalls, pleased to add their aid
To Froggs or Mise: and thus to Pallas said;
O daughter? Must not you, needs aid these Mise?
That with the Odors, and meat sacrifice
Used in your Temple, endless triumphs make;
And serve you, for your sacred victles sake?
Pallas replied; O Father, never I
Will aid the Mise, in any misery.
So many mischiefs by them, I have found;
(...), Lanas, eo quod colus cingant se^ coronent. Which our learned sect
translate eating the crowns that Pallas wore.
Eating the Cotton, that my distaffs crowned;
My lamps still banting, to devour the oil.
But that which most my mind eats, is their spoil
Made of a veil, that me in much did stand:
On which, bestowing an elaborate hand;
A fine woofe working; of as pure a thre^d;
Such holes therein, their Petulancies fed;
That, putting it to darning; when it was done;
The darner, a most dear pay stood upon
For his so dear pains; laid down instantly;
(...), Partus et id quod partu ^^^dit Matter. Metap. hic appellatur f^^nus quod
ex vsura ad nos redit.
Or (to forbear) exacted usury.
So, borrowing from my Phane, the weed I woue;
I can by no means, th'vsurous darner, move
To let me have the mantle to restore.
And this is it, that rubs the angry sore
Of my offense took, at these petulant Mise.
Nor will I yield, the Froggs wants, my supplies,
For their infirm minds; that no confines keep;
For I, from war retired; and wanting sleep;
All lept ashore in tumult; nor would stay
Till one winck seas'd mine eyes: and so I lay
Sleeplesse, and pain'de with headache; till first light
The Cock had crow'd up. Therefore, to the fight
Let no God go assistent; lest a lance
Wound whosoever offers to advance;
Or wishes but their aid; that skorne all foes;
Should any Gods access, their spirits oppose.
Sit we then pleased, to see from heaven, their fight.
She said; and all Gods ioin'd in her delight.
And now, both Hosts, to one field drew the jar;
Both Heralds bearing the ostents of war.
And then the (...) C^lex vi^arius.
wine-Gnats, that shrill Trumpets sound
Terriblie rung out, the encounter, round.
Jove thundered; all heaven, sad wars sign resounded.
And first, Lowd-mouth.
Hypsiboas, Kitchen-vessell licker.
Lychenor wounded,
Standing the impression of the first in fight.
His lance did, in his Lyuers midsts alight,
Along his belly. Down he fell; his face,
His fall on that part swaid; and all the grace
Of his soft hair, filled with disgraceful dust.
Then Hole-dweller. Qui for (...).
Troglodytes, his thick iaueline thrust
In Mud-borne.
Pelions bosom; bearing him to ground:
Whom sad death seas'd; his soul flew through his wound.
Beet-deuourer.
Sentlaeus next, Embasichytros slew;
His heart through thrusting: then The great bread-^ater.
Artophagus threw
His lance at The great Noise-maker, shrill or bigg-voic't.
Polyphon; and struck him quite
Through his midd-bellie: down he fell upright:
And from his fair limms, took his soul her flight.
The lake-louer.
Lymnocharis beholding Polyphon
Thus done to death; did with as round a stone
As that the mill turns; Troglodytes wound
Near his mid-neck; ere he his onset found:
Whose eyes, sad darkness seas'd. Qui lambit culinaria vasa.
Lychenor cast
A flying dart off, and his aim so placed
Upon Lymnocharis; that (...) intentissime dirigo, vt certum ictum inferam.
Sure he thought
The wound he wished him: nor untruly wrought
The dire success; for through his Liver flew
The fatal lance; which when The cabbage-eater.
Crambaphagus knew;
Down the deep waves near shore; he, diuing, fled;
But fled not fate so; the stern enemy fed
Death with his life in diuing: never more
The air he drew in; his Vermilian gore
Staind all the waters; and along the shore
He lay extended; his fat entrails lay
(By his small guts impulsion) breaking way
Out at his wound. Paludis Incola. Lake-liuer.
Lymnisius, near the shore
Destroid Tyroglyphus: which frighted sore
The soul of Qui in Calamintha herba palustra habitat.
Calaminth; seeing coming on
(For wreake) Bacon-eater.
Pternoglyphus: who got him gone
With large leapes to the lake; his Target thrown
Into the waters. Qui Aquit delectatur.
Hydrocharis slew
King Collup-deuourer.
Pternophagus, at whose throat he threw
A huge stone; struck it high; and beat his brain
Out at his nostrills: earth blushed, with the stain
His blood made on her bosom. For next Prise;
Lichopinax, to death did sacrifice
Mudd-^loeper.
Borborocoetes faultlesse faculties;
His lance enforced it; darkness closed his eyes.
On which when Leeke-or scalion lover.
Brassophagus, cast his look;
Kitchen smell, hanter, or hunter.
Cnisodioctes, by the heels he took;
Dragged him to fenn, from off his native ground;
Then seas'd his throat, and souc't him, till he droun'd.
But now; Psycharpax wreakes his fellows deaths;
And in the bosom of Fennstalker.
Pelusius sheathes,
(In center of his Liver) his bright lance:
He fell before the Author of the chance;
His soul to hell fled. Which Qui per lutum it.
Pelobates
Taking sad note of; wreakefully did sease
His hands gripe full of mudd; and all besmeared;
His forhead with it so; that scarce appeard
The light to him. Which certainly incenst
His fiery spleen: who, with his wreake dispenst
No point of time; but rer'd with his strong hand
A stone so massy, it oppressed the land;
And hurld it at him; when, below the knee
It struck his right leg so impetuously;
It peece-meale brake it; be the dust did sease,
Upwards euerted. But Vociferator.
Craugasides
Reuendg'd his death; and at his enemy
Dischardg'd a dart; that did his point implie
In his mid-bellie. All the sharp-pil'de spear
Got after in; and did before it bear
His universal entrails to the earth,
Soon as his swollen hand, gave his iaueline birth.
Eate-corne.
Sitophagus, beholding the sad sight,
Set on the shore; went halting from the fight,
Vexed with his wounds extremely. And to make
Way from extreme fate, lept into the lake.
Troxartes struck, in th'insteps upper part,
Physignathus; who, (privy to the smart
His wound imparted) with his utmost have
Lept to the lake, and fled. Troxartes cast
His eye upon the foe that fell before;
And, (see'ng him halfe-liu'de) longed again to gore
His gutlesse bosom; and (to kill him quite)
Ran fiercely at him. Which Scallian-deuourer.
Prassaeus sight
Took instant note of; and the first in fight
Thrust desperate way through; casting, his keen lance
Off at Troxartes; whose shield turned th'aduance
The sharp head made: and checked the mortal chance.
Amongst the Mise fought, an Egregiouse
Young spring all; and a close-encountring Mouse:
Pure Bread-betraier.
Artepibulus-his dear descent:
A Prince that Mars himself showed, where he went
(Called Scrap or broken-meat-eater.
Meridarpax.) Of so huge a might;
That only He still, dominer'd in fight,
Of all the Mouse-Host. He advancing close
Up to the Lake; past all the rest arose
In glorious object; and made vant that He
Came to depopulate all the progeny
Of Froggs, affected with the lance of war.
And certainly; he had put on as far
As he advanced his vant; (he was indude
With so unmatched a force, and fortitude)
Had not the Father, both of Gods and Men
Instantly known it; and the Froggs (even then
Given up to ruin) rescude with remorse.
Who, (his head moving,) thus began discourse:
No mean amaze, affects me to behold
Prince Meridarpax, rage so uncontrolled,
In thirst of Frogg-blood; all along the lake:
Come therefore still; and all addression make;
Dispatching Pallas, with tumultuous Mars,
Down to the field, to make him leave the wars:
How (...), Validus se^^ potens in retinendo.
Potently soever he be said,
Where he attempts once; to uphold his head.
Mars answered; O Jove; neither she nor I
(With both our aides) can keep depopulacie
From off the Froggs. And therefore arm we all;
Even thy lance letting brandish to his call
From off the field: that from the field withdrew
The Titanois; the Titanois that slew;
Though most exempt from match, of all earths seeds
So great and so inaccessible deeds
It has proclaimed to men; bound hand and foot,
The vast Enceladus; and rac't by th'root
The race of vpland Giants. This speech past;
Saturnius, a smoking lightening cast
Amongst the armies; thundering then so sore,
That with a rapting circumflexe, he bore
All huge heaven over. But the terrible ire,
Of his dart, sent abroad, all wrapped in fire,
(Which certainly, his very finger was)
Amazde both Mise and Froggs. Yet soon let pass
Was all this by the Mise: who, much the more;
Burnd in desire t'exterminate the store
Of all those lance-lou'd soldiers. Which, had been;
If, from Olympus, Jove's eye had not seen
The Froggs with pity; and with instant speed
Sent them assistents. Who (ere any heed
Was given to their approach) came crawling on
With (...). Incudes ferentes: Or Anuile-back't.

(...). Incus, dicta per syncopen, quasi nullis Ictibus fatigetio.


Anuiles on their backs; that (beat upon
Never so much) are never wearied, yet:
Crook-pawd; and wrested on, with foul cloven feet:
(...) Forcipem in ^re habens.
Tongues in their mouths: Brick-backt, all over bone,
Broade-shoulderd; whence a ruddie yellow shone.
Distorted, and small thigh'd: had eyes that saw
Out at their bosoms. Twice four feet did draw
About their bodies. Strong neckt; whence did rise
Two heads; nor could to any hand be Prise.
They call them Lobsters; that eat from the Mise,
Their tails; their feet; and hands; and wrested all
Their lances from them so; that cold Appall
The wretches put in rout, past all return.
And now the Fount of light forbore to burn
Above the earth. When (which men's laws commend)
Our Battle, in one day, took absolute end.
The end of Homers Battle of Frogs and Mise.
ALL THE HYMNS OF HOMER. An Hymn to Apollo.
I Will remember, and express the praise
Of heavens far-darter, the fair King of days.
Whom even the Gods themselves fear, when he goes
Through Jove's high house; and when his goodly bows
He goes to bend; all from their Thrones arise,
And cluster near, t'admire his faculties.
Only Latona, stirs not from her seat
Close by the Thunderer; till her sons retreat
From his dread archerie; but then she goes;
Slackens his string; and shuts his Quiver close;
And (having taken to her hand, his bow,
From off his able shoulders) does bestow
Upon a Pin of gold the glorious Tiller;
The Pin of gold fixed in his Fathers Pillar.
Then does she to his Throne, his state uphold;
Where his great Father, in a cup of gold
Serves him with Nectar; and shows all, the grace
Of his great son. Then the other gods take place.
His gracious mother, glorying to bear
So great an Archer, and a son so clear.
All hail (O blessed Latona!) to bring forth
An issue of such All-out-shining worth,
Royal Apollo, and the Queen that loves
The hurles of darts. She in the Ortygian groves,
And he, in cliffie Delos; leaning on
The lofty Oros; and being built upon
By Cynthus Prominent: that his head reares
Close to the Palm, that Inops fluent cheares.
How shall I praise thee? far being worthiest praise?
(O Phoebus) to whose worth, the law of lays
In all kinds is ascrib'de? If feeding flocks
By Continent, or I Will; all eminen'st rocks
Did sing for joy: Hill-tops, and floods in song
Did break their billows, as they flowed along
To serve the sea. The shores, the seas, and all
Did sing as soon, as from the lap did fall
Of blessed Latona, thee the joy of Man.
Her Childbed made, the mountain Cynthian
In rockie Delos, the sea-circled I Will:
On whose all sides, the black seas brake their Pile,
And ouer-flowd for joy, so franck a Gale
The singing winds did on their waves exhale.
Here borne; all mortals live in thy commands.
Who ever Crete holds; Athens; or the strands
Of th'Ile Aegina; or the famous land
For ships ( Euboea:) or Eresia;
Or Peparethus, bordring on the sea.
Aegas; or Athos, that does Thrace divide
And Macedon. Or Pelion, with the pride
Of his high forehead. Or the Samian I Will;
That likewise lies near Thrace; or Scyrus soil;
Ida's steep tops. Or all that Phocis fill:
Or Autocanes, with the heauen-high hill:
Or populous Imber: Lemnos without Ports*
Or Lesbos, fit for the divine resorts,
And sacred soil of blessed Aeolion.
Or Chius that exceeds comparison
For fruitfulnes: with all the Isles that lie
Embraced with seas. Mimas, with rocks so hie.
Or Loftie-crownd Corycius; or the bright
Charos: or Aesagaeus dazeling height:
Or waterie Samos* Mycale, that bears
Her brows even with the circles of the spheres.
Miletus; Cous; That the City is
Of voice-diuided-choice humanities.
High Cnidus; Carpathus, still struck with wind.
Naxus, and Paros; and the rockie-mind
Rugged Rhenaea. Yet through all these parts,
Latona, great-growne, with the King of dares,
Trauailde; and tried, If any would become
To her dear birth, an hospitable home.
All which, extremely trembled (shook with fear)
Nor durst endure, so high a birth to bear,
In their free States: though, for it, they became
Never so fruitful; till the reverend Dame
Ascended Delos; and her soil did sease
With these winged words: O Delos! would thou please
To be my son Apolloes native seat;
And build a welthie Phane to one so great:
No one shall blame, or question thy kind deed.
Nor think I, thou, do Sheep or Oxen feed,
In any such store; Or in vines exceed;
Nor bring'st forth such innumerable Plants;
(Which often make the rich Inhabitants
Careless of Deity.) If thou then should rere
A Phane to Phoebus: all men would confer
Whole Hecatombs of beeues for sacrifice,
Still thronging hither. And to thee would rise
Ever vnmeasur'd Odors; should thou long
Nourish thy King thus; and from foreign wrong
The Gods would guard thee; which thine own address
Can never compass for thy barrenness.
She said; and Delos ioi'd; replying thus:
Most happy sister of Saturnius?
I gladly would, with all means entertein
The King your son; being now despis'de of men;
But should be honored with the greatest then.
Yet this I fear; Nor will conceal from theee;
Your Son (some say) will author misery
In many kinds: as being to sustein
A mighty empire over Gods, and Men,
Upon the holie-gift-giuer the earth.
And bitterly I fear, that when his birth
Gives him the sight, of my so barren soil
He will contemn; and give me up to spoil:
Enforce the sea to me; that ever will
Oppress my heart, with many a watrie hill.
And therefore, let him choose some other land,
Where he shall please; to build at his command
Temple and Grove, set thick with many a Tree.
For wretched Polypusses, breed in me
Retyring chambers; and black sea-calues, Den
In my poor soil, for penury of Men.
And yet (O Goddess) would thou please to swear
The Gods great oath to me, before thou bear
Thy blessed Son here; that thou will erect
A Phane to him, to render the effect
Of men's demands to them, before they fall;
Then will thy sons renown be general;
Men will his name, in such variety call.
And I shall, then, be glad, his birth to bear.
This said; the Gods great oath, she thus did swear:
Know this (O earth!) broad heavens inferior sphere,
And of black Styx, the most infernal lake
(Which is the grauest oath, the Gods can take)
That here shall ever rise to Phoebus Name
An odorous Phane, and Altar; and thy fame
Honor, past all Isles else, shall see him emploid.
Her oath thus took, and ended; Delos ioi'd
In mighty measure, that she should become,
To farr-shot Phoebus birth the famous home.
Latona then, nine days and nights did fall
In hopeles labor: at whose birth were all
Heavens most supreme, and worthy Goddesses.
Dione, Rhaea; and th'Exploratresse
(Themis;) and Amphitrite, that will be
Pursued with sighs still. Every Deity
Except the snowie-wristed wife of Jove:
Who held her moodes aloft; and would not move.
Only Lucina, (to whose virtue vows
Each Childbirth patient) heard not of her throws;
But sat (by Juno's counsel) on the brows
Of broad Olympus, wrapped in clouds of gold.
Whom Jove's proud wife, in envy did withold;
Because bright-lockt Latona, was to bear
A Son so faultles; and enforce so clear.
The rest (Thaumantia) sent before to bring
Lucina to release the envied King:
Assuring her, that they would strait confer
A Carquenet, nine cubits long, on her,
All wouen with wires of Gold. But chargd her then,
To call apart from th'Iuorie-wristed Queen
The child-birth-guiding Goddess; for just fear
Lest, her charge vtter'd, in Saturnia's ear;
She, after, might dissuade her from descent.
When winde-swift-footed Iris, knew the intent.
Of the other Goddesses; away she went;
And instantly she past, the infinite space
Twixt Earth, and Heaven; when, coming to the place
Where dwelt The Immortals; strait without the gate
She gat Lucina; and did all relate
The Goddesses commanded; and inclined,
To all that they demanded, her dear Mind.
And on their way they went, like those two Doves
That, walking highways, every shadow moves
Up from the earth; forced with their natural fear.
When entering Delos; she that is so dear
To Dames in labor, made Latona strait
Prone to delivery; and to weild the wait
Of her dear burden, with a world of ease.
When, with her fair hand; she a Palm did sease
And (staying her by it) slucke her tender knees
Amidst the soft meade; that did smile beneath
Her sacred labor, and the child did breath
The air, in the instant. All the Goddesses
Brake in kind tears, and shrikes for her quick ease:
And Thee (O Archer Phoebus) with waves clear
Washed sweetly over, swadled with sincere
And spotless swath-^ands; and made then to flow
About thy breast, a mantle, white as snow;
Fine, and new made; and cast a Veil of Gold
Over thy forehead. Nor yet forth did hold
Thy mother, for thy food, her golden breast:
But Themis in supply of it, addressed
Lovely Ambrosia; and drunk off to thee
A Bowl of Nectar; interchangeablie
With her immortal fingers, serving thine.
And when (O Phoebus) that eternal wine
Thy taste had relisht; and that food divine:
No golden swath-band longer could contain
Thy panting bosom: all that would constrain
Thy soone-easd Godhead; Every feeble chain,
Of earthy Child-rights; flew in sunder, all.
And then did thou thus, to the Deities call:
Let there be given me, my loved Lute and Bow;
I Will prophecy to men; and make them know
Jove's perfect counsels. This said; up did fly
From brode-waide Earth, the unshorn Deity,
Far-shot Apollo. All th'Immortalls stood
In steep amaze, to see Latonaes brood.
All Delos, looking on him; all with gold
Was laden strait; and ioi^d to be extold
By great Latona so; that she decreed,
Her barrenness, should bear the fruitfulst seed
Of all the Isles, and Continents of earth;
And loved her, from her heart so, for her birth.
For so she florisht; as a hill that stood
Crowned with the flower of an abundant wood:
And thou (O Phoebus) bearing in thy hand
Thy silver bow: walk'st over every land.
Sometimes ascend'st the rough-hewne rockie hill
Of desolate Cynthus: and sometimes take will
To visit Islands; and the Plumps of men.
And many a Temple; all ways, men ordein
To thy bright Godhead: Groves, made dark with Trees,
And never shorn, to hide ye Deities.
All high-lou'd Prospects; all the steepest brows
Of farr-seene Hills: and every flood that flows
Forth to the sea; are dedicate to Thee.
But most of all; thy minds Alacrity
Is raised with Delos; since to fill thy Phane
There flocks so many an Ionian,
With ample Gowns, that flow down to their feet:
With all their children; and the reverend Sweet
Of all their pious wives. And these are they
That (mindful of thee) even thy Deity
Render more spritelie, with their Champion fight
Dances, and songs, performed to glorious sight;
Once having published, and proclaimed their strife.
And these are acted with such exquisite life
That one would say, Now, the Ionian strains
Are turned Immortalls; nor know what Age means.
His mind would take such pleasure from his eye,
To see them served, by all Mortality.
Their men so humane; women so well-grac't;
Their ships so swift; their riches so encreast,
Since thy observance. Who (being all, before
Thy opposites) were all despised, and poor.
And to all these, this absolute wonder add,
Whose praise shall render all posterities gladd:
The Delian Virgins, are thy handmaides, All;
And, since they served Apollo; jointly fall
Before Latona, and Diana too
In sacred service: and do therefore know
How to make mention of the ancient Trimms
Of men, and women; in their well-made Hymns;
And soften barbarous Nations with their song's.
Being able, all, to speak the several tongu's
Of foreign Nations; and to imitate
Their musiques there, with art so fortunate,
That one would say; there every one did speak,
And all their tunes, in natural accents break.
Their songs, so well composed are; and their Art
To answer all soundes, is of such Desert.
But come Latona; and thou king of Flames,
With Phoebe Rectresse, of chaste thoughts in Dames;
Let me salute ye, and your Graces call
Hereafter to my just memorial.
And you (O Delian Virgins) do me grace,
When any stranger of our earthie Race
Whose restless life, Affliction has in chase;
Shall hither come; and question you; Who is
To your chaste ears, of choicest faculties
In sacred Poesy; and with most right
Is Author of your absolut'st delight;
Ye shall your selves do, all the right ye can,
To answer for our Name: The sightlesse man
Of stony Chios. All whose Poems, shall
In all last Ages, stand for Capital.
This for your own sakes I desire; for I
Will propagate mine own precedencie,
As far as earth shall well built cities bear;
Or humane conversation, is held dear.
Not with my praise direct; but praises due;
And men shall credit it, because it is true.
How ever, I Will not cease the praise I vow
To farre-shot Phoebus, with the silver bow;
Whom louely-hair'd Latona gave the light.
O King? Both Lycia, is in Rule thy Right;
Fair Moeonie, and the Maritimall
Miletus; wished to be the seat of all.
But chiefly Delos, girt with ^illowes round,
Thy most respected empire does resound.
Where thou to Pythus wentst; to answer there,
(As soon as thou were borne) the burning ear
Of many a far-come, to hear future deeds:
Clad in divine, and odoriferous weeds.
And with thy Golden Fescue, plaidst upon
Thy hollow Harp; that sounds to heaven set gone.
Then to Olympus, swift as thought he flew
To Jove's high house; and had a retinew
Of Gods to attend him. And then strait did fall
To study of the Harp, and Harpsicall,
All th'Immortalls. To whom, every Muse
With rauishing voices, did their answers use,
Singing The Eternal deeds of Deity.
And from their hands, what Hells of misery,
Poor Humanes suffer; living desperate quite.
And not an Art they have; wit, or deceit,
Can make them manage any Act aright:
Nor find with all the soul they can engage,
A salve for Death, or remedy for Age.
But here, the fayre-hayrd graces; the wise Hours;
Harmonia, Hebe, and sweet Venus powers,
Danced; and each others, Palm, to Palm, did cling.
And with these, danced not a deformed thing:
No forspoke Dwarf; nor downward witherling;
But all, with wondrous goodly forms were decked,
And moved with Beauties, of vnpris'd aspect.
Dart-deare- Diana, (even with Phoebus bred)
Danced likewise there; and Mars a march did tred,
With that brave Beuie. In whose consort, fell
Argicides, th'ingenious Sentinel.
Phoebus-Apollo, touched his Lute to them;
Sweetly, and softly: a most glorious beam
Casting about him, as he danced, and played;
And even his feet, were all with rays araide.
His weed and all, of a most curious Trymm,
With no less Luster, graced, and circled him.
By these, Latona, with a hair that shined
Like burnisht gold; and, (with the Mighty Mind)
Heavens Counsailor, (Jove;) sat with delightsome eyes
To see their Son, new rankt with Deities.
How shall I praise thee then, that art all praise?
Amongst the Brides, shall I thy Deity raise?
Or being in love, when, sad, thou wentst to wowe
The Virgin Aza? and did overthrow
The euen-with-Gods, Elations Mighty seed?
That had of goodly horse, so brave a breed?
And Phorbas; son of sovereign Triopus;
Valiant Leucippus, and Ereutheus;
And Triopus, himself, with equal fall?
Thou but on foot; and they on horseback all?
Or shall I sing thee, as thou first did grace
Earth with thy foot; to find thee forth a place
Fit to pronounce thy Oracles to Men?
First from Olympus, thou alightedst then,
Into Pieria; Passing all the land
Of fruitles Lesbos, chok'^ with drifts of sand.
The Magnets likewise, and the Perrhabes?
And to Iolous variedst thy access?
Cenaeus Topps ascending; that their Base
Make bright Euboea; being of ships the Grace.
And fixed thy fair stand, in Lelantus field;
That did not yet, thy minds contentment yield,
To raise a Phane on; and a sacred Grove.
Passing Eurypus then; thou ma^'st remove
Up to earths euer-greene, and holiest Hill.
Yet swiftly, thence too, thou transcendedst still
To Mycalessus, and did touch upon
Teucmessus, apt to make green (...) on,
And flowrie field-bedds. Then thy Progress found
Thebes out; whose soil, with only woods was crowned.
For yet was sacred Thebes, no humane seat;
And therefore were no Paths, nor high ways beat
On her free bosom, that flows now with wheat.
But then, she only, wore on it, a wood.
From hence (even loath to part, because it stood
Fit for thy service) thou put'st on Remove
To green Onchestus; Neptunes glorious Grove;
Where new-tam'd horse, bredd, nourish nerves so rare,
That still they frolic, though they trauaild are
Never so sore; and hurrie after them
Most heavy Coches: but are so extreme
(In vsuall-trauaile) fierie-and-free;
That though their cochman, never so masterlie
Gouernes their courages; he sometimes must
Forsake his seat, and give their spirits their lust:
When, after them, their empty coach they draw,
Foming, and Neighing, quite exempt from awe.
And if their Cocheman, guide through any Grove
Unshorn, and vowed to any Deities Love:
The Lords encocht, leap out; and all their care
Use to allaie their fires, with speaking fair;
Stroking, and trimming them; and in some queach,
(Or strength of shade) within their nearest reach,
Reigning them up; inuoke the deified King
Of that unshorn, and everlasting spring;
And leave them then, to her preserving hands,
Who is the Fate, that there, the God commands.
And this was first, the sacred fashion there.
From hence thou wentst (O thou in shafts past Pere)
And found'st Cephyssus, with thy all-seeing beams;
Whose flood affects, so many silver streams;
And from Lylaeus, poures so bright a wave.
Yet forth thy foot flew, and thy fair eyes gave
The view of Ocale, the rich in towrs;
Then, to Amartus, that abounds in flowrs.
Then to Delphusa, putt'st thy progress on,
Whose blessed soil, naught harm fall breeds upon.
And there, thy pleasure, would a Phane adorn
And nourish woods, whose shades should never be shorn.
Where, this thou told'st her; standing to her close:
Delphusa? here I entertain suppose
To build a farr-fam'd Temple; and ordein
An Oracle t'informe the minds of Men:
Who shall for ever, offer to my love
Whole Hecatombs. Even all the men that move
In rich Peloponesus; and all those
Of Europe; and the Isles the seas enclose;
Whom future search of Acts, and Beings brings:
To whom I Will prophecy the truths of things
In that rich Temple, where my Oracle sings.
This said; The all-bounds-reacher, with his bow,
The Phanes divine foundations did foreshowe;
Ample they were; and did huge length impart;
With a continuate Tenor, full of Art.
But when Delphusa looked into his end;
Her heart grew angry, and did thus extend
It self to Phoebus: Phoebus? since thy mind
A farr-fam'd Phane, has in it self designed,
To bear an Oracle to men, in me;
That Hecatombs, may put in fire to thee;
This let me tell thee, and impose for stay
Upon thy purpose: Th'Inarticulate neye
Of fire-hou'd horse, will ever disobaie
Thy numerous ear; and mules will for their drink
Trouble my sacred springs; and I should think
That any of the humane Race, had rather
See here, the burreys of rich Coches gather,
And hear the haughty Neys of swift-hou'd horse,
Than (in his pleasures place) convert recourse
T'a Mighty Temple; and his wealth bestow
On Pieties; where his sports may freely flow,
Or see huge wealth, that he shall never owe.
And therefore, (would thou bear, my free advise;
Though Mightier far thou art, and much more wise
O King, than I; thy power being great'st of all)
In Crissa, underneath the bosoms fall
Of steep Paranassus; let thy mind be given
To set thee up a Phane; where never driven
Shall glorious Coches be, nor horses Neys
Storm near thy well built Altars; but thy praise
Let the fair race of pious Humanes bring,
Into thy Phane, that Io-Paeans sing.
And those gifts only let thy Deified mind
Be circularlie pleased with; being the kind
And fayre-burnt-offrings, that true Deities bind.
With this; His mind she altered; though she spoke
Not for his good; but her own glories sake.
From hence (O Phoebus) first thou made retreat;
And of the Phlegians, reached the walled seat;
Inhabited with contumelious Men:
Who, sleighting Jove; took up their dwellings then
Within a large Cave, near Cephyssus Lake.
Hence, swiftly moving; thou all speed did make
Up to the tops intended; and the ground
Of Crissa, under the-with-snowe-still croun'd
(Parnassus) reached; whose face affects the west:
Above which, hangs, a rock that still seems pressed
To fall upon it; through whose breast does runn
A rockie Cave, near which, the King the Sunn
Cast to contriue a Temple to his mind;
And said; Now here, stands my conceit inclined
To build a famous Phane, where still shall be
An Oracle to Men; that still to me
Shall offer absolute Hecatombs; as well
Those that in rich Peloponessus dwell;
As those of Europe; and the Isles that lie
Walld with the sea; That all their pains apply
T'employ my counsels. To all which will I
True secrets tell, by way of Prophecy,
In my rich Temple; that shall ever be
An Oracle, to all Posterity.
This said; the Phanes form he did strait present,
Ample, and of a length of great extent;
In which Trophonius, and Agamede
(Who of Erginus, were the famous seed)
Imposed the stony Entry: and the Heart
Of every God had, for their excellent Art.
About the Temple dwelt, of humane Name
Unnumbered Nations; it acquired such Fame;
Being all of stone, built for eternal date;
And near it did a Fountain propagate
A fair stream far away; when Jove's bright seed,
(The King Apollo) with an arrow, (freed
From his strong string) destroid the Dragonesse
That Wonder nourisht; being of such excess
In size, and horridness of monstrous shape,
That on the forced earth, she wrought many a rape;
Many a spoil, made on it; many an ill
On crooke-hancht Herds brought; being impurpl'd still
With blood of all sorts: Having undergone
The charge of Juno, with the golden Throne,
To nourish Typhon the abhorred affright
And bane of mortals. Whom, into the light
Saturnia brought forth, being incenst with Jove;
Because the most renowm'd fruit of his love
(Pallas) he got, and shook out of his brain.
For which; Maiestique Juno, did complain
In this kind, to the blessed Court of the skies;
Know all ye sex-distinguisht Deities;
That Jove (assembler of the cloudie throng)
Beginns with me first; and affects with wrong
My right in him; made by himself, his wife;
That knows and does the honored marriage life,
All honest offices; and yet has he
Vndulie got, without my company
Blew-eyd Minerua: who of all the sky
Of blessed Immortalls is the absolute Grace.
Where, I have brought into the heavenly Race,
A Son, both taken in his feet and head;
So oughly; and so far from worth my bed,
That (ravished into hand) I took and threw
Down to the vast sea, his detested view.
Where Nereus Daughter Thetis; (who, her way
With silver feet makes, and the fair araie
Of her bright sisters) saved, and took to guard.
But, would to heaven, another, yet, were spared,
The like Grace of his Godhead. (Crafty mate)
What other escape can thou excogitate?
How could thy hears sustain to get alone,
The grey-eyd Goddess? her conception,
Nor bringing forth, had any hand of mine;
And yet know all the Gods, I go, for thine
To such kind uses. But I Will now employ
My brain to procreate a masculine Joy;
That'mongst th'Immortalls, may as eminent shine;
With shame affecting, nor my bed, nor thine;
Nor will I, ever, touch at thine again;
But far, fly it, and thee: and yet will reign
Amongst th'Immortalls ever. This spleen spent,
(Still yet left angry) far away she went;
From all the Deathlesse; and yet praid to all;
Advanced her hand, and e're she let it fall
Used these excitements; Hear me now (O Earth?)
Broad Heaven above it; and (beneath your birth)
The Deified Titanoys; that dwell about
Vast Tartarus; from whence sprung all the Rout
Of Men and Deities: Hear me all (I say)
With all your forces; and give instant way
T'a son of mine, without Jove; who yet may
Nothing inferior prove, in force to him;
But past him spring as far, in able lim,
As he past Saturn. This, pronounced, she struck
Life-bearing Earth so strongly; that she shook
Beneath her numbed hand: which when she beheld;
Her bosom with abundant comforts sweld;
In hope all should, to her desire extend.
From hence, the Year that all such proofs gives end;
Grew round; yet all that time, the bed of Jove
She never touched at; never was her love
Enflamed to fit nere his Dedalian Throne,
As she accustomed; to consult upon
Counsels kept dark, with many a secret skill;
But kept her Vow-frequented Temple still,
Pleased with her sacrifice; till now, the Nights
And Days accomplished; and the years whole rights,
In all her reuolutions, being expir'de;
The Hours, and all, run out, that were required,
To vent a Birthright; she brought forth a Son,
Like Gods, or Men, in no condition;
But a most dreadful, and pernicious thing
Called Typhon; who on all the humane Spring
Conferred confusion: which, received to hand
By Juno; instantly, she gave command
(Ill to ill adding) that the Dragonesse
Should bring it up, who took, and did oppress
With many a misery (to maintain the excess
Of that inhumane Monster) all the Race
Of Men, that were of all the world the grace.
Till the farre-working Phoebus; at her sent
A fiery Arrow; that inuok't event
Of death gave, to her execrable life.
Before which yet; she lay in bitter strife,
With dying pains; gr^ueling on earth, and drew
Extreme short respirations; for which slew
A shout about the air* whence, no man knew
But came by power divine. And then she lay
Tumbling her Tr^ncke; and winding every way
About her nastie Nest; quite leaving then
Her murtherous life, embr^'d with deaths of Men.
Then Phoebus gloried; saying, Thy self now lie
On Men-sustaining Earth, and putrify:
Who first, of Putrefaction, was informed.
Now on thy life, have Deaths cold vapors stormd;
That stormd'st on Men the Earth-f^d, so much death,
In envy of the Offspring, they made breathe
Their lives out, on my Altars; Now from thee,
Not Typhon shall enforce the misery
Of merited death; nor she, whose name implies
Such scath (Chymaera) but black earth make prise
To putrefaction, thy Immanities.
And bright Hyperion, that light, all eyes shows,
Thine, with a night of rottenness shall close.
Thus spoke he glory'ng; and then seas'd upon
Her horrid heap, with Putrefaction
Hyperions lovely powrs; from whence, her name
Took sound of Python; and heavens sovereign flame
Was surnamed Pythius; since the sharp-eyd Sunn,
Affected so, with Putrefaction
The hellish Monster. And now Phoebus mind
Gave him to know, that falsehood had struck blind
Even his bright eye; because it could not find
The subtle Fountains fraud. To whom he flew,
Enflamed with anger; and in the instant drew
Close to Delphusa; using this short vow;
Delphusa? you must look no longer now
To vent your fraud's on me; for well I know
Your situation, to be lovely worth
A Temples Imposition; It poures forth
So delicate a stream. But your renown
Shall now no longer shine here, but mine own.
This said; he thrust her Promontorie down,
And damned her fountain up, with mighty stones;
A Temple giving consecrations,
In woods adioining. And in this Phane all
On him, by surname of Delphusius call.
Because Delphusa's sacred flood and fame
His wrath affected so, and hid in shame.
And then thought Phoebus, what descent of Men
To be his Ministers, he should retein;
To do in stony Pythos sacrifice.
To which, his mind contending; his quick eyes
He cast upon the blew Sea; and beheld
A ship, on whose Masts, sails that winged it sweld:
In which were men transferred, many and good
That in Minoian Gnossus, eat their food,
And were Cretensians; who now are those
That all the sacrifising dues dispose;
And all the laws, deliver to a word
Of Days great King, that wears the golden sword:
And Oracles (out of his Delphian Tree
That shrowds her fair arms in the Cauitie
Beneath Parnassus Mount) pronounce to Men.
These, now his Priests, that lived as Merchants then,
In trafficks, and Pecuniarie Rates,
For sandy Pylos and the Pylean States,
Were under sail. But now encounterd them
Phoebus Apollo, who into the stream
Cast himself headlong: and the strange disguise
Took of a Dolphine, of a goodly ^ise:
Like which; He leapt into their ship, and lay
As an Ostent of infinite dismay.
For none, with any strife of Mind could look
Into the Omen. All the shipmasts shook;
And silent, all sat, with the fear they took.
Armd not; nor struck they sail; But as before,
Went on with full Trim: And a foreright Blore,
Stiff; and from forth, the South; the ship made fly.
When first, they stripped the Mal^^e Promont'rie:
Touched at Laconias soil; in which a Town
Their ship ariu'd at, that the Sea does Crown,
Called Tenarus; A place of much delight
To men that serve Heavens Comforter of sight.
In which are fed, the famous flocks that bear
The wealthy Fleeces; On a delicate Laire
Being fed, and seated: where the Merchants, feign
Would have put in; that they might out again,
To tell the Miracle, that chanced to them;
And try if it would take the sacred stream,
Rushing far forth, that he again might bear
Those other Fishes that abounded there,
Delightsome company; Or still would stay,
Abord their dry ship. But it failde t'obay.
And for the rich Peloponesian shore,
Steer'de her free sail; Apollo made the Blore
Directly guide it: That, obaying still
Reached dry Arena; And, (what wish does fill)
Fair Aryphaea; And the populous height
Of Thryus; whose stream (siding her) does weight
With safe pass on Alphaeus. Pylos sands
And Pylian dwellers: keeping by the strands
On which The Inhabitants of Crunius dwell:
And Helida, set opposite to Hell.
Chalcis, and Dymes reached; And happily
Made sail by Pheras: All being ouer-ioide
With that francke Gale, that Jove himself emploid.
And then amongst the clouds, they might descrie,
The Hill, that far-seene Ithaca, calls her Eye.
Dulichius, Samos, and, (with timber graced)
Shadie Zacynthus. But when now they past
Peloponesus all: And then, when show'de
The infinite Vale of Crissa, that does shroud
All rich Moraea, with her liberal breast:
So francke a Gale, there flew out of the West,
As all the sky discovered; it was so great,
And blew so from the very Counsel seat
Of Jove himself: that quickly it might send
The ship through full Seas, to her iourneys end.
From thence, they saild, (quite opposite) to the East,
And to the Region, where light leaves his rest.
The Light himself being sacred Pylot there;
And made the Sea-trod ship, ariue them nere
The Grapefull Crissa; where he rest does take;
Close to her Port, and sands. And then forth brake
The far-shot King; like to a star that strowes
His glorious forehead, where the Midday glowes,
That all in sparkles, did his state attire,
Whose Luster leapt up, to the sphere of fire;
He trodd, where no way op'te; and pierst the place
That of his sacred Tripods, held the grace;
In which, he lighted such a fluent flame,
As guilt all Crissa; In which, every Dame
And Dames fair daughter; cast out vehement cries
At those fell fires, of Phoebus Prodigies:
That shaking fears, through all their fancies threw.
Then (lik the minds swift light) Again he flew
Back to the ship; shaped like a youth in Height
Of all his graces: shoulders broad, and streit,
And all his hair, in golden currls enwrapt:
And to the Merchants, thus, his speech he shaped:
Ho? strangers? what are you? and from what seat
Sail ye these ways, that salt and water sweat?
To traffic justly? Or use vagrant scapes
Void of all rule? Conferring wrongs, and Rapes
(Like Pirates) on the men, ye never saw?
With minds project; exempt from list, or Law?
Why sit ye here so stupefied? nor take
Land while ye may? Nor deposition make
Of Nauall Arms? when this the fashion is
Of men Industrious! who, (their faculties
Wearied at sea,) leave ship, and use the land
For food, that with their healths, and stomachs stand.
This said; with bold minds, he their breast supplied,
And thus made answer, the Cretensian guide;
Stranger? because, you seem to us no seed
Of any mortal, but celestial breed,
For parts, and person; Joy your steps ensue,
And Gods make good, the bliss, we think your due.
Vouchsafe us true relation, on what land
We here ariue? and what men* here command?
We were for well-knowne parts bound; and from Crete
(Our vanted country) to the Pylian, ^ea^
Vowed our whole voyage. Yet ariue we here,
Quite cross to those wills, that our motion^ stere.
Wishing to make return some other way;
Some other course desirous to assaie.
To pay our lost pains. But some God has filled
Our frustrate sails; defeating what we willed.
Apollo answered: Strangers? though before
Ye dwelt in wooddie Gnossus; yet no more
Ye must be made, your own Reciprocalls
To your loved City, and fair seueralls
Of wives, and houses. But ye shall have bear
My wealthy Temple; honored far and nere
Of many a Nation: for my self am Son
To Jove himself; and of Apollo won
The glorious Title; who thus safely through
The seas vast billows, still have held your plough.
No ill intending, that will let ye make
My Temple here, your own; and honors take
Upon your selves; all that to me are given.
And more: the counsels of the King of Heaven,
Your selves shall know; and with his will receive
Ever the honors, that all men shall give.
Do as I say then instantly; strike sail;
Take down your Tackling; and your vessel hale
Up, into land: your goods bring forth, and all
The instruments, that into sailing fall;
Make on this shore, an Altar: fire inflame;
And barley white cakes, offer to my name.
And then, (enuironing the Altar) pray,
And call me, (as ye saw me, in the day
When from the windy seas, I brake swift way
Into your ship;) Delphinius: since I took
A Dolphins form then. And to every look
That there shall seek it; that, my Altar shall
Be made A Delphian memorial
From thence, for ever. After this; ascend
Your swift blackship, and sup; and then intend
Ingenuous Offerings to the equal Gods
That in celestial seats, make blessed abods.
When, (having staid, your helthfull hungers sting)
Come all with me; and Io-Paeans sing
All the ways length, till you attain the state,
Where I, your oppulent Phane have consecrate.
To this, they gave him, passing diligent ear;
And vowed to his obedience, all they were.
First striking sail, their tacklings then they los'd;
And (with their Gables stoop't) their mast imposed
Into the Mast room. Forth, themselves then went;
And from the sea into the Continent
Drew up their ship; which far up from the sand
They raised, with ample raf^ers. Then, in hand
They took the Altar; and informed it on
The seas nere shore; imposing thereupon
White cakes of barley: Fire made; and did stand
About it round; as Phoebus gave command*
Submitting Inuocations to his will.
Then sacrifis'd to all the heavenly Hill
Of powrefull God heads. After which, they eat
Abord their ship; till with (...) foot rep^ea^;
They rose; nor to their Temple, us a delay.
Whom Phoebus vsherd; and ^oucht; all the way
His heavenly Lute; with Art, above admired;
Gracefully leading them. When all were fired
With zeal to him; and followed wondering, All,
To Pythos; and upon his name did call
With Io-Paeans, such as Cre^ans use.
And in their bosoms did the deified Muse
Voices of honey-Harmonie, in fuse.
With neuer-wearie feet, their way they we^^;
And made, with all alacrity, asce^t
Up to Parnassus; and that long^d-f^^ place
Where they should live; and be of men, the Grace.
When, all the way; Apollo showed there still
Their farr-stretch^ valleys, and their two-topt Hill;
Their famous Phane; and all* th^^ All could eaise,
To a supreme height, of their Joy* and praise.
And then the Cre^an Captain, thus inquired
Of King Apollo; Since you have retired
(O Sovereign) our sad lives, so far from friends
And native soil; (because so far extends
Your dear minds pleasure) tell us how we shall
Live in your service. To which question call
Our provident minds; because we see not croun'd
This soil, with store of vines; nor does abound
In welthie meddows; on which, we may live,
As well as on men, our attendance give.
He smiled, and said; O men, that nothing know
And so are followed, with a world of woe;
That needs will succor care, and curious moan
And pour out sighs, without cessation;
Were all the riches of the earth your own.
Without much business; I will render known;
To your simplicities, an easy way,
To wealth enough; Let every man puruaie
A skeane, (or slaught'ring steel) and his right hand
(Bravely bestowing) evermore see manned
With killing sheep, that to my Phane will flow,
From all far Nations. On all which bestow
Good observation; and all else they give
To me; make you your own All; and so live.
For all which, watch before my Temple well;
And all my counsels, above all, conceal.
If any give vain language; or to deeds;
Yea, or as far as injury proceeds;
Know that, (at losers hands) for those that gai^e;
It is the law of Mortals, to sustain.
Besides; ye shall have Princes to obey,
Which, still, ye must; and (so ye gain) ye may.
All, now, is said; give All, thy memories stay.
And thus to thee, ( Jove and Latona's Son)
Be given all grace of salutation.
Both thee and others of The Immortal state;
My song shall memorize, to endless date.
The end of the Hymn to Apollo.
A HYMN TO HERMES.
HErmes, the Son of Jove and Maia, sing,
(O Muse) The Arcadian, and Cyllenian King:
They rich in flocks; he heaven enriching still,
In Messages, returned with all his will.
Whom glorious Maia (The Nymph rich in hair)
Mixing with Jove, in amorous affair;
Brought forth to him: sustaining a retre at
From all th'Immortalls of the blessed seat;
And living in the same dark Cave; where Jove
Informed, at midnight, the effect of love,
Unknown to either man or Deity:
Sweet sleep once, having seas'd the ielous eye
Of Juno, decked with wrists of iuorie.
But when great Jove's high mind was consummate,
The tenth month had in heaven confin'de the date
Of Maias Labor; And into the sight
She brought, in one birth, Labors infinite.
For then she bore a son, that all tried ways
Could turn, and wind, to wished events, assaies.
A fair tongued, but false-hearted Counselor.
Rector of Ox-stealers; and for all stealths, bore
A varied finger. Speeder of Nights spies
And guide of all her dreams obscurities.
Guard of dore-Guardians: and was borne to be
Amongst th'Immortalls, that winged Deity,
That in an instant, should do acts would ask
The Powers of others, an Eternal Task.
Borne, in the Morn; He formed his Lute at Noone;
At Night stole all the Oxen of the Sun;
And all this in his Births first day was done;
Which was the fourth of the increasing Moon.
Because Celestial lims, sustained his strains;
His sacred swath-bands, must not be his chains.
So (starting up) to Phoebus Herd he stepped;
Found strait, the high-roof't Cave where they were kept;
And (th'entrie passing) he th'inuention found,
Of making Lutes; and did in wealth abound
By that Invention; Since He first of all,
Was author of that Engine Musical.
By this mean, moved to the ingenious work:
Nere the Caves inmost ouerture, did lurk
A Tortois, tasting th'odoriferous grass;
Leisurely moving; and this Object was
The motive to Jove's Son (who could convert
To profitablest uses, all desert
That nature had in any work conuaid)
To form the Lute: when (smiling) thus he said;
Thou mou'st in me, a note of excellent use;
Which thy ill form, shall never so seduce
T'euert the good, to be informed by it,
In pliant force, of my forme-forging wit.
Then the slow Tortois, wrought on by his mind;
He thus saluted; All joy to the kind
Instinct of nature, in thee; Borne to be
The spirriter of Dances; company
For feasts, and following Banquets; graced and blessed
For bearing light to all the interest
Claimed in this Instrument. From whence shall spring
Play fair, and sweet; to which may Graces sing.
A pretty painted cote, thou putt'st on here
(O Tortois) while thy bill-bred vital sphere
Confines thy fashion; but (surprised by me,)
I Will bear thee home; where thou shall ever be
A Profit to me; and yet nothing more
Will I contemn thee, in my merited store.
Goods, with good parts got, worth and honor gave:
Left goods, and honors, every fool may have.
And since thou first, shall give me means to live,
I Will love thee ever. Virtuous qualities give
To live at home with them, enough content;
Where those that want such inward ornament,
Fly out for outward; their life, made their lode;
It Is best to be at home; Harm lurks abroad.
And certainly, thy virtue shall be known
Against great-yll-causing incantation,
To serve as for a Lance, Or Ammulet.
And where, in comfort of thy vital heat,
Thou now breathst but a sound confused, for song;
Exposed by nature; after death, more strong
Thou shall in sounds of Art be; and command
Song infinite sweeter. Thus with either hand
He took it up; and instantly took flight
Back to his Cave, with that his home-delight.
Where, (giving to the Mountain Tortois vents
Of life and motion) with fit Instruments
Forged of bright steel; he strait informed a Lute.
Put neck, and frets to it; of which, a suit
He made of splitted quills; in equal space
Imposed upon the neck; and did embrace
Both back, and bosom. At whose height (as gynns
T'extend, and ease the strings) he put in pynns.
Seven strings, of several tunes, he then applied;
Made of the Entrails of a sheep well dried;
And thoroughly twisted. Next he did provide
A Case for all; made of an Oxes Hyde;
Out of his counsels to preserve as well,
As to create: and all this Action fell
Into an instant consequence. His word,
And work, had individual accord.
All being as swiftly to perfection brought;
As any worldly man's, most ravished thought,
Whose mind, Care cuts, in an infinity
Of varied parts, or passions instantly;
Or as the frequent twincklings of an eye.
And thus his House-delight given absolute end;
He touched it; and did every string extend
(With an exploratorie spirit assaid)
To all the parts, that could on it be played.
It sounded dreadfully; to which he sung;
As if from thence, the first, and true force spr^ng
That fashions Virtue. God, in him did sing.
His play was likewise an unspeakable thing;
Yet, but as an extemporall Assay,
Of what show, it would make, being the first way,
It tried his hand; or a tumultuous noise;
Such as at feasts, the first-flowr'd spirits of Boys
Pour out in mutual contumelies still:
As little squaring with his curious will;
Or was as wanton, and untaught a Store.
Of Jove and Maia, that rich shoes still wore,
He sung; who sufferd, ill reports before,
And foul stains, under her fair titles bore.
But Hermes sung, her Nation, and her Name
Did itterate ever. All her high-flowne fame
Of being Jove's Mistress; celebrating all
Her train of servants; and collateral
Sumpture of Houses, all her Tripods there,
And Caldrons huge; increasing every year.
All which she knew; yet felt her knowledge flung
With her fames loss; which (found) she more wished sung.
But now; he, in his sacred cradle laid
His Lute so absolute; and strait conuaid
Himself up to a watch-towre, forth his house;
Rich, and divinely Odoriferous;
A lofty wile, at work in his conceit;
Thirsting the practice of his Empires height.
And where Impostors rule; (since sable Night
Must serve their deeds) he did his deeds their right:
For now the neuer-resting Sun, was turned
For th'vnder earth, and in the Ocean burned
His Coch, and Coursers. When th'ingenious spy
Pieria's shadie hill, had in his eye;
Where the immortal Oxen of the Gods
In airs flood solac't their select Abods;
And earths sweet green flower, that was never shorn;
Fed ever down; And these the wittie-borne
(Argicides,) set serious spy upon:
Seuering from all the rest; and setting gone
Full fifty of the violent Bellowers.
Which driving through the sands; he did reuerse
(His births-craft trait remembering) all their houes;
And them transposed, in opposite remoues;
The fore, behind set; The behind, before;
T'employ the eyes, of such as should explore.
And he himself (as slye-pac't) cast away
His sandalls, on the sea-sands. Past display;
And vnexcogitable thoughts, in Act
Putting; to shunn, of his stolen steps, the Tract.
Mixing, both Tamrisk; and like-Tamrisk sprayes,
In a most rare confusion, to raise
His footsteps up from earth. Of which sprayes, he
(His armefull gathering, fresh from off the Tree,)
Made for his sandalls, Ties; both leaves, and ties
Holding together; and then feared no eyes
That could affect his feets discoueries.
The Tamrisk boughs he gathered, making way
Back from Pieria: but as to conuaie
Provision in them, for his journey fit;
It being long; and therefore needing it.
An old man, now at labor, nere the field
Of green Onchestus; knew the verdant yield
Of his fair armefull; whom th'ingenious Son
Of Maia, therefore; salutation
Did thus beginn to; Ho? old man! That now
Art crooked grown, with making Plants to grow!
Thy nerves will far be spent; when these boughs shall
To these their leaves, confer me fruit, and All.
But see not thou, what ever thou do see;
Nor hear, though hear; But all, as touching me
Conceal; since naught, it can endamage thee.
This, and no more he said; and on drove still
His brode-browd Oxen. Many a shadie Hill,
And many an echoing valley; many a field
Pleasant, and wishfull, did his passage yield
Their safe Transcension. But now, the divine
And black-browd Night (his Mistress) did decline
Exceeding swiftly; Days most early light
Fast hasting to her first point; to excite
Wordlings to work; and in her Watch-towre, shone,
King Pallas-Megamedes seed, (the Moon)
When through the Alphaean flood, Jove's powerful Son
Phoebus-Apollo's ample-foreheaded Herd
(Whose necks, the laboring yoke, had never spher'd)
Drove swiftly on; and then into a stall
(Hilly; yet past to, through an humble vale
And hollow Dells, in a most lovely Meade)
He gatherd all; and them divinely fedd
With Odorous Cypress; and the rauishing Tree
That makes his Eaters, lose the memory
Of name, and country. Then he brought, withal;
Much wood; whose sight, into his search let fall
The Art of making fire. Which thus he tried:
He took a branch of Laurel, amplified
Past others, both in beauty, and in sise;
Yet, lay next hand; rubbed it; and strait did rise
A warm fume from it. Steel, being that did raise
(As Agent) the attenuated Baies
To that hot vapor. So that, Hermes found
Both fire first; and of it, the seed, close bound
In other substances; and then, the seed
He multiplied; of sere-wood making feed
The apt heat of it; in a pile Combin'de,
Laid in a low Pit; that inflames strait shin'de;
And cast a sparkling crack up to the Sky;
All the dry parts, so fervent were, and hye
In their combustion. And how long the force
Of glorious Vulcan, kept the fire in course;
So long was he, in dragging from their stall,
Two of the crook-hancht Herd: that ror'd withal;
And raged for fear, t'approch the sacred fire:
To which did all, his dreadful powrs aspire.
When (blustering forth their breath) He on the soil,
Cast both, at length; though with a world of toil.
For long he was, in getting them to ground
After their through-thrust, and most mortal wound.
But work, to work, he ioin'd; the flesh and cut,
Couerd with fat; and (on treene broches put)
In pieces roasted. But, in th'Intestines
The black blood, and the honorarie chines,
Together with the carcases, lay there
Cast on the cold earth, as no Deities chere.
The Hydes, upon a rugged rock he spread*
And thus were these now, all in pieces shred,
And vndistinguisht from Earths common herd*
Though borne for long date; and to heaven endeard;
And now must ever live, in dead event.
But Hermes, h^rehence, having his content,
Cared for no more; but drew to places even,
The fat-works, that, of force, must have for heaven
Their capital ends; though stolen; and therefore were
In twelve parts cut, for twelve choice Deities chere,
By this devotion. To all which, he gave
Their several honors; and did wish to have
His equal part thereof; as free, and well
As the other Deities; but the fattie smell
Afflicted him, though he immortal were;
Play'ng mortal parts; and being, (like mortals) here.
Yet his proud mind, nothing the more obayde
For being a God, himself; and his own aid
Having to cause his due: And though in heart
He highly wished it; but the weaker part
Subdued the stronger; and went on, in ill.
Even heavenly Power, had rather have his Will,
Then have his Right; and will's the worst of All,
When but in least sort, it is criminal;
One Taint, being Author of a Number, still.
And thus (resolved to leave his hallowed Hill)
First, both the fat parts, and the fleshie, All
Taking away; at the steepe-entryed stall
He laid all; All, the feet and heads entire;
And all the sere-wood; making clear with fire.
And now, he leaving there then, all things done
And finished, in their fit perfection;
(The Coals put out; and their black Ashes thrown
From all discovery, by the lovely light
The cherefull Moon cast; shyning all the Night)
He strait assumed a novel voices note;
And in the whirle-pit-eating-flood, aflote
He set his sandalls. When now, once again
The-that-morne-borne- Cyllenius, did attain
His Homes divine height; all the farr-stretcht way
No one blessed God, encountering, his assaie;
Nor Mortal Man; nor any Dog durst spend
His-borne-to-barke-mouth at him; till, in the end,
He reached his Cave; and at the Gate went in
Crooked, and wrapped into a fold so thin,
That no eye could discover his repair;
But as a darkness, of th'Autumnall air.
When, going on; fore-right; he strait arrived
At his rich Phane: his soft feet quite deprived
Of all least noise, of one that trod the earth;
They trod so swift, to reach his room of Birth.
Where, In his swath-bands, he his shoulders wrapped,
And (like an Infant, newly having escaped
The teeming streights) as in the Palms he lay
Of his loved Nurse. Yet instantly would play
(Freeing his right hand) with his bearing cloth
About his knees wrapped; and strait (loosing both
His right and left hand) with his left, he caught
His most-lou'd Lute. His Mother yet, was taught
His wanton wiles; nor could a Gods wit lie
Hid from a Goddess; who did therefore try
His answer, thus: Why (thou made all of slight)
And whence ariu'st thou, in this rest of Night?
Improuident Impudent; In my conceit
Thou rather should be getting forth thy Gate,
With all flight fit, for thy endangered State;
(In merit of th'Ineuitable bands,
To be imposed by vexed Latona's hands
Justly incenst for her Apollo's harms)
Thenly thus wrapped, as ready for her arms,
To take thee up, and kiss thee: Would to heaven,
(In cross of that high grace) Thou had been given
Up to Perdition; ere poor mortals bear
Those black banes, that thy father Thunderer
Has planted thee of purpose to confer,
On them, and Deities. He returned reply;
As Master of the feats of Policy;
Mother? why aim you thus amiss at me?
As if I were a Son that Infancy
Could keep from all the skill, that Age can teach?
Or had in cheating, but a childish reach?
And of a Mothers mandats, feared the breach?
I mount that Art at first; that will be best
When all times consummate their cunningest.
Able to counsel, Now my self, and thee,
In all things best, to all Eternity.
We cannot live like Gods here, without gifts;
No, nor without corruption, and shifts.
And much less, without eating; as we must
In keeping thy rules, and in being Just;
Of which we cannot undergo the lodes.
It Is better here, to Imitate the Gods,
And wine, or wench out all times Periods;
To that end, growing rich in ready heaps;
Stor'de with Reue^news; being in corne-fielde reapes
Of infinite Acres; then to live enclosed
In Caves, to all Earths sweetest air exposed.
I, as much honor hold, as Phoebus does;
And if my Father please not to dispose
Possessions to me; I my self will see
If I can force them in, for I can be
Prince of all Thieves. And if Latona's Son
Make after my stealth, Indignation;
I Will have a Escape, as well as ^e a Search,
And overtake him with a greater lurch.
For I can post to Pythos; and break through,
His huge house, there; where harbors wealth enough;
Most precious Tripods; Caldrons; Steel, and Gold;
Garments rich wrought; and full of liberal fold:
All which will I, at pleasure own; and thou
Shall see all; will thou but thy ^ight bestow.
Thus changed great words; the Go^e-hyde-wearers Son,
And Maia, of Maiestique fashion.
And now the Ayre-begot Aurora rose
From out the Ocean-great-in-ebbs-and flows;
When, at the ne^er-shorne, pure-and-faire Grove,
(Onchestus) consecrated to the love
Of round and long-neckt Neptune; Phoebus found
A man whom heavy years, had pressed half roun^*
And yet at work, in plashing of a Fenc^
About a Vineyard; that had residence
Hard by the highway; whom Latona's Son;
Made it not strange, but first did question,
And first saluted: Ho? you? Aged sire
That here are hewing from the Vine, the Bryre;
For certain Oxen, I come here t'enquire
Out of Pieria; femalls All; and rer'd
All, with horns wreathed, unlike the common Herd;
A Cole-black Bull, fed by them all alone;
And all observed for preservation
Through all their foodie, and delicious Fen;
With four fierce Mastifs, like one-minded men.
These left their Dogs, and Bull; (which I admire)
And when was nere set, Days eternal fire;
From their fierce Guardians; from their delicate fare,
Made clear departure. To me then declare;
(O old man, long since borne) If thy grave raie
Has any man seen, making stealthfull way
With all those Oxen! The Old man made reply;
It Is hard (O friend) to render readily,
Account of all, that may invade mine eye;
For many a Trauailer, this highway tredds;
Some in much ills search; some, in noble thredds
Leading their lives out; but I, this young Day
Even from her first point, have made good display,
Of all men, passing this abundant hill,
Planted with Vines; and no such stealthfull ill,
Her light has shown me: But last Evening late,
I saw a Thing, that showed of childish state;
To my old lights; and seemed as he pursude
A Herd of Oxen, with brave Heads indude;
Yet but an Infant; and retainde a Rodd;
Who warily, both this, and that way trodd,
His head still backwards turned. This th'ould Man spoke;
Which he well thought upon; and swiftly brake
Into his Pursuit, with abundant wing;
That struck but one plain; ere he knew the thing
That was the Thief; to be th'Impostor borne;
Whom Jove yet, with his Sons name did adorn.
In study, and with Ardor, then the King
( Jove's dazeling Son) placed his exploring wing
On sacred Pylos, for his forced Heard;
His ample shoulders* in a cloud ensphear'd
Of fiery chrimsine. Strait, the steps he found
Of his stolen Herd: And said; Strange sights confound
My apprehensiue powers: for here I see
The Tracts of Oxen; but auersiuelie
Converted toward the Pierian Hills,
As tredding to their Meade of Daffodills;
But, nor mine eye, Men's feet, nor Women's draws;
Nor hoarie Wolves, nor Bears* nor Lions Paws;
Nor thick-neckt Bulls they show. But he that ^oes,
These monstrous Deeds, with n^uer so swift shoes;
Has past from that hour hither; but from hence,
His foul course, may meet, fouler consequence.
With thi^, took Phoebus wing; and Hermes still,
(For all his Threats) secure lay in his Hill
Walled with a woodd; and more* ^ Rock, beside
Where a Retreat rann, deeply multiplide
In blinding shadows; and where th'endlesse Bride;
Bore to Saturnius, his Ingenious Son:
An Odor, worth a Hearts desire, being thrown,
Along the Heauen-sweet Hill; on whose Herb, fedd,
Rich flocks of sheep, that bow not where they tredd
Their horney Pasterns. There, the light of Men,
( Jove's Son Apollo) strait descended then,
The Marble Pauement, in that gloomie Den.
On whom, when Jove, and Maia's Son set eye,
Wroth for his Oxen: On then, instantly
His Odorous swath-bands, flew; in which, as close
Th'Impostor lay; As in the cool repose
Of cast-on Ashes, Harths of burning Coals
Ly in the woods hidd, under the Controules
Of skillful Colyers: Even so close did lie
Inscrutable Hermes in Apollo's eye.
Contracting his great Godhead, to a small
And Infant likeness; feet, hands, head and All.
And as a Hunter has been often viewd,
From Chase retired with both his hands embrewd
In his Games blood; that does for water call
To cleanse his hands; And to provoke withal
Delightsome sleep; new washed and laid to rest;
So now lay Hermes in the close comprest
Chase of his Oxen. His New-found-out Lute;
Beneath his arm held; As if no pursuit
But that Prise, and the virtue of his play,
His heart affected. But to Phoebus, lay,
His close Heart, open: And he, likewise, knew
The brave Hyll-Nymph there; and her dear Son, new*
Borne; and as well wrapped, in his wiles, as weed's.
All the close shroud's too, for his Rapinous deeds,
In All the Cave, he knew: and with his key
He opened three of them; In which there lay
Silver, and Gold-heapes; Nectar infinite store;
And Dear Ambrosia; and of weeds she wore,
(Pure white, and Purple) A rich Wardrobe shin'de;
Fit for the blessed States, of powrs so diuin'de.
All which discouerd; Thus to Mercury
He offered Conference: Infant? you that lie
Wrapped so in swath-bands; Instantly unfold
In what conceald Retreats of yours you bold
My Oxen stolen by you; Or strait we shall
Iarr, as beseemes not, powrs Celestial.
For I will take, and hurl Thee to the Deepes
Of dismal Tartarus; where ill Death keeps
His gloomie, and inextricable fates;
And to no Eye, that light Illuminates,
Mother, nor Father, shall return thee free,
But under Earth, shall Sorrow fetter thee,
And few repute thee, their Superior.
On him replied, Crafts subtlest Counsailor;
What cruel speech has past Latona's Care!
Seeks be his stolne-wilde-Cows, where Deities are?
I have nor seen, nor ^eard; nor can report*
From others mouths, one word of their resort
To any strange r. Nor will I, to gain
A base Reward, a false Relation feign.
Nor would I; Could I tell. Resemble I
An Ox-Theefe? Or a Man? Especially
A man of such a courage; such a force
As to that labor goes? That violent course?
No Infants work is That. My powers aspire
To sleep, and quenching of my hungers fire
With Mothers Milk; and against cold shades, to arm
With Cradle-cloths, my shoulders; and Baths warm,
That no man may conceive, the war you threat
Can spring, in cause, from my so peace full heat.
And even amongst th'Immortalls it would bear
Event of absolute Miracle, to hear
A newborn Infants forces should transcend
The limits of his Doors; much less contend
With untamed Oxen. This speech nothing seems
To savor the Decorum of the Beams
Cast round about the Air Apollo breaks,
Where his divine mind, her intention speaks.
I brake but yesterday, the blessed womb,
My feet are tender, and the common Tomb
Of men, (the Earth) lies sharp beneath their tred.
But, (if you please) even by my Fathers head
I Will take the great Oath; That nor I protest
My self, to Author on your Interest
Any such usurpation; Nor have I
Seen any other, that felloniously
Has forced your Oxen. Strange thing! what are those
Oxen of yours? Or what are Oxen? knows
My rude mind, think you? My ears only touch
At their renown, and hear that there are such.
This speech he past, and ever as he spoke
Beams from the hair, about his eye-lidds brake;
His eyebrows, up, and down cast; and his eye
Every way looked, askans, and carelessly.
And he, into a lofty whistling fell;
As if he idle thought, Apollo's spell.
Apollo (gently smiling) made Reply;
O thou Impostor! whose thoughts ever lie
In labor with Deceit! For certain, I
Retain Opinon; that thou, (even thus soon)
Have ransackt, many a House; and not in one
Nights-worke alone; nor in one Country neither
Have been beseeging, House and Man together;
Rigging, and rifeling all ways; and no Noise
Made with thy soft fee^e, where it all destroies.
Soft therefore, well; and tender thou may call
The feet that thy stealthe, go, and fly withal.
For many a field-bredd Herdsman. (unheard still)
Have thou made drown, the Ca^er^s of the Hill
Where his Retreates lie, with his helpless tears,
When any flesh-stealth thy desire endea^^^*
And thou encountrest, either flocks of sheep
Or Herds of Oxen! up then do not sleep
Thy last Nap, in thy Cradle; but come down;
(Companion of black Night) and for this Crown
Of thy young Rapines; bear (from all) the state
And style of Prince Thief, into endless Date.
This said; he took the Infant in his Arms;
And with him, the remembrance of his harms;
This Praesage vtt'ring; lifting him aloft;
Be ever more, the miserablie-soft
Slave of the belly; Pursuiuant of all
And Author, of all mischiefs Capital.
He scorned his Prophecy so; he Nees'd in's face
Most forciblie (which hearing) his embrace
He loathed; and burl'd him against the ground; yet still
Took seat before him; though, (with all the ill
He bore by him) he would have left full feign
That Hewer of his heart, so into twain.
Yet salu'd all thus; Come! (you so swadl'd thing;
Issue of Maia, and the Thunders King;
Be confident; I shall hereafter find
My brode-browd Oxen. My Prophetique mind
So far from blaming this thy course; that I,
Foresee thee, (in it,) to Posterity
The guide of All Men, (All ways,) to their ends.
This spoken; Hermes, from the Earth Ascends;
Starting Aloft; and as in Study went;
Wrapping himself, in his Integument;
And thus asked Phoebus; Whither force you Me
(Farr-shot; and far most powrefull Deity.)
I know (for all your fayning) you are still wroth,
About your Oxen; and suspect my Troth.
O Jupiter? I wish the general Race
Of all Earths Oxen, rooted from her face.
I steal your Oxen? I again, profess
That neither, I, have stolen them; nor can guess
Who else should steal them. What strange Beasts are these
Your so-lou'd Oxen? I must say (to please
Your humor thus far) that even My few Hoowres
Have heard their fame. But be the sentence yours
Of the Debate betwixt us; Or to Jove
(For more indifferency) the Cause remove.
Thus when the Solitude-affecting God,
And the Latonian seed, had laid abroad
All things betwixt them; (though not yet agreed;
Yet, might I speak) Apollo did proceed
Nothing unjustly, to charge Mercury
With stealing of the Cows, he does deny.
But his Profession was, with filed speech,
And Crafts fair Complements, to ouerreach
All; And even Phoebus. Who because he knew
His Trade of subtletie; He still at view
Hunted his Foe, through all the sandy way
Up to Olympus. Nor would let him stra^e
From out his sight; but kept behind him still.
And now they reached, the Odoriferous Hill
Of high Olympus, to their Father Jove,
To Arbitrate the Cause, in which they strove.
Where, before both; Talents of justice were
Proposed for him, whom Jove should sentence Clear,
In cause of their contention. And now
About Olympus, (euer-crown'de with snow)
The rumor of their controversy flew.
All the Incorruptible, to their view,
On heavens steep Mountain, made returned repair.
Hermes and He, that light hurls through the air;
Before the Thunderers knees stood: who begunn,
To question thus far, his Illustrious Son:
Phoebus? To what end bringst thou Captive here
Him in whom my Mind, putts delights so dear?
This Newborn Infant? that the place supplies
Of Herrald yet, to all the Deities?
This serious business, you may witness, draws
The Deities whole Court, to discuss the cause.
Phoebus replied: And not unworthy is
The cause, of all the Court of Deities.
For you shall hear, it comprehends the weight
Of Deuastation; and the very height
Of spoil, and rapine, even of Deities rights.
Yet you (as if my self loved such delights)
Use words that wound my heart. I bring you here
An Infant, that, even now, admits no Pere
In rapes and robb'ries. Finding out, his Place,
(After my measure of an infinite space)
In the Cyllenian Mountain. Such a one
In all the Art of opprobration,
As not in all the Deities, I have seen;
Nor in th'Obliuion-marckt-whole Race of men.
In Night, he drove my Oxen from their Leas;
A long the lofty rore-resounding Seas:
From out the Rode way quite: the steps of them
So quite transposed, as would amaze the beam^
Of any minds eye: being so infinite much
Inuolu'd in doubt; as showd a Deified touch
Went to the works performance. All the way
Through which, my cross-hou'd Cows he did conuaie,
Had dust so darklie-hard to search; and He
So past all measure, wrapped in subtlety.
For, nor with feet, nor hands, be formed his steps,
In passing through the dry ways sandy heap's:
But used another counsel to keep hidd
His monstrous Tracts; that showd as one had slid
On Oak, or other Boughs; That swept out still
The footsteps of his Oxen; and did fill
Their prints up ever; to the Daffodill
(Or dainty feeding Meddow) as they trodd,
Driven by this cautelous, and Infant God.
A Mortal Man yet, saw him driving on
His Prey to Pylos. Which when he had done
And got his Pass signed, with a sacred fire
In peace; and freely (though to his desire
Not to the Gods, he offered part of these
My ravished Oxen) he retires, and lies
Like to the gloomie Night in his dimm Denn,
All hid in darkness; and in clouts again,
Wrapped him so closely; that the sharpe-seene eye
Of your own Eagle, could not see him lie.
For with his hands, the air he rarefied
(This way, and that moved) till bright gleames did glide
About his Being; that if any eye
Should dare the Darkness; Light appos'd so nie
Might blind it quite, with her Antipathie.
Which wile he woue, in curious care t'illude
The Extreme of any eye, that could intrude.
On which relying; he outrageouslie
(When I accused him) trebled his reply;
I did not see; I did not hear; nor I
Will tell at all; that any other stole
Your brode-browd Beeues. Which an Impostors soul
Would soon have done; and any Author feign
Of purpose only, a Reward to gain.
And thus he colored truth, in every lie.
This said; Apollo sat; and Mercury,
The Gods Commander, pleased with this reply.
Father! I Will tell the truth; (for I am true
And far from Art to lie.) He did pursue
Even to my Cave, his Oxen: this self day;
The Sunn, new raising his illustrious raie.
But brought with him, none of the Bliss-indu'd,
Nor any ocular witness* to conclude,
His bare assertion. But his own command
Laid on with strong, and necessary hand,
To show his Oxen. Using Threats to cast
My poor, and Infant powrs, into the Vast
Of ghastly Tartarus; because he bears
Of strength-sustayning youth, the flaming years.
And I, but yesterday produced to light
By which, it fell into his own fre sight
That I, in no similitude apper'd
Of power to be the forcer of a Herd.
And credit me (O Father, since the Grace
Of that name, in your style, you please to place)
I drove not home his Oxen, no nor preast
Past mine own threshold; for it is manifest,
I reverence, with my soul, the Sunn; and all
The knowing dwellers, in this heavenly Hall.
Love you; observe the least: and it is most clear
In your own knowledge, that my Merits bear
No least guilt of his blame. To all which, I,
Dare add, heavens great oath, boldly swearing by
All these so well built Entries of the Blessed.
And therefore when I saw my self so pressed
With his reproaches; I confess I burned
In my pure gall; and harsh reply returned.
Add your aid to your Younger then; and free
The scruple fixed in Phoebus Jealousy.
This said; he winckt upon his Sire; and still
His swath-bands, held beneath his arm; no Will
Discernd in him, to hide, but have them shown.
Jove laughed aloud at his Ingenious Son,
Quitting himself with Art, so likely wrought,
As showd in his heart, not a rapinous thought.
Commanding Both, to bear attoned minds
And seek out th'Oxen; In which search he binds
Hermes to play the Guide; and show the Sunn
(All grudge exilde) the Shroud to which he wunn
His fayre-eyd Oxen. Then; his forehead bowed
For sign it must be so; and Hermes showed
His free obedience. So soon, he inclined
To his persuasion, and command, his mind.
Now then, Jove's Iarring Sons, no longer stood;
But sandy Pylos, and the Alphaean flood
Reached instantly; and made as quick a fall
On those rich-feeding fields, and lofty stall
Where Phoebus Oxen, Hermes safely kept;
Driven in, by night. When suddenly he stepped
Up to the stony Cave; and into light
Drove forth the Oxen* Phoebus at first sight
Knew them the same: and saw apart dispread
Upon a high-rais'd rock; the hydes new flead
Of th'Oxen sacrifis'd. Then Phoebus said;
O thou in crafty counsels vndisplaid!
How could thou cut the throtes, and cast to Earth
Two such huge Oxen? being so young a birth,
And a mere Infant? I admire thy force
And will, behind thy back. But this swift course
Of growing into strength, thou had not need
Continue any long Date, O thou seed
Of honored Maia! Hermes, (to show how
He did those Deeds) did forthwith cut and bow
Strong Osiers in soft folds; and strappl'd strait
One of his hugest Oxen: all his weight
Lay'ng prostrate on the earth, at Phoebus feet:
All his four cloven houes, easly made to greet
Each other upwards; all, together bro^ght.
In all which bands yet, all the Beasts powers wrought
To rise, and stand; when all the Herd about
The mighty Hermes, rusht in, to help out
Their fellow from his fetters; Phoebus view
Of all this, up to Admiration drew
Even his high forces: And stern looks he threw
At Hermes for his Herds wrong; and the place
To which he had retired them; being in grace
And fruitful riches of it, so entire:
All which, set all his force, on envious fire.
All whose heat, flew out of his eyes in flames:
Which feign he would have hidd, to hide the shames
Of his ill governed passions. But with ease
Hermes could calm them; and his humors please
Still at his pleasure; were he never so great
In force, and fortitude; and high in heat.
In all which, he his Lute took; and assaid
A Song upon him; and so strangely played;
That from his hand, a rauishing horror flew.
Which Phoebus, into laughter turned; and grew
Pleasant past measure; Tunes so artfull clear
Struck even his heart strings; and his mind, made hear.
His Lute so powerful was, in forcing love;
(As his hand ruled it) that from him it drove
All fear of Phoebus; yet he gave him still
The upper hand; and (to advance his skill)
The utmost Miracle; he played sometimes,
Single awhile; In which, when all the Clymes
Of rapture he had reached; (to make the Sunn
Admire enough) O then, his voice would runn
Such points upon his play; and did so move,
They took Apollo Prisoner to his love.
And now the deathlesse Gods, and deathfull Earth
He sung; beginning, at their eithers Birth,
To full extent of all their Emperie.
And, first; the honor to Mnemosyne
(The Muses Mother) of all Goddess states
He gave; even forced to it, by the equal fates.
And then (as it did in Prioritie fall
Of Age, and Birth) He celebrated All.
And with such Elegance, and Order sung;
(His Lute still touched, to stick more off his tongue)
That Phoebus heart, with infinite love, he eat.
Who therefore thus, did his Deserts entreat:
Master of Sacrifice! chief soul of feast?
Patient of all pains? Artizan so blessed;
That all things thou can do, in any One.
Worth fifty Oxen is th'Inuention
Of this one Lute. We both, shall now; I hope;
In firm peace, work, to all our wishes scope.
Inform me, (thou that every way can wind,
And turn to Act, all wishes of thy mind)
Together with thy birth, came all thy skill?
Or did some God, or God-like man instill
This heavenly song to thee? Me thinks I hear
A new voice; such as never yet came nere
The breast of any; either Man, or God;
Till in thee, it had Prime, and Period.
What Art? what Muse? that medicine can produce
For cares most curele^^e? what inueterate use;
Or practice of a virtue so profuse,
(Which three, do all the contribution keep^
That Joy, or Love conferrs, or pleasing Sleep)
Taught thee the sovereign facture of them all?
I, of the Muses, am the capital
Consort, or follower: (and to these belong
The grace of dance; all worthy ways of song;
and euer-florishing verse: the delicate Set
And sound of Instruments.) But never yet
Did anything so much affect my mind
With joy, and care to compass; as this kind
Of Song and Play: that for the spritely feast
Of flourishing assemblies, are the best
And aptest works, that ever Worth gave Act.
My powers with admiration stand distract,
To hear, with what a hand to make in love,
Thou rul'st thy Lute. And (though thy yongst hours move,
At full art, in old counsels. Here I vow
(Even by this Cornell Dart, I use to throw)
To thee, and to thy Mother; I Will make thee
Amongst the Gods, of glorious degree.
Guide of Men's ways, and Theirs. And will impart
To thee, the mighty Imperatorie Art:
Bestow rich gifts on thee; and in the end
Never deceive thee. Hermes (as a friend
That wrought on all advantage; and made gain
His Capital object) thus did entertain
Phoebus Apollo: Do thy Dignities
(Farr-working God; and circularlie wise)
Demand my virtues? without envy I
Will teach thee to ascend my faculty.
And this Day thou shall reach it; finding me,
In Acts and Counsels, all ways kind to thee;
As one that all things knows: And first take seat
Amongst th'Immortalls; being good, and great.
And therefore to Jove's love, make free access,
Even out of his accomplished Holiness.
Great gifts, he likewise gives thee; who (fame says)
Have wunn thy greatness, by his will: his ways.
By him know all the powers Prophetical
(O thou farr-worker) and the fates of all.
Yea; and I know thee rich; yet apt to learn:
And even thy Wish, do but discern, and earne.
And since thy soul, so burns to know the way
To play and sing as I do: sing, and play.
Play; and perfection in thy play employ;
And be thy care, to learn things good; thy Joy.
Take thou my Lute (My Love) and give thou me,
The glory of so great a faculty.
This sweet-tun'd consort; held but in thy hand;
Sing; and perfection in thy song command.
For thou, already, have the way to speak
Fayrely, and elegantly; and to break
All eloquence into thy vtterd mind.
One gift from heaven found, may another find.
Use then, securely, this thy gift; and go
To feasts, and dances, that enamour so;
And to that covetous sport of getting glory,
That Day, nor Night, will suffer to be sorry.
Whoeuer, does but say, in verse; sings still:
Which he that can; of any other skill
Is capable; so he be taught by Art,
And wisdom; and can speak, at every part
Things pleasing to an understanding Mind:
And such a one, that seeks this Lute, shall find.
Him still it teaches easily, though he plays
Soft voluntaries only; and assaies
As wanton, as the sports of children are.
And (even when he aspires to singular
In all the Mast'ries he shall play or sing)
Finds the whole work, but an unhappy thing:
He (I say) sure; shall of this Lute be King.
But he; whoeuer, rudely sets upon,
Of this Lutes skill, th'Inquest, or Question;
Never so ardently, and angrilie;
Without the aptness, and ability
Of Art, and Nature fitting: never shall
Aspire to this; but utter triuiall
And idle accents; though sung never so loud,
And never so commended of the Crowde.
But thee I know (O Eminent Son of Jove)
The fiery Learner, of what ever Love
Has sharpn'd thy affections to achiue.
And thee, I give this Lute; let us now live
Feeding upon the Hill-and-horse-fed Earth
Our neuer-handled Oxen: whose dear Birth
(Their femalls fellowd with their Males) let flow
In store enough hereafter; nor must you
(How-euer-cunning hearted your wits are)
Boil in your Gall, a Grudge too circulare.
Thus gave he him his Lute; which he embraced;
And gave again, a Good, whose bright head cast
Beams like the light forth; leaving to his care
His Oxens keeping. Which, with joyful fare,
He took on him. The Lute Apollo took
Into his left hand; and aloft he shook
Delightsome sounds up; to which God did sing.
Then were the Oxen, to their endless Spring
Turned; and Jove's Two illustr'ous Offsprings flew
Up to Olympus, where it ever snew;
Delighted with their Lutes sound all the way.
Whom Jove, much ioi'd to see; and endless stay
Gave to their knot of friendship. From which date;
Hermes gave Phoebus, an eternal state
In his affection: whose sure pledge and sign
His Lute was; and the Doctrine so divine,
Jointly conferd on him. Which well might be
True Symbol of his Loves simplicity.
On the other part; Apollo, in his friend
Formed Thou Art of Wisdom; to the binding end
Of his vowed friendship; and (for further meede)
Gave him the farr-heard fistularie Reed.
For all these forms of friendship, Phoebus yet
Feared that both form, and substance were not met
In Mercurie's intentions: and, in plain,
Said, (since he saw him, borne to craft and gain;
And that Jove's will had him the honor done,
To change at his will, the possession
Of others Gods) be feared his breach of of vows,
In stealing both his Lute, and coming Bows.
And therefore wished, that what the Gods affect,
Himself would witness; and to his request
His head Bow; swearing by The Impetuous flood
Of Styx; that of his whole possessions, not a Good
He would diminish; but therein maintain
The full content, in which his Mind did reign.
And then did Maia's Son, his forehead bow:
Making, by all that he desired, his vow:
Never to prey more upon any Thing,
In just possession of the farr-shot King;
Nor ever to come near, a House of his.
Latonian Phoebus, bowd his Brow to this,
With his like promise; say'ng, Not any One
Of all the Gods, nor any Man, that, Son
Is to Saturnius; is more dear to me;
More trusted, nor more honored, is then thee.
Which, yet, with greater Gifts of Deity,
In future I Will confirm; and give thy state
A Rodd that riches shall accumulate;
Nor leave the bearer, thrall to Death, or fate
Or any sickness. All of Gold it is;
Three-leau'd; and full of all felicities.
And this shall be thy Guardian; this shall give
The Gods to thee, in all the truth they live.
And finally, shall this the Tutresse be
Of all the words, and works, informing me
From Jove's high counsels; making known to thee
All my instructions. But to Prophecy
(O best of Jove's beloved) and that high skill;
Which to obtain, lies burning in thy will;
Nor thee, nor any God, will Fate let learn.
Only Jove's mind, has insight to discern
What that imports; yet am I allowd
(My known faith trusted; and my forhead bowd;
Our great Oath taken, to resolve to none
Of all th'Immortalls, the restriction
Of that deep knowledge) of it All, the Mind.
Since then it sits, in such fast bounds confinde,
(O Brother) when the Golden rodd is held
In thy strong hand; seek not to have revealed
Any sure fate, that Jove will have conceald.
For no man shall, by know'ng, prevent his fate;
And therefore will I hold, in my free state
The power, to hurt and help, what man I will,
Of all the greatest; or least touched with ill;
That walk within the Circle of mine eye;
In all the Tribes, and Sexes, it shall try.
Yet, truly, any man shall have his will
To reap the fruits of my Prophetique skill;
Whoeuer seeks it, by the voice, or wing
Of Birds, borne truly, such events to sing.
Nor will I falfly, nor with fallacies
Infringe the truth, on which his faith relies;
But he that Truths, in chattering plumes would find;
(Quite opposite to them, that prompt my Mind,)
And learn by natural forgers of vain lies,
The more-then-euer-certaine Deities;
That man shall Sea-waies tred, that leave no Tracts;
And false, or no guide find, for all his facts.
And yet will I, his Gifts accept as well
As his; to whom, the simple truth I tell.
One other thing to thee, I Will yet make known
( Maia's exceedingly renowned son
And Jove's; and of the Gods whole session
The most ingenious Genius.) There dwell
Within a crooked Crannie, in a Dell
Beneath Parnassus; certain sisters borne,
Called Parcae; whom extreme swift wings adorn;
Their Number three; that have upon their heads
White Barley flower still sprinkled; and are maids;
And these are schoole-Mistresses of things to come,
Without the gift of Prophecy: of whom
(Being but a boy, and keeping Oxen, nere)
I learned their skill; though my great Father were
Careless of it, or them. These flying from home,
To others roofes; and fedd with Hony-come,
Command all skill; and (being enraged then)
Will freely tell the Truths of things to Men.
But if they give them not, that Gods sweet meat;
They then are apt, to utter their deceit,
And lead Men from their way. And these will I
Give thee hereafter; when their scrutinie
And truth; thou have both made, and learned, and then;
Please thy self with them; and the Race of men
(Will thou know any) with thy skill endeare:
Who will, (be sure) afford it greedy ear;
And hear it often, if it prove sincere.
Take these (O Maia's Son) and in thy care,
Be Horse, and Oxen: all such Men as are
Patient of labor; Lions; white-tooth'd Bores;
Mastifs, and flocks, that feed the flowrie shores;
And every foure-foot Beast: all which shall stand
In awe of thy high Imperatory hand.
Be thou to Dis too, sole Ambassador;
Who (though all gifts, and bounties he abhor)
On thee he will bestow, a wealthy One.
Thus King Apollo, honored Maia's Son,
With all the rights of friendship: all whose love
Had Imposition, from the Will of Jove.
And thus, with Gods and Mortals Hermes lived;
Who truly helped but few; but all deceived
With an vndifferencing respect; and made
Vain words, and false persuasions his Trade.
His Deeds, were all associats of the Night;
In which, his close wrongs, cared for no man's Right.
So all salutes to Hermes, that are due;
Of whom, and all Gods, shall my Muse sing true.
The end of the Hymn to Hermes.
A HYMN TO VENUS.
THe force (O Muse) and functions, now, unfold,
Of Cyprian Venus, graced with Mines of Gold.
Who, even in Deities, lights Loves sweet desire;
And all Deaths kinds of men, makes kiss her fire:
All Airs winged Nation; all the Belluine;
That or the Earth feeds, or the Seas confine.
To all which appertain, the love and care
Of well-crown'd Venus works. Ye three there are,
Whose minds, she neither can deceive nor move;
Pallas, the seed of Aegis-bearing- Jove;
Who still lives Indeuirginate; her eyes
Being blew, and sparkling like the freezing skies:
Whom all the Gold of Venus, never can
Tempt to affect her facts, with God or Man.
She loving strife, and Mars-his working Bones;
Pitched fields, and fights, and famous Artizanes,
Taught earthie men first, all the Arts that are;
Charriots, and all the frames vehiculare;
Chiefly with brass, armed, and adorned for war.
Where Venus, only soft-skinnd wenches fills
With wanton House-works, and suggests those skills
Still to their studies. Whom Diana neither,
That bears the Golden distaff; and together
Calls Horns, and Hollows; and the cries of Hounds;
And ownes the Epithete of loving sounds
For their sakes; springing from such spritely sports;
Can catch with her kind Lures. But hill resorts
To wilde-Beasts slaughters; accents farr-off heard
Of Harps, and Dances; and of woods vnsheard
The sacred shades she loves; yet likes as well
Cities where good men, and their offspring dwell.
The third, whom her kind Passions nothing please;
Is Virgin Vesta; whom Saturnides
Made reverend with his counsels: when his Sire
That aduers counsels agitates, life's fire
Had kindled in her; being his last begot.
Whom Neptune wow'd, to knit with him the knot
Of honored Nuptials; and Apollo too;
Which, with much vehemence, she refused to do;
And stern Repulses, put upon them both.
Adding to all her vows; the Gods great Oath;
And touching Jove's chynn, (which must consummate
All vows so bound) that she would hold her state;
And be th'Inuincible Maid of Deities
Through all her days dates. For Saturnides
Gave her a fair gift, in her Nuptials stedd;
To sit in midst of his house, and be fedd
With all the free, and richest feast of Heaven:
In all the Temples of the Gods being given
The prise of honor. Not a mortal Man,
(That either of the powrs Olympian
His half-birth having; may be said to be
A mortal of the Gods; or else that he
(Deities wills doings) is of Deity)
But gives her honor, of the amplest kind.
Of all these Three; can Venus, not a Mind
Deceive, or set on forces to reflect.
Of all powrs else yet, not a sex, nor sect,
Flies Venus; either of the blessed Gods;
Or Men, confin'de in mortal Periods.
But even the Mind of Jove, she does seduce,
That chides with Thunder so, her lawless use
In humane Creatures; and by lot is given
Of all, most honor; both in Earth, and Heaven.
And yet even his all-wise, and mighty Mind;
She, when she lifts, can forge affectes to blind,
And mix with mortal Dames, his Deity:
Conceald, at all parts, from the ielous eye
Of Juno; who was both his sister borne,
And made his wife; whom beauty did adorn
Past all the B^^ie of immortal Dames;
And whose so chiefely-glorified Flames
Crosse-counsailde Saturn got; and Rhaea bore;
And Jove's pure counsels, (being Conqueror)
His wife made of his sister. I, and more;
Cast such an amorous fire into her mind
As made her (like him) with the Mortal kind
Meet in unmeet bed; using utmost haste;
Lest she should know, that he lived so unchaste,
Before her self, felt that fault in her heart;
And gave her tongue, too just edge of Desert
To tax his lightness. With this End, beside,
Lest laughter-studying Venus, should deride
The Gods more then the Goddesses; and say
That she the Gods commixt in amorous play,
With mortal Dames; begetting mortal seed
T'Immortall sires; and not make Goddesses breed
The like with mortal Fathers. But t'acquite
Both Gods and Goddesses of her despite,
Jove took (even in her self) on him, her power;
And made her with a mortal Paramoure
Use as deformed a mixture, as the rest;
Kindling a kind affection in her breast
To God-like-limm'd Anchises; as he kept
(...), Altissimum habens virticem, cuiuss^mmitas ipsum polum ^^^^ngit.
On Idas-top-on-top-to-heauens-Pole heapt,
Amongst the many fountains there, his Herd;
For after his brave Person had apper'de
To her bright eye; her heart flew all on fire;
And (to amaze) she burned in his desire.
Flew strait to Cyprus, to her odorous Phane
And Altars, that the people Paphiane
Advanced to her. Where, (soon as entered) she
The shyning gates shut; and the Graces three
Washed; and with Oiles of everlasting sent,
Bathed, as became, her deathlesse lyneament.
Then her Ambrosian Mantle she assumed;
With rich and odoriferous Airs perfumed;
Which being put on; and all her Trimms beside
Fair, and with all allurements amplified;
The All-of-Gold-made-laughter-louing Dame;
Left odorous Cyprus; and for Troy became
A swift Contendresse; her Pass cutting All
Along the clouds; and made her instant fall
On fountfull Ida; that her Mother-Brests
Gives to the Preyfull brood, of savage Beasts.
And through the Hill she went, the ready way
TO Anchises Oxstall, where did fawn and play
About her blessed feet, Wolves griflie-gray;
Terrible Lions; many a Mankind Bear;
And Lybberds swift, insatiate of red Dear.
Whose sight so pleased, that ever as she past
Through every Beast, a kindly Love she cast:
That in their Denns-obscur'd with shadows deep;
Made all, distinguished, in kind Couples, sleep.
And now she reached the rich Pauilion
Of the Hero; In whom heavens had shown
A fair and goodly Composition.
And whom she in his Oxstall found, alone;
His Oxen feeding in fat Pastures, by;
He walking up, and down; sounds clear, and hye,
From his harp striking. Then, before him, she
Stood like a Virgin, that inuinciblie
Had borne her beauties; yet alluringly
Bearing her person; lest his ravished eye
Should chance t'affect him, with a stupid fear.
Anchises seeing her, all his senses were
With wonder stricken; and high-taken-heed^s
Both of her form; brave stature; and rich weeds.
For, for a veil; she shined in an Attire
That cast a radiance, past the Ray of fire.
Beneath which, wore she guirt to her, a Gown
Wrought all with growing-rose-budds; reaching down
T'her slender smalls; which buskinns did divine;
Such as taught Thetis silver Feet to shine.
Her soft white neck; rich Carquenets embraced;
Bright, and with gold, in all variety graced;
That, to her breasts (let down) lay there and shone,
As at her joyful full, the rising Moon.
Her sight showed miracles. Anchises Heart,
Love took into his hand; and made him part
With these high Salutations; Joy, (O Queen?)
Whoeuer of the Blessed, thy beauties been,
That light these Entries! Or the Deity
That Darts affects; or that gave the eye
Of Heaven, his heat and Luster! Or that moves
The hearts of all, with all-commanding Loves?
Or generous Themis? Or the blew-eyd Maid?
Or of the Graces, any that are laid
With all the Gods, in comparable skales?
And whom Fame, up to Immortality calls?
Or any of the Nymphs, that unshorn Groves,
Or that this fair Hill-habitation loves?
Or valleys, flowing with earths fattest Goods?
Or Fountains, pouring forth, eternal floods?
Say, which, of all thou art; that in some place
Of circular prospect, for thine eyes dear grace
I may an Altar build, and to thy Powers
Make sacred all the years devoted Hours,
With consecrations sweet, and oppulent.
Assured whereof; be thy benign Mind bent
To these wished blessings of me; give me parts
Of chief attraction in Trojan hearts.
And after; give me the refulgencie
Of most renownd, and rich Posterity;
Long, and free life; and Heavens sweet light as long;
The peoples blessings; and a health so strong;
That no disease, it let my life engage;
Till the utmost limit, of a humane Age.
To this, Jove's seed, this answer gave again;
Anchises? happiest of the humane strain?
I am no Goddess: why, a thrall to Death
Think thou like those, that immortality breath?
A woman brought me forth, my Fathers Name
Was Otreus (If ever his high fame
Thine ears have witnest) for he gouernd all
The Phrygian State: whose every Town, a wall
Impregnable embraced. Your tongue, (you hear)
I speak so well, that in my natural sphere
(As I pretend) It must have taken prime.
A woman likewise, of the Trojan clime
Took of me, in her house, the Nurses care
From my dear Mothers Bosom; and thus are
My words of equal accent, with your own.
How, here, I come; (to make the reason known)
Argicides, that bears the Golden Rod
Transferd me forciblie from my Abod
Made with the Maiden Train, of her that ioies
In Golden shafts; and loves so well the noise,
Of Hounds, and Hunters (Heavens pure-liuing power)
Where many a Nymph, and maid of mighty Dowre,
Chaste sports emploid All circkl'd with a Crown
Of infinite Multitude, to see so shown
Our maiden Pastimes. Yet from all the Fair
Of this so forcefull concourse; up in Air
The Golden-Rodd-sustaining- Argus Guide,
Rapt me in sight of all; and made me ride
Along the Clouds with him; enforcing me
Thro^gh many a labor of Mortality:
Through many an unbuilt Region; and a rude,
Where savage Beasts, devoured Preys warm, and crude*
And would not let my fears, take one foots tred
On her by whom, are all Lives comforted;
But said, my Maiden State, must grace the Bed
Of King Anchises: And bring forth to thee
Issue as fair, as of divine Degree.
Which said, and showing me thy moving Grace;
Away flew he up, to The Immortal Race.
And thus came I to thee: Necessity
With her steel stings; compelling me t'applie
To her high Power, my will. But You must I,
Implore by Jove; and all the reverence due,
To your dear Parents; who (in bearing you)
Can bear no mean sail; lead me home to them
An untouched Maid: being brought up in th'extreme
Of much too cold simplicity; to know
The fiery cunnings, that in Venus glow.
Show me to them then; and thy Brothers borne:
I shall appear none, that, parts disadorne;
But such as well may serve, a Brothers wife;
And show them now, even to my future life;
If such, or no, my Present, will extend.
To Horse-Breede-vary'ng Phrygia, likewise send
T'Informe my Sire and Mother of my State,
That live for me, extreme disconsolate.
Who Gold enough, and well-wouen weeds will give.
All whose rich Gifts, in my Amends receive.
All this performed; add celebration then
Of honored Nuptials; that by God and Men
Are held in reverence. All this while she said;
Into his bosom, jointly, she conuaid
The fires of love; when (all enamourd) He
In these terms answered: If Mortality
Confine thy Fortunes; and a woman were
Mother to those attractions that appear
In thy admired form; thy great Father given
High Name of Otreus; and the Spy of Heaven
(Immortal Mercury) th'enforce-full cause
That made thee lose the Prize of that applause,
That modesty, immaculate Virgins gives:
My wife thou shall be called, through both our lives.
Nor shall the powrs of Men, nor Gods withhold
My fiery resolution, to enfold
Thy bosom in mine arms; which here I vow
To firm performance, past delay; and Now.
Nor (should Apollo with his silver Bow
Shoot me to instant death) would I forbear
To do a deed, so full of cause so dear.
For with a Heauen-sweet woman, I will ly,
Though strait I stoop the house of Dis, 'and die.
This said; he took her hand; and she took way
With him; her bright eyes casting round; whose stay
She stuck upon a bed, that was before
Made for the King, and wealthy couerings wore.
On which, Bears Hydes, and bigg-voic't Lions lay;
Whose Preyfull lives, the King had made his Prey,
Hunting th'Idalian Hills. This Bed when they
Had both ascended; first he took from her
The fiery weed, that was her utmost wear.
Vnbutto'nd her next rosy Robe; and los'd
The Gyrdle, that her slender wast enclosed.
Vnlac't her buskinns; all her Iewellrie
Took from her neck, and breasts; and all laid by,
Upon a Golden-studded Chair of State.
Th'Amaze of all which, being removed: even Fate,
And counsel of the equal Gods gave way
To this; that with a Deathlesse Goddess lay
A deathfull Man: since, what his love assumed,
Not with his conscious knowledge, was presumed.
Now when the shepherds, and the Herdsmen, all,
Turned from their flowrie Pasture, to their Stall;
With all their Oxen; fat, and frolic sheep;
Venus, into Anchises, cast a sleep,
Sweet, and profound; while, with her own hands now
With her rich weeds, she did her self indow:
But so distinguished; that he clear might know:
His happy Glories; Then (to her desire
Her heavenly Person; put in Trimms entire)
She by the bed stood, of the well built Stall,
Advanced her head, to State Celestial,
And in her cheeks, arose the radiant hew
Of rich-cround Venus, to apparent view.
And then she rou^'d him from his rest; and said;
Up (my Dardanides) forsake thy bed.
What pleasure, late emploid, letts Humor steep
Thy lidds, in this inexcitable sleep?
Wake, and now say, If I appear to thee
Like her, that first, thine eyes conceited me.
This started him from sleep; though deep, and dear,
And passing promptlie, he enjoyed his ear.
But when his eye saw Venus neck, and eyes,
Whose beauties could not bear the Counterprise
Of any other: down his own eyes fell;
Which pallid fear, did from her view repel:
And made him, with a maine respect beside;
Turn his whole person from her state; and hide
(With his rich weed appos'd) his royal face;
These winged words using; When, at first, thy Grace,
Mine eyes gave entertainment; well I knew
Thy state was Deified: but thou told'st not true;
And therefore let me pray thee; (by thy Love
Borne to thy Father, Aegis-bearing Jove)
That thou will never let me live to be
An abject, after so divine degree
Taken in fortune; but take ruth on me.
For any Man that with a Goddess lies;
Of interest in immortalities,
Is never long lived. She replied; Forbear
(O happiest of Mortal Men) this fear:
And rest assured; that (not for me, at least)
Thy least ills fear fits; no nor for the rest
Of all the Blessed; for thou art their friend;
And so far from sustaining instant end;
That to thy long-enlarg'd life; there shall spri^g
Amongst the Trojans, a dear Son, and King;
To whom shall many a Son; and Sons Son rise
In euerlasting-great Posterities.
His Name Aeneas: therein keeping life;
For ever, in my much-conceipted grief;
That I (immortal) fell into the bed
Of one whose blood, Mortality must shed.
But rest thou comforted; and all the Race
That Troy shall propagate, in this high grace;
That, past all Races else, the Gods stand nere
Your glorious Nation; for the forms ye bear
And Natures so ingenuous, and sincere.
For which, the great in counsels (Jupiter)
Your Gold-lockt Ganymedes did transfer
(In rapture far from men's depressed fates)
To make him Consort with our Deified states;
And skale the Top^ of the Saturnian skies;
He was so mere a Marvel in their eyes.
And therefore from a Bolle of Gold he fills
Redd Nectar; that the rude distension kills
Of winds that in your humane stomachs breed.
But then did Languor, (...) Cuius Memoria erit perpetua.
on the Liver feed
Of Tros (his Father) that was King of Troy;
And ever did his memory employ
With loss of his dear beauty so bereuen;
Though with a sacred whirlewinde ^apt to heaven.
But Jove (in pity of him) saw him given
Good compensation; sending by Heavens Spy,
White-swift-hou'd Horse; that Immortality
Had made firm spirrited; and had (beside)
Hermes to see his Ambassie supplied
With this vowed Bounty (using all at large
That his unaltered counsels gave in charge)
That he himself, should Immortality breath,
Expert of Age, and Woe, as well as Death.
This Ambassie expressed, he mourned no more;
But up, with all his inmost mind he bore;
Ioying that he, upon his swift-hou'd Horse,
Should be stustain'd in an eternal course.
So did the golden-thron'de Aurora, raise
Into her Lap; another that the praise
Of an Immortal fashion, had in Fame;
And of your Nation, bore the Noble Name:
(His Title Tython) who, not pleased with her,
As she his lovely Person, did transfer;
(To satisfy him) she bad ask of Jove,
The Gift of an Immortal for her Love.
Jove gave; and bound it with his bowed Brow;
Performing to the utmost point, his vow.
Fool that she was; that would her love engage;
And not, as long ask, from the Bane of Age,
The sweet exemption; and Youths endless flower.
Of which, as long, as both the grace and power
His person entertainde; she loved the Man;
And (at the fluents of the Ocean
Nere Earths extreme bounds) dwelt with him: but when
(According to the course of aged Men)
On his fair head; and honorable Beard;
His first gray hayres, to her light eyes apperd;
She left his bed; yet gave him still, for food
The Gods Ambrosia; and attire as good.
Till, even the hate of Age, came on so fast
That not a lyneament of his was graced
With power of Motion; nor did still sustain
(Much less) the Vigor had, t'aduance a vain;
The virtue lost, in each exhausted lim^,
That, (at his wish) before would answer him;
All Powrs so quite decaid; that when he spoke,
His voice, no perceptible accent brake:
Her counsel, then, thought best; to strive no more;
But lay him in his bed, and lock his Door.
Such an Immortal; would not I wish thee,
T'extend all days so, to Eternity.
But if, as now, thou could perform thy course
In Grace of Form, and all corporeal force
To an eternal Date; Thou then should bear
My Husbands worthy Name; and not a Tear,
Should I need rain, for thy deserts declinde,
From my All clouded bitterness of mind.
But now, the stern storm of relentlesse Age
Will quickly circkle thee; that waits ^'engage
All Men alike; even Lothsomnesse, and Bane
Attending with it, every humane ^ane:
Which even the Gods bate. Such a Penance lies
Imposed on flesh and bloods infirmities.
Which I my self must taste, in great degree,
And date as endless; for consorting thee.
All the Immortalls, with my opprobrie
Are full, by this time; on their Hearts so lie,
(Even to the sting of Fear) my cunnings used;
And wiuing conuersations infused,
Into the bosoms of the best of them,
With women, that the frail and mortal stream
Does daily ravish. All this long since done.
Which now, no more but with effusion
Of tears; I must in Heaven, so much as name:
I have so forfaited, in this, my Fame,
And am imposed, pain of so great a kind
For so much erring, from a Goddess Mind.
For I have put beneath my Gyrdle here,
A Son, whose sire, the humane mortal sphere
Gives Circumscription. But when first the light
His eyes shall comfort; Nymphs that hant the height;
Of Hills; and Breasts have, of most deep receipt;
Shall be his Nurses: who inhabit now
A Hill of so vast, and divine a Brow,
As Man, nor God, can come at their Retreates.
Who live long lives, and eat immortal Meats;
And with Immortalls, in the exercise
Of comely Dances, dare contend; and rise
Into high Question, which deserves the Prise.
The light Sileni, mix in love with These;
And of all Spies, the Prince Argicides:
In well-trymmd Caves, their secret meetings made.
And with the lives of these; does life invade
Or odorous fur Trees; or high-forheaded Oaks;
Together taking their begetting strokes.
And have tbeir lives and deaths, of equal Dates;
Trees bearing lovely, and Delightsome states;
Whom Earth first feeds, that Men initiates.
On her high Hills, she does their states sustain,
And they, their own heights, raise as high again.
Their Growghts together made; Nymphs call their Groves;
Vowed to th'Immortalls services, and loves.
Which men's steeles therefore touch not; but let grow.
But when wise Fates, times for their fadings know;
The fair Trees still, before the fair Nymphs die;
The Bark about them; grown corrupt, and dry;
And all their boughs (fallen) yield to Earth her right;
And then the Nymphs lives, leave the lovely Light.
And these Nymphs, in their Caves, shall nurse my Son;
Whom (when in him, Youths first grace is begun)
The Nymphs, his Nurses, shall present to thee,
And show thee what a Birth, thou have by Me.
And (sure as now I tell thee all these things)
When earth, has clothed her plants, in five fair springs;
My self will make return, to this Retreat;
And bring that Flower of thy enamored heat;
Whom when thou then see, Joy shall fire thine eyes;
He shall so well Present the Deities.
And then into thine own care take thy Son;
From his calm seat, to windy Ilion.
Where, if strickt question, be upon thee past,
Asking what Mother, bore beneath her wast
So dear a Son; answer, as I afford
Fit admonition, nor forget a word;
They say a Nymph, called Calucopides,
That is with others, an inhabitresse
On this thy wood-crownd Hill; acknowledges
That she, his life gave. But if thou declare
The Secrets, truth; and art so mad to dare
(In glory of thy fortunes) te approve,
That rich-crownd Venus, mixed with thee in love;
Jove (fired with my aspersion, so dispred)
Will, with a wreakefull lightning, dart thee dead.
All, now, is told thee; comprehend it All.
Be Master of thy self; and do not call
My Name in question; but, with reverence vow
To Deities angers, all the awe, ye owe.
This said; she reached Heaven, where airs ever flow;
And so (O Goddess) ever honored be
In thy so Odorous Cyprian Emperie;
My Muse, affecting first, thy Fame to raise;
Shall make Transcension now, to others Praise.
The end of the first Hymn to Venus.
To the same.
THe Reverend Rich-crownd, and Fair Queen, I sing;
(Venus) that owes in Fate the fortressing,
Of all Maritimall Cyprus: Where the force
Of gentle-breathing Zephire sterde her Course
Along the waves of the resounding Sea;
While, yet, unborn, in that soft foam she lay
That brought her forth; whom those fair Howrs that bear
The Golden-bridles; joyfully stood nere;
Took up into their arms; and put on her
Weed's of a neuer-corruptible wear.
On her immortal head, a Crown they placed;
Elaborate; and with all the beauties graced
That Gold could give it. Of a weight so great;
That, to impose, and take off; it had set
Three Handles on it; made for endless hold,
Of shyning Brass; and all adorned with Gold.
Her soft neck; all with Carquenets was graced;
That stoop't, and both her silver breasts embraced,
Which even the Howrs themselves wear in resort,
To Deities Dances; and her Fathers Court.
Graced at all parts; they brought to Heaven her graces;
Whose first sight seen; all fell into embraces;
Hugged her white bands; saluted; wishing, all,
To wear her Maiden Flower in festival
Of sacred Hymen: and to lead her home.
All, to all admiration, overcome
With Cytheraea, with the violet Crown.
So, to the black-Browd-sweet-spoke; All Renown;
Prepare my Song; and give me, in the end,
The victory; to whose Palm, all contend.
So shall my Muse, for ever honor thee,
And (for thy sake) thy fair Posterity.
BACCHVS, OR The Pirates.
OF Dionysus (Noble Semeles Son)
I now intend to render Mention:
As on a promine^t shore, his person shone,
Like to a Youth, whose flower was newly blone.
Bright azure Tresses, played about his head;
And on his bright broad shoulders, was dispred
A purple Mantle. Strait he was descride
By certain Manly Pirates, that applide
Their utmost speed to prise him; being abord
A well built Barck; about whose broad ^ides ror'd
The wine-black Tyrrhene Billows: Death as black
Brought them upon him, in their future wrack.
For soon as they had purchased but his view;
Mutual signs past them; and ashore they flew:
Took him; and brought him, instantly aborde;
Soothing their Hopes, to have obtained a Horde
Of riches with him; and a Ioue-kept King
To such a Flower, must needs be natural spring.
And therefore-strait, strong Fetters they must fetch,
To make him sure. But no such strength would stretch,
To his constrained Powrs. Far flew all their Bands
From any least force, done his feet, or hands.
But he sat casting smiles, from his black eyes
At all their worst. At which Discoueries
Made by the Master: he did thus dehort
All his Associats; Wretches? Of what sort,
Hold ye the Person, ye assaie to bind?
Nay, which of all, the Power fully-diuin'de
Esteem ye him? whose worth yields so much weight,
That, not our well built Barck, will bear his freight.
Or Jove himself he is; Or he that bears
The silver Bow; Or Neptune. Nor appears
In him the least resemblance of a Man;
But of a strain; at least Olympian.
Come! Make we quick dismission of his state;
And on the black-soild earth, exonerate
Our sinking vessel, of his Deified Lode:
Nor dare the touch, of an intangible God.
Lest winds outrageous, and of wrackfull scath;
And smoking Tempests, blow his fiery wrath.
This well-spoke Master, the Tall captain gave
Hateful, and horrible language: called him slave;
And bad him mark the prosperous gale that blew;
And bow their vessel, with her maine sail, flew.
Bade all take arms; and said, their works requir'de;
The cares of Men; and not of an inspir'de,
Pure zealous Master. His firm hopes being fir'de
With this Opinion; that they should ariue
In Egypt strait; or Cyprus; or where live
Men whose brave breaths, above the Northwinde blow;
Yea, and perhaps beyond their Region too.
And that he made no doubt, but in the end,
To make his Prisoner, tell him every friend
Of all his offspring: Brothers: Wealth, and All;
Since that Prise, certain, must some God let fall.
This said; the Most, and maine-saile; up he drew,
And in the maine sails amidst, a franck Gale blew;
When all his ship took arms, to brave their Prise.
But strait, strange works apperde to all their eyes:
First; sweet wine, through-their swift-black Barck did flow;
Of which, the Odors, did, a little, blow:
Their fiery spirits, making The Air so fine,
That, they in flood were there, as well as wine.
A mere Immortall-making savor rose;
Which on the Air, the Deity did Impose.
The Seamen see'ng All; Admiration seas'd.
Yet instantly, their wonders were increased:
For on the Top sail, there rann, here, and there,
A Vine that Grapes did, in abundance bear;
And in an instant, was the ships maine Mast
With an obscure-greene-Iuies arms embraced,
That florisht strait, and were with Buries graced;
Of which, did Gyrlonds, circle every brow
Of all the Pirates; and no One knew how.
Which when they saw, they made the Master stere
Out to the shore: whom Bacchus made forbear,
With showing more wonders; On the Hatches, He
Apper'd a terrible Lion, horribly
Roaring; and in the Mid-deck, a Male Bear,
Made with a huge Mane: making all, for fear
Crowd to the stern, about the Master there:
Whose Mind, he still kept, dantlesse, and sincere.
But on the Captain rusht and rampt, with force
So rude, and sudden; that his maine recours
Was to the Maine-Sea strait: and after him,
Leapt all his Mates; as trusting to their swimm;
To fly foul Death. But so; found what they fled,
Being all to Dolphinns, metamorphosed.
The Master, he took Ruth of; saved, and made.
The blessedst Man, that ever tried his Trade.
These few words giving him: Be confident
Thou God-inspir'd Pylot! In the Bent
Of my affection, ready to requite
Thy late-to-me-intended benefit.
I am the Roaring God, of spritely Wine:
Whom Semele, (that did, even Jove incline,
To amorous Mixture, and was Cadmus care)
Made issue to the Mighty Thunderar.
And thus, all Excellence of Grace to thee,
Son of sweete-count'nance-cary'ng Semele.
I must not thee forget, in least Degree,
But pray thy spirit, to render so, my song,
Sweet, and all ways, in ordered fury, strong.
To Mars.
MArs Most strong: Gold-helm'd; making Chariots crack;
Never without a shield, cast on thy back.
Mind master towne-guard* with darts never driven.
Strong-handed; Allarmes; fort, and fence of heaven.
Father of Victory, with fair strokes given.
Joint surrogate of Justice, lest she fall;
In unjust strifes, a Tyrant. General,
Only of Just. Men, justly. That do bear
Fortitud's Scepter. To Heavens fiery sphere
Giver of circulare motion: between
That, and the Pleiad's that still wandering been.
Where thy still vehemently-flaming Horse,
About the third Heaven, make their fiery course.
Helper of Mortals; Hear! As thy fires give
The fair, and present boldnesses that strive
In Youth for Honor; being the sweete-beamd Light
That darts into their lives, from all thy Height
The Fortitudes, and Fortunes, found in fight.
So, would I likewise wish to have the Power
To keep off, from my head, thy bitter Hour;
And that false fire, cast from my souls low kind,
Stoop to the fit rule, of my highest Mind.
Controuling, that so eager sting of wrath,
That styrrs me on still, to that horrid scath
Of war; that God still sends to wreake his spleen;
(Even by whole Tribes) of proud injurious Men.
But O thou euer-blessed! Give me still,
Presence of mind, to put in Act, my will
Varied, as fits, to all Occasion.
And to live free; vnforc't; unwrought upon;
Beneath those Laws of Peace, that never are
Affected with Pollutions Populare
Of unjust hurt; or loss to any One;
And to bear safe, the burden undergone
Of Foes inflexiue, and inhumane hates;
Secure from violent, and harmefull Fates.
To Diana.
DIana praise (Muse) that in Darts delights;
Lives still a Maid, and had nutritiall rights
With her borne-Brother, the farr-shooting Sunn.
That does her all of Gold-made-Chariot runn
In Chase of Game; from Meles that abounds
In black-browd Bull-rushes; (and where her Hounds,
She first vncouples; joining there, her Horse)
Through Smyrna; carried in most fiery course
To Grape-rich Claros. Where (in his rich hom^,
And constant expectation she will come)
Sits Phoebus, that the silver Bow does bear;
To meet with Phoebe, that does Darts transfer
As far as He his shafts. As far then, be
The chaste Fame shot (O Queen of Archerie)
Sacring my song, to every Deity.
To Venus.
TO Cyprian Venus, still my verses vow:
Who Gifts, as sweet as honey does bestow
On all Mortality. That ever smiles;
And rules a face, that all foes reconciles.
Ever sustaining in her hand, a Flower,
That all desire keeps, ever in her Power.
Hail then O Queen of well built Salamine,
And all the state, that Cyprus does confine:
Inform my song, with that celestial fire,
That in thy beauties, kindles all desire.
So shall my Muse, for ever honor Thee,
And any other, thou commend'st to Me.
To Pallas.
PAllas Minerua; Only I begin
To give my song; that makes wars terrible Dinne:
Is Patroness of Cities; and with Mars
Marshalled in all the care, and cure of wars:
And in euerted Cities, fights, and Cries.
But never does her self, set down, or rise,
Before a City; but at both times She,
All iniur'de people, sets on foot, and free.
Give, with thy wars force, Fortune then to Me;
And with thy Wisdoms force, Felicity.
To Juno.
SAturnia, and her Throne of Gold I sing;
That was of Rhaea, the eternal spring;
And Empress of a beauty; never yet
Equaled in height of Tincture. Of the great
Saturnius (breaking Air, in awful Noise,)
The farr-fam'd wife, and sister; whom in ioies
Of high Olympus, all the blessed Love;
And Honor, equal, with vnequall'd Jove.
To Ceres.
THe Rich-hayr'd, Ceres, I assaie to sing;
A Goddess, in whose Grace the natural spring
Of serious Majesty it self, is seen:
And of the wedded, yet in grace still green,
( Proserpina, her Daughter) that displaies
A Beauty, casting every way her Rays.
All Honor to thee (Goddess:) keep this Town;
And take, thou, chief charge of my songs Renoune.
TO THE MOTHER OF The Gods.
MOther of All; both Gods, and Men, Commend
(O Muse) whose fair Form did from Jove descend;
That does with Cymball sounds, delight her life;
And tremulous divisions of the Fife.
Loves dreadful Lions Rores; and Wolves hoarse Houles,
Syluane Retreates; and Hills, whose hollow knoules,
Raise repercussiue soundes about her ears.
And so, may, Honor, ever crown thy years,
With All-else Goddesses; and ever be
Exalted in the Muses Harmony.
TO LYON-HEARTED Hercules.
ALlcides, (Force-fullest of all the Brood
Of Men, enforced with need of earthie food,)
My Muse shall memorise; the son of Jove;
Whom, in faire-seated Thebs (commixt in love
With great Heavens sable-cloude-assembling state)
Al^mena bore to him. And who (in date
Of days forepast) through all the Sea was sent
And Earths inernarable Continent,
To Acts, that King Eurystheus had decreede.
Did many a Petulant, and Imperious Deed
Himself; and therefore, suffered many a Toil.
Yet now inhabites the illustrious Soil
Of white Olympus; and Delights his life
With still young Hebe; his well-anckled wife.
Hail, King; and Son of Jove; vouchsafe thou Me
Virtue; and her Effect, Felicity.
To Aesculapius.
WIth Aesculapius, (the Physician) Son,
That cured all sickness, and was Phoebus
M^ Muse, makes Entry; to whose life gave yield
Divine Coronis, in the Dotian field,
(King Phlegius Daughter:) who, much Joy on Men
Conferd in dear Ease, of their yrkesome Pain.
For which; my salutation (worthy King)
And vows to thee paid, ever when I sing.
TO CASTOR AND POLLVX.
CAstor and Pollux, (the Tyndarides)
Sweet Muse illustrate; that their Essences
Fetch from the high forms of Olympian Jove;
And were the fair fruits of bright Leda's Love.
Which she produced, beneath the sacred shade
Of steep Taygetus; being subdued; and made
To serve Affections of the Thunderer.
And so, all Grace to you; whom all Aver,
(For skill in Horses, and their Manage given)
To be the brauest Horsemen, under Heaven.
To Mercury.
HErmes, I honor, (the Cyllenian Spy)
King of Cyllenia, and of Arcadie
With flocks abounding: and the Messenger
Of all th'Immortalls; that does still infer
Profits of infinite value to their store:
Whom to Saturnius, bashful Maia bore;
Daughter of Atlas; and did therefore fly
Of all th'Immortalls, the Society,
To that darcke Cave; where, in the dead of Night,
Jove ioind with her, in Loves divine Delight;
When Golden sleep, shut Juno's jealous eye,
Whose arms had wrists, as white as Iuorie;
From whom, and all, both Men, and Gods beside,
The faire-hayrd Nymph, her escape kept vnderscride.
Joy to the Ioue-got then, and Maia's Care;
Twixt Men and Gods, the general Messenger:
Giver of good Grace; Gladness, and the Flood
Of all that Men, or Gods, account their Good.
To Pan.
SIng (Muse) this chief of Hermes loue-got Ioies;
Goate-sooted, Two-horn'd; amorous of noise.
That through the faire-Greenes, al adorned with Trees
Together goes, with Nymphs; whose nimble knees,
Can euer^ Dance, foot; That affect to scale
The most inaccessible Tops of all
Vprightest rocks: and ever use to call
On Pan, the bright-hayr'd God of Pastoral.
Who yet, is lean, and louelesse; and does owe
By lot, all loftiest* Mountains, crowned with snow;
All Tops of Hills, and cliffie Highnesses:
All Siluan Copses, and the Fortresses
Of Thorniest Queaches, here and there does roue.
And sometimes, (by allurement of his love;)
Will wade the watrie softnesses. Sometimes
(In quite oppos'de Capriccios) he climes
The hardest Rocks, and highest: every way
Running their Ridges. Often will conuaie
Himself up to a watch-Towrs Top; where sheep;
Have their Observance: often through Hills as steep,
His Gotes he runns upon; and never rests.
Then turns he head; and flies on savage Beasts,
Mad of their slaughters. So most sharp an eye
Setting upon them; as his Beams let fly
Through all their thickest Tapistries. And then
(When Hesp'rus calls to fold, the flocks of Men)
From the green Clossets, of his loftiest Reeds,
He rushes forth; and Joy, with Song, he feeds.
When, (under shadow, of their motions, set,)
He plays a verse forth, so profoundly sweet;
As not the Bird that in the flowrie Spring
(Amidds the leaves set) makes the Thickets ring
Of her sour sorrows, sweetened with her song,
Runns her divisions varied so, and strong.
And then the sweete-voic't Nymphs, that crown his mountains;
(Flockt round about, the deepe-black-watred fountains;
Fall in with their Contention of song.
To which, the Echoes, all the Hills along
Their repercussions add. Then here, and there
(Placed in the amidst) the God, the Guide does bear
Of all their Dances; winding in, and out.
A Lynces Hide (besprinckled round about
With blood, cast on his shoulders. And thus He
With well-made songs, maintains th'alacritie
Of his free mind, in silken Meddows crownde
With Hyacynths, and Saffrons; that abound
Iu sweete-breath'd Odors: that th'vnnumber'd grass
(Besides their sents) give as through all they pass.
And these, in all their pleasures, ever raise
The blessed Gods and long Olympus, praise:
Like zealous Hermes; who (of all) I said
Most Profits, up, to all the Gods conuaide.
Who, likewise, came into the Arcadian state;
(That Is rich in Fountains; and all celebrate
For Nurse of flocks.) Where, he had vowed a Grove
(Surnamed Cyllenius) to his God-heads love.
Yet even himself (although a God he were
Clad in a squallid sheepskinn) gouernd there
A Mortals sheep. For soft Love, entering him,
Conformd his state, to his conceipted Trimm.
And made him long, in an extreme degree,
T'enioy the fayre-hayrd Virgin Dryope.
Which, ere he could; she made him consummate
The flourishing Rites of Hymen's honored State.
And brought him, such a piece of Progeny,
As showd (at first sight) monstrous to the eye;
Gote-footed, Two-horn'd; full of noise, even Then;
And (opposite quite to other children)
Told (in sweet laughter) he ought death no Tear.
Yet strait his Mother start; and fled, in fear
The sight of so vnsatisfying a Thing;
In whose face, put forth, such a bristled spring.
Yet the most useful Mercury embraced,
And took into his arms, his homely-fac't:
Beyond all measure joyful with his sight:
And up to heaven with him, made instant flight,
Wrapped in the warm skin, of a Mountain Hare:
Set him by Jove; and made most merry fare
To all the Deities else, with his Sons sight;
Which, most of all, filled Bacchus with delight;
And Pan they called him, since he brought to All,
Of Mirth so rare; and full a Festival.
And thus, all honor to the shepherds King:
For Sacrifice to Thee, my Muse shall sing.
To Vulcan.
PRaise Vulcane, now Muse; whom Fame gives the Prise,
For Depth, and Facture, of al Fordge devise;
Who, with the skie-eyd Pallas, first did give
Men, rules of buildings, that before did live,
In Caves, and Denns; and Hills like savage Beasts:
But now, by Art-fam'd Vulcans Interests
In all their civil Industries; ways clear
Through th'All-things-bringing-to-their-Ends, (the year)
They work out to their Ages ends; at ease
Lodged in safe Roofes, from Winters utmost prease.
But Vulcan; stand propitious to Me;
Virtue safe, granting, and Felicity.
To Phoebus.
O Phoebus! Even the Swann from forth her wings,
(Iumping her proyning-banck) thee sweetly sings,
By bright Peneus, whirle-pit-making-streames.
Thee, that thy Lute; make sound so to thy Beams.
Thee, first and last, the sweete-voic't singer, still
Sings; for thy songs-all-songs-transcending skill.
Thy Pleasure then; shall my song still supply:
And so salutes thee, King of Po^sie.
To Neptune.
NEptune, the mighty Marine God, I sing;
Earths mouer; and the fruitles Oceans king.
That Helicon, and the Aegan Deepes do hold.
O thou Earth-shaker; Thy Command, twofold
The Gods have sorted; making thee, of Horses
The awful Tamer; and of Nauall Forces
The sure Preserver. Hail (O Saturns Birth)
Whose graceful green bayre, circkles all the Earth.
Bear a benign mind; and thy helpful hand,
Lend All, submitted, to thy drad Command.
To Jove.
Jove, now I sing; the greatest, and the best,
Of al these Powrs, that are with Deity blessed.
That farr-off, does his dreadful Voice, diffuse;
And (being King of All) does all conduce
To all their Ends. Who (shut from all-Gods else
With Themis; that the laws of all things tells)
Their fit Composures, to their Times does call;
Wedds them together; and preserues This All. (given;
Grace then (O farr-heard Jove) the grace t'hast
Most glorious, and most great of Earth and Heaven.
To Vesta.
VEsta, that (as a servant) Ouersees
King Phoebus hallowd house: in all degrees
Of Guide about it; on the sacred shore
Of heavenly Pythos: and have evermore
Rich balms distilling from thy Odorous hair;
Grace this House, with thy huswifely repair.
Enter, and bring a Mind that most may move,
Conferring, even the great in counsels, Jove:
And let my verse taste, of your eithers love.
TO THE MUSES AND APOLLO.
THe Muses Jove, and Phoebus, now I sing;
For from the farr-off-shooting Phoebus, spring
All Poets, and Musitions; and from Jove
Th'Ascents of Kings. The Man, the Muses love,
Felicity blesses; Elocutions choice
In Syrrup lay'ng, of sweetest breath, his voice.
Hail (Seed of Jove) my song, your honors, give;
And so, in Mine, shall yours, and others, live.
To Bacchus.
IVie-Crown'd Bacchus, Iterate in thy Praises,
(O Muse) whose Voice, all loftiest
Echoes raises;
And He with all th'illustrous seed of Jove;
Is ioinde in honor: being the fruit of Love
To him, and Semele-the-great-in-graces:
And from the King, his Fathers kind embraces,
By faire-hayrde Nymphs, was taken to the Dales
Of Nyssa; and with curious Festiuals
Given his fair Grought; far from his Fathers view,
In Caves, from whence, eternal Odors flew.
And in high number of the Deities placed;
Yet, when the many- Hymne-giuen God, had past
His Nurses Cares; in Iuies, and in Baies
All over Thicketed; his varied ways
To syluan Couerts, evermore he took
With all his Nurses; whose shrill voices shook
Thickets, in which, could no footes Entry fall;
And he himself made Captain of them All.
And so (O Grape-abounding Bacchus) be
Ever saluted by my Muse, and Me.
Give us to spend with spirit, our Hours out here;
And every Hour, extend to many a Year.
To Diana.
DIana, (that the Golden Spyndle, moves;
And lofty soundes, as well as Bacchus loue^
A bashful Virgin, and of fearful hearts
The Death-affecter, with delighted Darts;
By Sire, and Mother, Phoebus Sister borne;
Whose Thigh, the Golden Falchion does adorn)
I sing; who, likewise, over Hills of shade,
And Promontories, that vast winds invade,
(Amorous of Hunting) bends her all-gold Bow;
And sigh-begetting Arrows does bestow,
In fates so dreadful; that the Hill-Tops quake;
And Bristlde woods, their leauie foreheads shake;
Horrors invade Earth; and fishie Seas
Impassiond furies; nothing can appease
The dying Braies of Beasts; and her Delight
In so much Death, affects so with affright,
Even all inanimate natures. For while she
Her sports applies; Their general Progeny
She all ways, turns upon, to All their Banes:
Yet, when her fiery Pleasures find their wanes;
(Her yielding Bow unbent) to th'ample House
(Seated in Delphos, rich, and Populous)
Of her dear Brother, her Retreats advance.
Where, Th'Instauration of delightsome Dance
Amongst the Muses, and the Graces, she
Gives form; In which, her self the Regencie
(Her unbent Bow hung up; and casting on
A gracious Robe) assumes; and first sets gone
The Dances Entry; to which, all send forth
Their heavenly voices; and advance the worth
Of her faire-anckl'd Mother; since, to light
She Children brought, the far most exquisite
In Counsels, and Performances; of all
The Goddesses, that grace the heavenly Hall.
Hail then, Latona's faire-hayrd seed, and Jove's;
My song shall ever, call to Mind your Loves.
To Pallas.
PAllas-Minerua's Deity, the renowned:
My Muse, in her variety, must resound;
Mighty in counsels; whose Illustrous Eyes,
In all resemblance, represent the skies.
A reverend Maid of an inflexible Mind:
In Spirit, and Person, strong: of Triple kind;
Fautresse of Cities, that just Laws maintain;
Of Ioue-the-great-in-counsailes, very Brain
Took Prime existence: his unbounded Brows,
Could not contain her; such impetuous Throw's
Her Birth gave way to; that abroad she flew,
And stood in Gold armed, in her Fathers view,
Shaking her sharp Lance: all Olympus shook
So terriblie beneath her; that it took
Up, in amazes, all the Deities there.
All Earth resounded, with vociferous Fear.
The Sea was put up, all in purple Waves;
And settld suddenly, her rudest Raues.
Hyperions radiant Son, his swift-hou'd Steedes,
A mighty Time staid; till her arming weeds,
As glorious as the Gods, the blew-eyd Maid
Took from her Deathlesse shoulders: but then staid
All these distempers; and heavens counsailor, Jove,
Reioic't that all things else, his stay, could move.
So I salute thee still; and still in Praise
Thy Fame, and others, shall my Memory raise.
To Vesta, and Mercury.
VESta I sing, who, in Bequest of Fate,
Art sorted out, an everlasting State
In all The Immortals high-built roofes, and all
Those of Earth-dwelling Men: As general
And ancient honors, given thee for thy gift
Of free-liu'd Chastity; and precious Thrift.
Nor can there amongst Mortals, Banquets be;
In which, both first and last, they give not Thee
Their endless Gratitudes, in pourd-out wine;
As gracious sacrifice, to thy divine
And useful virtues; being inuok't by All,
Before the least Taste of their Festival
In wine or food, affect their appetites.
And thou, that of th'adorn'd with all Delights,
Art the most useful Angel: borne a God
Of Jove, and Maia; of Heavens golden Rodd
The sole Sustainer; and have power to bless
With All good, All Men (great Argicides)
Inhabit all Good houses; see'ng no wants
Of mutual minds love, in The Inhabitants.
Join in kind blessing with the bashful Maid
And all-lou'd Virgin, Vesta; eithers aid
Combined in every Hospitable House:
Both being best seen, in all the gracious
House-works of Mortals. Jointly follow then
Even from their youths, the minds of dames and men.
Hail then, old Daughter of the ouldest God,
And thou great bearer of Heavens golden Rodd?
Yet not to you, alone, my vows belong;
Others as well, claim T'Homage of my song.
TO EARTH THE Mother of all.
MOther of all things, the well-founded Earth,
My Muse shall memorise; who all the birth
Gives food, that al her upper regions breed;
All that in her divine diffusions feed
In under Continents: All those that live
In all the Seas; and All the air does give
Winged expeditions; Of thy bounties eat
Fair Children, and fair fruits, thy labors sweat;
(O great in reverence:) and referd to thee
For life, and death, is all the Pedigree
Of Mortal humanes. Happy then is He
Whom the innate Propensions of thy Mind
Stand bent to honor. He shall all things find
In all abundance: All his Pastures yield
Herds in all plenties: All his roofes are filled
With rich possessions: He, in all the swaie
Of Laws best orderd, cuts out his own way
In Cities shining with delicious Dames;
And takes his choice of all those striving Flames.
High happiness, and riches, (like his Train)
Follow his Fortunes; with delights that reign
In all their Princes. Glory inuests his Sons;
His Daughters, with their croun'd selections
Of all the City, frolic through the Meades;
And every one, her calld-for Dances treads
Along the soft-flowre of the clauer Grass.
All this, with all those, ever comes to pass,
That thy love blesses, Goddess full of grace,
And treasurous Angel t'all the humane Race.
Hail then, Great Mother of the Deified kind;
Wife to the Cope of Stars? sustain a Mind
Propitious to me, for my Praise; and give
(Answering my mind) my vows fit Means to live.
To the Sun.
THe radiant Suns divine renown, diffuse
( Jove's Daughter, great Calliope my Muse)
Whom Ox-ey'd Euryphaessa gave Birth,
To the bright seed of starrie Heaven and Earth.
For the farr-fam'd Hyperion took to Wife
His sister Euryphaessa; that life
Of his high Race, gave, to these lovely Three,
Aurora with the Rosie-wrists, and she
That ownes th'enamouring tresses (the bright Moon)
Together, with the neuer-wearied Sun.
Who, (his Horse mounting) gives, both Mortals light
And all Th'immortalls. Even to horror, bright
A blaze burns from his Golden Burgonet
Which to behold, exceeds the sharpest set
Of any eyes intention: Beams so clear
It allwaies powers abroad. The glorious cheer
Of his farr-shining Face, up to his Crown,
Casts circular Radiance: that comes streaming down
About his Temples; his bright Cheeks, and all
Retayning the refulgence of their Fall.
About his bosom flows so fine a Weed
As does the thynnesse of the wind exceed
In rich context: beneath whose deep folds fly
His Masculine Horses, round about the sky;
Till in this Hemisphere, he renders stay
To His gold-yo'kt Coch, and Coursers: and his way
(Let down by Heaven) the heavenly Cocheman makes
Down to the Ocean, where his rest he takes.
My Salutations then, fair King, receive,
And, in propitious returns Relieve
My life with Minde-fit means; and then from Thee
And all the race of complete Deity
My song shall celebrate those halfe-God states,
That yet, sad deaths condition circulates.
And whose brave Acts, the Gods show men, that they
As brave may aim at; since they can but die.
To the Moon.
THe Moon, now Muses, teach me to resound,
Whose wide wings measure such a world of ground.
Jove's Daughter, decked with the mellifluous Tongue;
And seen in All, the sacred Art of Song.
Whose deathles Brows, when she from Heaven displaies,
All Earth she wraps up, in her Orient Rays.
A Heaven of Ornament in Earth is raised,
When her Beams rise. The subt'le Air is sais'd
Of delicate splendour, from her Crown of Gold;
And when her silver Bosom is extolled,
Washed in the Ocean; In Days equaled Noone,
Is Midnight seated: but when she puts on
Her farr-off-sprinckling-Luster-Euening weeds;
(The Month in two cut: her high-brested Steedes;
Man'de All with curled flames; put in Coch and All,
Her huge Orb filled) her whole Trimms Then exhall
Unspeakable splendors, from the glorious sky.
And, out of that State, Mortal Men implie
Many Praedictions. And, with Her then
(In Lo^^ mixed) lay, the King of Gods and Men;
By whom, (made fruitful) she Pandaea bore,
And added her State, to the immortal Store.
Hail, queen, and Goddess, th'iuorie-wristed Moon
Divine, Prompt; faire-hayr'd. With thy grace begun
My Muse shall forth, and celebrate the praise
Of Men whose states, the Deities did raise
To Semideities: whose deeds t'endlesse Date
Muse-lou'd, and sweete-sung Poets celebrate.
TO CASTOR AND POLLVX.
Jove's fair Sons, Fathered by The Oebalian King,
Muses-well-worth-All Men's beholdings, sing:
The Dear Birth, that Bright-Anckl'd Laeda bore;
Horse-taming Castor; and the Conqueror
Of Tooth-tongu'd* Momus (Pollux:) whom beneath
St^epe-Browd Taygetus, she gave half-God breath;
In Love mixed with the black-cloudes King of heaven:
Who, both of Men and ships, (being Tempest driven,
When Winters wrathful Empire, is in force
Upon th'Implacable Seas) preserve the course.
For when the Gusts beginn; (if nere the shore)
The Seamen leave their ship; and (evermore
Bearing two milke-white Lambs aboard;) they now
Kill them ashore, and to Jove's Issue vow,
When, though their ship (in height of all the rore
The winds and waves confound) can live no more,
In all their hopes; then suddenly appear
Jove's saving Sons; who both their Bodies bear
Twixt yellowe wings, down from the sparkling Pole.
Who strait, the rage of those rude Winds control,
And all the high-waues couch into the Breast
Of T'hoarie Seas. All which sweet signs of rest
To Sea-Mens labors, their glad souls conceive,
And End to all their yrckesome grieuance give.
So (once more) to the swift-horse-riding Race
Of Royal Tyndarus, eternal Grace.
TO MEN OF Hospitality.
Reverence a Man, with use Propitious,
That Hospitable rights wants; and a house,
(You of this City, with the seat of State
To Ox-eyd Juno vowed) yet situate
Nere Pluto's Region. At the extreme Base
Of whose so high-hayrd City; from the Race
Of blew-wau'd Hebrus lovely Fluent (graced
With Jove's begetting) you divine Cups Taste.
Certain Epigramms AND OTHER POEMS of Homer. To Cuma.
LEnd hospitable Rights, and house-respect,
You that the Virgin with the fair eyes decked,
Make Fautresse of your stately-seated Town:
At foot of Sardes, with the high-haird Crown,
Inhabiting rich Cuma: where ye Taste
Of Hermus heavenly Fluent; all embraced
By curld-head whyrlpits: And whose waters move
From the divine seed, of immortal Jove.
IN HIS RETVRNE To Cuma.
Swiftly my feet sustain me to the Town,
Where Men inhabit, whom due Honors Crown:
Whose Minds with free-giuen faculties, are moved;
And whose grave Counsels, best of Best approved.
UPON THE SEPVLCHER OF MIDVS, Cut in Brass, in the FIGVRE OF A VIRGIN.
A Maid of Brass, I am, Inf^ixed here
T'Eternise Honest Midus Sepulcher.
And while the stream, her fluent seed receives;
And steep trees curle their verdant brows with leaves;
While Phoebus, raised above the Earth gives sight;
And T'humorous Moon, takes Luster from his light;
While floods bear waves; and Seas shall wash the shore;
At this his Sepulcher, whom all deplore,
I Will constantly Abide; All passers by
Informing; Here, does Honest Midus Lie.
CVMA REFVSING HIS OFFER T'ETERNISE THEIR STATE, THOUGH BROVGHT THITHER by the
Muses.
O To what Fate, has father Jove given Over
My friendles life; borne ever to be Pore?
While in my Infant state, he pleased to save Me;
Milk, on my reverend Mothers knees, he gave Me*
In delicate, and curious Nurserie.
Aeolian Smyrna, seated near the Sea;
(Of glorious Empire; and whose bright sides
Sacred Meletus silver Current glides)
Being native Seat to me. Which (in the force,
Of farr-past Time) the Breakers of wild Horse;
( Phriconias Noble Nation) girt with Towers:
Whose Youth in fight, put on with fiery Powers.
From hence, (the Muse-maids, Jove's illustrous seed^
Impelling me) I made impetuous speed;
And went with them to Cuma; with Intent
T'Eternise all the sacred Continent
And State of Cuma. They (in proud Ascent
From off their Bench) refused with usage fierce
The sacred voice which I auerre, is Verse.
Their follies yet, and madness borne by Me
Shall by some Power, be thought on futurely;
To wreake of him whoeuer, whose tongue sought
With false empaire, my fall. What fate, God brought
Upon my Birth, Iile bear with any pain;
But undeserved Defame; unfelt, sustain.
Nor feels my Person (dear to me, though Pore)
Any great lust, to linger, any more
In Cuma's holy Highwaies: but my Mind
(No thought empaird, for cares of any kind
Borne in my body) rather vows to try
The Influence of any other sky,
And spirits of People; bredd in any Land*
Of never so slender, and obscure Command.
AN ASSAIE OF HIS BEGVNNE ILIADS.
I Lion, and all, the braue-Horse-breeding Soil
(Dardania) I sing; that many a Toil
Imposed upon the Mighty Grecian Powrs,
Who were of Mars, the manly Seruitours.
TO THESTORS SON* Inquisitiue of HOMER, Homer intimated in this his Answer to
Thestorides, A will to have him learn, The knowledge of himself, before he
inquired so curiously the causes of other things. And from hence, had the great
Peripatetique (Themistius) his most grave Epiphoneme, Anima quae seipsam
ignorant, quid sciret ipsa de alijs? And therefore ( according to Aristotle)
aduises all Philosophical Students, to begin with that Study.
ABOUT THE CAUSES OF THINGS.
THestorides? Of all the skills unknown
To errant Mortals; there remains not One,
Of more inscrutable Affair, to find
Than is the true State of a humane Mind.
To Neptune.
Hear Powreful Neptune, that shak'st Earth in Ire;
King of the great Green, where dance All the Quire
Of faire-hayr'd Helicon; give prosperous Gales
And good pass, to these Guiders of our sails:
Their Voyage rendering happily directed,
And their Return, with no ill Fate affected.
Grant, likewise, at rough Mimas lowest roots,
(Whose strength, up to her Tops, praerupt rocks shootes)
My Passage safe arrival; and that I
My bashful disposition may apply
To Pious Men; and wreake my self upon
The Man whose verbal circumuention
In Me, did wrong, t'Hospitious Jove's whole state,
And T'Hospitable Table violate.
To the City Erythraea.
Worshipful Earth; giver of all things good?
Giver of, even Felicity; whose flood
The Mind all-ouer steepes, in honey Dew.
That, to some Men, do infinite kindness show;
To others that despise thee, art a Shrew.
And give them Gamesters galls; who, once, their Maine
Lost with an ill ca^hce; fare like Abiects slain.
To Mariners.
YE waue-trod Watermen; As ill as she
That all the Earth in Infelicitie
Of Rapine plunges. Who upon your Fare
As steru'd-like-rauenous, as Cormorants are.
The lives ye lead, (but in the worst Degree)
Not to be envied, more then Misery.
Take shame, and fear the Indignation
Of him that Thunders from the highest Throne
(Hospitious Jove) who, at the Back, prepares
Pains of abhord effect, of him that dares
The Pieties break, of his Hospitious squares.
The Pine.
ANy Tree else, bears better Fruit then Thee,
That Idas Tops sustain; where every Tree
Bears up in air, such perspirable Heights,
And in which, Ca^^s, and sinuous Receipts
Creep, in such great abundance. For, about
Thy roots (that ever, all thy Fruits put out
As nourisht by them, equal with thy Fruits)
Pour Mars his Iron-Mines their accust pursuites.
So that when any Earth-encroching Man
Of all the Martial Brood Cebrenian;
Plead need of Iron; They are certain still,
About thy Roots, to satiate every Will.
TO GLAVCVS: WHO WAS SO MISERABLY, SPARING; THAT HE FEARED ALL MEN'S ACCESS TO
HIM
GLaucus? though wise enough; yet one word more,
Let my advice add, to thy wisdoms store*
For it will be better so. Before thy Door
Give still thy Mastifs Meat; that will be sure
To lie there, therefore, still; and not endure
(With waylaid ears) the softest foot can fall;
But Men, and Beasts, make fly Thee and thy stall.
AGAINST THE SAMIAN MINISTRESSE OR NVNNE.
Hear Me (O goddess) that inuoke thine ear:
Thou that do feed, and form the youthful Year.
And grant that this Dame, may the loves refuse
And Beds of Young Men; and affect to use
Humanes whose Temples, hoary hayres distaine;
Whose Powrs are passing coye; whose Wills would feign.
WRITTEN ON THE COVNSAILE Chamber.
OF Men; Sons are the Crowns, of Cities Towers:
Of Pastures, Horse, are the most bewtious Flowers:
Of Seas, ships are the Grace; and Money still
With Trains, and Titles, does the Family fill.
But Royal Counsailors; in Counsel set,
Are Ornaments past All, as clearly great;
As Houses are that shining fires enfolde,
Superior far, to Houses nak't and cold.
THE FURNACE CALLED IN TO SING BY POTTERS.
IF ye deal freely (O my fiery Friends,
As ye assure) I Will sing, and serve your Ends.
Pallas: Vouchsafe thou here, inuok't Access;
Impose thy hand upon this Fordge; and bless
All Cups these Artists earne so; that they may
Look black still with their depth; and every way,
Give all their Vessels a most sacred Sale.
Make all well burned; and Estimation call
Up to their Prices. Let them marcket well;
And, in all highways, in abundance sell.
Till Riches to their utmost wish arise;
And as thou make them rich; so make me wise.
But if ye now, turn all to Impudence;
And think to pay with lies, my Patience;
Then will I summon against your Furnace, All
Hells harmefull'st spirits; Maragus, I Will call;
Sabactes, Asbett, and Omadamus,
Who, ylls against your Art, Innumerous
Excogitates, supplies, and multiplies.
Come Pallas then; and all command to rise:
Infesting Fordge, and house with fire, till All
Tumble together, and to Ashes Fall:
These Potters selves, dissolved in Tears as small.
And as a Horse-cheeke, chides his foming Bit
So let this Fordge, murmr in fire, and flit;
And all this stuff, to ashie ruins run.
And thou (O Circe) Daughter of the Sun;
Great-many-Poison Mixer; come; and pour
Thy cruell'st Poisons, on this Potters floor;
Shiuering their vessels; and themselves affect
With all the Mischiefs possible to direct
Against all their Beings, vrdg'd by all thy feends.
Let Chiron, likewise come; and all those friends
(The Centaures) that Alcides fingers fled,
And All the rest too, that his hand struck dead
(Their Ghosts excited;) come and macerate
These Earthen Men; and yet with further Fate
Affect their Furnace; All their teare-burst Eyes
Seeing, and mourning for their Miseries.
While I look On, and laugh their blasted Art,
And them to Ruin. Lastly; if, apart,
Any lies lurking, and sees yet; his Face
Into a Cole, let th'angrie fire embrace;
That all may learn by them; in all their lust
To dare Deeds Great; to see them great and Just.
EIRESIONE OR The Olive Branch.
THe Turrets of a Man of infinite Might;
Of infinite Action; substance Infinite,
We make access to; whose whole Being rebounds
From Earth to Heaven; and naught but Bliss resounds.
Give entry then, ye Doors; more riches yet
Shall enter with me; All the Graces met
In joy of their fruition: perfect Peace
Confirming All; All crowned with such increase,
That every empty Vessel in your House
May stand repleate, with all thing precious.
Elaborate Ceres, may your Larders fill
With all dear Delicates; and serve in still.
May, for your Son, a Wife make wished approach,
Into your Towrs; and rapt in, in her Coch
With strong-kneed Mules. May yet, her state prove staid
With honored Huswiferies: Her fair hand laid
To artfull Loomeworks; and her nak't feet tread
The Gum of Amber, to a Golden Beade.
But I Will return; Return; and yet not press
Your bounties now assaid, with often Access;
Once a year, only; as the Swallow prates,
Before the welthie Springs wide open Gates.
Mean time I stand at yours: nor purpose stay
More time t'entreate. Give, or not give; away
My feet shall bear me; that did never come,
With any thought, to make your House, my Home.
TO CERTAIN FISHER-BOYES PLEASING HIM WITH INGENIOVS RIDDLES.
YEt from the bloods, even of your-selfe-like sires,
Are you descended; that could make ye heirs
To no huge hords of Coin; nor leave ye Able
To feed Flocks of innumerable Rabble.
The end of all the endless works of Homer.
THe Work that I was borne to do, is done.
Glory to him, that the Conclusion
Makes the beginning of my life: and Never
Let me be said to li^e, till I live Ever*
Where Is the outliuing of my Fortunes then,
Ye errant vapors of F^mes Lernean Fenn?
That (like possessed storms) blast all; not in Herd
With your abhorred heads: who* because casher'de
By Men, for Monsters; thinck Men, Monsters All,
That are not of your pyed Hood, and your Hall.
When you are nothing but the scumm of things,
And must be cast off: Droues, that have no stings,
Nor any m^re soul, then a stone has wings.
Auant ye Haggs; your Hates, and Scandalls are,
The Crowns, and Comforts of a good Man's Care;
By whose impartial Perpendiculare;
All is extuberance, and excretion All,
That you your Ornaments, and glories call.
Your wrie Mouths censure right? your blister'd Tongues,
That lick but itches? and whose vlce^ous Lungs
Come up at all things permanent, and sound?
O you (like flies in Dreggs) in Humors droun'd;
Your loves, like Atoms, lost in gloomie Air;
I would not retriue with a withered Hair.
Hate, and cast still your stings then; for your kisses
Betray but Truth; and your Applaud's, are Hisses.
To see our supercilious wizerds frown;
Their faces fallen like Foggs; and coming down,
Stinking the Sunn out; make me shine the more:
And like a checked flood, bear above the shore,
That their profane Opinions feign would set,
To what they see not; know not; nor can let.
Yet then, our learned Men, with their Torrents come
Roaring from their forced Hills, all crowned with ^ome,
That one not taught like them, should learn to know
Their Greek roots, and from thence the Groves that grow,
Casting such rich shades, from great Homers wings:
That first, and last, command the Muses springs.
Though he is best Scholar, that through pains and vows;
Made his own Master only; all things know's.
Nor pleades my poor skill; form; or learned Place;
But dantlesse labor, constant Prayer, and Grace.
And what is all their skill, but vast varied reading?
As if brode-beaten Highways had the leading
To Truths abstract, and narrow Path, and Pit?
Found in no walk, of any worldly wit.
And without Truth; all is only sleight of hand,
Or our Law-learning, in a Foreign Land;
Embroderie spent on Cobwebs, Braggart show
Of Men that all things learn; and nothing know.
For Ostentation, humble Truth still flies,
And all confederate fashionists, defies.
And as some sharpe-browd Doctor, (English borne;)
In much learned Latin Idioms can adorn
A verse with rare Attractions* yet become
His English Muse, like an ^^^ach^ean in Loome,
Wrought spite of Pallas; and therein be^raies
More tongue then truth, beggs, and adopts his Bays;
So Ostentation, he be never so
Larded with labor, to suborne his show;
Shall soothe within him, but a bastard soul,
No more Heaven heyring, then Earths son the Moule.
But as in dead Calmes, emptiest smokes arise
Unchecked, and free; up, strait into the skies;
So drousie Peace, that in her humor steepes
All she affects, lets such rise while she sleeps.
Many, and most Men, have of wealth least store,
But None the gracious shame that fits the Pore;
So most learned Men, enough are Ignorant;
But few the grace have, to confess their want,
Till Lives, and Learnings, come concomitant.
For from Men's knowledges* their Liues-Acts flow*
Vain glorious Acts then, vain prove all they know.
As Night, the life-enclining stars, best shows;
So lives obscure, the starriest souls disclose.
For me; let just Men judge by what I show
In Acts exposed, how much I err, or know*
And let not Envy, make all worse then naught
With her mere headstrong, and quite braineles thought:
Others, for doing nothing; giving All;
And bounding all worth in her bursten Gall.
God and my dear Redeemer, rescue Me
From Men's immane, and mad Impiety;
And by my life and soul, (sole known to them)
Make me of Palm, or Yew, an Anadem.
And so, my sole God, the thrice sacred Trine,
Bear all th'Ascription, of all Me and Mine.
Supplico tibi Domine, Pater et Dux rationis nostrae; vt Nostrae Nobilitatis
recordemur, qua tu nos ornasti; et vt tu nobis presto sis, vt jis qui per sese
mouentur; vt et a Corporis contagio, Brutorumque affectuum repurgemur; ^osque
superemus, atque regamus; et, sicut decet; pro instrumentis jis vtamur. Deinde,
vt nobis Adiuneto sis; ad accuratam rationis nostrae correctionem; et
coniunctionem cum jis qui vere sunt, per lucem veritatis. Et tertium, Saluatori
supplex oro; vt ab oculis animorum nostrorum, caliginem prorsus ab^tergas; vt
norimus been, qui Deus, aut Mortalis habendus, Amen.
Sine honor viuam, Nulloque Numero ero.

