THE STRANGE, VVONDERFVLL, and bloody Battle between Frogs and Mise:

The occasion of their falling out:

Their preparation, munition, and resolution for the watres: The several
combats of every person of worth; with many other memorable accidents.

Interlaced with diverse pithy and moral sentences, no less pleasant to be
read, then profitable to be observed.

Covertly decyphering the estate of these times.

Paraphrastically done into English Heroycall verse by W. F. C. C. C.

LONDON Imprinted by S. S. for John Bailey: and are to be sold at his shop in
Chauncery lane, near to the Office of the six Clerks. 1603.

Perlege Maeonio cantatas carmine Ranas, Et frontem nugis soluere disce meis.
Martialis in Xenia, 183.
To the virtuous, courteous, and worshipful Gentleman, Master Robert
Greenewood of Westerton, health, with the happiness of both worlds.
SVch loving favors from your son I found,
So kind affection at your Worships hand,
Though undeserved, that I still am bound,
And unto you and yours obliged stand:
And though that Green branch, which ay-springing stood,
As chiefest crown or garland to your wood,
Be by the stroke of Fate quite cut away,
Never shall a thanklesse nature in me sway.
No lofty Cedar, though in height he pass
Each seu'rall plant which desert forests yield;
No Laurel, though Apollo's tree it was;
No Pine for ships, no Oak ordayn'd to build,
Nor any shrub was half so dear to me,
As was that branch fallen from the Greenewoods tree:
Which though, as dead, entombed in earth it lies,
A day will come, we hope, to see it rise.
Here (worthy Sir) do I present to you.
The timely Buds of my frost-bitten Spring,
And though this trifle not deserve your view,
Yet such a trifle once did Homer sing,
Adorned with robes, spun from the wool of Greece,
Homely by me now clad in English fleece:
Albeit no pleasure in this toy you take,
Yet deigne a kind aspect for Hargreues sake,
The unworthy wel-willer of your Worships welfare, William Fowldes.

To the Reader in general.
Having of late, for mine own exercise at vacant hours, consummated the
translation of this little Book, I now boldly adventure to commit it to the
Press, being the rather induced thereunto by the encouragement of certain of
mine acquaintance: not that I seek hereby to win praise, or publish this for
any devotion in print, since I am verily persuaded, it deserves not the least
title of commendation: and I hold it as a maxim with Lylie, that he which
comes in print, because he would be known, is like the fool that goes
into the market, because he would be seen. Only I hope, that this my simple
labor will be a spur to the riper wits of our time, that the golden works of
this and other famous Poets, may not still lie hidden, as under a veil or
mystery, from the weak capacity of meaner judgments. Concerning my
translation, as I cannot altogether commend it: for quandoque bonus dormitat
Homerus: so neither will I wholly discommend it; in the one I might seem
arrogant; in the other be accounted foolish: and therefore puto rectius esse,
vt sint mediocria omnia. If one write never so well, he shall not please all;
if never so ill, he shall please some: a dog will bark, though he lack his
teeth; and a dolt will censure, though he want judgment. I know, to some
curious heads it will be thought amiss, that every verse answers not their
expectation, because I have not word for word concurd with the Author in my
translation: yet if they will but look a little into the difficulty of this
thing, considering the kind of verse which I have used, I hope they will rest
satisfied. I only will answer them out of Horace, Non verbum verbo curabis
reddere, fidus interpres. And furthermore (besides the diversity between a
construction and a translation) they may know* that there are many mysteries in
this writer, which uttered in English, would show little pleasure, and in mine
opinion, are better to be untouched, then to diminish the grace of the rest
with tediousnes and obscurity: I have therefore followed the counsel of the
aforesaid Horace, teaching the duty of a good Interpreter, qui, quae desperate
tractata nitescere posse, relinquit. By which occasion, some few sentences I
have in places omitted, somewhat added, some what altered, and somewhat
expounded: that which I have added, you shall find quoted in the margent. The
significations of the names (being indeed no names, but only words
correspondent to the nature of Frogs and Mise) ne quis in ijs haereat, lest any
should therewith be troubled, I have englished and inserted them in the verse,
that the inferior Readers should not be wearied with looking in the margent*
as for the learned, they need not be instructed. I mean not be a prejudice to
any that can do finer; only I would desire them to bear with this my simple
labor, and to accept it as a thing roughly begun, rather then pollished. And
if any with this will not be contented, let him take in hand, and do it anew
himself, and I doubt not, but he shall find it an easier thing to control a
line or two, then to amend the whole of this interpretation. Farewell.

W. F.

To the captious company of carping Readers.
Spurn not the study of my nouice Muse,
though but a toy;
Who scorns to read this trifle, let him choose,
though never so coy:
Yet no base trifle: for by Homers quill
The subject was contrived, if good or ill.
If then the subject was of Homers worth,
from Homers brain,
What should affray my Muse to set this forth,
and scorn disdain?
For he which scoffs this Poem in his pride,
If that he durst, great Homer would deride.
Let addle heads by idle humors guise,
ybent to stray,
Jest at this battle of the Frogs and Mise,
I Will not dismay,
Since Homer stands as bulwark on my part,
TO award the scornful terms that fools will dart.
The babbling praises of the vulgar vain
I naught esteem,
Nor how the curious, through fantastic brain,
my labors deem.
As one to every trifle gives applause,
So the other, all condemns, without just cause.
And yet the censure of the meanest wit
I nill refuse:
For slender judgments best I think befit
my simple Muse:
Only I wish, that he which reads this book,
His praise or dispraise may to reason look.
Nil moror vlterius.
In commendation of Poetry.
AMong the diverse currents that do flow
Fro^th' euer-springing fountain of all art,
The perled Nectar most content does show,
Which Poetry full sweetly does impart,
Whose hunny'd vapor comfort the heart, Aut prodesse volu^t, aut delect
are Poc^^, aut simul.

And under veiled fancies that does sing,
Which does much profit with great pleasure bring
For cert's the truth (though truth no colors need
To men of understanding and ripe years)
When she is masked in a seemly weed,
More fair, more sweet, and beautiful appears,
Her tale contents the mind, and glads the ears,
And makes men more attentive to her story,
That truth may still prevail with greater glory:
For as an Image drawn in white and black,
Though it be well proportioned with care,
If it do other comely colors lack,
To beautify the members, head, and hair,
Unto the eye appears not half so fair;
Nor with so much content does fill the mind,
As that pourtrayd with colors in his kind:
Even so a naked story simply told,
Though cause be true and worthy due regard, Vt pictura Poesis erit.

Does not men's hearts with such affection hold,
Nor has the outward senses so in guard,
As does that matter which is well declared,
Adorned pleasantly with terms and art,
Which pearcing the row the ears, does move the heart.
This knew the learned Poets all of yore,
This knew the immortal Sages long agone,
Whose works the wisest of our age adore,
Such store of wisdom in their books is shone,
Such pleasure unto all, offense to none,
Such grave precepts hid under fine device,
As ears and heart with wonderment surprise.
No fable sweet Philosophy contaynes,
Within the sacred volumes of her cell,
Dipped in the fount, which from A hill consecrate to the Muses.
Pernassus straynes,
Whereas the thrice three Nymphs are said to dwell,
That Barbarism and ignorance expel:
But under veil deep secrets does unfold,
Though bnt a tale by wanton Ovid told.
By wanton Ovid? heavenly Poesy
Pardon the rashness of my infant Muse,
That I, a client to thy mystery,
Should unadvised by that word abuse, Vita verecunda est, Musa iocosa mea.

And term him wanton, did no folly use:
For though his Muse was wanton, as he playned,
Yet Ouids life was chaste, and never stained.
Nor sung he always in a wanton lay,
And penned pleasing ditties of blind fire:
Of deeper matters much could Ovid say,
As he whose soaring spirit mounted higher,
Than ever Poet after could aspire.
And save the famous Homer chief of all,
Semper Virgilium excipio,
The Prince of Poets may we Ovid call.
But neither Homer, Ovid, nor the rest,
That ever tasted A fountain of the Muses.
Aganippes spring,
Though but to write of fables they addressed,
Which to th'vnskilfull no contentment bring,
But with such art and knowledge did them sing,
That in their volumes scarce appears one line,
Which to the learned does not seem divine.
No vice of youth, no villayny of age,
No lewd behavior of each degree,
But in the secret myst'ries of the sage,
And grave instructions of Philosophy, Ficta quidem narratione, sed verac^
significatione haec dicuntur.

Clad in the habit of sweet Poesy,
Is aptly cowched in some pretty fable,
As well the learned to discuss are able.
And not alone are vices set to view,
And horrid plagues attending wickedness:
But blessed virtue with the heavenly crew,
Which ever wayt upon her worthynesse,
By them are pourtrayd forth with comeliness:
The meanest fable Poet e're did make,
May stand as mirror for example sake.
For proof whereof read but this little book,
With understanding, knowledge, care and skill,
And thou shall find presented to thy look,
Such wit and learning from the Authors quill,
Which under fine inventions meet thee still;
So pleasant objects that occur thine The eyes of thy mind
eyes,
As will thy soul with wonderment surprise.
And not alone shall pleasure thee awate,
As thou perusest what I now present;
Here thou shall have fit matter for each state,
If thou consider what hereby is meant.
Then think thy time herein not idly spent:
Ponder with judgment what thou read'st at leisure;
So may thy profit equallize thy pleasure.
Batrachomyomachia:
Or, The Battle between Frogs and Mise.
YE thrice three daughters of immortal Jove, The nine Muses.

Boeotian Nimphs of Helicons sweet spring,
Bright lamps of honor shining from above,
Where still ye sit secure from enuies sting,
Guiding the stern of learnings sacred lore,
Vouchsafe to guide my pen, I you implore;
Your sweet consent conform my tender breast,
While I adorn my verse, as likes you best.
Deigne from your pleasant fountaynes of delight,
And euer-running Rivers of true skill,
Now to infuse sweet drops into my spright,
And heavenly Nectar on my plants distill:
That they may grow like Bay, which ever springs,
To bud the battles of two mighty Kings,
And all the world may know how strife did rife,
Between renowned Frogs and gallant Mise.
The antique deeds, Si paruis componere magnal^cebit.
which wanton Ovid told,
To be performed by Giants long agone,
When mighty hills together they inrold,
Thinking to pull the Thundrer from his throne,
Compared to these battles cannot be,
No more then brambles to the Caedar tree,
Whose lofty top dare check the The Sun
heavens fair eye,
When at midday he sits in majesty.
In these approved soldiers of stern Mars,
Manhood, or Mars himself, may seem to dwell:
For with such valor they endured the wars,
That horrid death their courage could not quell.
Stout resolution in their foreheads stood,
Fighting like valiant hearts amid their blood.
And this, Hic nostri surgit origo mali.
alas, did cause the mortal strife,
Whereby so many gallants lost their life.
The Kings own son, a Mouse of royal state,
Next heir by birth apparent to the Crown,
Toyled with travel, flying from the Cat,
Unto a pleasant brook to drink came down,
Where couching low his body on the bank,
With great delight cold water there he drank.
For though that gorged stomachs loathe strong drink,
Thirst makes the King cold water wine to think.
But while the gentle and debonayre Mouse,
Bathed his lips within the channel clear,
Quaffing most neatly many a sweet carouse,
Along the gliding current did appear
*A gallant Frog, This was the King of Frogs.
whose port and mounting pace,
Showed him to be chief ruler in that place.
For as quick sparks disclose the fire to be,
So does man's gesture show his majesty.
From forth the river, like to liquid glass,
The Frog ascends upon the waters brim,
And seeing where the Mouse lay on the grass,
With nimble joints he leapeth toward him;
And bending down his fair and yellow breast,
With kind salutes he welcomes this new ghest,
Beseeming well a Kings hye dignity.
And thus he spoke with solemn majesty:
Since that thou art a stranger, gentle Mouse,
From whom do thou derive thy pedigree?
Declare to me thy parents and the house,
Which have conceived such a progeny,
That, if thy worth deserve, with greater sway,
Unto my palace thee I might convey:
Where I with kingly presents will thee grace,
As shall befit thy virtues, and my place.
And doubt not but we can confirm our word:
For know it is spoken by a mighty King,
The only Monarch of this running ford,
Which all the Frogs to my subjection bring.
My promise to perform I want no store,
My kingdom stretches out from shore to shore. An nes as long as regibus esse
manus?

Scarce he deserves the title of a king,
That wants means t'acomplish any thing.
By birth I am a King, borne to the Crown,
And hold by right my rushie chair of state,
Peleus my durty Sire, great in renown,
Of Queen Hydromedusa me begat.
She at the flood of Padus did me bear,
Whose head and cheeks did put her in great fear.
And that my name and person might agree, Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis.

Blowne-cheeke Physignathus she cleaped me.
But since that valor in thy looks does dwell,
And * Mars has his abiding in thy face: The God of war.

I think thy birth does common Mise excel,
And thee descended from a higher place.
For majesty attends upon estate,
It cannot masked be, nor change his gate.
Thy Lordly looks, thy royal birth proclaim;
Tell me thy country, kindred, and thy name.
The Mouse arising from the rivers brim,
Hearing the Frog speak with such Majesty,
With haughty courage resaluteth him,
And thus replies with great audacitie:
*Wherefore desire thou to know our birth, A bold answer to a King.

Famous to gods above, and men on earth?
The greatest Kesar, and the country swayne,
Of our exployts and stratagems complain.
I am the Prince Prince Eateerumme.
Psicharpax, which in field
Dare meet a thousand crummes within the face,
All them encounter without spear or shield,
And bravely eat them up in little space,
Borne of King Eatebread,
Troxarta that redoubted king,
Of whose heroic acts the world does ring;
Both rich and poor my valiant father dread,
With so great courage he deuoures their bread.
Lick-meale Lichomile, a royal Mouse,
My fair Queene-mother me conceived hereby,
Under a pile of wood, behind a house:
(For at that present there the Court did lie)
Where like the child of Jove, The court then lay at woodstack.
within her lap,
I sucked sweet Nectar from her downe-soft pap,
Neatly she fed me in my younger years
With milk, chees-curds, nuts, apples, figs and pears
In vain you wish our honor should descend
(Because our birth is of no small regard)
To taste the pleasures that your Palace lend,
With store of iuncats and delights prepared:
For they whose lives and natures disagree,
Do hardly brook to join in company.
Like will to like, those birds consort together,
Whose wings are like in color, and of feather.
You simple Frogs live in the running main,
In brooks, in ditches, and the watrie Fen.
Upon the dry land we, brave Mise, remain,
Where we enjoy the company of men:
We feed upon their dainties at our ease,
Eat up their bread and victuals when we please;
We pass not for their locks, nor strength of place,
Both locks and strength does policy deface.
Yet though, when hunger moves an appetite,
We sometimes skirmish with the Kitchins store,
And here and there a little morsel bite,
And where we find it fatter, eat the more:
For I have heard my father say of old, A good axiom.

Which as a Maxim we Mise do hold,
Fatter the better (sure it is worth repeating)
A fat sweet modicum deserves the eating.
And though sometimes (too seldom I confess)
We light upon a Capon by the way;
Or fortune with a Rabbit does us bless,
Which is a dainty morsel at this day;
Or other pretty iuncate which we find,
And eat some part according to our kind:
Yet are we not so greedy, as some say,
Which blame brave Mise, yet take the meat away:
For often the greedy all-deuouring Cat,
Which would be thought a safeguard to the meat*
Does under color of her inward hate,
That aye between us two is wondrous great,
Forage the cupbords, kitchen, and the house*
Pretending hatred to the harmless Mouse: Too many of these Cats.

But cert's let all beware of this device,
One greedy Cat is worse then many Mise.
Often, when a Pigeon, or some dainty bit,
Chiefly for master or the mistress dressed;
If any parcel be reserved of it,
To close their stomach at another feast,
No sooner comes the morsel from the hall,
But servants take a part, or eat it all;
And when enquiry for this thing is made,
Still on the guiltless Mouse the fault is laid.
Surely I grant, it grieves me to the heart,
To bear these slanders and incessant wrong,
Which still they lay unto the Mouses part,
By their false lying and deceitful tongue,
But in my sprite I scorn the vain surmises, Infirmi est animi, exiguique
voluptas vltio.

Which every cogging mate by craft devises;
Yet smile to see the mistress of the house,
Upon her servants shoulders beat the Mouse.
Nethlesse they cannot say but we will take
A dire revenge upon them for the lie; The world is grown into a swaggering
vain: for not a Mouse will now put up the lie.

And since no conscience in a lie they make,
Their lie shall prove a truth, or we will die:
For not a hole or corner shall be free,
Where any scraps or broken meat we see;
But whatsoever we find, without delay
We Will quickly eat it up, or bear away.
And yet think not (Sir Frog) we gallants live
Upon the refuse scraps or broken meat;
Or feed on fragments which foul trenchers give,
When greazy scullions make them clean and neat.
Far be it from a lordly Mouses tooth,
To taste the trash that every Pesant does;
Well knows a discreet Mouse to choose the best,
Though he for anger often eat the rest.
Nor are we so faynt-hearted, if we chance
To meet a pie or pastie by the way,
Which like a Castle does her self advance,
Scorning the battrie of our brave array;
But straight courageously her walls we scale,
Or undermine them for to make her quail:
If valor will not bring our wish to pass,
Our teeth shall pearce her crust as hard as brass.
Sweet cakes, fat puddings, curdes, cream, are our meat,
With bacon-flitches hanging in the house,
Delicious hony-sops which gods do eat,
Are victuals only for the gallant Mouse.
No pleasant iuncates, no tooth-tempting fare,
Which huswiues lock up with no slender care,
Yet often more bold then welcome.
Yea, no delights the kitchen does contain,
But in the danger of our teeth remain.
Pale fear of death could never make me fly,
Nor safeguard of my life to leave the fight.
True valor will with honor rather dye,
Then like a coward live and take his flight.
But like a Soldier stout, and Captain bold,
Still in the foremost rank my place I hold,
Where I enact such wonders with my blade, Et coelum territat armis.

That troops I send to death and dusky shade.
The might of bourly man I do not dread,
Though other creatures live within his fear:
Often dare I bite his hand, and scratch his head,
When he the silent night in sleep does wear.
Casibus insultas quos potes ipse pati.
I scorn his gins and his alluring bayt,
Set to entrap us closely by deceyt:
Yet if therein the basest Mouse do fall,
In our revenge his meat shall pay for all.
Only the Owl I dread, and eyebright Cat,
Two cursed murdrers in the dismal night,
Whose monstrous jaws spare neither Mouse nor Rat,
But quick devour us without law or right:
Yet chiefly of the Cat I stand in fear,
Whose puling voice I never love to hear;
A hel-bred Harpie ranging round about,
Watching our coming in and going out.
I tell thee, Satietas nauseam parit.
Frog, I loathe to live on weeds,
Roots, coleworts, garlic, or the foolish beet,
Or stinking mushroms, growing with the reeds:
Such vulgar diet for base Frogs is meet:
Meat fit for Frogs which haunt the watery Fen,
Not for the gallant Mouse that feeds with men.
And here abruptly ending in disdain,
Thus smilingly the Frog replyde again:
Stoutly thou brag'st upon thy costly cheer,
Thy dainty dishes and thy kingly fare;
Much honor to thy belly thou do bear,
Vaunting what pleasures fall unto thy share,
And what a warlike heart in thee does dwell,
Which pale-faced fear of death could never quel:
But reason shows by daily practice found,
That empty vessels yield the greatest sound.
And yet seem not to scorn our rushy chair,
Because your belly-pleasures do abound:
With our delights no solace may compare,
That can among poor starued Mise be found.
Upon the land we dance and sport our fill,
In water bathe our lymmes (so Jove does will)
Our cates are consonant unto our state, Nulla aconita bibuntur fictilibus.

Not mixed with poison or deceitful bayt.
And if the knowledge of the truth did move,
Or breed in thee a liking and delight,
Like to the radiant son of mighty Jove,
When riding in his Carre he gives us light,
I to my palace will thee safely bring,
Sitting upon the shoulders of a king: Credito, credenti nulla procella nocet.

Leap on my neck, fear not the running main,
I bear thee hence, I bring thee back again.
He had no sooner said, but bending down
His back; though rare it is to see Kings bow;
The lieger Mouse, lighter then thistle down,
And swift as wind, which from the East does blow,
Upon his shoulders nimbly leaps in have,
And vawlting to his neck, does there hold fast,
Proud of his stately Porter, as he might:
For whom Kings bear, they may be proud by right.
Boldly the Frog does launch out from the brim,
Into the current of the water clear:
The Mouse rejoicing for to see him swim,
Upon his back like * Neptune does appear, Neptune the god of the sea

When mounted on a Dolphin in his pride,
Upon the tossing billows he does ride:
Or like the Sun, clad in his morning weeds,
Drawn in his fiery wagon by his Steeds:
With so great port and princely majesty
The little Mouse upon the Frog did stand, Mayor sum qua^ cui possit fortuna
nocere.

Proudly triumphing while the shore was nigh,
And that he could at pleasure skip to land.
Such great delights in water he did see,
Welneere he could desire a Frog to be.
But as no state can stable stand for aye:
So every pleasure has his ending day.
For when he saw the surging billows rise,
And on the sudden fall as low as hell,
Such store of tears did trickle from his eyes,
That their abundance made the water swell.
And now the waves be dash him more and more,
Tossing his corpse amid their watery store,
With grief he wrings his hands, and tears his skin:
Such woeful plight pale fear had put him in.
Now does he wish, Galeatu^ sero duelli poen^^e^
though wishes take no place,
That on firm land he were arrived again;
He curses Neptune and his trident Mace,
The troubled waters and the running maine:
Now, but too late (alas) does he repent
His foolish rashness, cause of this event.
But after-wit is like a shower of rain,
That falls untimely on the ripened grain.
His feet unto his belly does he shrink,
And on the Frog his back does closely sit,
Using his nimble tail, when he did sink,
In stead of oar. Pale fear did learn him wit.
The flowing billows mount above his head,
Speachlesse for sorrow, and for grief half dead:
Yet death is not so bitter as cold fear,
Which makes things greater, then they are, appear.
Sorrow tryumpheth in the Mouse his breast, Heu, quid agat?

Despair does sit as Marshall in his mind,
Danger and death on every side are pressed,
Still to receive him at each puff of wind:
But danger can the heart of pride never break;
When fear has staid the tongue, yet pride will speak.
And though the waters wash the outward skin,
They cannot wash presumption within.
For thus he sighing said, The gentle Jupiter when he stole away Europa.
Bull,
Which Ovid does applaud for knavery,
Did not convey to Creete his pretty trull
Upon his neck with so great bravery,
As King of Frogs does bear the gallant Mouse,
To see the pomp and pleasure of his house,
Plunging his lymmes amid the water clear,
Such confidence to swimming he does bear.
He this no sooner said, but sudden fear
Did stop the passage of his further prate:
For lo, a water- Serpent did appear,
A hellish torment to the Frogs estate,
Which cutting through the running stream that way,
Winding himself to find some floting pray,
The Frog espide: What cannot fear descry,
Which joined with care, preuents sad destiny?
For he no sooner did the Snake behold,
Gaping like Cerberus three-headed dog, Cerberus is said to have three heads,
and to be porter of hell

Ruffling his scaly neck which shone like gold,
But into water dives the wily Frog,
Leaving the Mouse, his friend, in sad lament,
Set forth to danger, death, and dire event:
For he which makes a friend of every stranger,
Discards him not again without some danger.
The silly Mouse distressed and forlorn,
Left to the mercy of the running main,
Unto the bottom headlong down is borne,
Where he, poor soul, in secret does complain,
Plunging with hands aloft now does he fleet,
Then sinking down again he strikes with feet:
But when grim destiny does once assail,
No might, no shift, no force can then prevail.
When therefore to approach he knew his death,
And that his wet hairs furthered his woe,
Fate still attendant for to stop his breath,
And death at hand to work his overthrow,
Weeping for sorrow, void of all relief,
Thus with himself he sighed to ease his grief:
For tears and sighs, sad orators of smart,
Though they release not, Fst quaedam flere voiuptas.
yet they ease the heart.
Perfidious Frog, procurer of my wrack,
Accursed Traitor to my fathers Crown,
Think not though vengeance for a time be slack,
That thundering Jove, to who^ all things are known,
Will be forgetful of thy treachery,
Through whose deceit I dye in misery,
Which from thy back, as off a rock I stood,
Have thrown me, perjured wretch, amid the flood.
Well thou perceiu'dst my valor and my might,
My worth, my courage, and agilitie,
Which like a dastard and faint-hearted wight,
At unawares have wrought my tragedy.
By craft I dye in water, though on land
Thou durst not once attempt it with thy hand:
But God, whose dwelling is the stars among,
He knows thy craft, and will revenge my wrong.
The Mise, Interdum lacrymae pondera vocis habent.
brave Mise, stern soldiers of stout Mars,
In troops shall march against thy damned crew,
And shall pursue thee with such bloody wars,
That Frogs unborn yet shall have cause to rue.
Such balefull stratagems that day shall be,
As never cursed traytrous Frog did see:
For never shall murder unrevenged boast.
And with those words he yielded up the ghost.
Lichopinax Lick-trencher, of great blood,
Sitting upon the grassie waters side,
Saw when the Mouse was drowned in the flood:
For murder by some chance will be espide;
And greatly weeping for the Princes fall,
Amayne he posteth to the Kings neat hall;
Where, to his Grace sitting with Lords of state,
He tells with grief his sons unhappy fate.
When as his Majesty this news did hear,
Sadly he took the Princes overthrow,
Down from his throne he fell with heavy cheer,
And swooned in the place for grief and woe.
His Nobles take him up without delay,
And on a royal pallet do him lay,
Where he for sorrow sick, was like to dye:
For childrens hurt near fathers heart does lie.
But all the Lords, though they were malcontent,
Grieved for his death which was their Kings sole care,
Yet like fell Lions unto anger bent,
A black revenge within their minds they swear.
With comfortable words they cheer their King,
Which somewhat did abate his sorrowing.
Hope of revenge did so his stomach prick,
Now he is strong again, Minuit vindicta dolorem.
which erst was sick.
His messengers dispatched are apace,
To all the hungry corners in his land,
Commanding all his subjects in short space,
At Court before his Majesty to stand,
To learn his pleasure for his woeful son,
Who^ the proud King of Frogs to death had don.
Whose corpse lie buried in the rolling wave,
Wanting a royal Hearse as Princes have.
The time no sooner came, The dutifulness of the Mise.
when every Mouse,
Of any office, calling, or degree,
In his own person at the kings great House,
Before his Majesty should present be:
But all the Lords, knights, squires and gentle Mise
Resort to Court, before the sun did rise,
The basest Mouse that had a tail behind,
Posted apace to know his Graces mind.
Within the Court assembled were the States,
And each one seated in his due degree,
The Commons stayed at the Palace gates,
Yet where they might the King both hear and see.
Then presently his Majesty came down,
Clad like a mourner in a murry gown,
And from his throne, though grief had made him weak,
Yet angry for his son, thus did he speak:
Stout Peers, The Oration of the King of Mise.
brave Nobles, and my Captains tall,
And you kind subjects to your loving King,
Though to my part these mischiefs only fall,
Which from my drearie eyes sad tears do bring:
Yet to you all this damage does belong,
For Kings mishap to subjects is a wrong.
I like a father, you like friends complain,
Since cursed Frogs, my son, your Prince, have slain.
Great are the cares attend upon a throne, Tenet auratum limen erinnys.

And most misfortunes sit in Caesar's lap:
Then who so wretched as poor I alone,
Predestinate to nothing but mishap?
Once happy in three children borne to me,
As pretty Mise as ever man did see.
But Fortune glad to triumph in my woe,
Has brought my sorrow with their overthrow.
For first, the eldest scarce was two months old,
When playing like a wanton up and down,
A griefly Cat the young Mouse did behold,
And quickly caught him by the tender crown.
Between whose cruel jaws my son did die,
Without remorse devoured traytrously.
A Stygian Butcher, known unto you all,
Whose teeth asunder tear both great and small.
My son next him, a little noble Mouse,
Too ventrous far to live (O grief to tell)
Hunting for food within a Farmers house,
Into an engyne made of wood he fell, Fraud perit virtus.

Invented by man's art and policy,
To crush and murder all our Progeny;
There (loving Subjects) died my second child,
With rigor massacred, with craft beguild.
And now my third, my last beloved son,
But best beloved son of all the three,
With whom my joys do end, my life is done,
Most dear to his Queene-mother and to me;
In whom decays the issue of my blood,
Ay me, Hinc illae lachrymae.
lies buried in the raging flood,
Betrayed and drowned by the Frogs fell King,
To whom my sword sad elegies shall sing.
Then quickly arm your selves, to arms, he cries,
Fight for your King and Country without fear,
Pursue the Frogs your cursed enemies,
And guard your selves with helmet, shield and spear;
With courage show your valor and your might,
The day is ours: for Jove still aids the right:
Brave Lords, kind subjects, fight courageously,
God and Saint She is holden patroness over Mise.
Gertrude grant us victory.
The King in anger here did make an end,
And presently dismissed all the crew,
Which all their study and endeavors bend,
That black revenge and battle might ensue.
The Kings sad words did stir them up so far,
That naught they talk of now but bloody war.
And every Mouse from greatest to the least,
Prepares such weapons as will (...) them best.
And first, The arms and weapons of the Mise.
for legs, these never daunted Mise,
Warlike habiliments in haste provide,
Guarded with husks of pease (O rare device!)
As though with boots or start-vps they would ride:
Whose policy if this our age would try,
So many maimed soldiers should not die:
For they which lose their legs, do lack their might,
Nor can they fly, nor stoutly stand to fight.
Next with a corslet they defend the heart,
Not made of steel, but of an old straw-hat,
With which before they did award that part,
Against the forces of the greedy Cat:
A piece of leather on their back they don,
Which serves in stead of an habergion:
The bottom of a candlestick does stand,
For target or a buckler in their hand:
Small brazen pinnes they brandish like a spear, Gerimus quae possumus arma.

And toss their needles like strong pikes about;
A walnut shell for helmet they do bear,
After that they had eat the kernel out.
And thus they march to fight that bloody fray,
Vaunting in armor and their proud array:
For weapons unto force fresh courage bring.
A Mouse in arms does think himself a king.
But when the trumpe of iron-winged Fame
Had sounded to the Frogs this bad report, Res animos incognita turbat.

Out of the water in great troops they came,
And on the shore together do resort,
There to determine what the cause should be,
Of these strange wars and sudden mutiny:
Their dread increases by each brute they hear:
For fear of unknown things breeds greater fear.
Whiles thus they stand perplexed and afraid,
A Herald bold of Arms they might descry, Herald Eatecheese.

Eat-cheese Tyroglyphus, which not dismayed,
Dare stoutly to their face the Frogs defy,
Whom noble Embasichytros begot,
That slily creeps into every pot.
He bearing in his hand a regal mace,
Thus to the Frogs did speak in great disgrace:
To you disloyal Frogs that hunt for blood,
And to your King that wrought our Princes fall,
Drowning his body in the raging flood,
Whose death to heaven does for vengeance call,
To you I come sad messenger of woe
From angry Mise, which wish your overthrow:
And here, in all their names, and from our King,
A flat defiance to base Frogs I bring.
Wars, Ingentes parturit ira minas
hostile wars, accursed traytrous Frogs,
Here I denounce, and spit within your face.
Damned deceitful wretches from your bogs
We will abolish your detested race:
Then arm your selves, for vengeance we will take
Upon all Frogs for our brave princes sake.
If courage in your crauen hearts does dwell
Meet us in open field: and so farewell.
When he had said these words, as in disdain
Scorning an answer from the Frogs to bear,
Forthwith he posted to the Mise again,
Whose message put the Frogs in mighty fear:
Yet fear breeds wrath, wrath kindles courage more.
That now winds rage which erst were calm before.
The King then rising from his chair of state,
Gravely their valors thus did animate:
Lords, The Oration of the King of Frogs.
Nobles, gallant Frogs, and all the Train,
Which here attend to know our royal will,
Subjects, nay, more then Subjects in our reign,
For we are fellows and compartners still:
Vex not your minds, all clouds do bear no rain,
Nor in proud brags true valor does remain.
These are but words, fit bugs to scarre the crows:
And cowards brags do seldom end with blows.
But if their meaning with their words agree,
Then do they seek to undermine our Crown,
A forged quarrel they impose on me,
That I a proud audacious Mouse should drown:
And under this false color they devise, Accipe Danaum insidias, and crimine
ab uno disc^ omnes.

To cloak the treasons of their enterprise.
Each fool can find a staff to beat a dog.
He must have both his eyes that blinds a Frog.
Heaven and earth to witness I do call,
And all the golden Planets of the sky,
That I attempted not the Mouses fall,
Nor once remember I did see him die:
But this I think, that, playing on the brim,
Seeing the gallant Frogs so bravely swim,
He thought to do the like, and leaped in,
Where he was justly plagued for his sin.
And now these lurking creatures, hungry Mise,
Which scarce dare show their faces in the light,
A crew of greedy vermin, which devise
Nothing but stealth and rapine in the night:
These do unjustly charge me with his death,
Because within our reign he lost his breath:
But I will teach these proud audacious fools,
Not jest with kings, nor meddle with edge-tooles.
Then friends, Si tamen horteris, fortius ibit equus
kind friends, and fellows to your king*
Pluck up your spirits, banish lavish fears;
For in this war, whence terror seems to spring,
Me thinks great joy and comfort still appears,
Since gallant Frogs, whom nothing terrifies,
Fight with a starued troop of hungry Mise.
Courage, brave mates, take weapons, and to fight:
Fortune defends true valor in his right.
But since men may in war sometimes prevail, Vis consilii expers mole ruit
suae.

As much by policy, as power or might,
And that where strength and prowess often fail,
Wit does at length give succor to the right
I wish you arm your selves with spear and shield,
And march along the shore unto the field, A rare policy of the Frogs.

Where, on a hill which ouer-lookes the flood,
We will incampe our selves as in a wood.
When to this place these crauen Mise convey
Their fearful soldiers, like a flock of sheep,
And to besiedge our fortress shall assay,
Where we upon the hill our forces keep:
If any boasting Mouse upon the bank
Dare but ascend one foot before his rank,
Him we will all assail in furious mood,
And cast his body headlong in the flood.
By this rare stratagem and brave devise,
We shall their malice and great pride abate:
Thus shall we conquer corner-creeping Mise,
Which would annoy our peace and quiet state.
And thus, Addidit inualida robur facundia causa.
with trophies and triumphing play,
We will like victors crown our heads with bay.
The^ arm your selves, brave mates, with spear and shield.
God, and great Neptune grant us win the field.
Here did he end, The armor and weapons of the Frogs.
and scarce he made an end,
But all the Frogs, from greatest to the least,
For these ensuing wars their studies bend
To get such weapons as befit them best:
First to their thighs green Malows they do wrap,
Which hang down like a bag or butchers flap.
Beetes, like a cloak, upon their back they don,
Which serves for breast plate and habergion.
A Cockles shell for sallet they prepare,
TO award their heads from blows amid the field:
In their left hands these water-souldiers bare
A leaf of Colewort for a trusty shield,
And in their right (for all parts armed were)
They toss a bulrush for a pike or spear.
Along the shore they march in this array,
Mad with fell rage, yet glad to see this day.
Thus whilst both armies did prepare to fight, A counsel assembled in heaven.

Almighty Jove, eternal, without end,
Inuites the gods into his palace bright,
Whence rattling thunder and bright flames descend:
And pointing with his finger down below,
To them these puissant warriors does he show,
Stout as the Centaures or the Giants great,
Which once assai'd to pull Jove from his seat.
Whom when the gods together did behold, Aspiciunt oculis superi mortalia
justice.

Marching like Pigmie-Braggarts in array,
And sternly shake their spears like champions bold,
As though no terror could their hearts dismay,
They made the court of heaven with laughter ring;
Such pleasure and delight the sight did bring.
Then smiling Jove (deep silence kept a space)
Lift up his voice, and spoke with royal grace:
If Frogs and Mise (quoth he) their patrons have,
Chaste daughter Pallas, Goddess of war.
my Bellona dear,
Tell us which side thou will protect and save,
Shall not the gallant Mise be victors here?
Great store of them within thy temples dwell,
Allured thither by the tempting smell,
Which still amounts from thy sacrifice.
Pallas again did answer in this wise:
Great Lord of heaven and earth, beloved Sire,
If you command, your daughter must obey,
My will subjected is to your desire,
For children cannot fathers hests denay:
Yet force me not, kind father, once to shield
These hunger-starued pirates in the field,
False lurking creatures, greedy theeuish Mise,
Whose teeth pollute my sweet fat sacrifice.
Great are the wrongs and mischiefs I abide, Quaelibet extinctos iniuria
suscitat ignes.

By these detested vermin day and night,
Much they impair my worship and my pride:
And shall I then defend them in this right?
The hallowed oil, which sacred fire does stay
Within my lamps, they steal and lick away:
My Crowns of victory
crowns they gnaw, but these are losses small,
This is the hurt molests me most of all:
My brave ensign embrodered all with gold,
Never brave ensign was so rich of price,
Wherein my acts and triumphs were enrold,
Is eaten, torn, and spoiled by these Mice.
This is my hurt surpassing all the rest,
For this cause chiefly I these Mise detest:
And shall I, father, seem to patronise
My foes, my wrongers, and sworn enemies?
Never these accursed beasts will I defend:
Command ought else, great Jove, but pardon this:
Nor durtie Frogs Bellona will befrend,
Whose joy and pleasure in foul puddles is.
For as I loath the Mise for sundry wrongs:
So I detest base Frogs for croking songs, Hoc illis garrula lingua dedit.

Whose harsh unpleasant voices in the night
Breed naught but terror to each mortal wight.
When I return often sweating from the wars,
And after fainting travel think to sleep,
With their seditious brawles, and croking iarres,
Which in the filthy marshes they keep,
Awake I lie, till mornings trumpeter
Gives warning for the day star to appear,
And cheerful Cock chants forth his wonted lay,
To show the dawning of the joyful day.
Though we are gods, yet let us all beware
To succor in our person either part: In audaces non est audacia tuta.

For if these meet the gods, they will not spare
To strike them with their iauelings to the heart:
But let us rather joy to see this fray,
Where we behold their ruin and decay. Quos oderit quisque perisse cupit.

Thus Pallas said. To whom incontinent
The heavenly Senate gave a full consent.
Mean while both armies mustred on the plain, The battle.

And place their wings and squadrons in array,
From either part a Herald does again
Give sign for battle and the bloody day.
The buzzing Flies, because they were of skill,
A blow aloud their horns and trumpets shrill,
A harsh tantarra sound unto the fight,
Which lends more courage to their wonted might.
Heaven and earth does thunder with the cry,
When front to front these noble armies meet,
Loose wauing in the wind their ensigns fly,
With wounds and fatal blows each other greet.
The Mise assail, the Frogs the fight accept,
In combat close each host to other stepped:
For now the wings had skirmish hot begun,
And with their battles forth like Lions run.
But who was first amid this bloody fight,
That gave the onset first, first wanne renown?
Croaking Hypsiboas, first like a knight,
Lick-taile Lichenor bravely tumbled down,
Into his paunch so strong he thrust his spear,
That forth his back behind it did appear,
Groueling the Mouse fell on the sandy plain,
By this audacious Frog with valor slain.
Next him Troglodytes, which not afraid,
Each secret hole and corner creeps in,
Gave Pelion the Frog, with aurt berayd,
A deadly foil with his small brazen pin:
Within the wound the iaueling sticks sore,
And from the veins forth streams the purple gore.
Thus to his end pale death this Frog did bring,
Which kills the caitife with the crowned king. Tendi^mus huc omnes,

Pot-creeping Embasichytros, of late
Whose valiant son did all the Frogs defy,
Now quite confounded by disastrous fate,
Deuoid of life thy headles truncke does lie
At hardy Seutl^ns his crooked feet,
A Frog which feeds on nothing but the beete.
And clam rous Polyphon there lies thou dead,
Slain by Artophagus which eats bread.
But when Limnocharis their deaths beheld,
Which in the marish has his whole delight,
The angry Frog, by love and ire compeld,
To sad revenge his power and forces dight:
Life must be paid with life, the Frog did cry, Mors morte piandae est.

Their deaths I will revenge, or with them dye.
Thus when true love, and valor guide the heart,
A cowards hand will play a soldiers part.
And from the ground a millstone in great have
He raught: Quaelibet iratis ipse dat arma furor.
strange wonders courage does enact:
And with great violence the same he cast
At proud Troglodites as one distract:
In middle of his neck the stone did light,
Whereby he sleeps in eternal night:
Thus bruised with the fall, this Mouse did lie,
Suffering the torments of deaths tyranny.
Young Lichenor, his son that first was slain,
A gallant Mouse, which did no colors fear,
Desirous, though with death, renown to gain,
That his exploits ensuing times might hear,
Fierce butcher like Limnocharis espide, Est vindicta bonum, vita incu^dius
ipsa.

Whose weapons were with blood in scarlet did:
To whom he said, Fight, coward, or else fly,
Thou or Lichenor here shall surely die.
And with those words, aiming his heart to hit,
Strongly his iaueling at the Frog he threw,
It pearst his side, Ipsa manus fortunaiu.
his breast and bowels split,
His vital spirits from his body flew;
Dead lay Limnocharis upon the plain,
The brauest soldier in the warrie train.
For death impartial does with one self hand,
Cut off the strong and weak at heavens command.
Crambophagus, Eat-Colewort, which of late
Basely his arms and weapons cast away,
Thinking by flight to fly the stroke of fate,
Ran to the water from the mortal fray:
Whom Lichenor more swift then he pursude,
And in his hearts warm blood his spear imbrued:
Upon the shore the dastard Frog was slain,
Ere he could leap into the running maine.
Heroical Limnesus, Fennie Lord,
Incensed by mad rage, black furies brand,
The bold Tyroglyphus slew with the sword,
A great commander in the Mouses band.
Deep holes and hollow caves he used to delue
Among the Cheeses lying on the shelue.
His head the Frog does from his neck advance,
And in great triumph bears it on his lance.
Faint-hearted So called of the herb Calamint.
Calaminthius in great fear,
Little in stature, and of courage small,
Beholding vast Pternoglyphus appear,
A Mouse exceeding great, strong, bourly, tall,
And which in bacon flitches holes does make,
He does his weapons with the field forsake, Pedibus timor addidit alas

And crauen-like fled to the durty bogs,
Even as the fearful Hare pursude with dogs.
But bold Hydrocharis, that loves the flood,
Famous for deeds of arms would never fly,
The furious Mouse this peerless Frog withstood,
Nor would he shun a foot though he should die:
Lately Pternophagon this gallant killed,
Which often with Bacon has his belly filled:
Now with a stone Pternoglyphus he slew,
Whose cloddred brains the crymson field imbrew.
Lichopinax, which first told to the king
The balefull news of his sons tragedy,
At Borborocaetes did his darts still fling:
A valiant Frog, though in the dirt he lie.
Prostrate he fell upon the sandy ground,
The Mouses dart had made a mortal wound:
Whereat pale death sent forth his fainting spright,
To sleep in darkness and eternal night.
When this the Frog Prassophagus beheld,
Eat-Leeke Prassophagus, swift as the Hynde,
He ran with mighty stowre along the field,
And taking Gnissodioctes neat behind, Quam ferus and vere ferreus ille fuit?

From off his feet the little Mouse he flong,
Into the streaming current all along,
Nor there he left him, till with raging mood
He had his foe estrangled in the flood.
Eat-crumme Psicharpax which was near allide
Unto the kings young son that erst was down'd,
In succor of his friends the Frogs defide,
And to the battle made him ready bound,
Durtie Pelusus in the paunch he thrust,
Faintly the Frog sunk down into the dust,
Whose fluttring spirit did her passage make,
Down to It is taken for the entry into hell.
Auernus that unpleasant lake.
Pelobates, which loves to tread the mire,
Saw when his friend and fellow soldier fell,
And adding fuel to the smoking fire,
His fury into burning flames began swell:
For filling both his hands with durtapace,
He cast it fiercely in Psicharpax face,
Which much besmeard his visage with disguise, Hoc virtutis opus

And almost blinded and put out his eyes:
But he the strong Psicharpax moved with spleen,
And justly angry at this beastly wrong,
Took up a mighty stone which there had been
A bound or landmark tweene two neighbors long,
And hurling it with vigor and great power,
He burst his knee asunder in that stower,
The right leg fell dismembered from his thie,
And not once moving on the ground does lie.
Ne there he thought to leave him in sad plight,
But with a iaueling would have reft his life,
Had not Craugasides, that croaking wight,
Whose chiefest pleasure is in brawling strife,
Kept off the blow, and with a sudden push,
Thrust through the Mouse his belly with a rush,
Upon the ground his bowels gushed forth: Mars dubious omnis, quosque ^eges
vnquam posse iacere cadunt.

Thus di'de this martial heart, and Mouse of worth.
Which when Eat-corne Sitophagus espide,
That erst was maimed of two legs in fight,
Washing his wounds along the water side,
And sore amazed at this rufull sight,
He dared not adventure forth again
Into the field, for fear he should be slain:
But leapt into the strong entrenched fort, Stultus, qui cum discedere possit,
pugnat.

Where he received was in joyful sort.
Nethlesse the warlike troops of either band,
Persisted still with courage in the field,
Great store lie slain upon the drenched sand,
Yet not, for thy, a soldier seems to yield:
Now fury roares, ire threats, and woe complains,
One weeps, another cries, he sighs for pains.
The hosts both clad in blood, in dust and mire,
Had changed their cheer, their pride, their rich attire.
Thus whiles the conquest was to neither bent,
But poizd in balance between hope and fear,
Those two which hold the supreme government
Over both the armies which in battle were, The conflict of the two kings

The Kings of Frogs and Mise together meet,
Where they with mortal blows each other greet:
But cowards often faintly step aside,
When manhood is by resolution tried.
For scarce they had encountered in the fight,
And lent some equal strokes on either side,
When king of Mise thinking his foe to smite
Upon the head, his sword to ground did glide,
But yet his foot it wounded when it fell,
Which blow did much his haughty courage quell:
For he which erst was author of this strife,
Now seeks the bogs for safe guard of his life.
The valourous incensed king of Mise,
Seeing the Frogs proud king so basely fly,
Which was of late so resolute and wise,
To vaunt of trophies e're he blows did try,
Calling his soldiers on with cheerful hue,
His fainting weary foe he does pursue,
Still hoping (since his wou^d had made him slow)
To overtake him with a fatal blow.
And but, that neuer-daunted Captain brought,
Captain Prassaus, green as garden-Leeke,
A troop of gallants which nould fly for ought,
To aid the king, his life had been to seek,
Which pressing through the middle of the fray,
Rescude their wounded king which fled away. Ipsa dies quandoque parens,
quandoque ^ouerca.

And with their darts beat back the Mise a space,
Till forth of danger they had rid his grace.
Greatly the Mise were daunted with their blows,
So thick they fell and forcibly were sent,
That they were forced from danger of the throws,
Back to retire and somewhat to relent,
Until their rage and fury were o'repast, Incerti fallax fiducia Martis,

Through want of breath: then they again as fast
The Frogs assail and mightily amate,
As forward erst, now backward to retraite.
Among the squadrons of the Mouses band,
One Mouse there was more gallant then the rest,
A brauer soldier was not in the land,
Nor stouter Captain ever wars professed:
For though stern Mars his manhood list to try,
Mars could not force this daring Mouse to fly:
But when in arms this warrior is yclad,
He rather is of Mars to be ydrad.
This was the son of Artepibulus,
Which does for bread in wait and ambush lie,
Of lofty heart and magnanimious,
A worthy sire to such a progeny,
Whom mighty Meridarpa^ he did call,
That eats the crummes which under table fall:
Was never Mouse which under hean'n does live,
That durst adventure with him for to strive.
Like to a Giant stood this champion bold,
Upon the shore near to the rivers side, Dii precor a ranis omen remouete
sinistru^.

Vaunting his might and prowess, as he would
Have pulled the throne of Jove down in his pride.
And holding up his bourly arms to heaven,
Swore by the Sun, the Moon, and Planets seven,
That e're bright Phoebus lighted from his wayne, Dii prohibete minas, Dii
talem auertite pestem.

One crauen Frog should not alive remain.
For by this hand, quoth he, by this right hand,
(Scarce would a man believe it though he swear)
Though not a Mouse will venture them withstand,
But fly the field for cowardice and fear:
Yet I, behold, I, will so thresh these Frogs,
That with their corses I will fill the bogs:
Or they, or I, by Jove this vow I make,
This night will lodge beyond the A river in hell, over which souls do pass
to all places.
Stygian lake.
And cert's, these words had not been spoke in vain,
He had performed his vow: (though shame to tell)
If that the Father of the heavenly train,
The king of men, and Lord of deepest hell,
Great Jove, had not beheld from starry skies
His dire complots and bloody enterprise,
And taking pity of the Frogs estate,
To Mars and all the rest thus began relate:
Ye Gods, which here behold this dismal day,
And see the slaughters of the cruel fight,
What braggard Mouse is this that bears such sway
Near to the river, vaunting of his might?
How bold he looks, how proud he bears his head,
As though the Frogs lay all before him dead,
Deeply protesting on the parched sand,
Not one poor Frog shall escape his murdring hand.
Divine inhabitants of heaven, behold,
Behold, Miseris miserentur num^ina.
I say, alas, the wretched case,
And great mishap which does poor Frogs enfold,
Now pressed to suffer ruin and disgrace:
Unless you deigne to save them at this hour,
And send in aid some number of your power,
To quel the daring courage of the Mise,
And stop proud Meridarpax enterprise.
If that displease, then let us Pallas send
T'asswage the fury of this cruel fone:
Or thou stern Mars haste thither for to wend,
Yelad in arms of Adamantine stone;
That this fell Meridarpax.
Tiger, greedy of his pray,
E're he annoy the Frogs, may run away.
Here Jove did end: But Mars of visage grim,
Arising from his seat, replide to him:
Beloved Father, Lord of heaven and hell,
To your behest all powers subjected stand,
Which do in heaven or lower regions dwell,
None may or dare deny when you command:
Then think, sweet Father, Mars accounts still
Your word for right, as law your only will.
Kings men command on earth, why should not Jove,
The King of Kings, command the gods above?
Speak but the word, great Mars is always pressed,
At Jove's appoint, in arms to enter field;
And for stout Pallas, at your least request,
I know my sister willingly will yield:
But neither I, Quid Mars ad multitudinem?
though I be god of wars,
Nor Pallas, whose renown does reach the stars,
Now are of force the falling Frogs to stay,
Or them preserve from imminent decay.
No, rather send the gods, send all the power,
That highest heavenly Hierarchies can make,
Or on their heads lightning with thunder shower,
(That all their army may with terror quake)
With which thou slew'st the Giants long agone,
A great Giant, which Jupiter slew with lightning.
Enceladus, and proud Phaeton, he was slain with thunder.
Apolloes son.
Thus ended frowning Mars. To whose behest
Great Jove gave full consent, with all the rest.
And presently ascending up the tower,
Where sulphrous brands, with stony darts of fire,
And all the weapons of his might and power,
Are kept, to plague proud rebels in his ire:
First, there he caused great ghastly flames arise,
And thunderclaps, that seemed to rend the skies,
And still among this hideous roaring sound,
He darted burning bolts the Mise to wound.
Pale fear assailed both the Frogs and Mise,
When first on sudden they the thunder heard, Plus valet humanis viribus ira
Dei.

So great a terror in their minds did rise,
As though with spirits they had been askard:
For who in's breast so stout a heart does bear,
That when heavens thunder, does not quake for fear,
And stand amazed to view with mortal eyes,
When angry Jove darts lightning from these kies?
Nethlesse, although the Mise were much dismayed,
To hear the sound, and see the fearful sight,
Yet left they not the battle as afraid,
But stood with greater courage to the fight.
Certes, Apparet virtus, arguiturque malis.
true valor may recoyle a space,
Yet still her force renues with greater grace.
Fiercer they rage than erst they did before:
Such heaps of Frogs lie slain upon the shore.
When angry Jove beheld with rufull eye,
For all his care, the Frogs still go to wrack,
And see the Mise more desperate hereby,
Scorning his lightnings and harsh thunder-cracke,
He wept to view their slaughter and decay:
And now he thought to try a surer way,
By other means the Frogs from death to shend:
For whom God loves, he favors to the end.
From forth the Cesterne of the Ocean deep,
Whence rivers both their spring and tides renew,
An ugly swarm of filthy monsters creep,
A foul infernal and ill-fauour'd crew,
Which still go backward with a squinting eye, The description of the Crabs.

To see before their footsteps what does lie:
For thus does mother nature always aim,
For each defect a remedy to frame.
Exceeding were their shoulders out of square,
So broad, so great, as irkes my muse to tell:
Their bald blue back withouten skin or hair,
Was all o'rewhelmed with a costiue shell,
As hard as Iron, or the flinty stones.
Their bodies wholly were compact of bones.
Before their ugly face two claws bear sway,
With which they wont to grope and feel their way.
On either side of their deformed breast,
Four crooked legs their grievous burden bear:
Two stern grim lowering eyes by natures hest,
In middle of their belly did appear.
Their griesly crowns seemed cloven into three;
On two whereof like helmets you might see.
So vile a brood of fell misshapen Snakes
Never could be found, but in the infernal lakes.
These monstrous ugly Crabs (for Crabs they were)
Crawling along the spacious continent, Quaslibet, ad poenas, res capit ira
Iouis.

When Jove beheld from out his Palace clear,
Which lies beyond the spangled firmament,
He sent the hel-bred band unto the fray,
To kill the Mise, or make them run away.
The Crabs obeyed, nor take they care for arms;
Their shells will keep them safe from greatest harms.
No sooner were they come unto the fight,
Where warlike Mise their enemies assail,
But all at once the Crabs upon them light,
Asunder break their legs, bite off their tail,
Their iauelings pluck away, and pinch their hands,
Nothing their savage cruelty withstands:
So Tiger-like upon the Mise they pray,
As would perforce the stoutest heart afray.
But when the Mise beheld these monsters rage,
So dire and bloody as does grieve me tell,
Their haughty courage somedeale began assuage, Rara quidem est virtus, qua^ non
fortuna gubernat

Their hearts from wonted resolution fell;
Their arms they throw away, the field forsake,
And to their heels for safeguard them betake:
For if both heaven and hell conspire decay,
No marvel though poor Mise do run away.
Thus by the succor of the Crabs that day,
The Mise were forced to a shameful flight, Pugna suam finem, cum fugit
hostis, habet

The Frogs preserved from imminent decay,
Which else had slept in death and endless night.
And now the welked Phoebus began to rest
His wearied wagon in the scarlet West,
When sullen night prepared her course to run,
Sealed up the battle with the setting Sun.
The conclusion of the Translator.
Lo, in a veil presented to thine eye,
Among more lessons worthy due regard,
Of trifling iarres and foolish enmity,
The ominous success and just reward.
See then from strife and discord thou refrain,
Lest sad repentance breed thy further pain:
For if Hodie sub hominum specie, Cancri causas agunt.
black Crabs do chance to part the fray,
Small is their gain that bear the best away.
Et facit ad mores ars quoque nostra bonos. FINIS.
To his Cousin, Mr. Ambrose Hargroues health.
WHether a secret influence from above,
Or supernatural motion of the mind,
May seem good-liking, and affection move,
Among those men whom kindred has combind*
Or whether nature, Cousin, us inclined,
So highly to esteem affinity,
I cannot easly judge, nor causes find,
Why we so favor consanguinitie:
But cert's the work is from divinity.
And whence this inward motion does arise,
Is for my purpose needless to decide,
Sithence we find it true, whom blood alies,
In league of friendship commonly abide,
And in the band of love are nearer ty'de:
Nethlesse when other cause bear a sway,
To move goodwill, E multis riuulis surgit ingeni aequor.
it cannot be denide,
But then it is more firm, as is the day
Brighter when Phoebus does his beams display.
Yet since first kindred does command as due,
An interchange of amity and love,
Much, I confess, for this I favor you,
In whom the gifts of wit and learning move,
Which more confirm what here I seek to prove:
But that you live old Hargreues only son,
Whose blessed soul rests in the arms of Jove,
And in the bosom of the Holy one;
This has the key of my affection.
This has the greatest intrest in my heart,
And deeper stands infixed in my breast,
Then either kindred, or the gifts of art,
Or what blind Nature does esteem as best:
For though I held him dear, I do protest,
Before his passage from this vale of woe,
Yet now enthroned in everlasting rest, Virtutem amissam quaerimus inuidi.

Much more I love: we seldom fully know
True Virtues worth, till Virtue we forgo.
Gone is the star, whose luster beautifide
Each twinkling light that Northren climats bred,
Yet though that clouds obscure Apollo's pride,
With greater glory soon he shows his head:
So though we think renowned Hargreue dead,
His life eclipsed by the clouds of fate,
No mist or darkness can so ouerspread
His lives true honor, or his praise abate,
But still it shines abroad in fresher state.
What should I think to set his praises forth,
Which far exceeds the compass of my brain?
Too lofty subject for my simple worth,
Nor can I easly reach so high a strain,
Which never tasted that immortal vain,
Flowing with Necter down the sacred hill,
Where those nine virgin- Muses aye remain,
Which learned heads with heavenly fury fill,
And drop arts drearyment into their quill.
Nethlesse, although so many tongues I had,
As A Giant with a hundred hands.
Briareus had hands great Homer says,
In habit of sweet eloquence yclad,
To blazon to the world his virtuous days,
I should but give an Echo to his praise,
And much abridge the volume of his story:
Virtue is best to crown herself with Bays,
And Hargreues worth to register his glory,
Which still suruiues, though life be transitory.
In spite of envy, slander, death and hell,
Hargreue reuiues from prison of the grave; Nunqua^ Stygias fertur ad vmbras
inclyta virtus.

Above the banks of Fame his praises swell,
Since hisssing Serpents sought him to deparue.
When Virtue most in spurned, she grows most brave,
Yet he which in his life was vnreuil'd,
In whom vile Malice could no vantage have,
After his death by slander is defiled:
But Virtues meed has Infamy beguild:
For forth the ashes of foul Obloquie,
Burned with the fiery brands of slaundrous lies, Effugiunt structos nomen
honosque rogos.

This peerless Phoenix, crowned with victory,
Still does renew himself and never dies,
And on the wings of Honor mounts the skies,
Whereas his soul rests in Iehoua's arm,
Scorning the checks of dunghill Scarabies,
And all the bitings of that viprous swarm,
Whose tongues are ever pressed to work his harm.
Cousin, me thinks, the mystery is deep,
That they which Shepherds do in show appear,
Clad in the habit of a simple sheep,
Whom neither pride nor envy comes near,
Should be transformed to an ugly Bear,
And play and Woolfe so fitly in the end, Pascitur in viuis liuor, post fata
quiescit.

As a dead man asunder for to tear,
Whom in their life they never durst offend,
Proving asauage Vulture to their friend.
Yet thus, we see, some Cooks are wont to use
The silly sheep, which whilst he breathes the air,
They never dare adventure to abuse,
Or seek the harmless creature to impair:
But when the bloody Butcher does not spare
Within his throat to sheath the murdring blade,
They straight disioynt his members without care,
And cut and mangle him before them laid,
More cruel then the Butcher by their trade.
Needless it is my meaning to unfold:
Your Eagles eyes will quickly see the Sun;
All that shows fair, Impia sub dulcimelle venena latent.
is not refined gold;
Nor all pure vestals which in cloisters won:
Sometimes a wolf a shepherds weed will don:
And starued Snakes, as Aesope wisely told,
Preserved through pity from destruction,
When fire has freed their joints benumbed with cold,
Will hiss their friend, like Serpents from his hold.
Pardon me, Cousin, though I seem too bold,
T'vnrip the Cankers of a festrea sore,
Too much I grieve to hear him thus controld,
And falsely slaundred by a grunting Bore,
And by a heard of swyne, which erst before,
When famous Hargreue lived, like dogs did flatter:
Yet heaven, I hope, which judgments has in store,
Will first or last reward them for this matter:
And turn the case on shore when tides want water.
Longer I will not agrauate their shame,
Broaching the caske of their vnnat'rall sin:
Well can the world testify the same,
How thanklesse and ungrateful they have bin,
And how injurious still they dealt herein:
But since the world neglects a dead man's wrong,
My Muse, alb'it she be both bare and thin,
Is not afraid, though enuies part be strong,
To let them know th'abuses of their tongue.
But let the wicked band themselves in one,
To work true virtues ruin and decay:
Tread you the path your father erst has gone,
And fear not what the proud can do or say:
For though ambition seem to bear a sway,
And enuies sting procure the just man's smart,
Truth will advance her cause as clear as day,
And turn the scandale of detractions dart,
Upon themselves, with shame and grief of heart.
Well could you beat (I know) the billows back,
Which seek t'o'rewhelme the Bark of Hargreues name:
But never tempest can his vessel crack,
Since Virtue serves as Anchor to his fame:
Deigne therefore, Cousin, to protect from blame
This simple work, that like as Hargreues friend
Stands in the front to patronize the same;
So Hargreues son in fine will it defend,
Lest Curres do bite behind what I have pend.
FINIS.

