A Sermon of Obedience, Especially unto Authority Ecclesiastical, wherein the
principal controversies of our Church are handled, and many of their
Objections which are refractorie to the government established, answered,
though briefly as time and place could permit: Being preached at a Visitation
of the right Worshipful M.D. Hinton, in Couentry.

By FRAN: HOLYOKE.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

Mr. F. H. I have perused your sermon; for the plainenes of words and sentences
like your self, who naturally are an enemy to curiosity. For matter sound, and
the doctrine necessary, both for the time, and especially for that place. I
know what tumultuous rumors it bred; and how it was by many more hainously
taken then either heresy or treason: how they traduced you and imagined what
evil they could against you, as both many in that City and the whole Country
about can well witness. And yet as you said you knew no cause why, unless it
were for that one voice which you urged among them to wit Obedience, a word
indeed harsh sounding in the ears of humorists, and especially to them in that
place, who challenge (...) by prescription. And howsoever me thought, you
touched them more near the quick, the last time you preached there before,
which was at the last Visitation of the late reverend Bishop deceased, yet this
was more hainously taken; for they say that none but you, ever durst presume so
much in that place being a stranger, to preach a doctrine which before hand you
knew would be so offensive; and where as ignorance of their humors at first
might be some excuse, yet this now must needs be great presumption. If the
whole City should be governed by men of that faction, there would be an odd
government. As appeared a year or two since, when some of them were in
special authority: one of them pulled down the picture of Christ from the
market cross, as a monument of superstition, having been there many many
hundred years; and placed in the rome the picture of an naked woman without
superstition, til many of the grave ancients of the City seeing the absurdity;
caused it to be taken down and the Princes arms to be set in place. Another
broke in pieces and defaced the picture of a dove which had hung over the font,
time out of mind. No marvel therefore if that sort of giddie heads would have
pulled you out of the pulpit, as since some of them have professed, they had
purposed. That it may appear unto all men what this sermon was, that raised
such anger, I have published it not altogether against your mind, that it
might answer for it self. And knowing that you owe even more then your self
to that worthy Gentleman your Patron, I have prefixed his name by way of
Dedication; without other epistle, for I know if you were to write unto him
your self, you could neither express your hearty affection toward him, his
deserts toward you, nor his worthiness, as well for the execution of justice
in his place, as for his uprightness every way, for his settled judgment in
religion and his integrity of practice, giving himself an example of obedience
in all things. God bless your studies that you may profit Gods Church and
present him your self with greater matters hereafter.

Those few things which you add in the end, which you told me you could not
then deliver for want of time; I have marked them with this mark,, in the
margent that no caveller may find show to except that this is not the same
which you delivered.

Your very loving friend I.D.H.

A SERMON OF OBEDIENCE.
HEB. 13.17. Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves
for they watch for your souls as they that must give accounts, that they may
do it with joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.


I Will not now spend time to discuss who was the writer of this epistle, which
is confessed almost of all to be canonical. For as St. Gregory upon Job
says it is to no purpose to search and enquire who is the writer of that
book, of which we acknowledge the holy Ghost to be the author.

This 13. Chapter contains in it many exhortations to the performance of the
duties of the second table concerning our love to our neighbor. And in this
17, verse is a special exhortation to honor and obey our superiors, which is
the first and principal commandment of the second table, having this
prerogative to be the first commandment with promise. For the words (...) are
taken by some to be civil magistrates, of others, to be Ecclesiastical
governors. The word (as the great greek Etymologist does expound it) (...) one
that is chief of a tribe, society or company, who excels in wealth, and for
that cause is selected and chosen above the rest to rule over others. But the
hebrew text has (...) your teachers and instructers. And therefore howsoever
it may include the temporal governors, yet is it chiefly and primarily to be
understood of spiritual. For the hebrew by the judgment of diverse grave
autors, is the true vernacle and authentic copy of this epistle. And where
it follows: For they watch for your souls; does more properly belong to the
ecclesiastical then civil governors. The word (...) has two significations
to give ear, or be persuaded unto, and to obey. (...) Zenop. verbis
persuadeor, to be persuaded by words, and (...) legi obsequens, Plato, to be
obedient to laws. So the hebrew word here used (...) is both to give ear, and
to obey; as they that are but meanly read in the hebrew do easily know. The
word (...) signifies, to yield unto or submit your selves unto, or be ruled
by. (...) Iliad. a. Si tibi omni in re morem geram. and Eurip (...), nil dans
loci senectuti. The hebrew has (...) humble your selves under their hands,
submit your selves unto them, yield unto the^. As if the Apostle should say,
harke^ diligently unto the voice of your teachers, follow their instructions
and admonitions, obey the commandments constitutions and ordinances, of them
or other your governors, and if you chance to be disobedient in some things,
show not your selves stubborn or obstinate, but submit your selves unto them,
and suppose they be (...), rigidi morosi austere, severe or otherwise faulty,
bear with the^ and submit your selves to their authority as unto Gods
substitutes. This being the sum and meaning. The parts are two, First an
exhortation or rather a commandment unto inferiors, to be obedient unto those
that be in authority over them, to instruct and govern them. Secondly
reasons to enforce obedience unto this commandment, The first reason is drawn
from the office and dignity of the person unto whom obedience is to be
given, they are such overseers as watch for your souls, as they that must be
ready to give an account, the second ab honesto, it were great ingratitude by
our disobedience to move them to perform this charge with grief of mind, and
not rather with joy and comfort. The third from the effect; for this in the end
will be unprofitable for you, the worst will be yours. Of these in order as they
lie.

But first before I come to handle the particulers, let this one thing not
impertinently be remembered in the general. That God has made a difference of
degrees amongst his people, even from the beginning, and still does and must
continue amongst Christians under the Gospel. where there has been and
always and now is, superiors and inferiors, some to rule and some to be ruled.
And this appears in the very frame of nature; for in the order of the
universal, all creatures are subordinate unto their superiors until they come
to the highest supreme power. Among the elements the earth is under the water,
the water the air, the air the element of fire, and that to the orb of the
moon, and every planet with their orbs one under another, and all the
celestial bodies differ one from another in glory and dignity, which order,
the superior bodies by their influences, and the elements by their alterations,
do not only bring perfection unto the whole but is the preservation of the
whole. So in the heavenly company and Church, there are Archangels, Angels,
principalities, powers, dominions, thrones, cherubins and seraphins. S. Hierom
in his second book against Iovinian proves both out of diverse places of the
Gospel, and out of many places of the old Testament this point at large and how
that in heaven there shall be differences of the degrees of glory. And out of
the epistles of S. Paul in the similitude of the members of a man's body, some
parts are more honorable then other there is the head above the foot, the eye
more honorable the^ the leg, etc. For, says he, some members are so
necessary as we cannot live without them, others such as though they be cut
off and we maimed, yet may we continue life. And the Philosopher to prove this
principle from the ground of nature, shows; that the man is by nature made to
govern the woman, the wise, the noble and the mighty, to govern the foolish,
the ignorant, the base and the weak, the father the children, and the master
the servants. Now take away this order, and the frame of nature would go to
ruin, to the former confused chaos, take away this order, and humane society
cannot be maintained, nay without this the communion of Saints cannot be
maintained. Against the Anabaptists and familists who would ha^ue all men
equal and all things in common. Yet Christ bid give to Caesar those things
which were Caesar's, and S. Paul bids every soul to be subject to the higher
powers for there is no power but of God, and he calls them Gods Ministers,
and yet at that time there was no christian magistrate. This being granted, yet
here some make question, whether there be any superiority or inferioritie
amongst the ministers of the Gospel, and whether there be subjection and
obedience due to be given of the one to the other. In the Apostles time it is
plain there were Prophets, and Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, Priests or Elders,
Deacons, Bishops, Evangelists, (...) and diverse others. In the ages succeeding
the Apostles, the general consent of al antiquity and the Churches of God
eastern and weasterne in all ages hitherto have kept a difference of degrees
in the Church, some besides laboring in the word of God to rule and govern,
and others that also labor in the word and are subject and to be governed by
others. S. Hierom, in his second book against Jouinian, proves that both in
the Gospel as well as in the law it is has and must be so, for says he, Yet
perhaps S. Hieron, ha^dle^^ this point more sparing because he should have
been elected Bishop of Rome, and by reason of his a mulators had the repulse.
sine causa est diuersitas nominum si non sit diuersitas meritoru^. And in his
commentary upon the 19. Chapter of Esaias, he makes mention of five orders in
the Church, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Believers, and those that were yet
catechized, and not admitted to the participation of the sacraments. In his
epistle ad Rusticum Monachum he says, singuli ecclesiarum Episcopi, singuli
archipresbyteri, singuli archidiaconi, and omnis ordo ecclesiasticus suis
rectoribus nititur; mentioning Bishops, and Priests that had also authority of
governing, and Archdeacons. But in his comment on the 6. of Hiemie, he says
that Bishops Priests and every Ecclesiastical order ought to feed the flock of
Christ; and in this dispe^sation there is no difference, but as it pleases God
to give diversity of gifts, and blessing to the outward means by the inward
working of the spirit. And further in his commentary upon the epistle of S.
Paul to Titus, he shows that the occasion of the difference in authority of
Priests, or Elders, and Bishops, was by reason of scismes and heresies, which
even in the Apostles time then began to rise: which might seem to have been
an ordinance then in force. In another place he says that unless this order
were, we should have as many ministers, so many scismes. In all S. Augustines
works and all the fathers before him, they all mention a difference between
Presbyterum and Episcopum both in authority and dignity. Bucer in his book de
animarum cura officioque ecclesiastici pastoris. V. etiam S. Hier. in ep stola
Eua^rio cum annotationibus Erasmi.
p. 280. excus. Basiliae. anno. 77. commenteth thus upon S. Hierom: It is not
credible that this parity between Episcopum and Presbyterum continued long in
any one Church, neither was it generally at any time observed in all Churches,
for even from the times of the Apostles, some one Priest or elder was chosen
amongst the rest, which should be in authority above the rest; as a guide and
governor to rule all the rest, as he proves out of Act. 15. that S. James was
Bishop of Jerusalem, etc. And that this ordination of Bishops was perpetually
observed in all Churches, may be gathered by all ecclesiastical histories and
ancient fathers as Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius etc. The necessity
hereof he amplifieth with reasons unanswerable. To this same purpose read the
Kings Majesty's Apology p. 45. 46 at full. And in all the ecumenical counsels
and provincial Synodes which were from time to time kept for the maintenance
of unity and repressing of heresy; Who were there to discuss, determine and
order matters in controversy, to set down the confession of faith for unity,
to make ordinances and constitutions whereunto ministers and people were
subject, were they inferior ministers or Bishops? In all this time there was no
question, whether the Church ought to be governed by Bishops and other
ministers of inferior authority and yet superior to others. If amongst us this
order of government were not, both ministers and ministry would grow into
contempt, and such anarchie here would be the overthrow of the Gospel and
Church of God amongst us. Thus much for the general.

Now to speak of the particular obedience, which consists in two things:
first in the obedience to the word of God preached, by him that watches for
the soul. Secondly, of yielding obedience unto the authority of such
ministers, as are in pre-eminence, as also in obeying their laws,
constitutions and ordinances. And first touching obedience unto the word, where
we are to consider, that unless we reverence the man that preaches the word,
at least for his calling and office sake, the word preached by him shall be to
small effect. Which Saint Paul knew well when (1 Cor. 4.1.) he says let a man
esteem of us as the ministers of God, and dispensers of his mysteries. And
Gal. 4.14.15. he glories, that the Galatians received him as an Angel, yea as
Christ himself, and that their love to him was such, that if it had been
possible they would have pulled out their very eyes to have done him good; and
this their respect of him was a glory and renown unto them. Our Savior Christ
complains, that the base esteem that his countrymen had of him was the
occasion why he preached little, wroght few miracles, and his coming was so
little availeable to them. This made S. Paul so careful to right his
reputation against the practices of the false apostles, who in many places
stands much both in proving the authority of his Apostleship, and also in
exalting of his gifts, and declaring the integrity of his conversatio^.

Christ to teach the honor due unto his ministers, puts upon them his person
and says (Mat. 10) that the entertainment and respect given unto them, he
accounts done unto himself. We read that the Prophets were sometimes called
me^ of God, sometimes Prophets of the Lord, and even Kings called them fathers.
2. King. 6.21. In like manner S. Paul in diverse places calls his auditors his
sons and himself their father, showing that as he loved them as his
natural sons, so ought they much more to honor him as their father. Hieron.
ad Nepotianum esto subiectus Pontifici tuo and tanquam animae parentem suspice.
In the Revelation ministers are called Angels, a high title of honor. 1: Tim.
5.17: The Apostle teaches that those elders that rule well are worthy of
double honor, the meanest then are worthy of honor, because they are more the^
themselves, they are the Ambassadors of Christ. 2. Cor. 1.14. pro Christo
legatione fungimur. Now do but consider this, the place and person they do
sustain, that Gods authority does shine in the^ emineently, and we shall easily
conclude, that to deny the^ the honor and respect due unto their office and
place, is to clip Gods coin, is treason against God himself. In the 5.
commandment, the yielding of a due honor has the promise of a blessed long
life, Vid. Bueer in lib. de ordinatione ministrorum ecclesia circa initium.
the contrary must needs procure a wretched life and a cursed death, in the 2
King: 2.24: verse. when certain children mocked Elizeus, God cursed them, and
sent a she bear out of a wood adioining which devoured 42 of them. Therefore
seeing we honor our lawier that watches for our goods, and our Physician for
the health of our bodies, much more ought their feet seem beautiful unto us,
that watch for our souls, that bring us the glad tidings of salvation.

The consideration of this will manifest unto us the wicked frowardnes of such,
as without all fear of God or respect of common civilitie (howsoever they will
seem to do it in zeal of religion) will speak evil of the^ that are in
authority, and especially of the ministers from the highest to the lowest,
they will bespurtle al with one blot or other though they be never so sober,
learned, reverend, godly or grave, yet al must be either false prophets,
antichristian prelates, timeservers, idle or evil persons, yea though they
preach often, if they preach not twice on the sunday, they must be damned
creatures, dumb dogs, and what not if they be not of their humor: for to
frame lies, to raise slanders, to backbite or any ways to impeach, any that
are conformable to the government of the Church, they account it religion, and
he the most forward, that herein shows himself most impudent: And this is so
common a vice annexed to the inbred-pride of faction, that few of them that are
refractorie to the government established, are free from: but Saint James tells
them, they seem to themselves to be religeous but their ill governed tongue
shows their religion is vain.

Another sort there are, that esteem basely of all ministers, as they be
ministers; who though their wickedness and contempt of God be herein far
greater, the^ the other; yet are they herein the less dangerous, because they
mask not in the cloak of religion, but manifest their profane hearts to all
men, yet it were meet that such gross contempt should not escape unpunished.

But the former sort object and say, they give honor to the ministry and the
ministers, though they esteem of some and not of others, I should say, more
then others; they only deny it to them that are not lawful ministers, which
have not a lawful outward calling, or want the inward calling which is gifts,
aptness to teach.

For the lawfulnes of the outward calling of our ministers, it was not called
into question either by Bucer, Pet. Martyr, or any of our worthy champions at
the time of the restoring of the Gospel, nor ever since, by any godly learned,
nor by any other protestant Church: amongst all which, the glory of our Church
shines in brightness as the moon amongst the stars; yet if there be any
that herein make scruple let him read S. Augustine and other learned and
ancient fathers against the Donatists, which serves for full confutation of the
same sect renewed in our days under other names.

To the second objection, that the minister happily is not (...) apt to teach,
and therefore no lawful minister, nor worthy of the honor of a minister. We
wish with Moses and I would to God that all our ministers in England, were good
preachers, yet we know that in all ages, there have been some ministers in
the Church, who could preach and for sloth would not, and some others that for
want of gifts could not, and yet were ever held for lawful ministers.

In the establishing of the Gospel after the abolishing of Popery, there was
not a sufficient number of preachers, and therefore there were many godly men,
chosen by godly Bishops and Martyrs, into the ministry, that should read the
Scriptures and prayers of the Church, catechize according to a form
prescribed, read homilies, administer the sacraments, and have the help of
preachers monthly or quarterly, or as often as they could be had. And since
then, there are very many places, where the stipend is not sufficient to
maintain a preacher, and are of necessity served with an unpreaching minister;
And yet we doubt not, but the people under them, may perform acceptable
service to God, in hearing reverently the word read, in ioining with him in
public prayers of the Church, giving diligent care to the homilies and sermons
which he reads, receives the sacraments, and hear sermons so often as they
can have them, and be in as good state of salvation, as some people, that have
diverse sermons made by extempory men, which stand upon the present assistance
of the spirit, dabitur in illa hora, and preach their own idle humors. S.
August. lib. 4. cap. 8. de doctrina christiana. shows, that there were in the
Church in his time, some ministers which had not the gift of preaching, of
whom he made no question but that they were lawful ministers, and he
approves their reading of homilies or pronouncing of other men's sermons to the
better edifying and instructing of their people. These are his words. Sunt sane
quidam, qui been pronunciare possunt, quid autem pronuncient excogitare non
possunt; quod si ab alijs sumant eloquenter sapienterque conscriptum,
memoriaeque commendent atque ad populum proferant, si eam personam gerunt, non
improbe faciunt. And by your leave, a great part of our curious preachers,
which envy so much against reading of homilies, and cannot endure that a
learned man should use the help of his own notes in the pulpit, (because they
themselves can preach little worth noting) which will seem to preach all out
of the Bible and their own meditations, yet will they preach other men's
sermons, printed and written, and study little else; and howsoever they know
themselves to be unlearned, yet do they account of themselves, and will be
accounted more then ordinary preachers. I would have them to deny ministers
that have not the gifts to make a sufficient sermon themselves, to be lawful
ministers, and then we should have a great many of their preachers in the same
state. Let it be proved that aptness to make and preach sermons of themselves
is the form and essence of a minister, which cannot be gathered out of St.
Paul, though questionless it is the principal quality in any minister.
Again if such shall be denied to be ministers (the congregations under them may
as well be denied to be visible members of the Church of God) then must the
sacraments administered by them, be denied to be sacraments, but so does no
protestant Church esteem of our ministers and congregations, nor any of any
sound judgment: S. Augustine Contra Parmentanum Donatistam, and contra
Cresconium grammaticu^ and contra Petilianum, shows, that the dignity of the
sacraments depends not of the worthiness of the minister, because the
sacraments are Christ's, and whosoever the minister be that baptiseth with
water, it is he that baptiseth with the holy Ghost. To conclude this point the
honor due unto a minister, Understanding that this doctrine touching the
reading of homilies by such as are not of sufficient ability to frame sermons,
was offensiuely taken as false and erronius. Let such offensive men know, that
herein I said nothing, but that which M. Bucer in his censure upon our book of
common prayer has written for the substance in his 7 chapter whither I refer
the equal reader espec. As for the carpets let them now bite him, who^ after
many years buried, was burned for despite borne unto his doct. (...)
is not to be denied unto him, that has not gifts of himself sufficient to
make sermons, seeing that this notwithstanding, he cannot be denied to be a
lawful minister, howsoever those that have greater gifts are worthy of double
honor.

Yet herein the slacknesse of some of the governors of our Church cannot be
excused, for there are many, that if they were urged and inioined, have
sufficiency both of learning and utterance, but their carelessness and idleness
is such, that unless they be compelled they will take no pains. There are
others that with good directio^s and helps of their able neighboring
ministers, would in short time be brought unto a reasonable sufficiency in
preaching; as I have known the experience of many in diverse places. Now for
the rest, which are not able of themselves to frame sermons, they might be
enioined to the catechizing which is appointed by authority, and to read
homilies which are set forth and enioined, and to procure their weekly or
monthly sermons at the least, according to the injunctions and Canons. And
seeing it has been a fault of some particular governors (and not the fault of
the government, which commands the contrary) to ordain such insufficient
men, in places where sufficient main tena^ce is for able preachers, it were to
be wished that for the time to come, they would admit none into such places but
preachers. And this evil was wisely foreseen and thought very necessary to be
redressed, when as by our ecclesiastical laws they ought to be graduats and
of a good age, and and not mere grammar scholars, nor youths, which are to be
admitted into the ministry. Moreover our governors of our Churches should do
a good and necessary service, to take a sure survey of those that are preachers
what their sufficiency is, for many out of their presumptious pride, or to
avoid the name of a no^preacher, though they have no learning nor any competent
understanding in the scriptures, will take upon them to preach very often, yea
some of them twice or thrice a week, and God knows, know not how nor what
they preach, to the great dishonor of God and reproach of preachers, bringing
the preaching of the word in contempt, and to be iested at. These unpreaching
preachers do more harm in the Church and more hinder the obedience unto the
Gospel, then any one thing, these ought to be forbidden to preach till they
be better instructed. Lastly, seeing the calling of ministers is to be
reverenced; they are to admonish the ministers, generally and particularly,
that by their piety, integrity, diligence and charity, they would force men
to yield that reverence and obedience as they are bound unto and as becomes
them.

Now for the reverence and obedience unto the word of God preached by the
minister. For as the reverent esteem of the ministry and ministers, is a
great cause that the people receive the word of God with more alacrity and to
their greater profit: So the message which they bring. i. the word of God,
adds authority and honor to the minister, and causes obedience to be yielded
unto it. For unless we be persuaded, that they are Gods ministers, and that the
word which they deliver, is Gods word, we shall neither profit by it, nor
yield obedience unto it, nay it will be a favor of death unto death unto us,
when we shall be guilty of taking Gods name in vain, and refuse the word of
reconciliation and means of salvation offered. S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
reioiceth that the Thessalonians received the word preached, not as the word of
man, but as it is indeed the word of God. and 2. Cor. 4.7. we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the virtue thereof might be
of God and not of ourselves. And this is not only in the Prophets and Apostles
who were extraordinary men directed in special manner by the holy Ghost; but
of all ordinary ministers in the Church, that so long as they speak the truth
of God according to the Scriptures, and draw sound instruction thence, and
apply it to our use, this word so preached, is to be esteemed as the word of
God, and so to be reverenced and obeyed. And they that shall otherwise esteem
of it, shall be guilty of taking Gods name in vain. For in old time God revealed
his will, by dreams, visions and sometimes by his own voice from heaven, yet
after he had ordained an ordinary ministry, he made known his will unto the
people by them. In the 20. of Exodus ver. 19. After the law was delivered with
thunder and lightnings and the noyze of trumpets, and the smoking of the
mountain, the people were sore affraide, and made request unto Moses, that
they might not hear God speak, but that Moses might be for the^ to God, and
deliver Gods will to them. In this ordinance of God, that his Ministers should
declare his will unto the people; first he declares his good will toward us,
when he takes out of men them that shall do his message in the world, that
shall be interpreters of his secret will, that shall represent his own person.
And so by experience he proves, that it is not vain that commonly he calls
us his temples, when out of the mouths of men as out of his sanctuary he
gives answers to men. Secondly, this is the best and most profitable exercise
to humility, when he accustometh us to obey his word, howsoever it be preached
by men like unto us, yea sometimes our inferiors in dignity. Thirdly, there was
nothing fitter for the cherishing of mutual charity then that men should be
bound together with this bond, when one is made pastor to teach the rest, and
the people are commanded to be scholars of the same school, to receive all
one doctrine at one mouth. These points Calvin handles so largely and so
pithily that I refer them that would be farther satisfied, unto his fourth
book of Institutions and third chapter.

But here arise two maine doubts, the one touching the doctrine, the second
touching the life of the Minister. First as concerning the doctrine; it seems
that here is great danger, if we shall take all for true Prophets, and all that
is delivered for Gods word. For we read 1. King. 18.26. and 1. King. 22.6. and
many other places, that their were false prophets, and therefore Deuteronomy.
18.20.21. the Lord is feign to teach them how, to know the true Prophet from
the false, whether they speak his word or their own.

Touching Prophets their calling was immediate and extraordinary, there was no
such question of Levits or Priests.











Thirdly, to try the ministers humility, whether he will acknowledge his error
when he is convinced, and reform it, as S. Augustine de catechizandis rudibus
declares. Quod si humanae infirmitatis intentio, etiam ab ipsa rerum veritate
errauer it, ne forte accidat vt hinc offendatur auditor. Non aliunde nobis
debet videri accidisse, nisi quia Deus experiri nos voluit, vtrum cum mentis
placiditate corrigamur; ne in defensione nostri erroris, maiori praecipitemur
errori. Fourthly to teach the minister not to trust to his wit or present
faculty, but by study, reading, meditation and prayer prepare himself.



lib. 2. de doctrina christiana cap. 40. says of this point: Philosophietiam
qui vocantur, si qua forte vera and fidei nostrae accommoda dixerunt, non solum
formidanda non sunt, sed ab ijs etiam tanquam iniustis possessoribus in vsum
nostrum ve^dicanda etc. The heathen Philosophers (says he) those things which
they have spoken truly, and agreeable to our faith, we ought to be so far of
from being afraid of it, as that we are to challenge it from them as from
unjust possessors to our own use, as the Israelites did the vessels, jewels
and raiment, which they borrowed from the Egyptians etc. To the same purpose
S. Hierom. Vid etiam S. Hieron Tom. 2 page 326 Basu-edit. epist magno oratori
Romano hanc quaest. copiose disputante
And now to conclude this point also. If thou suspect that thou hear the
preacher preach that which is neither the word of God nor agreeable unto it,
carry the point to be discussed by some ministers that be in authority (if he
himself do not satisfy thee) and let the spirit of the Prophets be subject
unto the Prophets, and if it prove to be an error, he may either confess his
fault and renounce his error, or else til such time be restrained. In the mean
time, unless thou can prove by this means, the doctrine delivered false,
thou art bound to reverence it, to receive it, and to obey it, as the word of
God.



The Scribes and Pharesies sit in Moses chair, all things therefore which they
shall command you to observe, observe and do ye, but according to their works
do ye not, for they say and do not. S. Augustine in his 46. tract upon S. John
writes thus, Habet ovile domini praepositos, and filios, and mercenarios. Sed
and mercenarij etiam necessarij sunt: multi quippe in ecclesia commoda terren a
sectantes, Christum tamen praedicant, and per eos vox Christi auditur, and
sequuntur oves non mercenarium, sed vocem pastoris per mercenarium. Sede^do
enim cathedra^ Mosi, legem Dei docent, ergo per illos Deus docet, etc. The
sheepfold of Christ has set over it, sons and hirelings. And yet the
hirelings also are necessary, for there are many in the church, which follow
after worldly commodities and yet preach Christ, and by them is the voice of
Christ heard; and the sheep follow not the hireling but the voice of the
shepherd by the hireling, for sitting in Moses chair, they teach the law of
God, therefore by them God teaches. And he alleges S. Paul Phil. 1.15. so^e
preach Christ of envy and contention, and some of a willing mind, some of
despite, thinking to add affliction to his bonds, but howsoever, he was glad
that Christ was preached, and Phil 2.21. etc. multis itaque prosunt dicendo
quae non faciunt, sed long pluribus prodessent faciendo quae dicunt, they do
much good unto many in saying that which they do not, but much more should they
do by doing that which they say. And in his second book contra Cresconium
Grammaticum, he answers an objection made by the Donatists out of the 50.
Psalm. What have thou to do to preach my laws, etc. He expounds it thus,
frustra hoc fit quantum ad te attinet, non tibi prodest, hoc tibi ad iudicium
damnationis non ad meritum salutis valebit. In vain thou do it as
concerning thy self, this shall avail thee nothing, this shall not be any
means to save thee, but to condemn thee: but they that shall hear the word
at such a man's mouth, believe it and obey it, though he be damned, yet they
shall be saved, because they followed the counsel of our Savior Christ Mat.
23. that which they say do, but after their works do not, etc.



S. Augustine contra epist. Parmeniani lib. 2. cap. 11. Carnales homines non
posse spiritales filios procreare. Ioh. 3. quod natum est ex carne caro est,
quod natum ex spiritu spiritus est. Carnal men cannot beget spiritual
children, because the Evangelist says, that which is borne of the flesh is
fleshly. Quasi nos dicamus per seipsum quemlibet hominem spiritales filios
generare, and non pro Evangelium in cuius praedicatione spiritus sanctus
operatur. 1. Cor. 4. ego vos genui per Euangelium, Euangelium autem fur quoque
Judas sine detrimento fidelium praedicauit. As if so be we may say, that any
man of himself can beget spiritual children, and not by the Gospel, in the
preaching whereof the holy Ghost works. As S. Paul says 1. Cor. 4. I have
begotten you by the Gospel, and the thief Judas preached the Gospel, without
any detriment to the faithful.

By this that has been said in answer unto the second objection, here arises
this conclusion. That evil and wicked men, being ministers of the Gospel, are
to be heard. 2. That the word of God preached by them is to be received and
obeyed as Gods word, and may be profitable to our salvation. 3. That they
notwithstanding are to be reverenced for the calling and place sake. And thus
much for the first branch of obedience in hearing.

Now for obedience unto ecclesiastical laws and constitutions. D. H. Zanchie,
shows, how that many not knowing the difference between humane traditions
and ecclesiastical constitutions, brand them both with one black mark. The
necessity of these he proves at large by unanswerable arguments, to be such,
as without the which, concord peace and unity, order nor decency can be
observed, nor the Church of God consist or be, nor any public worship of God
be preserved and maintained. Yet the necessity of these or those in
particular, is not such as that they are accounted necessary to salvation, or
that of themselves they bind the conscience with a religious observation of
them. So in the preface to the book of common prayer, where reasons are given
of the abolishing of some ceremonies and the retaining of others, is declared
the self same thing, and that many of these in our Church, may upon just
causes, which the Church and state shall think good, be changed or altered,
and therefore are not held equal in authority to the word of God. And we know
there is as great diversity in the minds of men, as is in their visages, and
therefore if some orders should not be set down, but that every man should be
left to his own liberty, we should have so many several congregations, so many
diverse religions. We see the variety of opinions touching the gesture in
receiving the communion, though there be order set down for the receiving of
it kneeling. Some hold it unlawful to kneel, and deem that to receive
standing is the best way, as here in this place. Others condemn kneeling as
Popish and idolatrous, and hold standing as Jewish as the other Popish, and
therefore say that Christ's example in this must be unto us a law and rule
from which we may not vary: he received it sitting, and therefore any other
gesture unlawful. Thus we see, if in this and other things, every man were
left to his own liberty, what an endless work there would be, there would be
concord in nothing but in diversities and disagreements. The use and end of
these rites (as D. Zanchie says) are first that they may procure a reverence
unto the holy things; and that by such helps we may be stirred up unto
godliness, and by a straight hand be led unto Christ. The second end, That
modesty and gravity, which in all other actions ought to be regarded, may
herein chiefly appear. Afterward he proves that ecclesiastical traditions
and constitutions, are not merely humane but divine, good, true, holy, and
pleasing to God, because they are ordinances of the church, which is guided by
the spirit of God which is truth. For the particulers they are partly humane,
and partly divine; divine because they are a part of that order and decorum,
that God has commanded in general, leaving the particulers to the discretion
of the church to be framed according to the general rule.

Now as there must of necessity be a uniform order in these things
prescribed: so also is it no less necessary to see uniformity in the
observance of these orders. For they are made to mainetaine and preserve unity,
and therefore generally to be observed in those places where they are
established. And if any inferior governors in the church (who are to see
uniform orders to be observed) will see some observed and some others wilfully
to be broken: It were in my opinion much better for them to be means unto
superior authority, that those orders which they think unfit were altered; then
that this liberty of diversity should be given, which breeds so great
scandals. For I know by manifold experience, the danger that this diversity of
observing orders brings. Some poor souls have and do stand amazed, whilst
they see in one parish one form of prayers and administering the sacraments,
and another in the next parish. They think these are diverse religions and
doubt what they may follow. Hereupon it comes to pass that some fall to
Popery, some to Atheism, and some to other heresies and schisms. These
inconveniences were wisely foreseen, in the establishing of an act in
Parliament for uniformity. And if political laws of heathen princes, be to be
observed for conscience sake (so that they enioine not disobedience to God)
much more these that are for mainetenance of concord, order and decency in the
worship of God. Aug. epist. 166. Hoc iubent imperatores quod iubet and
Christus, quia cum bonum iubent, per illos non iubet nisi Christus. That which
kings command, that Christ commands, because when as they command that
which is good, Christ commands by them.



de sacris vestibus) Touching the lawfulnes of these matters which are now made
question of by diverse, writes his censure at large upon our book of common
prayer liturgy and ceremonies. Now he says, that when first he came into this
land, he made doubt whether he might join with our church as with a church of
God, things were so far out of order; but when he looked more seriously into
the matter, he found that the fault was in the manners of the men and for want
of the execution of the wholesome orders prescribed, and not in the laws and
ordinances prescribed themselves: after he doubts not to avouch that
touching our laws, Bucer subscribeth to our book of common prayer.
orders and discipline established, he found not any thing, that was not either
directly, or by necessary consequence, drawn out of the word of God, howsoever
he wished that some things that troubled the consciences of some men, were
removed, for their sakes that took offense; which he shows in particular.
Peter Martyr in his Epistles seems to be of the same judgment.











Christ paid tribute Mat. 17.27. which he was not bound unto seeing he was
free: yet nevertheless he did it for avoiding offense. Now these men in
seeking to shun offense of I know not whom they imagine, will run headlong into
the wilful offense of the church and whole state, and rashly break the concord
and unity of the Church. This is to streine at a Gnat and swallow a Cammell. S.
Augustine writes at large most divinely on this point. Epist. 118. ad
Ianuarium. Those things, says he, which we observe not by written authority,
but by tradition, which are observed throughout the whole world, we must
understand, that they are commanded and appointed by the Apostles themselves,
or else are decreed in lawful councels whose authority in the Church is most
wholesome and holy. As that the passion, resurrection, and ascension of our
Savior Christ, the coming of the holy Ghost, are celebrated and solemnized
yearly, and whatsoever such like is observed of the whole church generally.
There are others which are different in several places and countries, as that
some fast on the satterdaies, and some do not, some receive the communion every
day, some satterdaies and sondaies only, some on sondaies only, and some at set
times. Totu^ hoc genus habet liberas observationes, nec est disciplina ulla in
his rebus melior gravi prudentique viro, quam ut eo modo agat, quo agere
viderit ecclesiam adquamcunque forte devenerit. Quod enim neque contra fide^
neque contra bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendu^ and pro eorum
inter quos vivitur societate, seruandum est. All things of this kind are free
to be observed as the particular churches shall think good; neither is there
in these things any better rule to a grave and prudent man, the^ that he behave
himself so as the church does unto which he shall happyly come. For that
which is enioined if it be nether against faith nor manners, is to be held
indifferent, and ought to be observed according as they do in place where we
live. Then he shows that his mother coming unto him to Millain, she found
that the church there did not fast on the satterdaies, and she began to be
troubled and to doubt what she might do. Then says he, for her sake I went
unto S. Ambrose and asked his council touching this matter: he answered me
that he could teach me nothing, but that thus he did himself, and if he knew
better he would rather observe it. When as I thought that he would have
yielded me no other reason but his own authority, he proceeded and said unto
me, when I come to the church of Rome I fast on the satterday, and when I am
here I do not, Sic etiam tu ad quam forte ecclesiam veneris eius morem serua,
si cuiquam non vis esse scandalum nec quenquam tibi. So thou also, unto
whatsoever church thou co^mest, follow the orders thereof, if thou would not
scandalize any, nor have any to offend thee. When I had told this to my
mother, she was satisfied. Ego vero de hac sententia etiam atque etiam
cogitans, ita semper habui tanquam ea^ coelesti oraculo susceperim: sensi enim
saepe dolens and gemens, multas infirmorum perturbationes fieri, per quorundam
fratrum contentiosam obstinationem and superstitiosam timiditatem, qui in rebus
huiusmodi, quae neque scripturae sanctae autoritate, neque universalis
ecclesiae traditione, neque vitae corrigende vtilitate, ad certum possunt
terminum pervenire, tantum quia subest qualiscunque ratiocinatio cogitantis,
aut quia in sua patria sic ipse consuevit, aut quia ibi vidit, ubi
peregrinatione^ suam quo remotiorem a suis eo doctiorem putat, tam litigiosas
excitant quaestiones, ut nisi quod ipsi faciunt nihil rectum existimant. I
often revolving in my mind this saying of S. Ambrose, have always accounted
of it, as if so be I had received it by an oracle from heaven: For with sorrow
and grief I have oftentimes found, that many weak ons have been sore
troubled, through the contentious obstinacy and superstitious fear of certain
brethren: who in those things, which neither by the authority of the holy
scripture, nor by the general tradition of the Church, nor for the utility of
amendme^t of life, can be brought to any certain end, only because some make
some curious scruple in their mind, either because they have used otherwise in
their own country, or because they have seen another manner used in places
where they have traveled, which by how much the more it be remote, by so much
the more they do esteem it, do stir up such contentious questions, that
they think nothing right but what they do the^ selves. And epist. 86. to the
same effect. In his rebus in quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina, mos
populi Dei, vel instituta maioru^ pro lege tenenda sunt. Here S. Austine
teaches a far better lesson touching offense and observance of orders of the
Church, the^ many amongst us will learn.





The assumption of this argument is proved by induction of particular examples
amongst themselves, who some allowing one and some another, they do unwittingly
in their diversities, allow al, and yet all agree in the general point of
disobedience to the ceremonies of the Church,

There are some out of pride, betake themselves to this disobedience for
singularities sake, and many seeing that in this flourishing time, they had
neither learning, piety, nor any tolerable gifts to commend themselves, think
by their refractarinesse, to grow into note: for the people desire novelty, and
no novelty pleases them better then that which tends to disobedience: and
let any one put on this person, he pleases the people, becomes famous, must
needs be learned, holy, and have al virtues in him. Some also by this means
have enriched themselves and made a gain of the time, have suffered a little
loss to have a tenfold greater gain in collections and contributions,
insomuch that some of the^ being before poor pedants, are now beco^e rich
vserers. And though some have lost much, yet many others have gained much more.
Now when the reward of disobedience, shall be greater then the reco^pense of
obedience, and disobedience being it self so pleasing a humor, it must needs
oversway many. The learneder sort, I persuade my self, do especially deny
their obedience unto the orders of the Church, because they themselves have
formerly spoken and preached against them, and cannot now without offense to
their people, whom formerly they have so instructed; practice the contrary;
else some of them have professed that to preach the Gospel, in an unknown
place, they could be contented to use them. There is another sort which are
neither hot nor cold, yield obedience, and yield not obedience, humor al
parties, and stand in the middle between two opinions: That if the government
of the Church should be altered, according to the practices of many men, they
might say; they were ever of that mind and therefore seldom or never used the
ceremonies but when they were urged; nay spoke against them privately and
publicly as far as they durst, yea humored, and most esteemed such men as did
wholly deny the lawfulnes of them: and if the state shall continue the present
government and ceremonies, and give no way to Aug. ipsa muta^tio consu^tudinis
etiam quae adtuvat vtilitate novitate perturbat. Formalists.
innovations, then they may say they hold with the doctrine discipline and
ceremonies of the Church, they have subscribed unto them, and yielded obedience
to the Church. These men are vile formalists, that turn religion into policy,
either condemn themselves in those things they know, or knowingly confirm and
sooth others in their errors and disobedience. These me^ neither deserve nor
have love of Prince, Magistrate, nor people, neither is any trust reposed in
them; for they cannot have good consciences which will stretch every way, and
howsoever some for their own purpose seem to flatter them: yet they are truly
esteemed of none. Yet God forbid that we should deny, but there are some which
deny obedience, for their conscience sake not rightly informed in the word of
God; who if they could have been persuaded otherwise, would never have
undergone such evident loss and trouble; yet let such labor to know that it
is not good to leave preaching of the word, a matter of substance which is
commanded under a Woe, for matters of circumstance, ceremonies, and in
question. And to consider the benefit of unity and peace. The reason that the
people allege, why they will not be brought to conform themselves in their
places, nor like such ministers as are conformable, is, because they have been
otherwise taught, and they were good men that so taught us, say they, And one
holds of Paul, another of Apollo: Novelty and singularity do so affect them,
that they scorn to do as the Church and state do: they say the small number
is in the right. The way that fewest approve and most condemn, that is the
true way. So did the Donatists plead in S. Augustines time, and because some of
them were then punished for their outrageous faults, they grounded hereupon
that they were the persecuted Church, they suffered for righteousness, and yet
the loving carriage and mildness of the Church then toward them, and their
proud, spiteful, and seditious practices against the Church; did evidently
testify who were Christ's disciples and who not who had the spirit of love and
unity, and who of pride hatred and contention. And I pray God we may once
clearly perceive that this is the practice of Satan (as Bucer says) to bring
us to a verbal profession, and by questions of genealogies and matters of
smaller moment, to tread S. James his religion under foot, when we shall have
religion, all in opinions, and little or never a whit in good works, as is now
come to pass. And all this while the Papists have gotten great advantage, and
by whose means the Brownists increase it is more then evident. and God grant
we may know how God delights in love and unity, and how Church nor state can
long consist, where divisions are fostered.

Now because all public disorders and disobedience, arise out of particular
houses and parishes; and that we are met together here at the Visitation, for
reformation of such things as are amiss. The churchwardens and sworn me^ are
to take heed that they perform obedience in presenting faults according to
their oath.



need there not be such exclaming against superiorpowers for the reigning of
all abuses, seeing the principal cause arises from ourselves. And thus much
for the first point of obedience: and for this time.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
I Know that it will be expected at this autors hands, that he should have
handled these points more fully and exactly, and have set the^ down in more
plausible and polished words and sentences: But understand that his study about
this, was begun and ended within the compass of one only week: besides it
was to be no larger then could be delivered in an hours space: and it was
purposed only for the supply of that place, at that time, without any intent at
all of further publishing, till their inordinate dealing extorted it out of his
hands, and now is set down as near as may be in the same words. His intent
was good, in Gods fear to persuade them to obedience and unity; which God
grant that they and we all may follow. Amen.


