FOUR LEARNED AND GODLY TREATISES; VIZ. The Carnal Hypocrite. The Churches
Deliverances. The Deceitfulness of Sin. The Benefit of Afflictions.


By T. H.

Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bear in Paul's Churchyard, 1638.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes.
1638.
Several Treatises of this Author.
1. THE Carnal Hypocrite, on 2 Timothy 3.5. The Churches Deliverances, on Judges
10.13. The Deceitfulness of sin, on Psalm 119.29. The Benefit of Prayer, on
Prover. 1.28, 29. 2 The Unbelievers preparing for Christ, out of, Revelations
22.17. 1 Corinthians. 2.14. Ezekiel 11.19. Luke 19.42. Matthew 20.3, 4, 5, 6. John
6.44.
3. The souls Preparing for Christ, or a Treatise of Contrition, on Acts 2.37.
4 The souls Humiliation, on Luke 15 Verses 15, 16, 17, 18. 5. The souls
Vocation, or Effectual Calling to Christ, on John 6.45. 6. The Souls Union
with Christ, 1 Cor 6.17. 7. The Souls benefit from union with Christ, on 1
Cor. 1 30. 8. The Souls Justification, eleven Sermons on 2 Corinthians. 5.21.
THE CARNAL HYPOCRITE.
2 TIMOTHY 3.5. Having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof, from
such turn away.


IF you cast your eyes into the first Words of the Chapter, in the first verse,
you shall find the holy Apostle writing to Timothy his Son and Scholar, does
by way of Prophecy, and direction from God, discover the manifold dangers that
would come to pass in the last days, and also annexeth the great danger in
the 3, 4, 5. verses, he makes up as it were a Catalogue of those corruptions,
that should harbor in their hearts, and discover themselves in the lives of
wicked men, in the last age of the world, which is the age wherein we now live.
In the 1. v. perilous days shall come, the reason of the trouble, and the
ground of the misery, that the Spirit has foretold, shall befall and be
brought upon the world, it shall not be in regard of the punishment inflicted,
but in regard of the sin committed.

Among which sins, he reckons up the cursed dissimulation, that men should
carry a fair show outwardly, when they had a great deal of wretchedness and
vileness in their hearts inwardly, that is one of the last, though not one of
the least sins here reckoned up, thus far the Apostle does exhort Timothy to
turn away from them.

Before we come to particulars,

The multitude of sins bring the dangerest times. When there are the greatest
abominations committed, there is the greatest danger to be expected. For the
danger of times lies not in regard of outward troubles but in regard of the
manifold corruptions that are in us, and the many evils committed by us, when
men are most wicked, then the time is most dangerous, for it is not the power
of Satan, nor his wicked instruments, that can bring misery to the People of
God, but the root of all ruin lies within our selves, Iere. 2.19. Here is
the evil, here is the venom of all afflictions, and the gall of all troubles,
that we have forsaken the Lord, that his fear is not within our hearts, 2 Chronicles. 15.5. They were without blessings, because without God.

Instruction say no more, but remember it is Gods only wish, that it should be
thus with us. Isa. 48.18. O that thou had harkened to my Commandments! what
then? what should we have got by it, mark then what follows, thy
righteousness had been as a river, O why might it not be our wish too, that
we that enjoy peace and plenty under our Sovereign, may have the same still
continued to us, still harken to God, and all things shall hearken to us, Hos.
2.21. If we would call and obey him, he would hear. Mat. 11.23. This was the
ground of the desolation of Sodom and Gomorrah, so that to humble, and to
reform our sins, is the best means to maintain the safety of a Kingdom or
Nation.

In the Verse observe two things first what Carnal Hipocrites and cursed
dissemblers will do, They have a form but deny the power. Secondly, what the
carriage of the Saints should be toward these, they should turn away, because
they turn away from God, and the power of godliness.

First, the Hipocrite what he does, he is only the picture of godliness, as
Machivel that cursed politician speaks, he would have a man to take up the
name of virtue, because there is no trouble in it, no disquiet which comes by
it, but he would not have him take up the practice of it. So it is with an
Hypocrite, it is easy to have a show and appearance, but when it comes to the
virtue, power, and strength of it, he cannot endure it.

Here is two things to be discovered, before we come to the doctrine, first
what is meant by godliness, secondly what is meant by a form.

First, this word Godliness implies two things, first, the doctrine of
Religion, which by the Apostles is called the doctrine according to godliness,
secondly, that implies that gracious frame of spirit, whereby the heart is
disposed and the soul of a Christian is fitted to express some gracious work
outwardly. For what the oil is to the wheels of a clock, it makes them run
glibber, so godliness to the soul, when the soul is oyled and anointed
therewith, it is fitted to perform any good duty.

Secondly, what is meant by the form of godliness, I answer, the word form
or fashion, it is taken by way of resemblance, and similitude from outward
things, it is nothing else but that outward appearance, that any thing has,
discovering the nature and being of it. We use to say, that he has the guise
of his behavior, and the proportion of such a ones carriage, though he has
not the like disposition of mind, so in this case a carnal Hipocrite may have
the guise and portraiture or the outward profession of a child of God, that
what a holy heart does express outwardly, he may express outwardly. Look as
it is among stage players, the stage player puts on brave apparel, and comes
on to the stage, and resembles the person of a King, and acts the part of a
Monarch, but if you pull him off the stage, and pluck his roabes from his
back, he appears in his own likeness, so it is here, a carnal Hipocrite,
a cursed dissembler is like a stage player, he takes upon him the person and
profession of a godly, humble, lowly man, and he acts the part marveilous
curiously, and he speaks big words against his corruptions, and he humbles
himself before God, and he hears, and prays, and reads, but when God
pluckes him off the stage of the world, and his body drops into the grave, and
his soul goes to hell, then it appears that he had not the power of g^dlines,
he was only a stage player, a stage professor. When Saul went to the witch to
raise him up Samuel, the devil took upon him the guise of Samuel, but he was
the devil, so many hipocrites, though they have the guise of holiness, and
the form of godliness, yet there is no soundness, there is nothing but
dissimulation within: Hence note this:

That godliness has a form,

Sound godliness always shows and discovers it self, where it is in the
life and conversation of him that has it. For it is not a mere fancy as some
think. And they think when we talk of godliness and inward moving etc.
what say they, will you have us Saints and Angels, as if godliness were some
secret thing, that never saw the Sun, the Apostle does professely oppose
these, and says they are real thing, and it is really in your hearts that
have it, and it does not keep close, but appears and discovers it self, in a
holy conversation outwardly. Psalm. 45.13. The Text says, The Kings daughter,
and that is not all, but her clothing is of gold. The Kings Daughter is the
Church of God, the Saints that God has soundly humbled, and powerfully
converted, they are the Daughters of God, they are sanctified and purged, and
the Image of God is stamped upon them, and what is their raiment outwardly? it
is of gold, they have golden speeches, golden conversations, not durty filthy
conversation as the wicked h^ve, Act. 4.20. See how prevalent grace is, where
it is, it was also the resolution of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.13. it is also said
of David, he believed inwardly and therefore spoke outwardly, so must we, or if
we rest upon God, we will express the power of his grace in the course of our
lives. Look as it is with a clock, if the wheels run right, the clock cannot
but strike, so it is with the trees of the field, if there be sap in the root,
it will discover it self in the branches, by the fruit and greenenesse of
them, though it be hidden in the Winter, yet it will appear in the Spring, and
in the Summer, so it is in the Souls of Gods Servants, the frame of a man's
heart, that is like the wheels of a clock, if a man have an humble heart, he
will have a holy life, it will make the hand work, the eye see, the foot
walk, and the actions be proportionable unto the disposition of the heart. So
if there be the sap of godliness and holiness, and meekness, and patience
in a man's spirit, it will appear in the blossom and fruits, in good speeches
actions, and an holy conversation. If there be sound grace in the heart, and
godliness within, we must not think godliness will make a monster; but it
will make a comely, decent proportionable Christian, that is four square in
all good duties at all good duties, at all times, in all places, upon every
occasion. I conclude with John the Baptist, Luke 3.8. Worthy, the word in the
Original is fine, Let your fruit be worthy, that is answerable, let them hold
weight for weight with amendment of life, if there be obedience in the heart,
it will answer such obediences outwardly, lay obedience in one balance, and
then repentance will poyse that obedience in the other scale

But you will say how comes this to pass,

I answer no, if there be holiness in the heart, it will show it self without.

From the power of grace, Mat. 6.22. The meaning is, the eye is the Conscience,
the sincere eye, is the sincere conscience, now if a man have a good conscience
inwardly, his whole conversation will be proportionable to the same. Mat.
13.33. The grace of God is compared to leaven, it will never leave leavening,
till it has leavened all the whole lump, if the heart be leavened with grace
and godliness, never think to keep godliness in a corner, and contrive it
into a narrow compass, no, no, it will never leave leavening, till the eye
looks holily, and the hand works mercifully. Nay, observe this in particular,
first let corruptions be never so strong in a gracious heart, the power of
godliness will over power all, and work out it self, and get ground in
conclusion. Look as it is with the Moule, put her into the ground, and stop her
up, she will work her self out one way or other, so it is with a gracious
frame of spirit, though there be a great deal of earthly corruption, yet a
gracious heart will work under ground, and work it self out of all these. It
is observed by natural Philosophy, when a Ship is cast away, the Sea vomits
on the shore the dead persons, and the Sea will not fetch them in again, so
there is a Sea of grace in the souls of Gods servants, there is but a
beginning of grace indeed, but there is abundance of life, and virtue and
power in the graces of Gods children, so that though there be many corruptions,
much deadness and untowardnesse, yet if this gracious work be there, it will
vomit out all, it will fling out those dead bodies, but never take them in
again. Ier. 20 4. observe when Jeremy out of a kind of discouragement and
pride of spirit, because he could not find that success, and some despised it,
and some scoffed, I will preach no more says he, but even then the word of the
Lord was as burning fire, this was the power of this gracious frame of heart we
speak of, Matt. 12.35. Bring forth good things, the word in the Original is,
All cast out good things, and it implies a kind of copulsion, so that a holy
man, out of the treasure of holiness casts out holy things, that is how ever
many corruptions hang about him, and would hinder him from doing what he
should, yet a good heart will cast out all, and break through all. Look as it
is with sire, let it be raked up never so close, yet there will be fire, it
will heat, and burn, and consume all into it self, so it is with the sire of
grace in a man's heart, though there be many clogging corruptions, yet if this
grace be there, though a man have a great deal of filthy noisome humors of
vanity, and collar and anger, and carelessenesse yet this fire will heat and
burn, and make way, and kindle and turn all into a flame at conclusion.

Secondly, it will not only break through all corruptions, but through all
outward occasions that comes against it. Psa. 39.3. The good man was among a
company of mockegods, that were flowting and gibing, and now says he, I burned
and spoke with my tongue, as who should say, the grace of God was so powerful,
that he could hold no longer, he could bear no more, but spoke with his
tongue. Look as it is with the Husband man, he casts his seed into the
ground, and covers it over with earth, yet that little seed will break the
earth, and rend the ground and come out: so it is with a godly and holy heart,
where in the immortal seed of Gods word is sown, though there be clogs and
occasions of oppositions, this way and that way, and another way, yet a
gracious heart will break through, and the good work of the Lord that is
implanted in the soul will appear in the life and conversation.

Consider Ephe. 1.6. There was such a proud heart humbled, such a carnal
wretch purified, 1 Pet 2.12. I would have Gods children carry themselves so
holily, that the wicked may admire at them, and glorify God, the second end,
why God gives grace, that we may be a means to draw others on in the same way,
wherein God has enabled us to walk, 2 King. 7.9. There they say, We do not
well, this day is a day of glad tidings, come therefore let us tell it to the
Kings household: so it is with a merciful gracious loving heart, if God ever
opens his eyes, and shows mercy to his soul, and pardon his sins, then he
thinks sure I do not well, that I do not tell it to my fellow servants, that
they may love grace and embrace it, and be blessed by it, this thou must do,
and ought to do, and this you cannot do if you keep your grace secret within
your hearts, therefore tell your fellow servants, of a truth I had as stony as
careless a heart as you, but it has pleased the Lord to break it, it has
cost me many a sob and salt tear, but now the Lord has pardoned me, did you
but know the peace of a conscience, you would never live as you do, this is
the frame of a gracious heart.

Instruction It is not the fault of gold that it glisters, but that it glisters
and is not gold. But what heart is thine in the mean time, that cannot endure
so much as the show of godliness, it shows a heart marveilous violent against
God, a heart marveilous Satanicall, he that loves his father, will love the
picture of his father, so if thou love holiness, thou will love the picture
of holiness.

But you will say we do not discommend holiness.

Give me leave to reply two things. First, word, and praying in families, no,
oh but this couzening, dissembling, why then, take thou that which is good,
sanctify thou the Lords day, and pray thou in thy family, show thy holiness
outwardly, and be thou also inwardly sincere, but thou that hate the form
of godliness, it is a sign thou hate the power of godliness.

Secondly, if thou hate them for hypocrisy, then thou hate them because
they are sinful, and if thou do, thou will hate those more that are
greater sinners, as a man that hates a tode, the greater the tode is, the more
he loathes it, so if thou hate hypocrisy because it is sinful, then thou will hate that man which has more sin, but thy conscience testifies that
thou can love drunkards, and harlots, adulterers, and speak well of
blasphemers, those thou art content with, and wilt not reproach them, this is a
great sign thou hate holiness and sincerity, because thou hate the show
thereof.

For reproof it condems the opinions of a great company of carnal
professors, that brag a strange sun, and a strange fire, so it is a strange
kind of imagination thou have, thou think thou have a good heart, and yet
never express it outwardly in thy conversation, it is well, sometimes there
may be a show without a substance, but this is impossible, that there should be
a substance without some appearance.

Should thou see a body lie on the bed, and neither sense in it nor action
proceeding from it, you would say it is dead, it lives not, so in this case if
faith work not it is a fancy, it is an idle foolish carnal presumption, why,
faith purifies the heart, and works by love, faith is, mighty and powerful,
and faith is operative and effectual, therefore thou that think thou have a
holy heart, and never show it in thy course, it is a foolish delusion of thy
heart, therefore know this for an everlasting rule, that the worst is always
within; Out of the abundance of the heart, etc. if thy eye, thy tongue and thy
life be naught, what a vile heart have thou then, there is the puddle of all
abomination and profaneness from within, for the heart mooves the eye, and
the tongue, and the foot to wickedness. If the Streams be impure the
Fountain is much more filthy, therefore away those carnal pleas and foolish
delusions.

Exhortation, we hear the meekness, etc. but show forth these virtues that
others may be bettered by them. Therefore the Lord says be ye holy as I am
holy, not in affliction only, but in all manner of conversation: mark he does
not say, have good minds only and honest hearts, but in all manner of
conversation; be holy in buying, selling, traveling, trading, etc. Gods
Saints should be so holy in their lives, as men should say, surely there is a
holy God, see how his servants are holy, there is a righteous God, see how
righteous his servants are. Away therefore with those idle sottish policies of
a company of carnal persons in the world, that are directly opposite to the
power of godliness.

There is a generation of Politicians in the world, that count it a point of
great wisdom for a man to conceal his Religion to himself, and the phrase
is among men, keep your holiness and your hearts to your selves, and they
confine godliness within a man's Closet or study, but if any holiness appear
in his life, or any exactness in his Courses, there is an outcry made
presently, O descretion would do well, if men were but wise much might be
done. Wisdom I dare not style it, but that the Scripture speaks of a
wisdom that is not from above, that is carnal, sensual and divelish
wisdom, which the Word requires not, the Word warrants not. These men may
imagine the holy Apostles wanted wisdom, Phil. 4 5. He exhorts you to let
your patience be made known to others and let all know it, for the Lord is at
hand. This takes away a cavil some may say, if a man does show and express
godliness outwardly, then contempt and persecution will be at hand presently,
why says the Apostle, the Lord is at hand to comfort you, to deliver you: Nay
in these men's conceits, Christ should have wanted wisdom, when he commanded
peremptorily, Matthew. 5.26. Let your light, etc. he does not say hide your
light in your souls, and keep your hearts to your selves, No, no, but let it
shine forth. You that are tradesmen, you are not content only to have your
sons put to prentise, but you would have them to learn their trade also, you
are bound prentise to the trade of holiness, you profess your selves to be
scholars in the school of the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore let us express
something we have learned, let us show something we have gained, show some
workmanship as the Apostle calls it, Ephe. 2.10. I would have every Christian
man express the workmanship of the Lord, that is, I would have him express
such holy graces in his course and conversation, that all the world should
find no flaw, that when the wicked shall say, what have you done with your
grace, are you a professor and pray, read and hear Sermons; now let a
Christian put the word to silence, I am more able to suffer persecution then
thou art to think of it I am more able to bear trouble then thou to hear of
troubles, Heb. 10.34. But some may say, I wonder you can endure such
indignities to be laid upon you, fie, you may wonder indeed, but now
godliness shows it self, what serves grace and godliness for, but only
that we should do something for the glory of God more then you can.

Aye

I

But

I

First labor to lay down all Paul is to knock off his own fingers, 1 Cor.
15. 10. but not I says he he shrinks in and will take nothing to himself, it
was not I, but the grace of God, which was the author and the cause of it, and
therefore 1 Phil. 20. Paul did set up God on the Pinnacle, so that nothing
appeared but Christ and his grace: he lay in the dust, that the Lord only
might tread upon him, that he only might be magnified, admired and extolled. I
would have a Christian deal in Christianity as men do when one lifts another
over the wall, he that is lifted up, is only discovered, but the other is not
seen, all men may view him, but the other not descried: so I would have the
soul lie down low in the dust, and at the foot of the Lord, and lay down
all excellency of gifts, that Christ and his grace might only appear. I would
have a Christian heart in reading, praying and professing to show forth Christ,
only lie thou hid and bear up the Lord and his grace, that he only may be
presented to the view of the world.

Secondly Matthew. 5.16. O that Christians would so walk and converse that the
whole world might see what grace can do? that men may say such a one by nature
is marvelous chollericke, but see what grace can do, he is very calm and
meek, such a man is a very coward naturally, but see what grace can do, he is
courageous for the cause of grace: observe the difference between a proud and a
meek spirit. 2 King. 10. 16. John come and see, etc. this is the pattern of a
proud spirit, for always a vain glorious man either begins or ends with
something of his own, and if for shame he cannot commend himself, yet he
will so express himself that he will leave some praise of himself behind
him; if he talks with some great man he will flatter, and fawn, and praise
the man he speaks to, so that when he is gone, they may say he is a wise
descreet man, and fits every man's humor that it may appear what parts are in
him. This is the temper of a proud man.

But now take an example of an humble heart, Act. 4.12, 13. that was a fair
booty to take a great deal of glory to himself, be it known not I, but the
name of Jesus has made this man whole, 1. John 20. I am not that great Prophet.

Labor Pet. 3. 1. I tell you a holy wife, that has the work of grace in her
heart, she may so behave herself to her husband, that he may say, what does
the grace of God work this? then sure I will love that word and that grace.
The servant that stands at the stall asks the Chapman what will you buy, he
does not sell for himself, it is his masters commodity: so it is in this case,
a Christian should not set out any thing, either parts or gifts to make men
buy, but that they might buy grace, and love grace, esteem of grace, and
rejoice in the power of grace.

This should be our aim and care in showing forth the power of godliness that
others may glorify God with us, and Paul, and said, O the admirable power of
God that can thus prevail, he that has been an opposer, now a Preacher of
Christ, men here wondered at the grace of God. So then labor to express thy
grace outwardly when time shall serve; art thou a holy wife, show thy self
meek to a churlish Naball, are you holy servants, and yet do you think you
may be way ward and proud, and take one end of the staff, and think your
Master nor Mistress may reprove you, this is not a show of godliness but of
sauciness, if you have grace inwardly, show it outwardly, and let all the
world know what it is to have a gracious heart, let them that have no grace be
proud, etc. but be thou meek, obedient, and lay thy hand on thy mouth, and
say nothing; O what a glory would come to the name of Christ hereby. Carry home
the point in hand, masters, servants, fathers and children, have you any
goodness, let the world see it, let thy father see it if thou be a child;
let thy master perceive it if thou be a servant, that the wicked of the
world may not say, what are your professors, that you talk so much of, they
are as proud and as peevish as others, they are as unjust as others; for shame
let it never be said so of you, but if you think you have any godliness,
express it then, why show it then, the fire cannot be without light, the Sun
without heat, so if grace be in your hearts it will appear in your lives.

Now the second thing is the behavior of the wicked to this power of
godliness, they deny it, that is, they submit not, they close not therewith.
As a servant that denies such a man to be his master, and the master deny such
a one to be his servant, when the one will not own the other, so Hypocrites
deal with the virtue of grace and power of holiness, they will by no means
bear the authority of it; look as it was with Peter in another case, he
denied Christ, as who should say, I would not own him, I do not belong to
him, I owe no subjection to him, he has no authority over me: so many go
under the name of Christians, but when it comes to the power of godliness,
then you say, godliness has nothing to do with me, you will do what seems
good in your own eyes, you fling off the power of godliness and the authority
of grace which should rule you. Hence observe,

That

For the opening of it two things are to be discovered, first, wherein
consists the denial of the power of godliness, secondly the reasons why they
that outwardly profess it, yet will not stoop to the power of it.

First your carnal Hypocrites deny the power of godliness three ways.

First, partly in their judgment, when they will not assent to the authority
of the truth, and acknowledge the necessity of godliness, when they say I hope
a man may be saved, though he be not so exact and precise, what though he
swear now and then, and has none but that, such a man I hope may be an
honest man and go to heaven. I see no necessity put upon a man, that a man
must thus conform his life to the rule of righteousness with the strictness
that Ministers call for and require, this is to deny it in your judgments.

Secondly in your wills and hearts, when the will and affections will not
submit themselves to be framed, and ordered, and disposed by the power of
godliness, you will be proud, and peevish, etc. and will walk in your own
ways, let God say what he will, and the Word command what it please, though
we are damned and go down to hell for it, this is a professed opposition of the
truth, and of the power of godliness.

Thirdly, when we deny it in our practice, in our actions, for if a man's
actions be naught, this is certain his heart is naught, this rule will never
deceive you, now we come to show the cause why a company of hypocrites can
swallow down profession, but these will only complement with godliness, but
away with the power of it.

Because godliness and the now here is the quarrel, therefore they take up
the show and deny the power thereof.

The power

The power of godliness is Gal 6.4. as who should say, many men think
themselves some body in the world, but they are nothing when they come to the
trial, Rom 7.9.21. before God opened his eyes he thought he was in a good
course but afterward it was otherwise, etc.

Outward hypocrites can lie, cheat, swear and be drunk for company, and go
away and never be troubled, they say, they will repent and hope God will
pardon them, etc. but the power says, oh those cursed distempers of heart are
enough to sink your souls into hell for ever, this now vexes them, and then
away goes godliness.

These deniers and opposers of godliness may be referred to three sorts or
ranks.

Such as openly and caustomarily continue in the commission of any sin in any
kind after their conscience has been convicted and after their judgment has
been informed, and also the nature of the sin, and the condemnation due unto
it out of the Word has been discovered, these do undoubtedly discover unto
the world, that as yet they have no work of true grace wrought in their
souls. I do not say they that commit only heinous sins and continue in
them, as drunkards, etc. but those that lie in and ordinarily take up the
practice of any evil which is known, these have not the work of grace in
their hearts. I know Gods Saints oftentimes trip and are taken aside, but
ordinarily to take up the practice of any evil cannot have true grace. As for
example a common and ordinary swearer, a common prophaner of the Lords day, a
man may pass this conclusion upon such persons to be graceless, this is
seen, 1 Ioh. 3.7. as if he had said, many will bear you in hand, that they
are honest and holy, but let no man deceive you, it is not saying but he that
does righteously is righteous. And he that commits sin is of the devil, but
you will say, does not every one commit sin, no, he that is said to fall into
sin is not said to commit sin, but he that takes up a trade in sin, it
is his occupation, they are workers of iniquity, Psalm. 14 9. The Lawyer goes
up to London in Term time, but he has his Vacation time too, so sinners have
their Vacation time, the Drunkard, Usurer, Adulterer have their Vacation times,
but so soon as the term time comes, so soon as the occasion is offorded, and
the opportunity offered they fall to their old trade. Now if you see these men,
you may know him, he is one of the limbs of Satan, he is one of impes of
the Devil, and in truth a child of the Devil so long as he remains in that
estate; he does not say, he falls now and then into an evil way, he is now
and then taken aside, but the rode wherein all travells is a naughty way, the
gamester sets himself to gaming, etc. that same setting of the Bias of the
soul in an evil way, and the expressing of the same in a man's practice,
certain yet he is in the gall of bitterness, these persons are called the
children of Belial, 1 King. ^1. this word signifies, such as will bear no
yoke; it is their ordinary course to shake off the Commandments of God, as
Drunkards, etc. are children of Belial, their hearts are base, and their lives
as bad as their hearts; but you will say, their hearts may be good for all
this; nay I say they cannot, how prove you this? I answer, thou toldest me so,
that is, thy life and conversation does testify it; the drunkard says, I am a
notorious drunkard, bear witness men, and Angels, and friends, and
neighbors, they proclaim it to mad men and children. Iam. 2.18. Show me thy
faith by thy works, hence I conclude, faith inwardly may be seen by works
outwardly; then I conclude also that he may his infidelity too by his works,
if grace be expressed by precious works, then a man's base heart may be
descried by base practices. No Physician sees the heart when he tries whether
his disease be in the heart, but he feels his pulse, but if that be
vehement and violent, he says his heart is very much distempered. Happily I
do not see the wheels of a Clock, but when it strikes, I know it mooves: So
it is herein, do not think that you may have good hearts, and yet wicked
lives, No, no, I can feel your hearts by your pulse, if your conversation be
naught your hearts are worser. Eccles. 10.3. The fool proclaims himself a
fool, so does the drunkard.

Aye cozen and dissemble now and then, but cannot a man have a good heart for
all this.

I will not tell you so, Matthew. 7.18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, he does not say a good tree may now and then bring forth evil fruit,
but commonly it brings forth good, no further it is impossible; why judge you,
can Grapes grow upon Thorns, or do men gather Figs on Thistles, can this
be, you will presently say this is impossible, it is against nature and reason.

He whose judgment is informed and his conscience convinced, what duty it is
he should take up, which godliness requires and also enables him to take up,
and yet will not set upon it, this man denies also the power of godliness in
his practice. I do not say thus, that he that cannot perform good duties
after such a manner or in such a measure, that he denies the power of
godliness. I say not neither that he which is surprised either by temptations
or corruptions; if he omit good duties now and then, and recover himself, and
uses greater speed and care afterward because he has been negligent. As
it is with a horse that stumbles, as soon as he recovers himself be goes
the faster, so if his stumbling and neglecting works this effect, he does not
this power of grace deny, but they that know this only and will not take it
up, he only denies it Grace wherever it comes it makes not a man a monster,
but ^ new creature, so that it has a heart but no foot, a foot but no
tongue, a hand but no head, a head but no heart; some will do something, but
know nothing, some will know something and affect nothing, grace will not do
thus; No, no, grace makes a man a new creature, whatever a Christian should
do, grace inables a man to do, 2 Timothy 2.21. A vessel of honor, not only
fit for some good work, but for every holy duty, and a good Christian due not
but at the first submit to it, Col 4.12. Drunkards now submit, Vusurers now
submit, Oppressers now submit; make restitution, or else thy heart cannot be
sound.

Aye but you will say,

I say he that will not set upon the performance of every duty that God
requires and endeavors not to do it as well as he can, the power of grace to
perform any, hence it comes to pass that if any man will paddle with the Lord
and take up services by halfes, and will have his reservations and excuses. I
have oppressed and cannot make restitution, any thing but that I am loath to
pray in my family, that is seditious, etc. Now if you are convinced of any duty
and set not upon it, you are professed opposers of the power of godliness

He that is wilfully ignorant and will not search nor seek out those truths
whereof he ought to be informed, nay he will not receive directions from
those that are able to teach and guide him in the way of salvation, he that
purposely flies off because he may have some plea and pretense for himself, to
take up the course he would walk in, he is a denier of the power of
godliness. As for example sake,

A man will often hold this as a shield and a buckler, knew I it, or were I
persuaded of it, then would I do it, thus men as it were withdraw themselves
from the jurisdiction of the truth, and they will not know that they should
know, that so they may have color to excuse them in the not doing of that they
would neglect; now these men though they be not informed, yet they because they
are wilfully ignorant, and because they withdraw themselves from under the
power of the means that should inform them, these are professed opposers, for
godliness has that power which is able for to make a man perform any duty, 1
Cor. 2.5. 1 John 2.27.

Now we come to the carriage of the Saints, what their behavior should be to
such dissemblers, the Text says turn away from them, because they turn away
from godliness, as they are estranged from God so should we be estranged
from them.

First for the meaning of the words, this phrase turn is not to be found in
all the Scripture but in this place, and it is a borrowed speech from things
that are contrary one to another, and therefore withdraw your selves one from
another, and set your selves one against another; these are implied in the
phrase, first the heart is estranged from another, secondly the life and
conversation is in some measure withdrawn from another.

Secondly we come to show the nature of this communion we ought to have with
these, and how far we may go; first we will discover it in general,
secondly we will lay forth the rules in particular.

Communion therefore is twofold, Public, Private.


Public concerns the public Congregation, and it is an open mee^ing of many
together by virtue of public authority to partake of holy duties. Three things
observe in the description, first there must be an open meeting, because it is
in the Congregation, the Congregation is like to common pastures, that are
common for every man's Cattle, so the ordinances of God are common pastures for
every one, secondly it is by virtue of public authority, for that is observed
of Hezechiah, that he opened the temple doors, so that public authority
gives warrant to public meetings, thirdly is the sharing of men together in
the holy ordinances of God.

Now the question grows on, how far is it lawful for the Saints of God to
converse with those that are common swearers, and drunkards, and adulterers,
and the like for the present; what are these rules.

The rules are two, first those that have public authority in their hands,
they to whom God has committed authority over others, such as are either
scandalously naught, or openly profane, should by them be excommunicated, as
we may see by the example of Paul, 1 Corrinth. 4.5. Matthew 18.15.

The second rule suppose they that are in authority will not separate them, the
second rule then is this, yet the Saints of God should not abstain from the
Congregation, it is pitiful indeed, and the thing is troublesome and tedious
to a gracious heart, and we must mourn for it, but being it is not in my
power I must not abstain, I know there are many objections and cavills of the
Anabaptists against this, and they thus reply.

This ought to be done,

I answer it is true, James said of the abuse of excommunication, it is a shame
in the Church, but that part is yours to whom authority belongs.

But they cast this as a reproach upon our Church, common drunkards they say,
and swearers if they do but pay 2. pence for their offering at Easter, may
receive the Supper of the Lord.

We confess this fault, let it lie where it is, we cannot reform it, we can
only mourn for it, and that God will accept, 1 Cor. 5.11. there they bring
Scripture for it. If there be any Adulterer or unclean person says the Text
among you, let him not eat, that is communicate with him say they.

Answer, I say to eat, there is not referred to the communion in eating the
body of Christ, but eat not with him, that is, be not familiar with such a
person, and it includes the word familiarity not communion at the Lords Table.
Psalm. 41.9. There eating implies a common inward familiarity, my own familiar
friend, etc.

But

It the company of a man in my own house then I have to refuse him in the open
Congregation, I can keep a man out of my house, but I cannot fling him out of
the open congregation, that belongs only to those that are in place and
authority.

Constant communion is that, when there lies such a bond upon a bondsman, that
he cannot break this communion, such is the communion between the husband
and the wife so having hired a servant, nor the servant from the master when he
please until the covenants be fulfilled, this is constant communion.

The question now is, how far a man may turn unto the wicked, such as are
openly wicked

The rules of the question are three.

First for a faithful man, when he has his liberty, then to enter into
communion with the wicked is unlawful, as for a free servant to make choice of
an ungratious master, and so for a holy master to make choice of a wicked
servant, so for a good woman being single to make choice of a wicked man, or
for a holy man to choose a wicked wife.

If

As fly the house, thou that art a prentise, when thy years are expired lose
thy self and deliver thy heart from this communion.

Now we come to mutable, or voluntary private communion.

Voluntary communion is a closure with such in common company and inward
familiarity, so as when occasion serves they may all alter and change again.

In the mutable communion observe these three things.

1. It is a closing and fastening together, a meeting and concurring of men
together, so far as occasion drives them one to another, or else as affection
draws them one to another, and therefore Psalm. 119 63 the word translated, a
friend, signifies a companion, that is the first passage.

2. We have the propriety or quality of this communion in the next words, it is
a closure in common company, and familiarity, when they close one with another
in common conversation. Prove. 28.7. so wicked company one with another in
drinking, swearing, etc.

They are joined together in inward familiarity, when there is a closure and
combining one with another, when the souls of sundry men are Cabbins to keep
the counsels and secrets one of another, Job. 19.14. the word there
translated a familiar is a man of secrets, so we may see it in the example of
Jonathan and David, the Text says that the soul of Jonathan was knit to the
soul of David.

Lastly, they so close in common company and inward familiarity, that yet
notwithstanding it is in a man's power as occasion serves, to change either this
company or familiarity, therefore we call it mutable communion because there
is no bond nor tie lies upon a man to engage himself to his company, but as
occasion is offered, a man may turn the back to a base fellow that has
cozoned him, this I take to be the communion mainely here intended, though the
other are included, but this voluntary society I think is that the Apostle
here specially aims at. Hence,

It is the duty of all the Saints of God, not to close in communion and
unnecessary company, and inward familiarity with those that are the deniers of
the power of godliness.

I say meetely observe the Saints must not close in common and unnecessary
communion with the wicked, I call it unnecessary, because a man may be forced
sometimes to keep company with profane men, as for example these three bonds
force him.

1 Bond.
Sometimes the bond of a man's calling will force him to keep company with the
wicked, as the Magistrate must be ordinarily in the company of the wicked to
reform them, the Physician among his patients, the Minister among his people,
the Lawyer among his clients; so Inkeepers, the Law will force them to
entertain a stranger, and to give him that which is reasonable.

2 Bond.
The bond of humanity and civilitie, that binds a man sometimes to keep company
with the wicked, as the bond of neighborhood, for example, people that live in
the same place or town, they are forced to consult about the affairs of the
town and other occasions one with another.

The bonds of Religion and natural mercy binds sometimes to keep company with
such, 3 Bond.
for the souls of all men should labor to do good unto all, so far as
necessity requires and opportunity is offered thereunto, for we are bound to
preserve the honor, life, goods, good name of any man, what ever he be, be the
company never so wicked yet the duty is good and holy.

Therefore I say we must not close with men in unnecessary communion, so far
we must turn away from them, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 These. 3.6. withdraw your selves
from them, it is a comparison taken from full Sails, when the Sails of a
ship are drawn, and it has full sail, it goes very swiftly: So says the
Apostle, do not strike sail, do not freely express your selves in
familiarity with him, but withdraw your selves, Psalm. 56.8 shut the door
against them, so you see the point is clear.

For our better direction observe these three particulars, first something by
way of explication, how far the limits of turning from the wicked does go,
secondly the reasons why we must turn away, thirdly the use and application.

Where may we set the bounds and compass of our familiarity with the wicked?
for this we must remember these two passages, some that deny godliness make
it their trade and practice, secondly others only deny it upon occasion, and
though they have grace yet from both these we must turn away.

But carry our selves familiar to wards these.

In these particulars, first,

First how far must the heart of a good man be restrained from the company
and familiarity of those that are scandalously wicked?

I answer the rules are two.

1. The Saints Psalm. 15 4. Observe two passages, first, every wicked man is a
vile man, secondly, they should despise and contemn them, it is a badge of a
Christian, the note of a holy heart in whose eyes a wicked man is vile, a vile
drunkard, a vile adulterer, etc. it is not a matter of liberty, but of
necessity, as Esaias 5.20. it is marvelous lying so to do. The Scripture styles
wicked men dogs, hogs, and fools, what the Scripture says, we ought to give
ear unto, a drunken man a fool, a covetous man a fool, etc. if we judge not
so, we judge otherwise then the Scriptures.

Where wicked men think it a pride and audacity for Gods Saints to esteem
basely of them, it is no such matter, be you better and they will judge better
of you; should a man judge that to be Gold which is dross, that to be Silver
which is Lead, should we judge you to have the love of God when you have none.

2. The soul with such wicked persons, this will follow from the former by
clear, and evident, and sound ground; that which the soul abhors and that
which the heart is carried with abomination against, there cannot but a
separation will follow, and he must needs be marvelous jealous of being tainted
thereby.

Now we come to the second thing which was the outward behavior and carriage,
and this also may show a dislike.

How far must our outward carriage be turned away from a wicked man.

How should a man carry himself toward the wicked of the world,

I answer you must bear a great deal of love toward them, services for them,
and they are three especially.

You must labor to have a spirit of campassion, and to mourn inwardly, and be
grieved thoroughly for the sins that are in them, and for the manifest
miseries they pluck upon themselves, this was the behavior of our Savior
Christ, Oh Jerusalem, etc. If ever you have had any relish of mercy and
compassion from the Lord Jesus, O then pity those that want this pity; when
you see a company of drunkards staggering and a company of blasphemers stabbing
the Almighty, and drowning their souls in the pit of destruction for ever, if
you have any mercy, any bowels of compassion within you, let your eyes drop
down tears in secret and mourn and lament for the misery and desolation of
such poor creatures, happily enemies to God, happily enemies to thee, but what
of that? we our selves were once haters and hated of God, and ran the broad
way to Hell and everlasting destruction, therefore show pity and compassion to
such poor souls, Ier. 13.17. Oh pity them poor creatures, they know not
what they do, if you houle and mourn in secret inwardly for the confusion
that is like to fall upon their poor souls, and think with your selves, what
must all those cursed drunkards and wretched Adulterers, and wicked blasphemers
live here sinfully, and perish everlastingly, and go down to hell and grave,
there in everlasting torments never to be comforted, never to be refreshed?
if you have any bowels of compassion, you cannot but mourn for them

Prayer for them in secret, when thou art praying to God, and seeking to the
Lord for mercy for thy self, put into the same prayer all those that are in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, put up a petition for the
drunkard, put up a petitition for the adulterer, as thou desire God to save
thy soul, so entreat the Lord to turn the heart of the drunkard, etc.
Remember what Abraham did for Ishmael, O let Ishmael live in thy sight Lord, so
pray you, Oh that such a drunkard might have his life amended, O that such a
profane heart may live in thy sight Lord.

You must use all means to reclame them, you must reprove them sharply,
counsel them compassionately, and strive with them mightily that so you may
bring them home to know the things belonging to their peace here, and
everlasting happiness hereafter.

Now we are to enquire, whether we must not turn from such as heretofore have
not been noted to be wicked persons, but such as has receiveved mercy and
favor from the Lord.

It may be in these two cases that follows,

Those that have professed Christianity, 1 Case.
and approved themselves outwardly to the Church of Christ, yet
notwithstanding, if by reason of inward corruptions or temptations or occasions
pressing in upon them, they fall foulely and scandalously into some notorious,
offense, then we should turn away from having any inward society with them
for the while, till they have upon sufficient proof by their humiliation and
reformation, and if it be possible they have given satisfaction publicly to
the Church of God, 1 Cor. 5.9. the reason of this is pregnant, for the truth
is, such falls give a good ground of suspicion, that there was never yet any
sound grace wrought in their hearts; I do not say a ground of conclusion, but
of suspicion, that the work was not sound, nor this grace sincere in the
heart, because he has sinned so foulely, and fallen so fearfully. For how
ever the Saints fall so foulely, yet this is ever observeable, it is not
ordinary, as few be drunk, few commit adultery after their conversion, they
have their infirmities and weaknesses, and though they may fall
extraordinarily, yet ever observe as that their fall is foul, so their
repentance is great, as in David, He roared, etc. and mark it, after the
Saints of God have repented of their falls, who ever read that they fell into
the same sins again.

A man that has lived in the bosom of the Church, Case 2.
and has been conceived and judged in the course of reason and charity to be
in the state of grace, yet notwithstanding if he come to this pass, that he
is obstinately incorrigible, though the fault be but small, and not known of
many, if yet he will not yield, when all arguments are answered, and all pleas
removed, then shake hands with him, and have no familiarity with him for the
time. This I take to be the scope of the Text, Matthew. 18.15. It skils not what
the matter of the fault be, but what the incorrigiblenesse of the parties. 2
These. 3.14. observe it, it is very reasonable a man should do so, for he that
will not receive good by the society of the members of Christ, it is fit he
should be cast out from having any communion with the members of Christ. For
what is the end of Communion, but that men might be informed; now if a man will
not hear nor be convinced, it is fit he should be deprived of the comfort of
the society of the Saints. I reason thus, he that may be excommunicated
publicly, may be separated privately from the company and intimate society of
the Saints; but he that is obstinately incorrigible may be excommunicated
publicly, therefore he may be separated from the society of the Saints.

1 Rea.
Because it is the practice of much love, nay of the greatest mercy that a man
can show to a wicked profane wretch, I presume you will hardly think it so, you
will say, this is love indeed, when a man cannot look upon another but he
must disdain him, does a man show mercy to another when he will not keep his
company, if this be your love, God bless me from such love; take heed what
thou say, God bless thee from folly and not from this love, and you shall
plainly see it so, because this course and behavior is that, which God has
appointed as a special means, it is that which is mavelous helpefull and
useful, and profitable, to withdraw a wicked man from his wicked course, and
work sound repentance in his soul, therefore it must needs be an argument of
great affection, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. Note him, why? that he may be ashamed, now he
that is ashamed of his course, is in some way and readiness to forsake and
abandon his course; For shame implies these three things.

First, he that is ashamed of a thing sees the vileness of a thing: secondly,
he sees himself vile and base, and that discredit is like to befall him by
reason of the vileness of the thing: thirdly, he labors to keep himself,
that dishonor and discredit may not fall upon him, and he labors to keep
himself from such occasions and practices which may bring this discredit upon
him: so this is the next way for thee to make him ashamed etc. How justly may
such a one reason with himself, when he sees the Saints of God are weary of
his company, and loath to converse with him, how vile is my course, how base is
my sin and ungodly practices, what reason have I to loath my sin, therefore
let me for ever abhor these base courses, that makes me to be abominated of
the Saints and servants of the Lord.

This Reason concerns our selves, Ground 2
that we may not be defiled, that we may not be infected with their wicked
courses, and polluted with their society. It is in this case with sin, as it
is with the plague of the body, he that will be clear of it, the old rule is,
fly far enough, fly soon enough; he that is with those that are infected,
likely he shall be infected: so it is with sin, which is the plague of the
soul; he that has a plague sore blossoming, he that has a tongue belching
forth his venom against the Lord of host: he that has a plague sore of
drunkenness, a plague sore of adultery, if ever you would be preserved, then
go far enough, fly soon enough, the Alehouse is the Pesthouse where the
plague is, the drunkards are the persons infected: if thou would be clear,
come not near them. Joseph learned to swear when he was in Pharohs Court, and
Barnabas with dissembling, when he saw Peter halt before him; so it is said the
Israelites mingled themselves among the Cananites, and learned their works, as
they say, one rotten apple spoils all the rest, and one scabbed sheep infects
the whole flock, with the froward we shall learn frowardness, etc. It has
been the bane and ruin of many a man, and he has carried this company
keeping to his grave, nay happily to hell, etc. This is the cause why the Lord
is constrained, when all reasons prevail not, when all arguments persuade not,
the Lord is feign to bring him out by an almighty hand, unless the Lord let in
the fire of hell on the conscience of the drunkard and tire him out of his base
company, there is little hope that the means of grace will work upon him for
his good, therefore fly far enough. Prove. 22.24. 1 Cor. 7.6. sin is there
compared to leaven, now leaven does not that which is only next it, but the
whole lump; so mark the Apostles Argument. A wicked man comparably does not
only leaven himself, but he leavens all his company, all that converse with
him, and all that maintain familiarity with him, with the swearer thou will
swear, with the dissembler, with the lier, etc. 3 Argu.


Because it is a special means to fit us, and so to furnish our hearts to be
much more ready and chearefully enlarged in a constant and holy performance of
all good duties that God requires of us, and to discharge all those holy duties
which ought to be performed by us, Psalm 119.115. as if he had said, until you
be gone, there is no doing for me, the presence of the wicked and Gods sincere
service cannot stand together, he that will keep the company of the wicked,
cannot keep the commandments of God, he that will not depart from them, God
will depart from him; therefore away with these. Observe the manner of the
phrase. David presumes this, that ill company is not so much the breach of one
commandment as the breach of all Gods Commandments, as who should say, I
shall keep the first Table, not the second, etc. he says not I cannot keep
the Sabbath, or pray, etc. but I cannot keep the Commandments.

The company and society of the wicked does hinder a man in keeping Gods
Commandments in three particulars.

First it takes off the fitness and disposition of the soul to the
performance of any service, 1 Parti,
that when the heart is sometime teachable and pliable coming to God, when
there are some good desires after God, when wicked company meet it, plucks all
these up by the roots, and if his conscience will not suffer him ^o do as
they do, O then there is cause enough of gibing, and tanting, and scoffing
extremely, your conscience, says the d^unkard, will not suffer you to be
drunk, your conscience, says the swearer, will not suffer you to swear, O
you are a tender conscioned man? Thus if there be any desire or disposition of
doing good, wicked company blast it even in the and. This is the cause that
many young men curse their companions, or else when they are going the way of
all flesh, this strikes him to the heart, the time was I may say, that God gave
me some inclinations after goodness, and my heart was wandering after heaven,
and mine eyes were opened, and my mind enlightened, and I had a resolution to
take up good courses, and perform duties, but oh this ill company spoiled all,
this was the man that cut me off from my course, and that took away my
disposition of spirit from me, and made me twice as bad as himself, though he
be as bad as the devil.

2 Parti,
Cursed loose company, it deprives the soul of the benefit of all the means,
and hinders the success of all the Ordinances of God, that they can never
work upon the heart, wonder not then, though they cause a man to break all
the commandments of God, since the Word of God works not, nor cannot for these
three causes.

First, either it keeps a man from coming under the means, and therefore
shall never receive good thereby, loose company load all holy courses with
such scandalous reproaches, that they scare poor sinful creatures from
undergoing of them.

2 Nay further, it is the policy of all loose persons, they will appoint their
meetings when they may hinder men most from the means that may do them good,
and this is the reason, that of all the days in the week, they choose the
Lords day, and of all the hours in the day, the Sermon or Prayer time is the^
hour wherein they meet. And if he be resolved to attend upon the means, they
then fore-stall the market, and make him have a slight account of preaching;
what need we all this preaching? let him preach till his heart ache, who is
the better for his preaching; so then if the poor soul does come, the soul
hear and cares not, if he cares, he attends not, if he attends, he regards
not, if any thing touch him, he casts it off, as if it did not concern him.

Thirdly, loose persons, if it be so, that any thing do remain upon the
heart, if the Lord comes home and affrights his soul, and discover his sin,
and writes bitter things against him, and the soul promises, resolves to
turn unto the Lord, and to leave all, never to return. O then what a do is
there with this cursed rabble to pecke out the good seed of the Word which is
sown in the heart, they will never leave plucking and haling of the poor
soul, til they have made him cast away the blessed truth: it is with cursed
ones in this case as it is with the ravenous bird, Math. 13. Hence it is, that
it they see one hang the wing a little and go aside, they think the Minister
has wounded him, and they imagine he will withdraw himself from their
company, therefore they make after the soul overcome, and thus they set upon
him, why is it? how comes it? what is the reason? what is the cause, that thou
art thus disquieted? what art a mad man to be troubled thus at the words of a
Minister, I would never do it while I lived, what would I care what all the
Ministers in the world should say, they must say something, now let not this
trouble thee; and thus they pluck the soul from under the power of the
means, and happily the seed of the Word that the Lord then sowed, will never
sow it again, may be it was the last time of asking, had he then withdrawn
himself from the society, that seed might have taken root, and he might
have been blessed for ever, but the ravenous companions stole it away: thus
then we see wicked companions keeps a man from coming to the Word; if he does
come, they forestall the power of the Word, if the Word does prevail, they
pluck the seed of the Word out of the soul, that it can do their souls no
good that keep company with the wicked.

3 Parti.
Your cursed companions will never leave a poor sinner till they mould him even
according to their own mind, until they bring him to their own bent and
frame: therefore note thou that keep company with wicked ungodly persons,
they will leaven thee according to their own frame, and they will leave thee,
the very same lusts and corruptions, this is the cause of a final and total
destruction of a world of people. There is this kind of privilege in ungodly
company keepers, that there is a kind of army of corruptions, they are the
devils army, and they, fight the devils battles, therefore the soul is beset
round with them. Were a man to fight against another man, there were some hope
of resistance, or if there were two against one, there were some hope of
es^ape, if he could not oppose them, yet he might sly from them: but if he
be among an army there is no way to escape: so it is with those that keep
wicked company, thou art beset with an army, perhaps profaneness hit thee not,
their hypocrisy; happily hypocrisy does not, their looseness, happily loosnesse
does not, then envy or some other distemper. Imagine you see a man in the midst
of an army of Archers, happly though one hit him not, yet one of twenty; if
one of twenty hit him not, one of a hundred may; if one of a hundred may not,
one of a thousand may, one or other will hit him, he cannot avoid it, all
ungodly courses, all wicked speeches, counsels, persuasions are but like so
many arrows, and thou that art in the midst of wicked persons, thou art in the
midst of an army, one or other will hit thee, thy conscience will be wounded,
thy soul ruinated by this means. This I observe by my experience wicked men
will never leave till others be worse than themselves; they are like the foggy
air in the Fenns, if a man live in the place it will be sure to arrest him; it
is called the Fenne Bailiffe, and will never leave till it has turned the
humor of his body into the same nature with it self and then he may live
there, and have his health well enough: so it is with a company of filthy foggy
drunkards, and adulterers, and company-keepers, they will never leave thee till
they arrest thee with base courses, til they have molded thee with their
frame, then thou may enjoy their society here, wi^h them and go down to
hell hereafter, Mat. 23 15. So it is generally in this case, he that before
company-keeping was somewhat tender and shamefast, he would blush to be seen
in an Alehouse and in base courses; but after he has bin a while with them,
they make him twofold the child of the devil, now he has a whores forehead,
and his brow is of brass, and his neck of iron sinews, and dares be drunk
at noone day, etc. the reason is, he is perfectly new molded.

Instruction

But

O take heed of this, if the Saints of God say, depart from me ye wicked:
what will then the God of all Saints, if the gracious Saints will not abide
thee here, will the God of all Grace abide thee in heaven hereafter; no no the
fearful sentence will pass upon you, at the great day of account, Depart
from me ye cursed; therefore labor to be senceable of this, and so be humbled
and abased for this, and labor for to be better, and then the Saints of God
will love and delight in your society.

THE CHVRCHES Deliverances.
IVDGES 10.13. Wherefore I will deliver you no more.


THese words are the speech of the Lord to the people of Israel. From the sixth
Verse of the Chapter, to the end of the seventh we have the condition of the
people of Israel in great distress discovered, together with the dealing of
God toward them, and their behavior toward him.

In the Chapter three things are especially considerable:

First, we have the children of Israel Apostatizing, and declining from the
Lord, and the sincerity of his worship. In the first part of the Verse, Ye
have forsaken me, and served other Gods: Here was the declining of the people
of Israel; they forsook the true God, and served false gods; and as their
sins were, so were their plagues, the Lord pursued them with heavy
judgments, and fierce indignation: heinous sins are commonly accompanied
with great plagues and punishments, and that appears in the ninth Verse:
Israel was sore distressed.

Secondly, we have the people of Israel crying and complaining to the Lord, in
the time of their trouble; they that forsake the Lord in the time of
prosperity, were feign to fly to him in time of adversity for succor: And
therefore we shall see how earnestly they cry unto the Lord, in the tenth
Verse; heavy afflictions breed hearty prayers and earnest supplications; their
punishment was not so grievous, but their prayers were as hot and vehement,
They cried to the Lord, says the Text.

Then lastly, we have the Answer of God, in the 12, 13, and 14. Verses, where
the Lord does relate his good dealings with them: and their unkind dealing
toward him: I have delivered you, says the Lord, out of the hand of such and
such enemies; he reckons up his former mercies, but now he does deny to show
any more favor toward them, because they had abused his former mercies, and
that is, in the words of the Text, Wherefore I will deliver you no more (as who
should say) go now to the gods of Zidon, let those Idols save you now, let
those Images deliver you now: but my kindness was not regarded, my mercy was not
respected, and for my part I will deliver you no more, expect no succor from
me at all.

In the general, before we come to the maine, see here the denial of the
Lord to the people of Israel, though they sought him, and cried unto him. The
Point is this, Those that come unto God in prayer in their sins, they shall be
sure to have a denial of their prayers, Psalm. 66.8. If I regard iniquity in my
heart, God will not hear my prayer: so it was here, though they sought God
mavelous earnestly; and cried in the vehemency of their spirits, yet the
Lord stopped his ears, and listened not unto them, he gives no answer unto
their cry; he professes plainly, he will not deliver them, he will not
succor them.

The Use of this Point in general is this: First, covetousness, it is not
praying but lying, and dissembling, and mocking, and abusing the great God of
heaven; as though we should come before the Lord to ask him leave to sin,
and entreat favor of him that we might commit our sins without any
disquiet, that he would give us a privy seal to sin: these drunken prayers,
these idle proud profane prayers, and lying prayers, the God of heaven will
not hear them, when they come from a lying, dissembling filthy drunken heart;
thou that bring such prayers, the Lord will not hear, the Lord will not
accept, the Lord will not regard such prayers. This is the thing, I would have
wicked men take notice of, that think to heal all in the time of distress,
with a few large desires and idle wishes, they will be proud and loose, and
opposers of God and his Gospel, and yet you think God cannot but grant you
what you desire, if you have but half an hours warning to ask pardon: no,
you that live in your sins, and pray to God in your sins, you bring
judgment upon your selves, and plague upon your souls, but mercy you shall
have none, answer you shall not receive in this kind, Prove. 28.9. The prayer
of the wicked, etc.

The second Use is a ground Esaias 1.17. Cease to do evil, learn to do well:
and then whatsoever your abominations be, they shall be pardoned, whatsoever
your miseries be, I will ease you, Psalm. 10.17, 18. The Lord prepares the
hearts of his people to call upon him, a heart mourning for sin, and a heart
loosned from sin: when you leave sin behind you, and send up a prayer from
an humble heart and a broken soul, then God will hear you, and you shall
receive an answer from the God of heaven, as he sees you have most need to
carry you on in a Christian course. In the Verse there are three things
observeable: He says, I will not deliver you, go to your gods let them
comfort you, for my part, I have no comfort, no mercy for such as you are,
those gods you served in prosperity go to them now for succor in the time of
trouble: In the Verse it self, take notice of three things; first, that God
does deliver his Church, for that is presumed, I will deliver you no more (as
who should say) I have preserved you, and protected you and the like: God takes
this for granted, and they found this by experience. Secondly, God sometimes
denies succor to his people, I have done so, but now I will deliver you no
more; I have no more mercy for you to succor you in the day of trouble.
Thirdly we have the cause of this: Wherefore, that is, because you have served
other gods, and departed away from my worship, because you will not reform
your wicked ways, I will deliver you no more First, for the former, God does
deliver his Church. The Doctrine is this, The Lord is the deliverer of his
Church and people in the time of trouble: the Church is in great misery it is
confessed, and the Church has been delivered, it cannot be denied; now I must
add the third (namely) That God is the Author of the deliverance of his
Servants: Psalm. 3 last. The Prophet David attributes this as a matter of
propriety to the Lord, Salvation belongs unto the Lord; it is not to be
understood of spiritual redemption only, but also of temporal deliverance in
the time of trouble: It is that observeable, Ier. 14.8. It is as I may so say,
one of Gods Names whereby he is known to his Church, and whereby he shows
himself, Oh, thou the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in the time of
trouble. It is not meant in regard of spiritual redemption still, but in
regard of temporal deliverance from those troubles that do betide, and those
grievances that lie upon, and those heavy burdens that press down the
Church of God, and therefore how ever it is true, there are many means used,
and many helps appointed by God for his peoples good; yet it is not men, it is
not the policy of the wise, it is not the power of the mighty, it is not the
fence of the Walls, nor the strength of the Castles, it is not the number of
the Soldiers, nor the skill of the army: but it is the Lord that is the
deliverer of his people, as we may see Psalm. 44 4 Command th^n deliverance unto
Jacob: the Lord has deliverance at command, the Lord can bring, keep and
succor as he sees fit, nay it is that which God takes and challenges to
himself, as that he will not have any other to share in, he will not have
any other part stakes with him, in the performance of goodness and mercy to
his children, Deuteronomy. 32.39. It is that the Lord takes unto himself, salvation
is mine, preservation is mine, the issues of life and death, are only in the
hand of the Lord, the point then is plain enough, we will open the ground of
it, the which the cause now requires, being a remembrance of that miraculous
deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason; The grounds of the point, are four,
The first is this, God is infinitely wise, and only knows how to deliver his
people, men are driven to their wits end many times, they see no means
offered, no means appointed, they can sinde no cause how to succor themselves
in the time of distress, but he is an experienced deliverer, 2 Pet. 2.9. God
knows how to deliver his, when enemies are practicing beneath, and digging
deep in their devices, the Lord sits in heaven, and sees all, and laughes at
them; all their practices he observes them, nay the Lord knows all the
purposes, policies, and engines, which the wicked purposes to contrive, before
they contrive them, as when David was in K^ylah, he asked the Lord, will Saul
come, aye says God, and will they deliver me into his hands, they will
deliver thee says God; the Lord knew what the men of Keylah intended, before
they showed their malice, therefore he makes way for the escape of David.

Secondly, as God only knows, all the engines and policies and practices of
the wicked, when they are devised in the depth of the earth, as the Psalmist
speaks: Let them do what they will, and endeavor what they can never so
cunningly and secretly, the Lord knows them. But secondly, the Lord is only
able and sufficient to deliver his in want of means, above means, nay against
means, 2 Chronicles. 14.11 When Asa was in great extremity, when there was five
hundred thousand came against him, the greatest Army we read of in holy
Scriptures, and not many more in profane Stories, the Text says, He cried
unto the Lord, and said, thou can deliver by many or by few; God could save
Asa and his Nobles, though he had no Army at all; for observe it, this
All-sufficiencie and ability of God, in delivering his children in time of
troubles, will discover it self in three branches, and they are the
particulars of this second general.

First, the Lord provides means, before any means can be Psalm. 47. the last
Verse, all the shields of the earth are the Lords; all the shields in Spain,
Germany and Denmark, and England, they are all the Lords, all mean before
they are, have their being from the Lord, and Esaias 54.16. the Text says, there
was no Smith before God created him, nor no coals before God made them, so
that there are no means but they came from God.

Secondly, God works with all means before they can work, as there is no
means unless God provide them; so the means that ar^ can do nothing unless
God work with them, Psalm 18.34.39. we shall observe it, God does not only
give David arms, but he teaches his arms to war he does not only give
D^vid hands, but he teaches his hands to fight, he does not only give him
strength, but he girdeth him with strength to the battle, so that all means
in the world, further than God is pleased to go out with them, they are like
the withered hand of Jeroboam when the Prophet cried against the Altar:
Jeroboam stretched out his hand, and he would plague the Prophet, and he would
imprison him, but alas, his hand withered, so all the armies, all the plots and
policies, are like withered hands, unless the Lord come with them.

Thirdly, it is the Lord that gives success to all the means, when they are
improved for the deliverance of his Church; so that as there is no means
unless the Lord provide them, as those means can do nothing unless the Lord
work with them: so these means can obtain no issue, they can compass no
good, unless the Lord be pleased graciously to breath upon them, and give
success unto them: therefore when the Midianites thought to have carried all
before them, and quite to overthrow the people of Israel, because they had a
mighty army, yet the Lord defeated their purpose, and turned their swords into
their own bowels. Thus we see the ability and sufficiency of the Lord in
delivering his people, it is he that gives all means, it is he that works
with all means, it is he that gives success to all means. In the third
place, the Lord is mavelous gracious and merciful and tender over his
people; as he is every way sufficient for to do them good, so he is mavelous
careful of their good, Esaias 63.9. in all their afflictions he was afflicted;
many a man has power and wisdom and all, he knows how to help another, yet
he wants a heart, he wants pity and compassion whereby he may lend succor to
those that stand in need thereof: but it is not so with God, but in all the
afflictions of his people, he is afflicted with them; in all troubles, he is in
trouble with them; in all banishment he is in banishment with them.

Fourthly, as the Lord is merciful, and loving and free and tenderhearted
toward his people, as ready to help them as they are ready to call upon him;
so lastly, the Lord is marvelous watchful, to do that which he is able and
willing to do: we know what the Text says, Psalm 121.4. He that keeps
Israel, neither slumbers nor sleeps. Nay, he is exceeding zealous for Israel:
That is the phrase of the Prophet: Let us sum up the Point then, and see the
issue of all, and the case will be marvelous clear: If it be so, that God
only knows how to deliver his people, if he be able to do what he knows, if
he be merciful to do what he is able, and if he be watchful to do what he
is willing, then God must needs be the deliverer of his Church.

We come now to the use of the Point, and so we will proceed to the next. It
is great pity that we should so behave our selves, that this God should not
succor us; but say, He will deliver us no more, but let us make use of the
Point in hand. And the Use we are to make is this;

Is it so, and preservation we have enjoyed, to whom it is, we ought to
render all the glory of our protection and safety, that has been continued
for the space of above sixty years to this Kin^dome; Do as the Prophet David
does: The Lord is the Author of all, let the Lord have the honor of all, Give
unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name. The Prophet David does distraine,
as it were, he is violent with the hearts of men, and he labors to wrest
praise and honor from men, Give unto the Lord the honor and the glory due
unto his name: the truth is, we must not sacrifice to our own nets, that is,
we must not praise our own power, and say, it is our power that has
accomplished it, and our wisdom that has effected it: no, it is not our
shipping, it is not our power or courage, or means that have done it.
Therefore let us do as the Prophet David does, in the 44. Psalm, It was not
my Bow that did succor me, it was the Lord that has delivered me, and
relieved me, and his be the praise for ever: and if all people should do this,
and ought to do this, then I had almost said, nay, why may I not say so, why
should we not do it more than all the world besides, for whence comes it,
whence is it, that the Lord has had an eye unto me above all the rest, when
the fire of Gods fury has flamed and consumed all the country round about us;
Bohemia, and the Palatinate, and Denmark, when the fire has thus burnt up
all, yet this little Cottage, this little England, this Spanne of ground, that
this should not be searched, nay when the sword has ruinated, and overcome all
the other parts of Christendom, where the name of the Lord Jesus is professed,
we sit under our Vines and Figtrees, there is no complaining in our streets,
our wives are not husbandlesse, our children are not fatherless: mark the
reason and ground of all, is nothing else but Gods mercy toward us, and above
all, here is seen the abundant goodness of the Lord, notwithstanding our
unthankefulnesse and carelessness, we yet continue to be a nation, there is no
other reason to be given of this, but Gods love will have it so, when as in
other Countries, here one is banished from his house, another from his country,
that we are here this day to call upon the Name of the Lord, this is evidence
enough that it is the Lord that delivers England: and shall the Lord do this,
and shall not we acknowledge it, shall not we observe it and remember it for
ever, shall not we score up the kindness of the Lord, and set up pillars of
his preservation and records of his mercy to our souls for ever; and above all
other deliverances, that in 88. was a great deliverance, but we specially
record that upon the fifth of November: this we record unto all posterity;
and let us but cast our thoughts upon the malice of our enemies, and then it
cannot but be confessed that the Lord has delivered us: it is the Lords own
work; and this shall appear, if we compare the practice of the wicked, and
the deliverance of the Lord together agreeably, three things in the former may
be observed, three things in the latter may be considered, and does show that
God only delivered, if we look to the enemies of Gods grace and Gospel,
three things will make it appear, that none but the devil could devise that
plot, and if on the other side, we consider the succor and deliverance the
Lord did lend, it will appear that none but the Lord could deliver us and
succor and relieve us. Let us consider three things in the Gunpowder plot.
First, observe their policy; secondly, their malice; thirdly, their
stoutnesse, whereby it will appear, that they intended the whole ruin, not
only of us, but of the Gospel, they thought to have carried the matter so
cunningly, that it should never have been spied, nay, so fiercely, that it
should never have been recovered; first, for the former, behold in the
forefront the depth of their policy the place, that is mavelous fit, the
conveiance mavelous easy the pretense mavelous unsuspected, for they have
a seller, it is in the earth, and hard by the water that they may convey things
thither: and what can be alleged better than barrells of beer for a seller,
and therefore no man questioned or imagined, that there was any matter of
treason intended against the State: Secondly, as their policy was great, so
the rage of these sinful persons was beyond measure hellish; for murder is so
unnatural, that the earth groans under it, and the Sun blushes to behold a
murderer: but to stay a Magistrate, the Law of Nations and Civilitie loathes
it, but to lay hands upon the anointed of the Lord Reason and Religion, and the
law of all Nations condemns it to the pit of hell. It was not the blood of a
subject they did intend to spill, nor of a Magistrate, that they did desire to
take, nor yet the blood of the King they sought for, but when the best of the
Cominaltie and Gentry of the Land were assembled, the choicest of the Nobles
and the Council, the King himself, the highest of all degrees, and the
choicest of all estates, when King, Queen, and Nobles were there assembled for
the glory of God, and to enact good laws for this Common wealth, now these in
that place in one hour, in one instant should all have been miserably blown
up and torn in pieces, so they should not have been found, or being found,
should not have been known that they might be buried according to their
degree: This is that matchless villainy, and that unconceiveable treachery,
which the Papists had contrived, and had not God delivered us (blessed be his
name, he did so) but had he not delivered us, we may easily conceive what the
success would have been. Oh the lamentable confusion that would have been in
every corner of the land, when a man's goods should have been taken from him,
and no law to help him, nay, his liberty should have been deprived of, and
his blood should have been shed, and no man to relieve him; therefore since
this might have been; and since the Lord has preserved us, that it is not so,
score up this goodness, and think of this kindness of the Lord. This is the
fruit of Popery, and the practice of the Papists. Oh that you would loath such
savage cruelty worse than hell it self. Add hereunto the third thing we must
take notice of, if any thing more may be conceived to manifest the heinousness
of the fact, the actors of the work took the Sacrament upon it, that they
might not go back from the performance hereof: what cursed wretches were
these, not only to commit sin, but to make the Lord the Author of it, nay,
to make the Sacrament the scale of the desolation of the Church: Could the
devil do more, I think he could scarce endeavor to do worse: this was their
policy, and it should have been our misery, if the Lord had not delivered us.
Thus we see the policy, their malice and resolution that we are defended from
this malice of theirs, and succored from this policy of theirs, there is no
other reason can be rendered, but the Lord is the defender of his people; it
was by his, power that we were delivered, and that we are a Nation this day,
it was the Lords work, and to him we ought to return all the praise; so much
for the first Use of the Point.

The second use is this If God shall send desolation upon the Land, and we be
scattered one from another, yet uphold your hearts and sustain your souls,
the Lord will say to the South give up, and to the North keep not back, but
bring my servants from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth, he
will restore those little ones again, and they shall live to praise his Name,
and magnify the greatness of his power, he can deliver against all means,
against all hopes and expectations; think this against the time of trouble:
the enemy is very strong, and we are weak, if you expect any strange extremity
intended against us, think of this against that time, though the policy
malice and power of the enemy be great, and we are weak and feeble, yet the
Lord is still the deliverer of his servants, and behold the salvation of the
Lord, the Lord has power enough still, and can overpower the power of the
enemy, the Lord has wisdom still, and can defeat the policy of thy enemy:
think of this, and hear for after times.

The last Use is an Use of exhortation: Luke 1 74, 75. see the Collection there
made; He has delivered us from the fear of our enemies, that we should serve
him in righteousness and holiness all the days of our lives. God has
redeemed us from the jaws of hell, and the bond of the devil, (to what
purpose) that being redeemed from the devil, and from our temporal enemies,
we should live in baseness, and looseness, and dishonor him as he has
delivered us? No, but to serve him in holiness and righteousness; not in
Holiness only, in regard of the first Table, but in Righteousness also, in
regard of the second Table, and before him, that is, in Sincerity, and all the
days of our life, that is, in the days of grace and prosperity, as also in
the days of affliction: therefore say, the Lord has delivered us in Eighty
eight, and in the Gunpowder treason, to what purpose, therefore call upon one
another and say, our lives, our substance and all we have is the Lords,
therefore let us serve him, and glorify him, 1 Samuel 27.28. when Hannah asked a
child, and the Lord heard her, when she had the child, she returns, and mark
how she pleads, I prayed for the child, and the Lord heard me, therefore I will
give him again unto the Lord. You Fathers of Israel, and Daughters of Sarah,
men and brethren, think of it: Nay, I go further, you little ones that are
preserved this day that you live, you may thank the Lord; if Eighty eight or
the Gunpowder treason had taken place, where had you and your fathers been; but
if children will not, or can not, yet you mothers teach them, and fathers
instruct them, think of it, and join all in the same resolution, do as Hanna
did, present all you have about you before the Lord, and say, these children
are thine, we begged them in Eighty eight, and in the Gunpowder treason, they
are thine by creation, they are thine by preservation, it is the Lord that has
delivered us from the jaws of the Lion, from the power of malicious enemies,
therefore now join hands and hearts together, and say, Lord bless goods and
children, all we have is thine, we consecrate all to thy Majesty; had the
Papists prevailed, had the Powder plot taken ground, we had been defeated, but
thy power resisted them, and thy wisdom defeated them, therefore all is
thine, and we render all unto thee. Thus I charge you, give up all unto the
Lord, he gave all at first, he has preserved all hitherto, therefore give up
all to the Lord, as you have received all from him.

The second part of the Exhortation is this, as we must consecrate all to God
that has given all, so secondly, here is a point of wisdom, Labor to be in
league with this God. Oh that I could persuade you to tender your own comfort.
If you heard the enemies were landed, you would run a hurry and say, how
shall we be saved and delivered? what course shall we take, and whether shall
we go? Now learn a point of wisdom, and labor now to be in league with
that God, that is the deliverer in the time of trouble, make God on your side,
and then all will go well with you; deliverance is not in men, it is not in
power, it is not in policy, it is not in shipping, it is only of the Lord, in
whom you may have it and from whom you may receive it, persuade your hearts
therefore to be in league with this God, and to join sides with the Lord, that
in the time of trouble, he may pluck you out of the paw of the Lion, that he
may turn the heart of the enemy toward you; if he should come, God grant he
may never come; but in the mean time we shall do well to provide against the
day of trial and misery, which is like to approach unto us. I say no more, but
conclude this Point, with that, Joshua 9. as the Gibeonites dealt with Joshua,
so deal with God, at the 11. and 12. Verses: when the Gibeonites heard wha^
Joshua had done, that he had subdued all enemies, and slame all Kings that came
against him, and gotten a great victory; what course took they? they labored
to make peace with Joshua, they saw he was coming against them, and that the
Lord had given him exceeding strange victories: Now the Gibeonites come to
Joshua in Gigall, and tell him we are men of a far country, and we have
heard all that the Lord has done for you in Egypt, and what he has done to
Sihon King of Heshbon, and Og King of Bashan, wherefore our Elders said go and
meet them, and say we are thy servants, make a league with us. They heard how
God had destroyed Pharaoh, and his host that came against his children, and
how he delivered diverse Kings into their hands; therefore now they seek to
get favor with Joshua. We are thy servants, now therefore make a league with
us. Let this be your course: have you not heard of the greatness of God who
succored you in Eighty eight, and who was it that made good his promises unto
us in all extremities? It was the God of Israel, the Lord did all this; do as
the Gibeonites did, therefore humble your souls and seek to him, and say, we
are thy servants, only make a league with us, make peace with us; a league
defensive, and a league offensive, that the Lord may deliver us and stand by
us, that the Lord may be at peace with us, that in the day of trouble we may
receive comfort and grace from him: so much for that Point. But this is that
which cuts our hearts, and damps a man's endeavors, and makes his heart break
almost: aye, but what if God will not deliver, and make a league with us, a
shame it is, and a sorrow it should be that ever we should so behave our selves
toward this God, that he that has delivered us, should give us a flat den
all, and say, go to your Cups, you that are drunkards, and to your whores, you
that are adulterers, those are you gods, let them now deliver you, I will
deliver you and save you no more. Remember the time was, I have heard you, and
delivered you, but you turned my grace into wantonness, Therefore I will
deliver you no more. This will be a heavy doom, if God thus answer us. I come
therefore to the second Point The estate of Gods Church may be It is that which
God does here profess peremptorily, I will deliver you no more, you have not
acknowledged what I have done heretofore, nor walked worthy of it, therefore I
will now stay my hand and deliver you no more. The Point is clear, The estate
of Gods Church may be such, that he will send them no further succor and
relief, Luke 21.22. It is observeable, when the day of Jerusalem came on, and
when desolation should come upon it, the Lord calls them the days of
vengeance, as who should say, the Lord has a fit season appointed wherein he
will punish his Church and people, and when the time is come, those are the set
and determinate days of vengeance, and the seasons of plagues and punishments,
which the Lord which is the God of all seasons will observe: The Wiseman says
there is a season for every thing; A time to plant, and a time to lack up; a
season to do good to a Nation, and a season to overthrow a Na^ion, R^v. 14 15.
There is a harvest of vengance, when a people is ripe to ruin, put in thy
sickle for the harvest is ripe: the harvest is nothing else but the desolation
of a people, and the sickle is nothing else, but the ruin of a people, so that
there is a kind of ripeness, and fitness for desolation, wherein the Lord
will execute judgment upon his people, hence it is that the Lord says, he is
weary with bearing: nay, the patience of God is even put to a stand, Ier. 5.7.
How shall I spare thee for this; as who should say, God was put to a stay, as I
may speak with reverence, he was put to plea with himself, he knew not how to
preserve his own honor, and save them, as who should say, my long suffering
will endure it, but my faithfulness will not endure it my anger burns out
against you. I have spared you often, I will spare you no more, Esaias 1.24 there
the Ministers of his patience are at an end. I will ease me of my adversaries,
and avenge me of mine enemy; as if I had said, I have borne with you so long
that I have been pressed as a Cart is pressed under sheaves, at last I will
turn you off. I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies:
therefore, Ezeck. 14.14. there are three passages to be observed when the Lord
sees the time of destruction coming on and determined, the Text says, If
Daniel, Noah, and Job were among them, they should deliver none but their own
souls: you know if any thing will prevail with the Lord, it is Prayer, the
prayer of the faithful; Noah; Daniel, and Job, were eminent in prayer, yet the
prayers of the best deliver not sometimes, nay, if they should join all
together, for that is observeable, if they were in it, as in a draught, when a
Cart is at a plunge, one or two horses cannot pull it out, but if there come
two or three horses more stout and strong, they will pluck it out, or tear
all in pieces, but if these three should join all together their prayers and
desires for a people, the Lord says, As I live I will not save them: the Lord
takes an oath of it, now whatsoever the Lord swears to, it is undoubtedly
accomplished, that shows immutabilitie of the decree, other threatenings may be
dispensed withal, but as I live says the Lord, though they all pray and join
together, yet they shall not deliver this Nation from punishment; so then the
case is clear, you see there is a day of vengeance, a ripeness of a people
unto ruin, the Lord will bear no longer, nay he will ease himself, and all
the means under heaven cannot prevail with him, they continuing in their
estate, but now the maine thing comes on, when is this time, what is this
estate, when the Lord will not deliver any more, how shall we know it? when may
we fear it? how shall we judge of this condition of a people when it is thus
with them? Give me leave first to discover it in general, and then descend to
particulars, the case in the general is mavelous, the time when and what the
condition is, when the Lord will not deliver, Genesis 15.16. this is evidently set
forth. The Text says of Abraham, that the fourth generation that should come
of Abraham should come into the land of Canaan: but why should they not come
now? because, says the Text, the sins of the Amorites are not yet full and
perfectly ripe: this is the reason why Abraham and his posterity shall not take
possession of the land of Canaan for the present, intimating that if the sin
of the Amorites had been now full, the Lord would have brought his people into
Canaan and destroyed the Amorites, they should not have continued, but because
they were not yet ripe, therefore the Lord does still bear with them; so then
when the sin of a Nation comes to full ripeness and perfection, then the
truth is the Lord will save and deliver no more; now the ripeness of an estate
and condition will appear in two things, as it is in other things, in fruit,
and in the body of a man; we say a child is come to full growth when two
things befall him: when he has attained his full bigness, and when he is come
to be full of strength, we say then, he is as good a man as ever he will be;
so it is in the nature of sin: when sin is come to the full bigness and
strength and power it is the deadly symptom of desolation and confusion of a
Nation where such kind of sins are, therefore mark it, this is the cause
generally to be observed and concluded.

Now I come to the particulars, and here I must stay a little, because the
point lies here, and I must show two things, first, when sin is come to the
full bigness, and when it is come to the full strength and ripeness, and when
these two are proved, the Case will be clear; when a destruction of a people
is determined of God, and will be effected by God: these things belong to every
soul of you, if you have not hearts of Christians about you, but even of
humanity, as you are men, that belong to the same Country, and live in the
same Nation, these things belong unto you, therefore attend thereunto. And
first, I will open the first thing, and show you when sin is come to the full
bigness, and that it may be discovered by two things. The first is this, when
sin is grown universal, and common, and general, so that corruption is as
it were crept into every corner and coast of the Nation, nay, it accompanies
every sort and condition of men, in every place, in every village and town: I
must confess, that amongst a world of people some there will be, that will
keep their garments unspotted, and themselves undefiled from the courses of
the wicked, but this is not the meaning of the point: but sin is said to be
general, when the face of a Church and a Commonwealth is overspread with
base abominations, though some particulars be preserved, and some few keep
themselves unspotted there with, what is that to the maine, what is a handful
to the multitude, what is one family to a town, or one in a family, or one
street in a city? When sin overwhelmes the whole face and course of the
Church: when for the general, almost all sorts and conditions of men depart
from the Lord, Genesis 6.23. this we shall observe is the very note that hastens
desolation and discovers the bigness of sin: All flesh had corrupted their
ways, and God saw that the earth was full of violence, behold here is
universal injustice, profaneness and contempt of God and his ordinances, all
flesh had corrupted their ways, all kinds of men, great ones, poor ones,
honorable ones, base ones, all in all places and conditions, they all run in
the stream of ungodliness, therefore mark in the 6. Verse, the Text says,
It grieved the Lord at the heart that he had made man; God was inwardly vexed
with his people, and then he begins to make an end, a Deluge of sin, and a
Deludge of destruction, a sloud of wickedness overflowed the old world,
therefore the waters drowned the old world: Look as it is with a Garden, if
all the good fruit and herbs be spoiled, only here and there a root of an
herb, but all the rest is like a wilderness, then it is time to dig up the
ground; so when wickedness in a Land is grown like a wilderness, drunkenness
and swearing, like a wilderness, here and there is a Saint of God and a poor
soul, that walks in sincerity, but for the common, the general sort deny the
power of godliness; when it is come to this pass, this is the time for
desolation and ruin; go to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see
if there be any that does righteousness; it was a strange desolation of
righteousness, (as if the Lord had said, go from town to town, and see if
there be any Magistrate abiding, or any Churchwardens abiding, and mark, he
goes to the poor, and they know not the judgments of the Lord, then he goes
to the rich, and they know it, but they break all bonds. Now mark what the
Lord answers, Therefore a Lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a
Wolf of the evening shall devour them, because rich and poor and all were
backesliders, the Lord beset them with plagues, with Lions and Bears, and
Wolves, that is, ravenous enemies shall rend and tear them in pieces and none
shall deliver: As it is in a man, if all the blood and spirits be infected, if
the substantial parts, the head, the heart, and the liver be consuming and
rotting, there must follow a total ruin of the whole man, because there is an
universal kind of corruption. Look as it is in the building of an house,
when the maine pillars begin to rot, and the supporters of the house moulder
away, there is no supporting of it, but it must be made new, or else it will
fall down; as it is in the body natural, so also in the body politic, as in
the house, so in the estate, when there is a kind of rottenness in the body
and estates, when the head is sick, and the heart heavy; When the children
gather sticks, and the father kindles a fire, and the mother bakes cakes to
the Queen of heaven: this is when young and old, and all conspire together in
wickedness, the Lord sends fire from heaven and none shall quench it, Ier.
7.18. they all were busy to perform idolatrous worship, father and mother,
children and all, and says the Lord, Do they provoke me to anger, and not
themselves to the confusion of their own faces: so it is when the husband and
the wife and children, and all swear; when the father and mother hates
holiness, the Lord will send fire from heaven, and none shall quench it,
iniquity swells and grows big in such a case.

Secondly, the bigness of sin is discovered, when with the commonnesse of
sin, there is opennesse joined, when sin grows open, and shameless, when
the practisers thereof become bold and base in their abominable practices:
Look as it is with a graft, when it is little it cannot be perceived, the
hedge or pale may hide it, but when it is grown, it overtops the pale and
wall, and every man may perceive it; for when sin is committed only by a
few, when it is confined into a Cottage, or into an House, then it is not so
open to the view, but when all sorts are given to it, the sin comes to have a
whores forhead, and a brazen face; sinners are more bold to oppose governors
that are in place to punish it, then they are to execute the law upon them:
drunkenness was wont to be a rare thing, as one spoke, drunkenness was for
Beggars, but now it is for Gentlemen and Knights: this shows, that now sin
is open and shameless, and therefore that it is come to its full bigness, and
therefore we may justly expect desolation. But in the next place you will say,
how shall we know when sin is come to the full strength, I answer, look as it
is grace, so it is in sin: when a man can undergo all trials, and bear up
himself against all temptations and doubtings, when he can either recover
himself being fallen, or else keep himself, this is an undoubted sign of a
perfect and strong Christian: so it is in the nature of sin, in the body of
sin; in this old man of corruption, when a sinner is come to this pass, that
he is able by the power of his corruptions to withstand all the means of
reclaiming and reformation, when he is not bettered by them, nor cannot be
wrought upon by the power of them, then he is a strong wicked man, he is one
of the else sons of Satan: he is one of the generals of the field in the
camp of the devil; when all the helps that God has appointed, and all the
means that God has ordained for the subduing of base corruptions, yet if the
sins that are in a family, or town, or Nation, if the stream and tide of
them bear down all before them, the work of the Magistracy and Ministry,
and means appointed, then it is a sign, that sin is come to the full
strength, and that ruin and desolation shall befall that person, or family, or
town, or nation, when sin is come to that perfection, as it is in the body
of a man, when a Gangrene is spread so far that nothing can stop it, no
physic can remove it, it presageth the certain ruin of that man, that
member must be cut off, or else the body will perish: so when sin is grown
so remediless, that all the means which God has ordained for the purging out
of the same will not prevail, then it is a sign that sin is come to the
full strength, and that such a nation or person is fit for ruin. But you will
say, wherein does this strength of sin appear in the opposing the means of
reformation: I answer, it appears, in five particulars; The first is this,
when a Nation or People does not profit by all the corrections that God lays
upon them, when the rod and blows wherewith God has exercised them have not
proper and powerful effects in the hearts of those that have been beaten
mightily by the hand of God, when the corrections of the Lord, humble not a
People, and reform not a Nation, purge not the corruptions, and subdue not
their distempers, nor make them come home to him that smote them, this argues
the strength of corruption, when the fiercest indignation of the Lord is not
able to crush a proud drunkard, howsoever the Lord has sent many plagues into
this country, and into this town, here one is dying and there another is taken
away by the destroying Angel of the Lord, yet is not his drunkenness any whit
abated, that man will be as drunk and proud, and as scorning, and as
contemning of God and his ordinances as ever: Think of it, the God of heaven
will require it one day at your hands, when men will not be bettered by Gods
corrections, he will break them in pieces; this is the course that God takes
with them, Levit. 26.24. the Famine has been threatened, the plague inflicted
and the Sword is coming, when your husbands went to rack then you were
howling and crying, if the Sword come to pluck away the child out of the
mothers arms, then there will be howling and taking notice of the abomination
that harbors among you: if all the former judgments do it not, he will send
the Sword, and there are seven plagues in a Sword; he has a quarrel against
all profane persons that hate godliness: God will be revenged upon the heads
and hearts of them in that day, when he sends to visit them. Look as it is
with a Goldsmith, if he have a vessel or any piece in that nature that is all
battered or broken together, or if there be a crack in it, that all the
scowring and hammering of it will not bring it out, then he will melt it; so
when the canker of a base heart, this cankar of pride and covetousness, when
these eat into the hearts of a company of sinful creatures, he hammers them,
he sends plagues and sicknesses, but if all this will not do it, then he
will melt them, and destroy their cursed generation and raise a new building
that will walk with more care and conscience, and be subject with more
uprightness, to take his yoke upon them, and if the Lord should not proceed
after this manner, God could not maintain his own glory and Justice: if a
company of wretches might scoff at the corrections of the Lord, and count them
as matters of nothing they will brave the Almighty, let God do what he can,
we will be profane, and carnal, and unjust, let God plague us, we will be
more vicious than God can be angry with us, and execute plagues upon us: when
it is thus with wicked men, the Lord will make them feel his fingers, and they
that will not be amended, the Lord will knock them to pieces and consume them.
And when we shall see the streets run with the blood of drunkards and loose
persons, then you will say, had the hand of the Lord wrought upon us, it would
not now have been thus with us, Isai. 9.13. the Lord smote the people and they
returned not, therefore what says the Lord, he will plague and make an utter
ruin of them, because they would not humble themselves before the Lord, nor
seek to him, nor make their peace with him, the Lord has seven plagues more,
and he will welter you in your blood, and pluck your cursed abominations from
your bosoms, then you will say. God is just and terrible, and had we been
reformed by former punishments, we had not hence under this fierce rod which
we now feel.

The second sign of the strength of sin is this, when the Lord sends peace
and plenty, and prosperity, and these blessings of God do not persuade men
to love him so much the more, and use them so much the better, but they fall in
love with the gift, and for^ake the giver; you make your honor, and ease, and
pleasure, you make them gods, and depart from the Lord, which is the giver of
all, then it is just with the Lord to pluck away that ease and honor and
preferment that you dote upon, and are addicted to, that in the want of these,
you may learn to prize the Gospel, and learn to esteem of the Lord Christ
and his grace above all these contents the world can afford: now unless the
Lord should be accessory to the dishonor of his own name, what would you have
the Lord to do, would you have him give you peace and prosperity, to neglect
the peace of a good conscience; by this means God should be as it were, the
author of his own dishonor: no, no, think of it; I fear it will be true, if
the Lord should take away our ease and liberty, that we have made Idols off,
then you shall say, if you had prized God and Gospel more than ease and
liberty, you might have had these and God and Gospel too, Deuteronomy. 28.48. this is
that which will one day stick heavy upon your hearts; for your souls sake
think of it, and remember it; if the Lord should send the enemy upon us, and
lay hardness over us, and we should be made vassals unto the tyranny of
wicked men, this will stick to your hearts: had I served the Lord in plenty,
and such a time when I enjoyed the means of salvation, then it had been well
with me, but I was loose and profared the Lords day, and therefore it is just
now, I serve the enemy upon the Lords day, I am made a drudge and a vassal
and a slave to the malice of the wicked. It is just with God and righteous with
the Lord, you would not serve God when time was; you would not hear the Word
when time was, God will provide a course for you, you shall have service
enough, and God will hold you to it, you shall serve cruel and bloodthirsty
enemies, to the shame of your faces here, and to the ruin of you and yours
hereafter for ever, 2 Chronicles. 36.21. then shall the land rest one Sabbath, says
the Text: mark this among the Jews; the Lord appointed every seventh year to
be a Sabbath, that the Saints should rest, there should be no plowing nor
sowing and all creatures should rest; now they were so covetous that they would
pluck commonly out of the earth, the seventh year, well says the Lord, you
will not let the land rest, you shall be led captive, and then the land shall
rest on her Sabbath; it is just that God should pluck away these benefits, to
the confusion of our face, for ever when we abuse them. Look as it is with a
wife, if she should have a servant in the house which she loves more than her
husband, what course must be taken, he must fling him out of the house and
away with him; so when we should love God and prize his glory and truth, I,
yet we will love the world, and profit, and ease, and quiet, and peace, and
liberty, and we will do nothing that may hazard these: it is righteous with the
Lord to cashere those commodities, and pluck away the adulterous lover of
wealth and honor and ease, that he may make a way himself in your souls,
that he may rule in you, and take possession of you.

The third means is this, when corrections reform not, and the blessings of
God persuade not men, then the Lord vouchsafes to send his Word among his
people, and that should supply the want of all other means, and should be more
powerful than any other in the world besides, so that howsoever the covetous
Carle dotes upon his wealth, the Word should loosen his mind from it, and
reveal the vanity of it; however corrections humble not, yet the Word is able
to break the soul, and work the soul to an humble subjection, the Word is
the power of God to salvation, which is able to crush all corruptions, and
subdue all sins, but sin is come to this height that the Word is
unfruitful and unprofitable, then sin is desperately strong, and we are
then come to the last and worst estate that can be, it is more than we are
aware of, and more than commonly we consider of, we know not what we do, when
our hearts continue in resisting the Word of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. It is a
deadly sign of desolation of any people: When the liberty of Jerusalem was at
the last gasp, giving up the Ghost, and there was but an inch between them and
desolation, mark what the Text says, they mocked his Prophets, and despised
his Messengers, till the wrath of the Lord arose, and there was no remedy, here
was the ground, this was the maine thing, that the sin eats the estate in
sunder, and pulled down the pillars of the common wealth of Judea, you would
think, was it so much to despise the Word of a Minister, Ah, says the Text,
the wrath of the Lord arose and there was no remedy; as if he had said, the
Lord is able to bear much at the hands of ungodly men: and me thinks the Lord
says; I could have endured your drunkenness, and endured your profanesse, had
you but submitted to my Word, those corruptions might have been subdued, but
not only to practice ungodliness, but to refuse the word, that should subdue
those corruptions: when the Lord saw this, his wrath arose, and there was no
remedy, God can endure much, though a man have many corruptions in him, though
many sins have been committed by him if the soul be yet content to hear
and tremble at Gods Ordinances, but when a man is not content to commit sin
only, but he will oppose Gods Word: then the Lord, like the Lion of the tribe
of Judah, can hold no longer, then the wrath of the Lord arose, and there was
no remedy, but he would lay waste the Land, when we spill the physic that
should cure us, and cast away the salve that should heal us, how can we be
helped and cured, this is the ground and reason of those many phrases we have
in Scripture: Why? the Lord is said to extend his providence over a people, in
vouchsafing the Gospel, Mat. 23. the later end; it is a well known place, we
will open it a little and apply it to our purpose, because it is pregnant: the
Text says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee under
my wings by the preaching of the Gospel, and revealing of their sins, he
would have gathered their hearts unto him, and would have cast the wing of his
providence over a people, as they are willing to submit to the Gospel, but
Jerusalem would not, he sent his Prophets to reveal his will, they stoned
them, therefore says the Text, Your habitation is left unto you desolute, that
is the issue, they would not have the Word reform them, therefore they shall
have the Sword to plague them, Luke 19.44. the case is evident, the Lord
discovers the besiedging and the sacking of Jerusalem, there shall not a stone
be left upon a stone, because thou know not the time of thy visitation; as
who should say, the Lord came to visit Jerusalem with mercy to comfort her,
with pardon to cheer her, to show her her sins, and humble her soul, but she
regarded not this kindness of the Lord, therefore there is a siege about her,
and that is very heavy, and take notice of it. The Lord is specially angry
with a Nation, for the breach of his Covenant, and neglect of his worship, the
Lord does hate it, and is carried with great violence toward those people that
worship God falsely, 1 King. 13. the two last Verses, the Text says, He made
of the lowest of the people Priests: as who should say, he made a company of
drunkards, and belly-Gods Ministers, and is that such a great matter? Yes, that
one sin turned to the utter ruin of the house of Jeroboam, to root him out.

Fourthly, if this will not do the deed, but men will resist the means that
God puts into their hands: then fourthly, this is an other evidence, that sin
grows strong when there wants a competent number of mourners in a land, which
might uphold it, and join sides against sin and Satan, and maintain the
good of a kingdom, in despite of the wicked in a kingdom, this is one of the
last succors of supplies a kingdom has, how ever wicked men will not be
persuaded and humbled, yet if there be a competent number. if there be so many
as will make an army of fasting and prayer to grapple with God, they may
prevail with God for mercy for a kingdom, there is hope though the most be
naught, yet the better side will prevail, but when the floods of iniquity
slow in amain, so that the best of Gods people are taken aside with the
stream of corruption, and begin to grow careless, and not to oppose the
sins of the times, this is a sore argument that there is almost no remedy
for such a Nation, no means to beat back the indignation of the Lord, Genesis
19 when Sodom could not save it self, ten righteous persons would have saved
it, though they would have pulled Gods indignation upon them, yet a competent
number often men would have stayed the indignation, and gone between the
living and the dead; so were there a proportionable number of mourners in a
Land, though there be a company of mocke-gods, that would pull down the
indignation of God upon them, yet a company of godly gracious men might strive
with the Lord, and uphold their liberty, but when corruptions are grown so
strong that good men are defiled, and their hearts tainted, and their mouths
stopped, woe to that kingdom and people: Look as it is with the seacoast,
when the banks are such that they can bear out the waves, be the sea never so
boisterous, there is hope of safety, but if the sea break all before it,
there is no hope to stop it, so it is in this case, the banks that bear out
the indignation of the Lord, are righteous holy men, they stay the hand of God,
and stop the flood of Gods vengeance; that they do not break in and overflow
all, but if the bank be gone, if a convenient company of godly men be taken
away, then there is no hope of mercy, but the sea of Gods indignation will flow
in amain upon that place.

The fifth and last means, to uphold liberty and safety of a Nation, is this
when men begin to be sensible of misery, when they have eyes to see the plague,
and hearts affected with the sins committed, and with the judgments deserved
when they observe what will befall, they will use some means that it may not
befall: but when a people grow senseless, and benumbed, and secure, in a base
practice and ungodly course, that they observe not the evils committed, nor
take notice of the judgments of God deserved, but lie in a careless secure
condition, there is no expectation in reason how such a Nation should prevent
the wrath of the Almighty, when they see not what shall befall, have no care to
prevent what may befall, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. There is a warning shot before the
Cannon shot, there is a watch word before destruction comes, when they cry
peace, then comes destruction: when they quiet themselves in their own
courses- when they are not only wicked, but secure in their wickedness, then
comes sudden destruction, I conclude with that, Matthew. 24.39. As it was in
the days of Noah, there the Lord as it were smites men with Plagues answerable
to their sins, they were careless and secure in the days of Noah, and then
came sudden destruction, so it will be now, as in the days of Noah, when
Noah, was knocking the Arc, every nail he drove, was a Sermon: Repent you
carnal and unjust oppressors, the flood is coming and desolation approaching,
but they knew nothing, that is, they feared no such matter: Let N^ah say what
he will, what, a flood come and destroy all the world? it will not be, it
cannot be, they knew nothing before the slood came, so then the issue is this,
when sin is grown universal, when men are shameless in the commission
thereof, and out-bid all means of reformation, the corrections of the Lord
humble not, the mercies of the Lord persuade not, the word reformes not, nay
when the righteous are perished from the earth, and the banks are broken
down, when there is not a competent number of mourners, to withstand the wrath
of the Lord, nay when men are senseless and secure, all men commit sin, and
fear not the wrath of God for sin, then sin comes to be of a Giant-like
strength and bigness.

We will now make use of the point, the case is clear, when sin outbids all
means of reformation, then men are ripe for desolation, we will first raise a
ground of instruction, and then make way for an use of examination, and learn
this point of instruction, that this, of all plagues under heaven, is one of
the heaviest of all judgments, it is the sorest that a wicked man should
prosper and thrive in his ungodly courses, that he should be able to break
through the net, and come off clearly; whatsoever comes to the countrary, he
has what he will, and does what he please, and no word reformes him, no
means hinder him, think of this when the Lord pulls up the stake, and gives
him the reine, and lets him go post-haste, and hurry headlong down to
destruction, that is the only way to pull the soul of a sinner into the
bottomless pit. It is said, Hosea 2. that when the Lord does please to bring
any of his people home, this is Gods special care in the sixth Verse, the Lord
pricks his fingers, and stops him, and makes a hedge about a covetous
deceitful wretch, that he cannot break through but he has now a knock of
conscience, now a judgment of God, now a terror of the Almighty. This is the
only way to bring a soul home to God, then she will say, I will return unto
my first husband, but this is one of the heaviest judgments, and sorest
plagues that can befall a sinful creature, that the Lord should pull down the
hedge, and break open the wall, and let them run riot, take thy course, and
follow thy vanities, I will hinder thee no more till I have thee in hell, and
then thou shall be plagued for all together, Ier. 12.3. it is a fine phrase,
when Jeremie was perplexed with the prosperity of the wicked, he was
marvelously troubled, because of the excellency of ungodly men, at last he
quits himself with this, they were as Sheep fatted for the slaughter. What
will become of you that have all means of reformation, the Lords mercies and
Ministers, and judgments have striven with you; what will become of you when
such a creature comes to hell, the devil will make bonefires of him, but they
shall make holy day in hell, their plagues shall be nothing to theirs that have
had all means, and resisted all means of grace and salvation, the devils
will rejoice to meet a drunkard in hell, and say, what art thou come to hell,
after all means vouchsafed, and all helps bestowed? the devils will make
bonefires, and stand on tip-toes and crow over such persons. What, you that
enjoyed the means of grace and salvation, what, you come to hell too; all the
whole route of them will outbrave such an opposer of God, and his ordinances,
he shall be a head block in hell; I will conclude the point and say no more;
if there be any such here present, (as there is too many) that can brag of
their loose courses, and glory of their villainy; I drunk him under the table,
no counsel shall prevail with him, no means shall take place in him, do
boast of thy villainy in this kind, do glory because thou thrivest in thy
wickedness; woe, woe to thy soul, thou art ready for the slaughter, and the
Lord shall bring thee down into everlasting destruction; know it, God has
said, when the harvest is ripe, he will put in the Sickle, and thou that art
ripe shall be sure of desolation: Look as it is with a sick man, when meat
cannot nourish him, when physic works not, and Physicians are at a stand,
and all leave him, then we say he is but a dead man; the Physicians have left
him, think of it, the Lord of heaven comes to visit thee, thy sick soul is
like the sick man, many mercies he powers into thy soul to humble thee, many
judgments, to eat out thy proud flesh; he comes to lance thee on one side,
and bind thee upon the other side, but if all these will do thee no good, it
is a fearful symptom; nay it is certain, there was never any man so sure to
dye when all means left him, as thy soul shall be damned when all means
prevail not.

The second use is a use of examination, Is this true then, when sin grows
ripe, then the Lord will not succor and relieve any more, then we may have a
shroud guess, and gather a soar argument of the ruin and desolation of any
person, town or country, when a Nation is as it were giving up the ghost, and
drawing on to everlasting destruction, the former doctrine will be a mervelous
help, and great succor unto us for direction in this ca^e: The Physicians,
one part of their skill is this, they call it a foretelling sign, whereby they
have a soar guess when the body is dying, and nature growing on to
dissolution; when they see such and such signs in a man, they say he is dying,
why the truth says, the Text says, and the Scriptures profess it, where ever
there is a full increase a full strength of sin, an universal kind of
incorrigiblenesse in a sinful course, it is a deadly sign that that state,
kingdom or person, is breathing out his last, and drawing to desolation, as
near as may be.

THE DECEITFVLnesse of sin.
PSALM. 119.29. Remove from me the way of lying, and grant me thy Law
graciously.


TO press on to the words, and not to make any long Preface either with the
commendation of this book of Psalms in general, or this Psalm in
particular, only thus much, Interpreters observe this Psalm as a Diamond
among Pearls, or as the Gold among other mettalls, or as Saul higher then his
brethren there is a kind of excellency which Interpreters conceive to be in
this Psalm; partly in regard of the largeness of the matter, partly in regard
of the spirit, and life, and strength that appears in every line therein; Not
to trouble you with these tinglings which come only to the care, but are not
sappy to nourish and affect the heart, only a little consider that the Lord by
the Penman of this Psalm, does strive after a spiritual kind of
exquisitnesse, dividing it into 22. Parts, according to the Hebrew Alphabet,
and every part having two verses beginning with the same Letter. Secondly it is
observeable, that among 176. verses there is not above one or two but
mentions the Law of God, either Law, or Precepts, or Commandments, or Word,
or Statutes, Testimonies or the like, as if the Prophet David had bestowed
himself wholly, and had been eaten up with the Law of God. The aim of the
Text is to discover the great desire that the holy Psalmist has, and
expresses to God for the removal of the body of sin that was upon him, and
for the supply of that grace he stood in need of, and craved at the hands of
the Lord, and the two parts of David, prayer are the two parts of the Text; the
first is the evil that he would have removed from him, first, take from me
the way of lying, the second is the great good he needs, and begs and craves
to be bestowed, upon him, grant me thy Law graciously.

In the former again take notice of two things, the first is the nature of the
sin described, and it is termed the way of lying. The second is the
affection David had to this sin, he was weary of it, and burdened with it,
and was desirous to have it removed from him, take it from me, and not only
take it, but cause it to go away, as the Hebrew phrase carries it, it implies
an action upon an action, as the Hebrew expresses it, if the way of lying will
not go, Lord take it away from the soul of thy servant; we will first come
to the first part, and pass breefely, because it is not the maine thing we
intend, but what is meant here by the word way? We must understand that the
passages of a man's Spirit, and the practices of a man's life and conversation
are said in Scripture to be a path or way, it is compared to a path way, when
all the power and ability of a sinner is spent in traveling and passing from
one duty to another, from one action and service to another, as the body
passes from place to place, so the soul of a man goes from one service to
another, so that the work of a man, whether touching the soul or his outward
actions, they are said to be a man's way; the mind is plotting and the
affections stirring, and the will choosing, and all the parts of the body are
acting forth their several works, this is a way, this the Prophet David
intimates, Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways? that is
the frame of his heart inwardly, and his conversation outwardly, and the
motions of the heart, and thoughts of the mind they are the galleries within
doors, and all a man's courses and carriages and speeches are the rodes and
outroomes, so that by the way is meant nothing but the cursed distemper of a
man's heart, and the disorder of his life; the corruption of a man in regard of
his disposition inwardly, and his actions outwardly, that is the way the
Prophet here means.

Now the point we are to treat on is this; the nature of all sin is to be
deceitful, the course of corruption is deceitful, it is fair in the outside,
but in the bottom it will cousen and delude; all the ways of sin are
crooked, and all the ways of wickedness are perverse, it is the nature of all
sin in general, and of every sin in particular to be counterfeit and
deceitful, this the Apostle intimates, Ephesians. 4.22. Put off the old man says
the Text, that is corrupt after his deceitful lusts, the lusts of a man's heart
will tell him he lies to his face.

Now the deceit of sin is double, first it makes a man deceive others,
corruption in the heart is like rottenness in the root of a tree, or in the
coare of an Apple, it withers all the branches if the root be rotten, and if
the coare of an Apple be rotten, though it be never so beautiful, it will
deceive him that buyeth it, it will not be fit for food to him that has it;
so rottenness in the heart and distempers in the soul, it will wither all the
shows of equity, and honesty, and uprightness, that formerly were observed,
Z^ba had a deceitful heart, and of a servant he becomes a false accuser,
Achitophel had a proud heart, and of a Counselor he becomes a traitor, and
David was wonderfully cozoned in him, it was thou my familiar that did eat
bread at my table: So the covetousness of Demas his heart made him fly off
from the truth, and forsake the fellowship and faith of Saint Paul, and leave
him in the lurch, Paul had some confidence in him, but he deceived Paul, he
had a covetous heart.

Secondly, it is deceitful, not only because it deceives others, but it
deceives the Author himself, as it makes the sinner deceive others, so it
deceives the sinner, it promises fair, and performs nothing in conclusion, it
has a fair outside, but the issue is nothing at all, it promises mountains
of riches and ease, but when a man lies on his death bed, it plagues the soul
and rends the heart, Obad. 3. We shall observe the maine cause of the
couzenage of Edom, The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou that
dwell in the clifts of the rocks, that says, who shall bring me down?
Because she was ferced strongly, and had men and means, she lifted up her
self and said, I shall never see desolation; the pride of thy heart shall
deceive thee, no body couzened her but her self, none deluded her but her own
soul, and it is pretty to observe concerning Jonah, he was sent to Niniveh,
but because he thought disgrace should befall him, he should proclaim
destruction to the city, and God would pardon it, and so he should be counted a
false Prophet, this made him take another course, now he goes to Tarsis, and
enters into a ship, and is gore far, but this pride and policy of his
deceived him, he thought he should have had all quiet and content and ease,
no, the Lord sent a troublesome messenger after Jonah, the Winds began to
bluster, and the Waves beat, at last they awake Jonah, and Gods anger awoke
his conscience, and God with great trouble sends him to Niniveh, God made him
go down into the belly of hell, and yet made him go to Niniveh too, and does
his message too: Little did Ac^n think when he took the Babilonish garment,
and the wedge of gold to enrich him, all Israel should stone him in the Valley
of Achor. So Gehezai out of covetousness got two suits of raiment, but he
little thought he had got a suite of leprosy that should cleave to him and his
posterity for ever, nay, Exodus 1. I will name only this, when Pharaoh was to
trade with the children of Israel, he calls his Council, Let us deal wisely,
he thought all the world was his now, but when he thought to deal wisely, his
wisdom couzened him, for take notice of it, which is a thing remarkable, the
way he took to suppress them did multiply them, for hard labor is the only
way for generation and multiplication, and his putting of them to great pains,
turned to deceit to himself: so then if sin promise fair to others, and
never does what it pretends; if it promise fair to the workers thereof and
never performs it, then sin is deceitful, sin is a liar: you might save
me a labor, then me thinks every man that understands himself, and has
common sense will make the sense and conclusion fair, never believe a liar,
reason and experience teaches us this; no man will place his confidence in a
dissembler that will cousen him: this will be the issue of all ungodly courses;
you that look after and attend to any sinful course, how ever some promise
fair, and pretend much, glorious comforts and encouragements, if you will
believe a loose conversation, it will make you believe it will keep touch, and
be as true as steel, and whatsoever is promised shall be accomplished
undoubtedly, and performed certainly to your souls, but believe it not: it is
in this case with sin, as it was sometimes with Saul, when Saul would draw
his followers after him, and knit their souls to him: mark how he pleads, Can
the son of Iesse make you Captains of hundreds, and Captains of thousands;
and as who should say, he is a poor banished man, and cannot keep himself,
much less can he keep you, but Saul can do all this, therefore follow him.
So sin will speak thus of it self, and say, can a holy conversation, a
Christian way, an exact life, can these procure pleasure, and case and credit;
nay, is it possible they should procure any content in this world: Judge but
equally and indifferently in this case, and mark how every lust will plead
for it self. Whether is it more likely says flattering and time-serving, that
friends and great means which I will bring with me, or persecution, and
opposition, which will attend a holy course, whether more like to enrich you; and
ambition says, whether will great living and preferment or a prison which
exactness and curiosity has accompaning of it, whether is more likely to
advance you? and impatience says is like to right your wrongs, you have hard
dealing and measure, if you will be ruled by me, I will revenge all, but if you
be ruled by patience and meekness you must bear all, whether is like to
right your wrongs? and this is the reason that one follows revenge, and
another malice, and thinks to give himself full content, stop your ears, and
fence your hearts, against these chanting charms of sin and Satan, believe
not one sentence or syllable, they will all deceive you, they will pretend
fair, but the issue and event will not be answerable in any measure. Alas
what is it for a man to drink a draught of poison in a golden cup and die as
soon as he has done? what is it to be rich and a reprobate, honored and
damned? what is it for a man to pull vengence upon his brother, and to pull
everlasting destruction upon his soul, these are liars and will deceive you,
for the Lords sake therefore never rely upon and trust thereunto, and bring
experience from former times of the old deceits of sin, and cast
disparagement in the face of these pleas, and stop the mouth of these sins,
and tell ambition, is this your honor, with Haman to be in high regard to day
and hanged to morrow? then let me be mean still, is this all the content that
all the carnal means in the world can afford, to fare deliciously every day
with Dives, and then lie in hell for ever? Let me live poorly rather; this
will stop the mouth of these pleas; if a man have experience of an old
cheater, if a man be noted, and have been on the Pillery for his cheating, no
man will trust him, he couzens and deceives all that ever he deals withal,
have nothing to do with sin, it is an old Cheater, an old Deceiver, there was
never any that trusted thereunto, or had dealing therewith, but was couzened
and deluded, therefore, as they said, What have we to do with Idols? So say
you, what have I to do with pride, and malice, and envy, and earthly
mindedness, and carnal security? they are all deceivers and cheaters: this
they served such a one, and such a one, therefore I will have nothing to do
with them, Psalm. 62.10. the Text says, Trust not in oppression because the
oppressor has a weighty purse, and great friends and means, he thinks to
carry all before him, but trust not in oppression, for it will deceive you, so
trust not to a proud heart, trust not to a malicious heart, in conclusion it
will leave you in the dust, when you look for consolation, you shall see
nothing but misery and confusion, gall of conscience here, and the worm that
never dies hereafter will be the issue thereof.

Secondly, as we must be careful not to trust a Liar, and depend upon a
Cheater, so we must be careful to warn others of sin; this humanity learnes
us, and reason will persuade a man to this, if he has escaped robbing by the
highway, he tells every passenger, take heed how you pass by such a place
least you are surprised: if a man has taken a Cheater, he will bid every man
have a watchful eye to the cutpurse lest he be deceived; much more ought we
to have a care of the souls of our brethren, you that have heretofore found by
woeful experience the treachery of sin; a proud heart has couzened you, and a
loose heart has deceived you, when you are delivered and freed from these
spoylers and robbers in this nature, leave a remembrance to your fellow
brethren, as is is said of Lots wife, Remember Lots wife; her hankering after
Sodom brought her confusion; remember Lots wife, and bold proud wives and
servants, take heed of a proud heart, I was deceived with it, take heed of a
malicious heart, I was cozened with it, take heed of a coveteous heart, I had
like to have been overthrown with it, if the Lord had not been merciful, I
had never been delivered from it, Heb. 4.1, 2. The place is excellent, take
heed, says the Apostle, lest you also fall short, and as if he had said, you
that live in the bosom of the Church, and enjoy the means of grace and
salvation, you think you must needs go to heaven: take heed this couzened
sixty hundred thousand fighting men in the Wilderness, they were deceived and
ruinated, and it slew them; take you heed therefore, remember their dead
carcasses, and beware you, least you trust wholly to the means, and perish in
the means, not trusting to God, and relying upon him for your everlasting
comfort: and it is that which Saint Paul leaves upon record, as a point in his
own experience, Phil. 3 8. speaking there of trusting to man's carnal
confidence, if any man could boast of this, and that, says he, then much more
I, I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and circumcised the eight day; and if any
man may boast, if any man have cause to trust upon these carnal proppes, I
have more than any man, but they leave me in the lurch, and that which I
counted gain, it proved loss; as who should say, you that live, remember
this, I thought to be saved by my privileges, and I trusted to my
performances, I thought none should go to heaven, if not learned Paul, and
judicious Paul, and experienced Paul, but these left me in the lurch in
conclusion, therefore take heed that you trust not thereunto.

We come now to the affection which the holy man had to this sinful distemper
in this nature, the Text says, Remove from me the way of lying, take it away,
that is the phrase, I will do what I can Lord, and do thou what I cannot, but
however it is take it away from my soul.

The Point is this, A good heart is in good earnest content to part with any
corruption: What David did, a good man must do, the ground is the same, and
the work of grace is the same, a good heart is in good earnest content to part
with any corruption, he does not put off God with good words, and think to
satisfy God with fair speeches, but it is seriously and sadly, and in good
earnest content to part with any corruption: He does not say Lord, take away
some style out of the way, or take away some logge or impediment in the way of
sinning, I would not be disparaged and disgraced and troubled in sinning, no
Lord, take away the way of sinning, that I may never walk in that way more:
this was the guise of the soul of the holy man; and it is so with every holy
man, and Hos. 14.2. and it was so with the converted Church, when their hearts
were humbled, and they came to seek the Lord, they say, take away from us all
our iniquity, and receive us graciously: they do not half it with God and
patch it, and peece-meale it; but oh take away all iniquity, even the greatest
and the least and the dearest, take away all Lord, not only the open and the
known, but the secret and the hidden, Lord take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously: In the old Law the burnt offering was all to be burnt;
so is it with a sound heart, when it offers a whole burnt offering to the Lord
of sin, leave not a hair or a hoof behind, but let all be consumed, and all
over-mastered, and subdued: so Psalm. 119.133. Let not any iniquity have
dominion over thy servant; marke^ the generality, there is none exempted, none
reserved, there is no reservation, not one Lord Let no sin have dominion over
me. A good heart will not deal with sin as the people of Israel dealt with
the Cananites, the Lord commanded them to drive out the Cananites and leave
none there, but they for their own profit would not destroy them utterly but
made them tributaries, but a sound haart will not thus deal with sin, he
would have it utterly removed: it is a base thing that a man should retribute
from his sins, he will not banish all malice, but he will take tribute of
malice, that he may vex those he has some secret spleen against, but this
is the course, every man should take up, we should banish all sin, every
Cananite, every corruption, and not only not suffer it to dwell with us, but
not to be among us; therefore look what Haman did against Mordecay, he was
not content to kill Mordecay alone, but he hated the whole Nation of the
Jews, therefore he would be at the charge to dispatch the whole nation; let
but the King send out his decree, and he would be at the charge for the
destroying of the Jews, this shows the malice of the man; so it might be with
our malice against sin, a man must not only hate a base beggarly corruption,
a poor Mordecay that will not profit, but the whole nation of corruption
abandon that, God has given out his warrant against every corruption,
therefore be thou at the charge to execute it, and set thy self against the
whole nation of rebellion of heart, and distemper of spirit; this ought to be
the guise and frame of the soul. I have done with the proof of the Point: we
come now to open the Point; when I say the good heart is content to part with
any corruption, this parting of sin and the soul appear in two particulars:
First, he labors and strives and endeavors to do what he can himself;
secondly, he goes to God to do that he is not able: first for the former, the
endeavor and strife of a sinner, for the parting of his sin and his soul,
it appears in four particulars, in all which we may fully perceive, that in
the soul of a gracious man, there is this resolution to make a breach between
his soul and his distempers: first, a sound heart is ready to take the least
notice of any thing that is unlawful, it hearkens to any information, that may
discover any thing to be sinful in any measure, after any manner; this is
one argument that the soul is resolved to part with any sin, because it is
mavelous ready to hear any thing against sin that it might part there
from; a man that does seriously desire to remove another out of his possession,
the course whereby he does express his affection is this, he is ready to
hear any report, and hearken to any relation by any man, after any manner,
that will bear an action against the party, and he will not only hear it,
but record it, and make his advantage of it, that he may remove the man if it
be possible out of his possession; so it is with a gracious heart, when the
soul of a faithful Saint of God is weary of his inmate, of the sinful body
of death that hangs about him, and would dispossess it, and reform it were it
in his power, not only the dominion of it, but the presence of it in his heart
any longer, he is ready to hearken to the least information, from any
occasion, from any speech, from any action of the meanest Saint of God, that
appears in his course and conversation, whereby he make it questionable, such
a course is sinful, and such a practice unlawful, he is very careful to
attend, and lay his heart levill thereunto; nay, if his enemy out of malice and
spleen, and envy, shall cast any thing upon him as a matter unlawful, it
mill make his heart shake within him, and he begins to consider, I never
thought such a course unlawful, and such a practice unwarrantable, I see such
a man dares not do it, if it be a sin, why should not I reform it as well
as another, and if it be not a sin, why should he abridge himself of that
liberty which is lawful, and the soul will never be quieted, till it get
sound information, what is lawful, and may be performed, and what is
unlawful, and ought to be avoided: this is an argument, that he is willing to
part with his corruptions, because he is willing to know what is evil, that
he may avoid it, Job 6.24. Teach thou me, and I will hold my tongue, cause me
to understand wherein I have erred: He does not quarrel with the man that
counsels him, or wrangle with the man that advises him, but teach thou me,
and I will hold my tongue; I know not, I perceive not, but cause me to know,
inform soundly, reprove me thoroughly wherein I have done amiss, Nay, Job
34.32. it is a sine passage, What I know not, teach thou me, if I have done
amiss I will do so no more: he is willing to hear any thing, willing to be
informed, he will not cast off counsel, and reproof with matter of scorn,
and say, I know as well as you, let every tubbe stand upon his own bottom,
meddle you with your own matters, and do not you come in another man's
Diocese; no, a gracious heart will not do this, but what I know not teach
thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more: a gracious heart when
he cannot see himself, will be suspicious, what courses are unlawful, and
will seek direction from God, that he may clearly perceive it, and reform it
and avoid it: the heart of man is deceitful above all things, therefore a good
man when he has searched what he can, if he hear of any trick and device
that a carnal hypocrite may have, he searches and seeks, am I such a one?
and he looks up to heaven, and says, Lord thou know the heart, let me
know it, thou know the windings of this soul of mine, let me understand it
that I may not be couzened.

The second is this, when the sound heart is informed of the sin with
evidence of reason, it yields quietly, and sits down convinced, and submit it
self to the authority of the power of the truth; this is another thing, a
gracious heart, as it will not when there is no reason to gainsay a truth, so
it will not invent tricks to defeat the power of the truth when it is
evident, and plainly brought home to the judgment, this is certain, though a
man out of a carnal mind, because flesh will have his bouts, although a
gracious heart sometimes when it is informed, and Reasons are sound, and
Scriptures undeniable, it will a little quarrel and wrangle for the while: yet
when it sees it cannot answer the argument, it will be content to embrace the
reason and be framed thereby, and submit to the rule thereof, Job 40.4. when
the Lord came to school Job, and had informed him of his own exellencie, and
his baseness, he yields up the bucklers presently, once have I spoken, but I
will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further, as who should say, I
have spoken foolishly, and said unadvisedly, but I will say it no more, and
famous is that of the Cananitish woman, when Christ was hot upon her, and
called her dog, truth Lord says she, yet the dogs may eat of the crummes
that fall from their masters table as who should say, I confess I am as bad as
thou speak, I deny not what I am, I am a dog I yield it, yet the dogs lie
under the table, that is all I crave and ask, that I may lie under the table
and wail for crummes of mercy, you know how it was with Peter when he had
denied our Savior, he does not wrangle it out and color it over, but the very
look of our Savior was enough to make him got out and weep bitterly, if the
arguments be plain, and reason good, it will not cast them behind his back,
and wink with his eyes, and will not see the truth, but a gracious heart
yields easily, and comes on comfortably to receive the truth, I confess this,
and experience has taught as much in this nature in point of conscience, it is
possible for the soul, partly out of weakness of judgment, not being able
to perceive the truth, or else out of a self wild distemper which blinds the
judgment, it will wrangle against the truth, but in my experience I have
observed this is the issue, it will never leave inquiring and disputing about
the business till it fall that way, the bias of the soul will run directly
toward the truth; it is with a good heart though a weak one, as with a sound
stomach though distempered; take hot water into a windy stomach the wind will
stir on one side, and the water on another side, and distemper the stomach,
but let the party take a little Methridate, the Methridate closing with the
stomach will ease a man, and refresh a man in this kind: so a good man has a
weak judgment in this kind, and sometimes a distempered heart, but when the
good word of the Lord, the Cordial water, the Methridate, when that comes into
his mind, and is taken into his soul, a man will quarrel with profit and
ease and carnal reason, but yet the soul will be the better and will close
with it, for its everlasting good.

Thirdly when a sound heart has taken notice and is informed, and upon that
information sits down convinced, then in the third place it will set it self
immediately to the duty whereof it is informed and convinced, when the judgment
stands clear, and the heart yields, the floodgate is set open, and the water
will flow, if there were any evil before committed, the soul sets upon the
reformation of it, if any duty not before performed, it now sets upon the
performance thereof; consider of it, it is true I do not say that when a man
is informed and convinced, what is the course God requires, and what is the
duty God commands, a man can then do the duty as he ought, but he will do
what he can, and labor for ability to do that, which for the present he
cannot, Genesis 22 3, it was a hard task that God enjoined Abraham, to sacrifice
his beloved and darling son Isaac, now when the thing was plain though it
was never so hard, Abraham set about it, he got up betimes in the morning, and
he and the child went, and the servants and all, and he addresseth himself to
the performance of the duty, and he prevents all occasions that might hinder
him, his wife was not acquainted with it, his servants knew nothing of the
matter: so if a man be the son of faithful Abraham, if the^ Lord commands
it, though it be the killing of a darling secure, tender, beloved lust, if the
Lord say it must be done, this sin must be abandoned, this corruption must
be reformed, though it be never so profitable, and bring never so much
contentment; he will rise betimes in the morning, that is, he will use all
means, and employ all helps for the accomplishing of it. A gracious heart if
his mind be informed and his conscience convinced of a duty, he will set upon
the duty, it is a thing I would have you remember, it is a marvelous distemper
of Spirit, when people speak thus, I confess it is a thing that ought to be
avoided, the word forbids it, the Lord condemns it, and my conscience goes
against it, but what would you have me do? I cannot set into the work, I
cannot go on in the work, why then lay all aside, lay sincerity aside, for it
cannot stand with sincerity, that I should be informed, and convinced of a
duty which the Lord requires at my hands, and I not set upon it. I do not say
a found heart will not do it as he ought, but he will strive to get ability
to perform that God requires. Alas says the Gallant I confess these fashions
are fooleries, but what shall I do out of fashion with the world, the Text
says, fashion not your selves after the world, but the truth is I know not how
to get out, and how to get in, it is a strict passage, art thou informed of a
duty and convinced of it, and is thy heart persuaded of it, and will thou not
set about it? where is grace then, Civlitie will reform, Hypocrisy will
reform, Nature will reform, Reason will reform a man in outward things, but
if a man will not part with an apish fashion, a foolery, how will he part with
all sin, that will not part with the shadow, the appearance of sin? I
conclude thus, he that is informed and convinced, what is sin, and ought to be
avoided, and will not address himself to reform it, that man is not under
the power of the Word and therefore has no power of grace, but he that knows
the Word of God requires this, and that God exacts this, and is convinced of
it, and will not submit to that word, he is not under the power of the Word,
therefore has no power of grace.

Lastly, as he is willing to know what he should do, and is easily convinced
of what he is informed, and does endeavor to do that whereof he is convinced:
so in the last place his heart is content to take up the hardest means, the
sharpest medicines, that God has appointed for the killing and slaying of his
corruptions, if there be any medicine in the world more keen then other, any
means more sharp then other that may cut off his base distempers, a gracious
heart will be content to take up that, that it may serve his turn, that there
might be reformation made. I express it thus, take an arm or a leg that
has a Gangrene, the nature of the sore is, that it will infect, and spread,
and kill the whole man, now the Surgeon comes and tells the patient, either
you must lose your leg, or your life, either you must have your arm cut off,
or you will cut off your days, there is no other remedy, why then if the
patient say he will abide the worst, every man will say he does not purpose to
live; if he did purpose to maintain life, he would take away that which will
take away life: So it is here with some kind of baser sins, I mean grosser,
opener notoriouser crimes that I may so say are scandalously vile, there is no
way in the world, but there must be some sharp corrasive applied, or else the
soul will never be separated from these, there must be some strong corrasive
and sharp medicine applied, now if the soul will not take that corrasive, and
medicine, he does not purpose to part with sin, because he will not use the
means that may take away sin; as for instance a man has gotten an estate by
theeverie and couzenage and the like, now when the Word of God comes home to
his conscience and informs him, and tells him he must satisfy every man, that
is the thing, he must make satisfaction, for he should humble himself and
bemoane his estate with tears, that will not serve the turn, nothing will
cure him, but satisfaction that is the Gangrene that must be cut off, but then
he will say most of his estate was gotten by this means, and if he make
satisfaction he shall beggar himself, but if he be content in good earnest
to part with his sins, he will take this course because nothing else will do
the deed, a Broker in London that had gotten much by couzning, when the Word
came home unto him, and discovered his sins, he was content to make
satisfaction till it came to five and ten pound, but when it came to an hundred
pound he flew off; I will pass no judgment upon him, but his course was base
before, and so it was afterward, a man that deals falsely, this is the
medicine this is the corrasive that must cure him, thus Zacheus did. If I have
wronged any man says he by forged cavelation, let him come I will restore him
fourefold. A gracious heart that is truly wrought upon will apply this
medicine; the other instance is this, imagine a man that lives in the bosom of
the Church, a great professor has been either openly drunk, or has been a
known adulterer, there is no cure for this man, let him fast and pray, and
humble his soul, and cry and howl, I know not how this man's conscience can be
quieted unless he make public confession in the Congregation, he must not
only satisfy his own conscience, but he must satisfy the Congregation, the
Church of God has been wronged, and the Church of Christ dishonored and
discredited, he must therefore undergo public penance, as his offense was
public, this is a sharp medicine, and corrasive, but a good heart will take
it up, as an ancient spoke, he lay at the Church door and said, spit upon me,
cast me out of your Congregation, so God cast not my soul out of heaven I care
not. Thus much a good heart will do, and then he is content in good earnest to
part with his corruptions, he is willing to know what is sin, he yields when
he is informed, and readily embraces what he yields to, nay he will take the
sharpest medicine to do him good, but if yet the sinner finds that he cannot
be rid of his corruptions and distempers, then he goes to God, and entreats
him to do that for him which he cannot do himself, and that appears in
three things The first passage is this, it looks unto the truth of God, and it
wishes and welcomes those truths that are in reason most powerful to prevail
with his soul, and most likely to work most effectually, for the subduing of
his sins, that when he cannot do what he would, and master his sins as he
desires, he wishes that the Lord would direct some man by some powerful truth
to pluck these rebellions out of his soul, he wishes and he wellcomes, and
he takes those truths that may be powerful and effectual this way, so that
the soul makes his moan to God and complains as David did, ye are too hard
for me ye sons of Zerviah, Oh Lord, these corruptions stick too fast, they
are too strong, they are too mighty for me, I am not able to remove them, but
Lord, take them thou away from my soul, take away the way of iniquity from
me, nay, tear them from me, nay, do what thou will with my soul, only
remove them from my my soul, this is a gracious heart now, nay, the Lord takes
this as his proper work and special prerogative, I take away the heart of
stone, and I give the heart of flesh, this is his perogative royal, none
meddles with it but he, therefore the soul argues thus, Lord, thou have said,
that thou take away the heart of flint, thou have promised to subdue a
stubbourne spirit, and to master a malicious vain spirit, Lord do this for
the soul of thy servant, take away these distempers, and in thy
faithfulness, answer the desires of the soul of thy servant, help me Lord
against the rage of these sinful distempers, and when the truth of Christ
lays battery against a man's heart, and that it brings and sets up another
frame and disposition of heart, the soul lies under the blow, and closes with
that truth, more of that Lord, oh there again Lord. A man that is troubled
with the toothach, if the Tooth-drawer apply his instrument, and he find he
has hold of it, he says, that is it, pull it out, leave nothing behind. So
when the soul is under the stroke of strong distemper, if he make conscience
of these things, when the word comes home to his soul, and meets with that
distemper, he says Lord, pluck out all of it, that I may never see that pride
more that I may never see that malice more, leave not a stumpe behind, Lord,
that I may be freed from that cursed distemper of spirit, this is the
difference between a varnished hypocrite, and a sound heart, a wretched
unsound heart, it fears least the Word should come home to it, it fears the
blow when he sees it coming, he wishes he were rid of the place, or the
Minister rid of that point; but a sound heart fears least the Word should
not come close enough, it is conscious to it self, and knows and sees, I have
heard such Sermons, and such terrors, and such mercies revealed, and I am still
to this day stubborn, to this day rebellious; so that I fear nothing will
prevail with me, nothing will get ground against this rebellious spirit of
mine, I fear the Word will not touch me, nor master this rebellious spirit,
this is somewhat, you mean in good earnest that you and your sin will part;
it is a fine passage Zach. 13.6. One meets him and asks him, where had thou
this wound? I was wounded in the house of my friend; a gracious heart counts
the Minister a friendly Minister, and a friendly Word that cuts his heart to
the quick, and goes to the coare of his corruptions, oh the wound was the
wound of a friend, it was a friendly reproof, the Minister spoke friendly to
me that wounded my corruptions, I saw the coare coming, why this is somewhat
when the soul can welcome such truths, as are for the a wakening of it.

Secondly, as the soul wishes and wellcomes those particular truths, that may
awaken and overpower a distemper, and leave a contrary grace, so it is
restless before God be pleased for to work this, before it see every
corruption mastered, and the frame of sin tottered at a restlesly looking to
God, and restlesly waiting upon God, why when will it once be? such a man's
heart is broken, and such a man's conscience awakened, and such a man's spirit
brought low, and Lord, shall nothing prevail with me? He is restless in
seeking unto the Lord till he see every sin mastered, and every corruption
overpowred, so that though it be inherent, yet it is not regnant. The Irish man
being malicious and fearful, he never thinks his enemy killed till he has
cut off his head, he will be sure to make him past recovery; so a gracious
heart never thinks his sins are slain, till he see the strength and power
thereof subdued in every particular more or less, till he see the very blood
and life of his corruptions removed this is that a gracious heart is restless
and entreats at Gods hand from day to day, therefore it is a fine passage, Romans
7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death;
mark the weight of his complaint, he does not say, deliver me from the
stroke of sin, or the action of sin, but from the body of sin, there is
a body of pride, there is a body of malice, a body of anger, a body of the
cursed distempers of a man's soul; now a gracious heart is not content to be
freed only from the tongue of pride, that he may not speak proudly, but Lord
deliver me from the body of pride, from the body of malice, from the inward
frame of my distempers: in a word, look what Haman said concerning Mordecay,
when he had all the cappes in the country, and all knees bowing to him, What
avails this, says he, so long as I see Mordecay sit in the Kings gate? So
says a gracious heart, what availes it me, that I am not a thief, or a
drunkard, or an adulterer, if yet this proud heart prevails, this proud heart
and carnal confidence of mine will bring my soul into everlasting
destruction, the soul is restless till the Lord look upon him, and deliver
him from his corruptions.

The third thing is this, that the soul is content that God shall do what he
will with his corruptions, take them away after what manner he please, though
it be upon the hardest terms in the world, as it welcomes those truths that
may work, as it is restless till they do work, so it is contented that the
Lord should work upon sin, and subdue it upon the hardest terms in the
world. A covetous man if nothing but beggary will loosen his heart from the
world, then he will pray the Lord to make him give away all, and leave
himself a beggar so he may have a liberal heart: So if a man be notable to
subdue the pride of his heart, a man has great parts and abilities, and he
prankes up himself therein, if there be nothing will cure this timpany, if
nothing will do the deed, unless God knock off the wheels and leave him in
the dust, and make him the offscouring of the world, yet a gracious heart
though this be hard says, Lord let me have an humble heart whatever it costs
me, this man now is in good earnest content to part with his corruptions.

For the use of the point we have first here a matter of lamentation, and I
know not whether we are to condemn the evil of the world, or mourn for the
evil that appears in the hearts and lives of men, but this is sure, that if
this be the behavior of a sound heart, then there is little soundness and
uprightness in the world, not to hover in general, but to pitch upon
particulars which is the life of application, let me make it appear in these
three particulars, this is a bill of indictment and falls heavy and foul upon
these three sorts; the first is the profane person the second is the indulgent
hypocrite, he is very loath to part with his corruptions, if this be true, if
this be the frame of heart which David expresses, and is in the soul of
every good man, then judge you, I will say nothing, but judge you, set down
the sentence, what do you think of those that are content rather to part with
their blood and with their hearts, then with their base corruptions? I mean
the profane, carnal wicked of the world, they are so far from being content
to have their sins taken away, that they are not willing to hear of it, they
are not willing that the Minister should meddle with them, or that any man
should touch them or come near them nay there is no power outwardly that can
prevail, no ability in any means that is able to tear these distempers away
from their souls, and pluck the cup from the drunkard, or the dalliance from
the adulterer, or a fashion from the fashion-monger, they are up in arms
presently, nay observe it men must beware it they meddle with these things,
they will take away men's credit and liberty, and life many times, rather then
they will suffer their corruptions to be remooved, and their souls humbled by
the power of the Word. John must rather lose his head, then Herod his
incestuous adultery. Nay the league of these men with their lusts it is
everlasting, Ier. 18.12. when the Prophet came early and late speaking to the
people, this is the good and ancient way walk in it, mark how they answer, we
will walk in our own ways, and as they resolved so they did, Ier. 8.5. the
Text says, when the Prophet came to speak to them, and inform them of their
wicked ways, and pluck away their corruptions, they took hold upon their
deceits, the phrase is strange, this is all the quarrel in the world between
the Minister and the hearts of the people; we come to pluck away your sins,
we would pull down your proud heart, and subdue your cursed distempers, and
you take hold of your lusts, you take hold of pride and will continue proud
still, you take hold of malice, and you will be malicious still, in despite of
God and Ministers, and counsels, and directions and what ever comes to the
contrary; look as the Philistims dealt with the Arc, so these profane
carnal hearts deal with the Word of the Lord, when it comes to take away
their distempers, 1 Samuel 4.9. when the people of Israel brought the Arc into
the Camp, they began to be amazed, and said there was never such a thing
before, therefore say they, strengthen your hand, O ye Philistims, and quit
your selves, that ye be not servants to the Hebrews. The Arc was a type of
Christ now if they would have been ruled by Christ, and have received him they
might have been blessed by Christ, but all is gone when the arc comes to take
away their sins, therefore they join hand in hand, and strengthen themselves
against him, so it is with a naughty and carnal heart, when they see the word
of God close, that the ministry of the Gospel is keen and pierces, when a
man shall not hover in the general, that a man may be a Christian, and
profane, (a swearing, lying, profane Christian) but the word will pluck away
every corruption, and master every lust, when they find the ministry thus
strong, and the Word thus keen, and the work of Gods Spirit thus mighty, they
arm themselves and say, Play the men O ye Phil^stines, they bend head, and
hand, and heart together; look either to master the power of the Word, or to
lay down the power of your corruptions; therefore take heed of the nice,
precise, curious course that the word reveals, and the ministers would press
upon you. The resolution of these men is that of Ruth and Naomi, they say to
their sins as they did, nothing but death shall part us, the contentious man
will part with his estate, before he will part with his brangling, so the
ambitious man will be content that God shall take away his Word and Spirit, but
shall not take away his vain glory, you will not part with your sins until
death, why you shall live in your sins here, and you shall be damned for
ever for your sin; we have now done with the carnal Gospeller and profane
person.

We will now trade in the second place with the indulgent hypocrite, I use
this term because it fits the passage of the point in hand, and he is cashered
and cast out, as not sharing in, as not partaking of the least dram of
uprightness of heart, this indulgent hypocrite, I compare to a fond cockering
father, that never loves to have his child out of his sight, but if he die,
he will die with him almost: So this hypocrite, he is not willing to see an
everlasting divorce between sin and his soul, he has some secret haunt of
heart, and distemper of spirit, and he will leave them now and then a little,
but he will not part wholly with them, the soul of the hypocrite is hankering
after those secret distempers of spirit, and though sometimes the Word does
overpower him, and the work of conscience does make him, not dare to live with
his sins, yea he will meet with his sins as occasion serves, and they
will mainetaine their old league and friendship in this case, as it is with a
cockering father, when sometimes the friends persuade him, and necessity
forces him, and he sees he must put out his child to school, or else he
will be spoiled, loath he is to have him go out of sight, but go he must,
therefore go he shall, but his conclusion is this, he will see him once a
quarter, or every good time: or look as it is with servants in a family that
intend marriage before the master be acquainted with it, though the master
turn one of them out of the house, that they do not dwell together, yet they
will meet one another, and confer with one another as occasion serves. So it
is with this indulgent hypocrite, he is very tender over his old ancient
darling distempers, privy pride, and secret self-love, and carnal
confidence, and earthly mindedness, he is not able to part wholly with these,
but if reason force him, and conscience press him, and he must part with his
profit if he be covetous, then with a sad heart he parts with his base profit,
away you must, I must cousen, no more; and ease away you must, I must suffer
for the cause of Christ, but though he puts them from under his wings, thus for
the present, yet he will not have them go far, but he must hear of them,
and see them at some seasons: so the Tradesman, he has his fingers knocked off
from base dealings and false weights, and measures, but when the fair comes,
and advantage comes, he will send for couzening again; so he that prizeth
his liberty more than the Gospel and truth, and he that prizeth his honor
more than Gods honor, and yet says he must abandon all, and forsake al if
dangers approach, and miseries are at hand, then he can send for securirie, and
shift for himself, and by base dealing maintain his own quiet: this I take
to be the indulgent hypocrite, and me thinks it is like Pharaohs dealing,
when Pharaoh was battered with the hand of God, and the judgments of God
pursued him, Exodus, 8.28. he could not bear it out, and therefore was content
to let the people go and sacrifice to the Lord, but go not far, says he;
so this indulgent hypocrite says, ease, you and I must part, and profit, you
and I must part, but go not far in the mean time, let me hear of you as
occasion serves: this is the guise of this hypocrite, which is indeed
professely opposite to soundness and uprightness, and this wretched
hypocritical person, discovers the falsenesse of his heart in three
particulars, first, if there be search made, or information given touching his
sins, he will not be known of it, he will not be seen to own any sin
in the world, but he puts a new suite and a new tire upon his base courses,
and he invents away and shift to make that he does lawful, and then no man
shall condemn that he does as unlawful: it is a pretty passage, it is with
the soul as it was with Abraham and Sarah, Genesis 12.13. Abraham was very
fearful because his wife was beautiful, least he should be slain for her
sake; now mark the covenant, Therefore say I am thy brother, say so though she
lied. So observe it, corruptions make a covenant with a corrupt heart, as
covetousness makes a covenant with a miserable carnal base heart, and says,
if the case so require it; and the necessity of the Church expects it, that I
should give somewhat liberally, if any such occasion comes, says the soul to
covetousness, I am resolved not to give, but to be close-fisted: but then some
will say this man is a covetous man, oh say not you so by any means, but say I
have a great family and a great charge, and then I shall save my money and my
credit too, now covetousness is no more covetousness, it has put on a new
suite, it is frugality now. So ease and liberty make an agreement with the
soul, if it be so that I must be compelled to suffer, the times are
dangerous, if misery and calamity should come upon us, I am resolved to suffer
nothing, but say not so by no means, but if any man say, you will not perform
your duty, unless you be forced to your duty, say not so, but say thus, my
conscience is fully informed upon good grounds, though I am not informed yet,
say so, and I shall save my ease and honor and all, this is base cozonage, the
soul deals in this kind as Rahel with the Idols, or Rahab with the spies,
when Laban came to inquire of his Idols, she took the Idols and sat upon
them, and she let him search all the stuff but that, and her excuse was the
custom of women was upon her, so the indulgent hypocrite, he will be content
to have his heart and life ransackt and searched, till it comes to his idol
pri^e or vain glory, or time serving, but if it come to this Idol, the soul
will sit upon this Idol, and then it is not the Idol, but a kind of
excellency he does pretend, so tell the fashion-monger of this and that, it is
not pride, but it is comeliness, the fashion is under, but comeliness is ever;
this now is a cockering hypocrite.

Secondly, if it be so that this wretched heart be both informed and his
conscience be convinced that it is a sin he must amend it, and ought to
reform it, then the second passage is this, he does go very slowly about the
reformation of this, he whiles off the proceedings against his sin, he says
it must be so and ought to be so, and he will take a convenient time to
reform the sin, and in the mean time he commits the sin, look as it is
with a sleepie Magistrate or cockering father, if a man plead to one of the
misorder of the town that must be reformed, and to other that the child has
done things that cannot be excused, they say it is true, and I will take a time
to requite it says the father, and observe a convenient season to reform it,
but the one neglects the child, and corrects it not, and the other neglects the
sin and reformes it not, this is false dealing with the Lord, this is a
lively picture of an indulgent hypocrite, sometimes reason convinces him and
he yields; I confess I should pray in my family, and I confess my heart is
cowardly and base, and I should suffer for Christ, and let liberty and honor
lie rather then let the cause of Christ go, but alas what should I do? I
shall take a convenient time to reform these things, all things cannot be done
at once, threaten their sins and they will require it, but in the mean time
they pardon their sins, I will pray in my family, and reform my servants,
but that time of reformation will never come, they are loath to deal hardly,
loath to proceed to reformation of the evils that are dear and tender unto
them, you know what he said, father I will go into the Vineyard but went not,
and they in Deuteronomy. all that the Lord has commanded, we will do, but did it
not, they were all shell and no substance at all.

Thirdly, if he do proceed or be forced to proceed, and labor for the
reformation of his sins, the third passage is this, he will not deal
thoroughly, he will not deal keenely with his corruptions, but he will dally
with it, he will not have a total separation made, and a thorough execution
against sin, but only a moderation, and some connivance at sin, though he
lays some kind of punishment upon it, and snubs his corruptions, yet he will
not kill it, he threatens his evil and reformes it in some measure but he
will not abandon it utterly, that he may never have more society with it, take
notice of the guise of this hypocrite, you shall commonly have him complaining
of too harsh preaching, there is wisdom in all things, these things are able
to gaster a man's conscience, and terririfie men's souls, the English of it is
this, take heed that you do not smite sin too hard, and torment the devil
too much, you shall hardly hear of a good heart that is sensible of his sin
and tired therewith, but he thinks, more of that Lord, and yet more sharply
and keenely, I am afraid that the Word will not come close enough, and that the
Minister will not meet with my sins and pluck away my corruptions from me;
when Absalon rebelled against David, and conspired against his kingdom, he
gives this charge, deal kindly with the young man for my sake, he has dealt
basely with me, but deal kindly with him for my sake, as who should say, he
must be suppressed I confess it, he must be subdued I acknowledge it, but
take him, do not kill him by no means; so this hypocritical heart says,
deal kindly with pride, I cannot part with it, deal kindly with carnal
confidence, I cannot live without it: a man may dally though he commit not
adultery, a man may pot it a little, though he be not drunk, oh deal kindly
with drunkenness, and deal kindly with wantonness, these are the guises of
wretched hypocrites: whereas I beseech you observe it, a gracious heart is like
that spoken of, Deuteronomy. 13.8. the Lord gave this charge, If thy brother the son
of thy mother, or thy son, or the son of thy daughter, or the wife of thy
bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul shall entice thee secretly,
let us go serve other gods, thou shall not spare him; this is the frame of a
gracious heart indeed, and of a sound heart indeed, that is content to have
his corruptions, though never so dear removed from him, that will not pity
his sin, that will show no mercy to pride, no mercy to earthlimindednesse,
but will slay them, this is sound dealing indeed. We see then all this while,
that this man hides his sin and will not be known of it, and when he knows
it, he will not kill it but put in bail, and when he does proceed against
it, he will not slay it, but only snibbe it a little, this is a rotten
naughty heart, it is not content to part with his sins, which is the frame
of every good heart.

Now in the second place, it is a word of exhortation, you see the way, walk
in it, you see what God requires, do what you know, you see what a sincere
heart will do, therefore call and knock at one another door, is my heart
good you bear in hand, so this will try it, a good heart is content to part
with any corruption, art thou so? say it is so? ask thy heart, am I content to
part with the world, and idleness and pride, are you content to pray in your
family, and reform your servants? then you have sincere hearts, go your
ways, and go comfortably, go cheerfully, and the God of heaven go with
you, if there be a Saint in heaven, thou art one hear upon earth, if there be
a sound heart in heaven, thou have a sound heart here, though thou art weak
and feeble, but do it to purpose now, do not pretend fair, and fall short,
half in Egypt, and half out of Egypt, body out of Egypt, and heart in Egypt,
but take away all, and then the work is sincere, profit might persuade you to
this, do not trouble your selves to think, if I leave all my sinful courses
what will become of my comfort, and honor, and contentment? Why, you shall not
lose these, but only alter these and change them for better, what profit is it
to be proud, and dogged, and waward, and snarling at Gods truth? What profit is
got by covetousness and cheating? all these profits and pleasures and
contentments, are but shadows and lying vanity, there is woe in all thy
wealth, and poison in all thy prosperity, and the best are but temporary, and
mutable, insufficient, but part with these, and have eternal joy and
everlasting comfort, and durable riches, do but change therefore, it is not
the leaving of these, but the laying out of these; a man will do much for a
good purchase, he that has a fair bargain, and a great penny worth, though
he has so me old gold, he is loath to part, withal, yet if for so many
hundreds as he lays down shall have so many hundreds a year, he will art
with his old gold for such a purchase; so you shall not lose your profit and
pleasure and contentment, but lay them out for a greater fold; He that leaves
father or mother or friends for my sake shall have a hundred fold here is and
everlasting happiness here, after; the purchase is propounded, therefore bring
out your old gold, those old pleasures, those old contentments and delights in
the world, bring all out, and lay all down before Christ, and part with all
for Christ, and you shall receive comfort here, and everlasting happiness
hereafter; but if profit cannot prevail with you, yet let danger force you
hereunto: know therefore there is danger in the neglect thereof, if you would
not have God take away your sins, the truth is, God will take away his mercy
from you, and God will take away his grace and spirit from you, you shall never
have it upon these terms: is there any man such a babe in nature, that he
will not part with the wound that will kill him; is there any man so foolish
that he will not take that physic which should purge him, when he knows it
will recover him? Take notice of it, one of these two things you must take,
either part with thy sin, or part with happiness, either suffer God to take
away thy sins, or else he will take away his mercy, Psalm. 53. Thou art a God
that love not wickedness; if you will have sin dwell in your souls, God
will never dwell with you, nor you shall never dwell with him, if you will
harbor and hold your sins, you must hold your shame too, you will not part
with your sins, you must part with heaven, for there is no coming there for
you with your sins.

Heavy afflictions breeds earnest prayers from the wicked.
PROVE. 1. 28, 29. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.


FOr the coherence of these words know thus much from the 20. verse to the end
we shall take notice of two things mainely intended by the Spirit of God.
First, the kind loving and passionate invitation of wisdom to simple,
sinful, scornful wretches, this we shall observe from the 20. verse to the
23. there wisdom cries earnestly and utters her voice in the streets, that
is, she presses in with a kind of violence to win and woe the souls of
sinners that at last they may know the things belonging to their peace. The
second is the issue and success that the voice of wisdom found in the hearts
of those to whom she spoke, and the success is double, the first is the
contempt of scorners against the call of wisdom, they stop their ears, and
harden their hearts, and will not submit to Christ, and be ruled by him, and
that in the 24. and 25. verses, the second issue is in the words of the Text,
they rejected God, and God rejected the^, they cast his call behind their
backs, and therefore he casts off them, Then shall they call, says the
Text, but I will not hear; they that rejected mercy offered, shall not
obtain mercy sought and desired, this is the scope of the words, Then shall
they call, that is, in the time of trouble, and in the day of distress, then
they will call for mercy, and comfort, No, says the Lord, time was I offered
mercy, but then mercy was not worth the receiving, I called and you would not
obey, therefore call you shall, and seek you shall, but I will never answer
you, you shall never find me.

In the words observe two passages: First, we have here the practice of the
wicked, In the time of trouble. A company of scorners and mockers in their
distress, they will cry and call unto the Lord; Secondly, we have their
success, God will not hear them: In the former we have several particulars
to be observed; first, they sought the Lord, and called upon the Lord, a
company of scornful wretches, and wicked reprobates sought the Lord;
secondly, observe the time when they sought him, when their calamities did come
like a whirlewinde, In the day of trouble then they cry and call, and cry unto
the Lord; the last thing is from the manner of it, it was not slightly, but
they cried unto the Lord; and withal the Text says, They sought him early,
that shows their earnestnes, and their crying that shows their vehemence,
and yet the success is this, the Lord will not answer: they shall not find
him. In the Verse we have three points of great use: the first is from the
time, Then shall call. The Point is this, That scornful persons in the time
of affliction, are forced to seek, and to sue unto the Lord. Secondly, that
when they do seek, they seek somewhat vehemently, and earnestly; the third
is this, that howsoever they do thus seek, yet the Lord will not answer. The
first point is this, That scornful wretches in the time of affliction are
forced to seek unto the Lord; They that have neglected prayer formerly, when
trouble comes, and desolation approaches, then they call and seek for favor:
In the 78. Psalm, Verse 4. This is plain, the children of Israel when the
Lord slew them, then they sought him, so Isaiah 25. The Text says, that in the
time of trouble they will visit the Lord, In the time of prosperity the Lord
calls for holy duties, but then he cannot hear of you, you will not visit him
but in the time of trouble, then the Lord shall be acquainted with you;
Experience teaches this when a man is upon the wrack, then he confesses his
sins, and then the Lord rends a yrayer from him, and then he confesses like
Pharaoh, I have sinned, and I and my people are wicked, but God is just and
righteous, 1 Samuel 12.19. When the people of Israel were set a ^adding after a
King, Samuel made a mavelous elegant gracious Sermon unto them, exhorting
them not to forsake the Lord, but they say in the eight Chapter, Nay, but we
will have a King; as who should say, have you said what you will, is your Sermon
done, why, yet we will have a King, but; but when the Lord thundered from
heaven, then they cried, we have sinned, he is a terrible God, we see now he
is an angry God, we observe, it now we have sinned, pray for us, and to the
rest of our sins we have added this, in asking us a King, when the Lord sent
his judgments upon them, then they desired favor, and pardon, and desires
the Prophet to pray for them. The reasons of the Point are two; the first is
this, because nature it self is proffessely cross unto trouble and vexation,
it is tired therewith, and is desirous to be eased thereof; and howsoever a man
be never so unreasonable, no counsel takes place in him, yet the Word
prevails not with him, and God cannot rule, yet he carries nature about with
him, he is a man still, he has flesh and blood still, therefore when Gall
comes to his heart, and the Wormwood into his soul, Nature it self will make
him in regard of the horror that lies upon him to seek unto God, and
endeavor after means, to ease and refresh him: yon know how it is with
rebellious children, a froward little one however he will hear no counsel,
not receive any direction from the Parents, yet when the rod comes, and falls
heavily, they will down on their knees, and ask forgiveness, and nature
forces this, he feels the blow, and so uses means to be eased, even nature
compells us to seek for case, and call for succor in the time of trouble;
Nay, the beasts though never so sturdy, yet the bit in their mouths, and the
shackles on their heels, and the whippe on their back, will make them
teachable and tractable; nature teaches us this, therefore so long as nature
is in a man, afflictions force the soul being tired with misery for to seek
and call and use means to be succored. The second Reason is, because all
other means are helps in the time of trouble, and therefore they are forced
to seek to God because all other comforts fail: in the 107 Psalm. ver. 20. the
Prophet speaks of those that travel by sea, when they are tossed by the
waves, then they call upon God; as who should say, so long as any thing would
do it, God shall never hear of them, but when all helps and means fail,
then God must help or no one can. Take a man when outward afflictions ceaze
upon him, as in the time of death, friends may talk to him, and companions may
mourn for him, but all now leave him in the lurch, unless the Lord help they
cannot, therefore they are forced to repair to the Lord, and to visit him with
their prayers, so then the argument is this, if it be so that nature forces a
man in the time of trouble to seek for ease, and if it be so that all other
means cannot help a man but only the Lord, then no marvel and that in the
time of distress, the wicked seek unto the Lord for comfort. This is the
first use of the point, is it so that scoffers in the day of trouble are forced
to seek unto the Lord, then this highly commends the price and worth of Gods
ordinance, heaing and praying and the like, because in the heaviest times, at a
dead lift, when all fail, wicked men then selves are forced to take up these
ordinances of God, take a drunkard or an adulterer on his deathbed then let
all the profits in the world be offered him, you see how unprofitable they
are, it is a vexation to the drunkard to see his campanion, nay all the
pleasures of the adulterer they are as so much gall to his conscience, because
he has delighted in those dalliances. Now when all the profits and pleasures
in the world are not able to comfort them, then send for a Minister that he may
pray for me, pray for you? why I had thought you had not stood in need of
prayer, is prayer come into any reckoning with you, what is the reason of this?
why they that scorned prayer formerly, now at the day of death and time of
affliction then nothing but Ministers, and Christians, and prayer, why? the
reason is, nothing else will hold water and give a man comfort in the day of
distress, therefore let us prize those means of salvation, that will be so
powerful and comfortable when all other means fail, it is true that wicked
men in their mad moods, and wicked fits, scoff and are despisers of the
ordinances of God, and what needs this praying and this Bible carrying, and
sanctification of Sabboths, and seeking of God; this is in a drunken mood, but
when they come to their wits again in the day of death and time of trouble,
they admire then (...) such holy courses, and they will seek such godly
courses when trouble comes, then nothing but prayer and good duties, then he
sets a high price and commendation upon these courses, see them therefore and
love them because they will be in account when the day of distress comes.
Secondly, do afflictions many times force a scorner to seek unto God, then
take notice of the fearful stubbornenesse of such kinds of spirits that all
afflictions, and plagues do not provoke their souls to be humbled and to
seek for that favor of God which they stand in need of; go thou therefore
that art such a one, and reason thus with thy self, good Lord what a wretched,
knotty, sturdy heart have I? how many judgments has God sent upon the nation,
how many upon my particular, how many upon my family, and yet this soul is not
humbled and enlarged to seek unto the Lord and call upon his name, as the
devils almost would do, what a vile unreasonable distemper is this, one
judgment after another, and one plague after another, did cause Pharaoh to
confess his sins, the Lord did wrest it out of him, nay the devils believe
and tremble, Iam. 2.19. Good Lord? I beseech you think of it, what a hard
hearted Pharaoh confess his sins, and what do the devils believe and
tremble at the wrath of God, why then what a hard heart have thou, that the
Lord flasheth hell fire in thy face and sends plague after plague, and yet
never touched and humbled, all wrests not one prayer from thee. In the third
place it is a ground to teach us thus much, never place much confidence in
those prayers that are wrung out of a man by force of affliction, the Lord
plucks it out of thee whether thou will or no, he will make the stoutest hearts
to come in, scorners, reprobates, they pray, the Lord makes; them cry and howl
and call daily upon him, and yet all this while nature forces them, therefore
trust not thou to forced prayer in the day of distress, that which is commonly
most forced, is commonly most false, and therefore shall find little
acceptance, it was a speech of a good man that the repentance of a dying man,
it is commonly a great fear of a dying repentance, so I say when a man lives
wickedly all his life time, and then thinks that a few lazy wishes in the
time of trouble will serve the turn, take heed, hypocrites do thus, and
scorners do thus, and yet are never heard, but rejected, the Lord he loves
prayer and holy duties in the days of peace, and when a prayer comes out of
love to God, and love to the duty, there is some comfort in this, but little
comfort can I or any Minister give you in the time of sickness, if you never
used to seek to God in the time of health, for you seek only when you are
forced thereunto.

The next point is this, that the seeking of scorners is somewhat earnest and
vehement, but we will come to the third which is this, scornful men, wicked
men, they may seek, God earnestly, they may call upon him vehemently, and yet
never be heard, never receive any mercy or acceptance from him, Luke 13, 24.
Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many shall strive to enter, but
shall not be able, it is not any man's power to be able to enter; no, no, many
shall seek this but shall not be able. Add to this John 8.21. It is the
heavy doom of Christ upon the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall seek me says
he, but shall die in your sins; as who should say I offered you, grace you
refused it, I come home to you, you entertain me not, the time will come, when
I will lay anguish on your hearts, and horror on your souls, and then you
shall seek me but shall not find me, but shall die in your sins, you will
have your sins, I cannot remove them, you will not suffer me to take place
with you, the truth is, you shall die in your sins, take your proud hearts
and go down to hell with them, take them, and perish with them, I go to my
father to heaven, but you shall never come there: Our Savior says, the time
shall come that you shall seek me, and shall not find me, but die in your
sins; but you will say, if they may seek, call, and yet not find, how comes
this to pass, is not seeking the way to finding, is not calling the way to
receiving, has not God said, if you ask any thing in my sons name, you
shall receive it? I say as the Apostle James in another case; You ask and have
not says he, because you ask amiss; so I say to you, ye seek and find
not, because you seek amiss: Though they call with violence, and seek with
vehemency: yet it is not suiteable to Gods rule, and that is the reason they
do not prosper: now the reasons why their seeking do not speed are three;
first, they seek unseasonably, when the Lord happily has taken away the
means of salvation, when the time is past, and the opportunity is over, when
God has taken away the means, as also the blessings upon the means; in the
25. of Matthew, the five foolish Virgins went for oil, and when the time was
past, and the door was shut, then they knock at heaven gates, open to us, but
the door was shut, they that stood upon the watch, and attended the Lords
coming, they entered into the bride Chamber, Esaias 55.6. Seek the Lord, while
he may be found, that is, while the means of grace are continued, while
Wisdom is crying, and the Lord Jesus is holding out his golden Scepter of
mercy and salvation: Now is the day of salvation, now is the time accepted,
who knows whether the Lord will cover the heavens, and take away the light of
the Gospel, and make us wander in darkness, Rocks, and Wildernesses; if
desolation should come we must be driven from our houses and habitations, here
one man alone, there one woman alone, and there a child crying, and the third
dying, then we shall observe what opportunities we have had and neglected, the
Lord was near to us in the use of the means, but now the time is past, the
Gospel and opportunities are gone, he that seeks unseasonably may sink
down, and never enjoy means and helps, and the blessing of God upon them,
Revel. 2.21. God gave Iesabel a day of repentance, but she repented not,
therefore he would cast her into a bed of sorrow, she loved bedding and ease,
and pleasure, and delight, and she had a time of repentance, but she would
not take it, therefore because she loved bedding, she shall have enough, she
shall have a bed of sorrow, and anguish, that is the first ground, that seek
unseasonably: secondly, they seek upon a false ground, it is not out of hatred
of sin, that they seek for mercy but out of horror of conscience, it is not
out of loathsomeness of corruption, but by reason of the burthensomnesse that
lies upon their hearts; it is not for holiness they labor, but for quiet,
ease, and contentedness, that they might not be troubled and vexed, Psalm.
78.36. The Text says those that did seek the Lord when he plagued them,
dissembled in their hearts, they pretended to seek the Lord, and worship the
Lord, but they did not seek the Lord but their own ease and dissembled
fearfully and abused the Lords mercy and patience that he had vouchsafed unto
them; look as it is with the dog, he does not cast up his vomit, because he
loathes it, but he is weary of it, he loves it still, therefore lickes it up
again presently, he did not cast it up out of loathsomeness of it, but because
it did trouble his stomach; so it is with a carnal hypocrite in the horror
of heart and anguish of spirit; it is not for love of holiness but of quiet,
that he renteth himself and says, I have hated Gods people, profaned the
Sabbath, and committed adultery secretly, he would vomit and confess his
sins, and crave mercy, not because he loathes his sin, but he loathes
anguish and horror of heart, and when that is taken away, he falls to his
vomit and base practice. Thirdly, they seek to a false end, he does not seek
grace for a Christ's sake, and Christ for the love of a Christ, to have union
with him, but he seeks grace not to have have sin removed, but to have a
kind of safenesse in his sin; a wretch in the desperate anguish of spirit
seeks unto a Savior, as to a Surgeon, not that he may remove sin, but that
he may be the more quiet in sin, he would have Christ pardon sin, that he
may commit sin with quietness, not to have him take away his corruptions,
and convert his soul, but to heal the wound, and to take away the bitterness
of sorrow, Esaias 58 34. A company of wicked wretches seemed to seek the Lord by
fasting, but they did not seek the Lord, but their own lusts, they fasted
that they might continue in their base courses, with more quietness, without
destraction, or suspicion, as a malefactor after he is attached and condemned,
he will seek a pardon, and sue for it, not that he might become better
afterward, but for quiet and liberty, that he may not be hanged, so a
cunning chapman is content to attend and pray, that he may cousen and cheat,
by fasting and praying so much the more: so then gather up the Point, if they
seek out of season, out of false grounds, and to a wrong end; no marvel then
though they call earnestly and seek vehemently, and yet God answers not, nor
is found of them according to their desires.

The first Use is for terror, Is it so that a man may seek earnestly, and yet
never obtain mercy, then this is able to shake and sink a company of souls
of carnal wretches: Oh, the lamentable condition of a company of poor
creatures that live in the bosom of the Church, and therefore it falls sore
upon those creatures that make a scoff at praying, and hearing all ignorant
and deluded persons, that know not how to pray and seek to the Lord for grace
and mercy; me thinks the former truth were sufficient to dash all the carnal
hope that can creep into the mind of such creatures, therefore take notice of
the desperate condition wherein they lie; Reason thus, Is it so, that those
that seek the Lord shall never find him, then what shall become of me that
never cried at all, nay, that loath prayer, and reject the use of Gods
ordinances, and despise the means of grace and salvation, whereby I must seek
and obtain mercy if ever I have it; if they that do seek attain not, then I
that never seek, my condition is desperately lamentable, fearfully
irrecoverable, why? Why, my heart rises at such persons; I have tanted this
praying, and mocked this fasting, good Lord, what shall become of my soul,
desperate is my condition, and fearful is my estate, the Lord be merciful
unto me, I am gone for ever, I, grace will the Lord vouchsafe? grace to me; do
I count of mercy and pardon for my sins? no let me set my heart at ease,
those days are gone I mercy, no, I have loathed and scorned mercy, the day
will come when the Lord will say, you have hated mercy, therefore you shall be
condemned, and never partake thereof, nay, what will become of a company of
carnal wretches, that set themselves with desperate indignation to hinder, and
crush, and oppose the improvement of all holy means, if there be any servant
in their family, that rises early to pray to the Lord, if there be any child
that is godly, and a wife that looks toward Sion, there is an uproare in the
family, the master he flies about, and says, I cannot maintain my family by
poaring on a book, how then do thou get thy living if not by praying and
reading, thou gottest thy living, but a curse with it, if thou get without
these means, thou may get wealth, but God will curse thee with it, and thou
shall go down to hell and thy wealth with thee; why reason thus with your
selves, I cannot so much as buy cattle, but I must seek in the Fayres, I
cannot provide food for my family but I must go to the market, and what a
wretched heart have I that think to get mercy and grace and salvation, and yet
he in my base lusts, and never stir a foot to seek the Lord, and call upon
his name, how is my judgment blinded, and my soul couzened, ^hinke of it if
those that offered fair for mercy and grace by many prayers, and desires, and
endeavors, if they in the mean time fell short, and never came to heaven,
what will become of me that never look after the things of grace and
salvation, surely if the Lord be in heaven I shall never come there.

The last use is this, you will say what shall we do if seeking will not get
it at the hands of the Lord, then we had as good cast away all, and do
nothing, as get nothing by what we do; therefore the last use is a word of
exhortation, we are to be entreated in the name of the Lord Jesus to do not
only what these seekers do, but go further, and do more; This is no
argument because they obtain not mercy by seeking, therefore we should not
seek, therefore seek after another manner, so seek and pray that you may
find benefit thereby, and comfort therein unto your souls, in the 13. of Luke
24. this is the use Christ makes, many shall seek to enter in and shall not be
able; what shall we therefore cast care away, no therefore strive you to
enter, seek after another manner then they do that so thou may obtain that
which they shall never obtain, many deal in this case as Gentlewomen at a
Sermon; if they may have a seat at their ease; they will sit down and hear,
but if they must crowd for it, then they return and get no good, so many seek
but they strive not, with their seeking they are not able to crowd thorough all
occasions, and take up arms against the distempers of their souls, that so
they may obtain that mercy they stand in need of, But you will say if
earnestness and vehemence will not do the deed, what then will do the
deed, the rules therefore for our direction in seeking are three; first labor
to seek seasonably while the day of grace lasts, and the Sun shines, take
the season and go on cheerfully, and arrive at the end of your hopes, call
upon the Lord while he may be found, it was the direction God gave to
Jerusalem, and the moon he makes for her neglect, therefore Luk 19.41. O that
thou had known in this thy day, etc. he cease praying and falls to
weeping, he had preached often, and prayed often, but nothing would prevail,
he falls a weeping over it. O that thou had known at least in this thy day,
the things that belong to thy peace, as who should say, now this is thy day,
now the word is brought home unto thee, now my Disciples are preaching, and the
Son of man himself is come to woo you, Oh that thou had known in this
thy day the things that, etc. but they are hidden from thine eyes, take notice,
every man has a day and a season which is the harvest of salvation, do you
not take notice of this, that at some Sermon God opens the eye and pricks the
conscience, and sometimes lovingly persuades a man, and the soul is yielding
and walking after the Lord, the soul melts lovingly under the hand of God,
this is thy day, take heed how thou neglectest it, and as thou go home,
entreat the Lord to make profitable that which thou have heard, and say this is
my day, I am now in the fire, Lord melt me, I am now under the power of thy
ordinance, make it effectual to my soul, and take notice of it, if the spirit
of God call and you regard it not, and let all go, and all commodities are
plucked up, and gone, you may come, and call, and cry, but it is too late; that
Spirit which thou have resisted shall never work more, thank thy self, the
day is gone, now they are hidden from thine eyes, the day is over, and
therefore thou may cry, Oh, for a Minister, and oh for a Sabbath, no, no,
if all the Angels in heaven should speak, and all the Ministers on earth
should preach themselves hoarse, thou would not be affected therewith,
therefore take the season and the golden opportunity of grace, and when Christ
comes to your souls entertain him, if Christ knocks, open the door, if he
awaken thy conscience do not snubbe it; labor now to see thy sin that thou
may find mercy at the hand of the Lord. Secondly, as we must seek
seasonably, so we must seek with our whole heart, now the whole heart makes
known it self in two particulars; the first is this, when all the good things
of this world, be they what they will be, cannot withdraw us from Christ, this
is one part of the whole heart, when profits and pleasures of this world stand
in competition and opposition between God, and our duty to cast off all, and
say whether I have honor and liberty or no, I care not, so I have God, my God
I will have, this is a happy seeking away therefore with that lazy heart, I
think it should be so, and ought to be so, and it is good sanctifying the
Sabbath, and praying, it is mervellous reasonable I ought to do it, but if I
do it, ease and honor will be gone, and disgrace will be cast upon me, thou
now seek thy ease and honor, and the Lord of heaven will curse thee, and
thy seeking, but if thou did seek with thy whole heart thou would go
thorough the work, and say, what regard friends and honors? let ease and
friends look to themselves, let friends be displeased, I had rather friends
should be displeased then God, it is not necessary to be rich or honorable, but
it is necessary to find mercy, and to have sins pardoned. Secondly, as no
good thing must withdraw us from God, so no misery must be a stop to let us
from coming to the Lord, but we must break through all miseries that lie
between God and us, this is that Saint Paul resolved, Acts 20.24. as who
should say, come what can come, though heaven and earth meet together, I am
resolved to do what God requires, he that seeks God with his whole heart, if
he were to run thorough hell he would run thorough it to go to God, now
away with that dawbing and hagling with the Lord: O says the poor soul, I
confess the course is honorable, God requires it, and I should do it, but if
I do it, trouble and persecution will befall me, what shall become of me and
mine, will you have my wife and children undone, if thou thus seek the Lord,
thy seeking is accursed, thou do not seek with thy whole heart, they that
seek with their whole heart are like a maid that sets her affections strong
upon a man, happily her friends will be reasoning about the portion, and there
is a cavil on the one side, and an objection on the other, poverty on one
side, and maintenance on the other side; but if the woman love the man, for the
man's sake she will say, let me have him though I beg and die with him, so it
is with the soul of a poor Christian that seek, Christ with his whole heart,
when Christ and grace and duty be propounded, and the match offered, and
Christ tendered to the soul and the Lord says, I will be thy Savior and
Redeemer but thou must look for disgrace and misery, and persecution, but
there is a better life a coming now, if you stand for a portion with Christ,
that you must have ease and quiet, and will not have misery and prison with
Christ, then you are never like to make a match, but he that loves Christ for
Christ's sake, the soul says, let the Lord Jesus be a Savior to me, though I
beg and die, and never enjoy good day, it is enough my soul shall be saved,
if I should rot in prison, and be banished into the utmost coasts of the
earth, yet let me have my Savior, let him take possession of me, let his
Spirit rule me whatsoever come of it; this is to seek God with our whole
heart, and now you are like to find him. Thirdly, you must seek the Lord
constantly, you must persevere in the use of all means, look as it is with a
man that is resolved to find another, and not to leave seeking till he has
found him; he goes first to his house, he is not there, he was gone to such a
place an hour before, well, he pursues him thither, he is not there, but is
gone to the Market, he follows him thither, when he comes thither, he is
gone home again, well, then back again he goes to his house, and never
leaves hunting and pursuing of him till he finds him; so it is with a soul
that truly and constantly seeks after the Lord, he is to be found in his
ordinances, happily thou come to the Word and find him not here, the Word
says he went from hence to fasting and prayer, then thou find him not
there neither, then thou go from fasting and prayer to holy conference, then
he is not to be found there, but is gone to the public ordinance, in the
Congregation, then thither thou go, and wilt not be content till thou
find him, but go backward and forward, from the Word to prayer, and
fasting, from them to conference, from thence to the Word again; this to seek
the Lord constantly and he that thus seeks is like to obtain, Psalm 122.1.
The Prophet David says, He will wait until the Lord shows mercy: let this
be thy resolution, seek unto God till he do work effectually upon thy heart,
thou have fasted and prayed, yet God has not heard, why, fast and pray still
until he supply what is wanting, and pardon what is amiss; thus never leave
endeavoring and doing until the Lord shows mercy unto thy soul, and give
the assurance of the pardon of thy sins: thus seek the Lord seasonably, thus
seek thee Lord with all thy heart, thus seek him constantly, thus seek him
with your whole heart, and he will be found of you in mercy and compassion.

FINIS.

