A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE QVEENES MAJESTY at Hampton Court, on Sunday the
(...) day of October:

By I. HOPKINS, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in ordinary.

P^ 3.18. Many walk of whom I have told you often (...) now tell you weeping,
that they (...) the enemies of the cross of Christ.

AT LONDON (...) printed by F. K. for Thomas Man. 1609.

TO THE MIGHTY, HIGH-BORNE, VIRTUOUS, AND MOST excellent Princess: ANNE, by
the grace of God, Queen of great Britain, France and Ireland.
YOur Majesty's attentive hearing, and gracious approouing this plain Sermon,
when it was preached before your Highness, mine own experience of your
religious devotion in frequenting the service of God: and your Highness godly
affection to goodbooks, and daily reading them, which has been often
testified by such as are acquainted with your Majesty's studies: have emboldned
me to print this Sermon, and present it to your Majesty, earnestly desiring
that it may be as profitable for the increase of godliness in such as read it,
as it will be acceptable to many, being graced with your Majesty's name and
patronage.

The Lord of heaven and earth so bless your Majesty with a daily increase of
his graces, that as your Highness has the happiness to be the most worthy and
famous Queen of Europe, so after many years enjoying your Crown upon earth,
you may be crowned with eternal glory in heaven. For which none shall more
heartily pray, then

Your Majesty's most humble servant, I. HOPKINS.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE Queens Majesty at Hampton Court, on Sunday the
16. day of October.
GENESIS 5.24. And Henoch walked with God, and he was no more seen: for God took
him away.


IT is an observation no less ancient, then true, that such as search into
the bowels of the earth for metals, after long labors, and great pains do
find paruum in magno, a little metal in much oar: but, says S. Chrysostom
in his fifteenth Homily upon Genesis: they that labor in the sacred mine of
the holy Scriptures shall find magnum in paruo, a great treasure of doctrine
in a few words, many divine instructions in a short sentence. And this (most
Gracious and Honorable) is this day fulfilled in our ears; this parcel of
Scripture very short, and yet the matter so large, as will be hardly delivered
within the usual time limited for a Sermon. The words are an historical
record of an holy man, that lived in the first age of the world, whose life for
an example is left to perpetual memory. For as the doctrines in the
Scriptures are for the information of our judgments, so are the examples for
the reformation of our affections. And no doubt good examples where they are
well observed, and carefully applied, are strong motives to virtue and
godliness. And it is undoubtedly one of the causes of the common corruption of
this age, that there are so many examples of profane impiety, and so few
presidents of religious virtue. But that we may the better understand, and
remember that which we shall hear from this Scripture, we will observe therein
two parts: The life of Henoch for our example; ( Henoch walked with God.) And
his end for our comfort; He was no more seen: for God took him away. His life
considered, first in it self, that he walked with God: Next with certain
circumstances, necessarily observed for his greater commendations, as shall
afterward appear. In the second part, The thing it self, that he was no more
seen. And the reason of the same, for God took him away. And Henoch walked
with God, etc. This phrase is usual in the Hebrew tongue. To walk, signifies
to hold a course of life. To walk in the counsel of the wicked, is to live in
the counsel of the wicked. To walk in the ways of the Kings of Israel, is to
live like the Kings of Israel. To walk after Baalim, is to practice the
Idolatry of Baalim. To walk with God, is to live according to Gods will, both
in worshipping of him as he has commanded, and practicing such moral duties
as he has prescribed; And to walk at all times and in all places, as in the
presence of God, who is an eye witness of our most secret actions; Psalm. 139.
for though all men walk in Gods sight (as who can hide himself from him
whose eyes behold all places, Prou.
spying out the evil and the good?) yet the most sort of men, Job 39.
like the Ostrich, mentioned by Elihu in the book of Job, either know it not,
or regard it not. But that the meaning of these words may more clearly appear
unto us, let us look into other places of holy Scripture, where the like
words are set down and expounded, so shall we see how the holy Ghost (the
best Interpreter of the Scriptures) will teach us to understand them. In the
third chapter of the first book of the Kings, Solomon says thus unto the
Lord: King. 3.6.
Thou have showed to thy servant David my father great mercy when he walked
before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with
thee. And in chapter 9. the Lord says to him, 1. King. 9.4.
If thou will walk before me, as David thy father walked in pureness of
heart, and in righteousness, to do according to all that I have commanded
thee, etc. Also in the second of the Kings, and the twentieth chapter Hezechiah
says, I beseech thee O Lord remember now how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.
So that by all these places it is evident, that to walk with God implies three
duties, truth for the foundation, righteousness and holiness of life for the
outward conversation, and sincerity in the heart without dissimulation. Henoch
then is commended for these three things, soundness of religion, sincerity of
heart, and godliness of life. And this was the walking that was commanded to
Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Genesis 6.9.
commended in Noah, and worthily recorded by this example of Henoch for our
instruction: first, that we settle our faith upon true grounds: Eccles. 10.1.
secondly, that we take heed of hypocrisy, which like a dead fly corrupts
all the box of ointment: lastly, that our conversation be in holiness,
without which no man shall see God. Heb. 12.14.
If we build on a false foundation, Matthew. 7.
the building will fall. If our profession be in hypocrisy, our hope will be
as the web of a spider. And if we join not virtue to our faith, Job 18.14. 2.
Pet. 1. James.
it will be a dead, or a devils faith. Therefore we may hence conclude, that
neither heretics, hypocrites, nor profane persons walk with God, and they
that walk not with God in the kingdom of grace, shall never rest with him in
the kingdom of glory. In the application therefore of this point, such as by
reason of carelesnes to hear, and learn good things, are yet ignorant of the
grounds of religion, and therefore may easily be led into error, are to be
admonished to lay a better, and more sure foundation against the time of
trial. For assuredly so many could not be seduced (as daily are in these
times) if ever they had learned and believed the true grounds and foundations
of the faith. Act. 17.11.
Also we ought like ye men of Berea to make trial of the truth of those things
we hold and have learned by the rules of faith, and willingly suffer our
selves to be informed in the essential grounds of true religion. For although
that errors in some circumstances are not so dangerous (so as they be not
wilful) for who in some things may not be deceived?) yet to err in the
foundation is the certain ruin of the whole work, and so to die is the
undoubted destruction both of body and soul. Secondly, we must be sure that
in this walking with God our heart be sound. Prou. 4.23.
Of all watch and ward (says Solomon) look to thy heart. For if that be
sincere, it is so highly acceptable with God, that in mercy he passes by
many imperfections. And it was a special part of the last admonition that
David gave unto Solomon, 1. Chron. 28.9.
to serve the Lord with a perfect heart. Dissembled holiness is double impiety,
and though such paintings may deceive men, they can never deceive the al seeing
eyes of the eternal God. Lastly, that this our walking may be pleasing to the
Lord on al parts, we must do that which is good in Gods sight, that is, we must
not only avoid such things, as the eyes of the Lord cannot abide to behold, but
we must likewise practice and perform those good works that he has commanded
us, and are belonging to our several callings. We are created to good works
to live in them; Ephesians. 2.10. Psalm. 34.14. and Isa. 1.16.
not only must we cease from evil, but do good: remembering the punishment
of that servant who hid his masters talent in a napkin. Luke 19.20.
For according to our several places, gifts, and means, the Lord requires of
us to seek his glory; and as we desire that the Lord will bestow upon us
glory in heaven, so must we always endeavor to advance his glory here upon
earth. But it will be said, Durus est hic sermo: this is a hard saying, who can
thus walk? And if none shall enjoy the kingdom of heaven but such as walk
thus upon earth, then who shall be saved? It is true indeed, there are none that
make such straight steps to their feet, but sometimes they slide, or step out
of the way, neither is any man so upright upon earth that does good and sins
not: In some things we offend all, Iam. 3.2.
says the Apostle. But it follows not, because we cannot line in the
perfect obedience of the law of God, therefore we should not labor to do our
uttermost endeavor, and (as I take it) the word used in the original text will
give some light hereunto, (...)
which properly signifies, made himself to walk, implying not a perfection
of the work, but a diligence in the endeavor to resist the temptations of
sin, and fight against the lusts of the flesh. And this is the fulfilling of
that which the Scripture teaches, that the life of a Christian is a continual
warfare, the profession whereof we undertake in our Baptism, 1. Tim. 1.18. 2.
Tim. 4.7. 1. Cor. 9.24. Luke 13.24.
and the execution whereof must be the daily practice of our lives. The life
of a Christian is compared to running in a race, set out by the words of
laboring, striving, indeuouring, and here by walking: for the passage to
heaven is painful on foot in the work of mortification, not riding at ease
in following the pleasures and lusts of the flesh. In my bed by night I sought
him that my soul loved, Cant. 3.1.
I sought him but I found him not, says the spouse of Christ, teaching that
such as will find Christ, must arise from their bed, (by which is meant,
pleasures and delights of the flesh) and seek him in the exercises of fasting
and prayer, and such like duties of holiness. The way to heaven would never have
been called a narrow way, nor the gate a strait gate if it were sufficient, in
words to profess true religion, and in our works to deny our hearts no
pleasure. Hitherto we have heard the religious and godly life of this holy man,
and how he walked with God. But as all virtues and vices are aggrauated, or
extenuated by their circumstances; so in the observation of the matter
precedent in this history some necessary points may be noted, by which the
excellency of this his walking may much more be admired, and they are
specially three.

1. The condition and state of life wherein he lined. 2. The men with whom he
lived. 3. The time how long he continued.
First, for his estate, it is apparent that he was a great Prince of his time;
the eldest of his house; of the first line in the descent from Adam: that he
enjoyed abundantly the plenty of the earth, that then was exceeding fertile in
yielding all kind of fruits, as being not yet sowred with the unsavory
corrupt matter the universal deluge left upon it (for howsoever we read of
sin in that age of the world, we read of no famine) and being the heir of
his house, and first borne of the family, his authority and power was great.
Now that wealth, greatness, and plenty, are strong temptations to our nature to
take liberty to sin, may appear by that warning which Moses gave the
people: And when the Lord thy God has brought thee into the land which he
swear unto thy fathers, Deur. 6.10.11.12.
etc. with great, and goodly cities which thou buildedst not: and houses full
of all manner of goods which thou filledst not, etc. And when thou have eaten,
and art full, Then beware lest thou forget the Lord. And the danger of this
temptation made Agur, Prou. 30.
as it is in the Proverbs, to mislike as well abundance of riches, as extremity
of want, being a great occasion of pride, and forgetfulness of God: For what
made Nabal so proud that a man might not speak to him, 1. Sam. 25.17.
but his wealth? what made Haman the son of Amedatha so proud, but his
greatness, by reason of the Kings favor? Wealth and liberty are the parents of
many sins, and are indeed those thorns that choke the good seed of the
word, Luke 8.14.
not in their own nature, (for so they are the good blessings of God) but by
the corruption of our nature that is so apt to abuse them. There is an evil
sickness that I have seen under the Sun, Eccle. 5.12.
riches reserved to the owners thereof for their evil, says Solomon. This
indeed has not been true in all, Abraham, Job, David, Iehosaphat, Joseph of
Arimathea and many other have bin rich, and yet walked with God as Enoch did:
and rich Abraham received poor Lazarus into his bosom, to show that neither of
both the estates, either of riches, or poverty stop up the way to the kingdom
of heaven. But if riches were not a dangerous impediment our Savior would not
have said, It is harder for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. Now for the curing of this
sickness (as Solomon calls it) these remedies are to be used. First, to
remember we are stewards of these blessings, and must give account to God for
the abusing of them.

Secondly, we must know that this is not our heaven: it is but as the passage
through the wilderness to the land of promise. For if we will needs have a
heaven here, we may fear it will one day be said to us, as Abraham said to
the rich man, Luke 16.
Son remember thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, etc.

Thirdly, we must understand that pleasures are but like Eues Apple, pleasant
in show and taste, but ye cause of extreme misery: like Esaus red broth,
pleasing his appetite, but the loss of his birthright: like the Israelites
Quails, that made them fat bodies, but lean souls: like Ionathans honey,
that cleared his eics, but had like to have cost him his life: like Ezechiels
book, sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly: to conclude, like Jonas
gourd, short, slight and momentarie, dying in the birth, and perishing in the
cradle.

Fourthlie, whereas there is a lawful use of pleasure (which no sound Divine
ever denied) yet we must hearken to Solomon, ^rou.
who says, Pastime is not meet for a fool: meaning such as have not godly
wisdom to use them: for even as children will surfeit themselves with fruits,
and intemperat persons with drink, so will fools do with pleasures. Now
pleasures and recreations are indeed ordained as sweet ingredients to abate
the bitterness of humane mortality: and like as the immoderate use of sweet
meats cannot be healthful to the body, so is the daily following of pleasures
as hurtful to the soul.

Lastly, (for I may not be over tedious) the meditation of our last end is a
singular help to keep us from being bewitched with these Circes cups of
pleasures: Qui considerat qualis erit in morte, semper pauidus erit in
operatione, Greg. lib. 12. Mor.
says S. Gregory; He that considers what he shall be in his death, will
never be without fear in the works of his life: and most bitter will the
remembrance of vain pleasures be, when death shall cease upon us. The second
circumstance we considered, is the time when Henoch lived, viz. in a declining
age of the world, Call. in Genesis Exemplum singular nobis in persona vnius
hominis statuitur, qui in horrenda dissipatione firmus stetit.
the children of Cain being many, his time paralleling with Lamech, that had
corrupted the institution of marriage with polygamy, and was (as by his own
boasting may appear) an insolent tyrant. Now what an hindrance it is to
godliness to live among wicked men, Genesis 4. Psalm. 120.
David's complaint, Psalm. 120. and our daily experience will sufficiently
prove. Genesis 19.23.
Lots daughters could never have devised such a way for their incest, if they
had not seen the effects of drunkenness in Sodom. The Israelites by seeing
the idolatry of the Egyptians did learn to make the golden calfe in the
wilderness; Exodus 3^.
Genesis 42.
and Pharaoahs court taught Joseph to call his brethre^spies against his
knowledge, and so often to protest the same by the life of Pharaoh. Neh.
The children of Israel by living among the Heathen were readier in the speech
of Asdod then in the language of Canaan; and Peter never denied his Master,
Matthew. 26.
till he kept company with the high Priests servants. Surely no contagion is
more dangerous to the body, then the wicked examples of the ungodly are to
the soul; and who would make him his companion that is diseased with an
infectious malady A?s therefore we must take heed we be not stained with the
evil examples of the ungodly, lest being like unto them in their lives, we be
made partakers of their plagues, Apoc. 18.4.
so must we be careful to avoid their company and fellowship, Eccles. 13.
lest touching pitch we be defiled therewith. David the King in setting down
the orders of his house, Psalm. 101.7.
says, There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house, he that tells
lies, shall not tarry in my sight: and S. Paul admonishing us not to be
deceived, nor corrupted with the words of the wicked, adds this caveat as a
means, Ephesians. 5.7^.
Be not therefore companions with them. Ieremies example is worthy to be
remembered herein, who sat not in the assembly of the mockers. Ier. 15.17.
But seeing so long as we live in this world, there will be ever some darnell
among the corn, so that we cannot be always free from evil company; Let us
remember the holy man Lot, who though he lived in Sodom, became not like the
Sodomits, but his righteous soul was vexed with seeing their unlawful deeds:
2. Pet. 2.7.8.
Eliah the Prophet, Daniel with his fellows, and Henoch in this place, that
continued their soundness of religion, and life without blemish,
notwithstanding all the evil examples of their time. And thus much for the
second circumstance in this example. The third and last is his perseverance,
viz. that he lived this holy life, and continued this godly course all his
time which was more then three hundred years. A goodly perseverance
undoubtedly, and an argument of a sure building, that in so many years was not
shaken: many for a time have run well, and yet ^re they came to their races
end, have fallen foulie, but constantly to persevere, hic labor, hoc opus est.
The people at the first hearing of the law were very zealous, and promised
much; but, says the Lord, O that there were in them such an heart to fear me
and keep all my commandments Always! that it might go well with them and
their children for ever. Wherein the perseuera^ce is noted to be the principal
thing that the Lord looks for at our hands. For to be sometimes moved to
devotion and contrition, may arise from sudden affliction of sickness,
imprisonment, or such like, peradventure by hearing of a Sermon, where the
judgments of God are zealouslie denounced (as was Felix at the Sermon of S.
Act. 24.
Paul) so have I seen at sea many passionately affected with show of
repentance by occasion of a violent storm, and yet has all been like a
morning cloud, Hose. 6.4.
and as the morning dew has vanished away. And we see how much corn is sown
(as our Savior Christ teaches) which though it take some shallow root,
Matthew. 13.
never abides to bring forth fruit. But to have religion so settled in the
heart, that the life be always seasoned with an habitual practice thereof, is
that which God only accepts, and is here in this example set before us. In
cassum bonum agitur (says S. Greg. 1. lib. Mor.
Gregory) si ante vitae terminum deseratur: It is in vain to begin a course
of godliness, and after with Demas to embrace this present world. He runs in
vain that falls or fails ere he comes at his races end: and as those whom
God loves, he loves to the end, so those that prosesse to follow him must do
it to the end. Lots wife by looking back was made an example to all
backsliders, that the salt of her destruction might season us to a more
constant resolution. Memineritis vxoris Lot, (says a father) de Sodoma quidem
eductae, quia Deo credidit; sed in via mutatae, quia retro aspexit: Remember
Lots wife, led out of Sodom, because she believed the Angels; but turned to a
pillar of salt, because she looked back. Good works have a reward if we
faint not; but to begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, is fearful; and
for such it had been better they had never known the way of righteousness.
Let us therefore rather endeavor to be like the Church of Thyatira, whose last
works were more then the first: and remember, sine perseuerantia nec qui
pugnat victoriam, nec palmam victor consequitur: without perseverance, neither
he that fights gets the victory, nor the conqueror the honor of triumph.
For he only shall be crowned that continues to the end. Ioas is not reckoned
among the good kings, because his zeal lasted no longer then Iehoida lived.
Nor Nero among the good Emperors for his first five years clemency. The end
of a thing (says Solomon) is better then the beginning. Quinqueuium Neronis.
Suet. Ecclesiast. 7.10.1. These. 5.
Therefore I will conclude this point with the warning of the Apostle, seeing
that God by his spirit has begun the work of grace in us, that we quench not
the spirit. And because a fire is put out as well by withdrawing the fuel, as
by pouring on water, 1. Tim. 4.13.
we must give good heed to two other admonitions in that place: Pray
continually, despise not prophecy: and that in the 1. to Timothy the 4. Give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. For where prayer is
devoutly used, and the word carefully read, and heard, the increase of godliness
will undoubtedly follow; but when prayer is neglected, and preaching despised,
all godly and religious motions will soon be quenched. And thus much
concerning the life of Henoch, wherein we have seen a rare and worthy
president of true godliness. Now it remains to learn what fruit and effect
followed the same. It has been a common opinion among the Atheists that there
is no God, because neither is there punishment for vice, nor reward for virtue
(as they affirm.) Mal. 3.14.
And the Prophet Malachi had to do with such in his time, that said, it is in
vain to serve God. And such were also in the Prophet Zephanies time, Zeph.
1.12.
that said, The Lord will do neither good nor evil. Eccles. 9^2.
And in the book of Ecclesiastes the wise man justly taxes those Epicures
that said, al things are alike to all, to the just, and to the wicked, to the
good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to
him that sacrifices not, as is the good, so is the sinner, he that swears as
he that fears an oath. And it is to be feared this opinion too commonly
prevails in the world, and that is the cause why religion and religious
actions be in so small account as they are. But whosoever shall take counsel
from the holy Scriptures, shall find that this is nothing else but a mere
sophistication of Satan to bring godliness into contempt. Famous are those
blessings that are promised in the law, to the religious keepers of the same,
Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
and ever true is that which was spoken to Heli from the Lord, Them that honor
me, 1. Sam. 2.30. Ioh. 12.26.
I will honor, etc. Which is also confirmed by that saying of our Savior, If
any man serve me, him will my father honor. The examples in the Scriptures are
many, that confirm unto us this truth. In the second of Chron. the prosperity
of Iehosaphat is wholly attributed to this, as the true cause of the same,
because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not
Baalim. And though his kingdom was but small, not so much as the fourth part
of this Island, he was able to bring into the field above eleue^ hundred
thousand fighting men, God blessed so exceedingly him and all his people, as
in the same Chapter does at large appear. Noah, Abraham, Joseph, Joshua, and
Caleb are all confirmations hereof. Psalm. 119.56
This I had because I kept thy precepts, says the Prophet David, deriuing the
ground and cause of his happiness from his true service of almighty God. Ier.
39.16.
Ebedmelech the black-more was promised of God to be delivered (at that great
slaughter, and sacking of Jerusalem) from those that sought his life, and that
he should not fall by the sword, because thou have put thy trust in me, says
the Lord. And to conclude with the saying of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. Thus
by these (whereto might be added many more testimonies and examples) it is
plainly proved that it is not in vain to serve God. Now let us see what yt
was wherewith the religious life of Henoch was rewarded. And he was no more
seen, etc. This is the prerogative that Moses shows to have been bestowed
upon Henoch by the Lord, as a rare fruit of his great sincerity and
godliness. viz, that he was taken from among the society of me^ in the
midst of his age, which at the first sight may seem strange; all men
naturally desiring long life, and the wicked threatened with this judgment,
that they shall not live out half their days. But if we look more thoroughly
into this point, Psalm.
we shall see that neither is long life always a blessing, nor for the children
of God to die in their youth, an argument of Gods displeasure. For assuredly
this translation of Henoch was a singular favor of God toward him, otherwise
it should never have here by Moses bin so particularly recorded, Heb. 11.
nor by S. Paul afterward so expressly recounted among those glorious
achieuements of faith. For can any earthly benefit be counterpoysed with this
favor of God, To be received into heavenly glory; from the worlds misery,
into the society of Angels; from the company of evil men, into rest, and
peace; from this pilgrimage of trouble, into eternal safety; from daily
tentation, into the perfection of contentation; from continual coffeehouse,
into the haven of assured safety, from the storms of perpetual danger?
undoubtedly had I the tongues of men and Angels I could not to perfection set
out the greatness of this disparitie. And that in the midst of his age, for
long life is but as a long warfare, as a long winter, as a long imprisonment,
as a long and tedious journey at sea, wherein all the hope of contentment
stands on the safe arrival in the harbor, and returning home into our
country. Long life (I say) is not always a blessing; for how many live long
to their greater misery in this life, and further punishment afterward? How
much happier had it bin with Heli that he had died young, then to have lived
to see the impiety of his sons, and their miserable end? How much happier
with Saul if he had died in the prime of his years, then in living long, to
commit so many fearful sins, and at length to be his own murderer? Ah how
happy had it been with Zedekia if he had died in his cradle, rather then to
live to see Jerusalem (through his rebellion and perjury) sacked, that famous
Temple burnt, his own children slain before his face, and then (his eyes
being put out) to live yet longer in miserable captivity? How much better had
it been with Ioas to have died in Iehoiadas time; then in living after him, 2.
Chro. 24.
of a religious King to become a profane Idolater and bloody man; and in the
height of his sin, to be slain by the hands of murderers? On the
otherside, the Scripture says of the death of Ieroboams son that died young,
1. King. 14.13.
that he only of Ieroboams house should come to his grave, because in him
there was found some goodness toward the Lord God of Israel. So as this was
the favor that God bestowed on him to take him away a child, before he was
corrupted with his fathers idolatry, or saw the disastrous ruin, and
desolation of his fathers house. Was it not promised as a blessing to Josiah
that he should be gathered to his fathers, and should not see the evil that
came to pass immediately after his death? To the ungodly indeed it is a
punishment to be taken from their heaven and pleasure which they have in this
world, and to be cast into eternal torment after their life is ended: Eccles.
41.
and herehence it comes, that death and the remembrance thereof is, and ever
has been, so bitter to them, because they have no hope, after this life is
ended: according to that of Solomon, Prou. 11.7.
When a wicked man dies all his hope is gone. Now what this benefit was that
Henoch received, is very briefly noted in one word veennenu, which the Vulgar
translateth, (...)
and non apparuit, and he appeared not. Tremellius; and non extitit, he
remained no more among men. Montanus, according to the Hebrew, and non ille,
he was not: and the Apostle to the Hebrews has (...), he was translated,
that is, taken from the society of men, not by the usual way of death, the
common end of all flesh: but as he in his body lived a heavenly life, so
was his body freed from ordinary corruption, and received into a heavenly
condition, like those that shall be found alive at the coming of Christ, that
in a moment shall be changed, and caught up into the clouds. And this
translation, and assumption of Henoch before the law; 1. Cor. 15.1. These. 4.
and Heliah under the law, did undoubtedly nourish the hope of the
glorification of the bodies of the Saints, as types prefiguring the ascensio^
of Christ, in whom the promise of all heavenly glory should be performed and
accomplished. Into what place he was received, the conjectures have been
diverse, all the Divines of the Church of Rome, with some of the Ancients,
affirm, that he with Eliah were placed in Paradise, that garden of Eden,
whence Adam was expelled, and that they shall come at the latter end of the
world to preach against Antichrist; which is a mere conceit without any
warrant or authority. Neither that place of the two witnesses in the eleventh
of the Apocalypse, nor that of the 44. of Ecclesiasticus, commonly alleged for
the proof hereof, give warrant to this imagination. First, Perceius is of this
judgment with many others. Genesis 7.20.
for the place of Paradise, it was undoubtedly drowned in the great deluge of
the waters which were 15. cubits above the highest mountain. And by the
geographical description thereof by Moses, Genesis 2.8.
it is apparent it was planted upon the earth on the East part of Mesapotamia,
Philo Iudaeus.
near Babylon, and not above the sphere of the Moon, P. L. Sent. lib. 2.
did. 17.
(as Peter Lombard, and others do imagine.) The two witnesses mentioned by S.
John (using a certain number for an uncertain) signify nothing else but that
the Lord should have always some, that in a holy zeal should preach against
the enemies of the truth, whom though the wicked should kill and murder, yet
should they not so extinguished gods spirit, but others should still be raised
up (as has bin in all ages of the church) to supply their rooms in the Lords
vineyard: the Lord never left himself without witnesses of his truth. And
whereas they urge a miracle in their raising to life again, the like manner of
speaking is in the eight of Ecclesiastes, Eccle. 8.10.
I have seen the wicked buried; and they returned; which no man ever
understood of those that were dead and buried, but of others as wicked as they
which succeedinglie supplied their places. Eccles. 44.16.
The son of Sirach calling Henoch an example of repentance to the
generations, may with much more probability be understood of his translation,
then of any second coming of him to be expected, and of the generations that
lived when he was so taken up, that they should be moved to repentance by the
knowledge of so great an honor done to so holy a man, (or made more
inexcusable) rather then of any other generations in the latter end of the
world.

Others do hold, that Henoch was received up into the highest heavens, in
coelum beatorum: the place whither Christ did ascend, and where the souls of
the Saints rest in happiness, waiting for the resurrection. But this opinion is
contradicted by other Divines very learned; as Peter Martyr, Calvin, P. M. upon
the assumption of Heliah. Call. Com. on this place.
and diverse more of the late writers: against which opinion also is alleged
that place in the 10. Heb. verse. 19.20. We may be bold to enter into the holy
place, by the new and living way which he has prepared for us through the
veil, that is, Theophylact upon this place.
his flesh. That is, says Theophylactus, this our Captain first entered, he
went before and first made this passage for us; and therefore called a new way,
because Christ was the first that made it by his ascension. To this end is also
brought that place in the 1. Cor. 15.23. Every man in his own order, the first
fruits is Christ, afterward they that are of Christ, etc. And also that place
in Ioh. 3.13. where Christ says: No man ascends up to heaven, but he that
has descended from heaven, that son of man which is in heaven: (which I am
not ignorant is otherwise expounded, but it is not my purpose to stand upon
it.) Omitting therefore all coniecturall opinions, seeing the holy Scripture
has not made it manifest, modest ignorance is better then curious inquisition.
Beza annot. Heb. 11.5.
For as a learned man says, Temerarium est de his statuere, curiosum
inuestigare: It is rashness to determine such doubtful things, and curiosity
to search after them. The secret things belong to the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things reueiled to us, and to our children for ever, that we may do
all the works of this law. Melius est dubitare de occultis quam litigare de
incertis: It is better to leave hidden things in doubt, then to contend of
things uncertain. But howsoever, this is certain, that Henoch was translated
into unspeakable joy and happiness: Ioh. 14.2.
For the meanest of those glorious mansions (whereof our Savior says in his
fathers house there are many) do beyond all comparison exceed the most
glorious palace or paradise upon earth. The Lord so guide our hearts, and order
our ways by his grace in our walking on this vale of misery, that we may
(like this holy man) keep that strait and narrow way that tends to eternal
life, yt after our earthly pilgrimage is finished, we may be received into
that glorious rest which is purchased for us by the precious bloodshedding of
our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and the holy Ghost be
all honor and glory now and for ever Amen.

FINIS.

