THE SHIELD of the RIGHTEOUS: OR, The Ninety first Psalm, expounded, with the
addition of Doctrines and Uses. Very necessary and comfortable in these days
of heaviness, wherein the Pestilence rages so sore in LONDON, and other parts
of this KINGDOM.

By ROBERT HORN, Minister of Gods Word.

PSALM. 3.3. But thou Lord art a Shield for me, my glory and the lifter up of
mine head.

PSALM. 91.3. Surely, he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter and
from the noisome Pestilence.

4. -- His truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith, and are to be
sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, EDWARD WATIES, Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices
in attendance, at the Council of the Marches of WALES.(*)
Worthy SIR,
THe first draught of these meditations on this whole Evangelical Psalm, I
sent (some years ago) to a friend and lover of One of the Justices in
attendance at the Council, in the Marches of Wales, and chief Justice in one
of the welsh Circuits.
yours, Richard Atkins, Esquire, now with God, yet without any meaning then, to
bring (thus) upon the stage of public judgment. Howbeit, if he had ouerliued,
this purpose in Me of now sending them abroad into the hands of men; I
confess, or profess rather, they must have carried his name with them into
the world, to the Altar of which I did owe the Sacrifice of my best in this
kind: which must have been so, not only (though chiefly) in respect of
himself, who was unreprovable in his place of Justice, and private ways as
you know; but much in regard of my bond to him while he lived, whereof In my
Epistle before my Sermons on Luke 15.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
(else where) I gave true and plain signification. But, being translated since
to the house of glory from his house of clay, whom could I find out, next,
fitter (upon just matter) then your worships self to receive the debt I owed
him? your similitudo morum with him, or profession like his; your great respect
and love to Me, with your esteem of all who, in the Ministry do service
faithfully and with pains, may rightly command Me in this Dedication, which I
esteem much less then your own. Add unto this, that (having long known you)
I could never find other mind in you then that which was of the side and part
of goodness, opposing evil and the workers thereof. Much else might be
spoken of you particularly and truly to the praise of God; but He that sees in
secret will reward you openly. This, at this time, made me bold with your Name,
which is as an ointment of sweet odor in the Country you live in. And so I
make humble tender of a mean Commentary upon a Psalm of grace: the Psalm was
David's; the Speakers, God and David. God spoke to David with good words and
comfortable, as Zachary 1.13. and the same Almighty God in the same most
gracious Psalm, speaks with like comfort to you, and to all his by Him.
Reverend Beza in his argument upon it, tells what comfort the had by it, when
he (first) heard it sung in an assembly of Christians. It so carried him by
divine rape at that instant, that ever (after) he laid it up graven in his
heart: for, as if it had lift him up, from the earth, into heaven, it ravished
all his powers, making him to think he heard God himself to call unto him by
particular. name: what that Worthy conceived by the singing of the Psalm, that
may your worthy self gather by the meditation. The Shield of it is large
enough to compass you (also) with the like mercy. If you put on the defense
of the Highest; this Psalm will guide your ways to peace, and finish your
course with much true comfort. Think therefore (Christian Sir) in reading of
this Psalm what godly Beza conceived upon the singing of it: and that is, that
God calls you by Name, meaning to inuest you in these privileges of his
Saints, and to be on your right hand ever: wherefore, what is here spoken to
the Saints, read with faith, as spoken to your self, being a Saint by
calling: with this meditation you may make your pillow, when you shall be
ready to make your bed in the dark, and the grave shall be your house, Job.
17.13. Then shall you go with much contentment to your bed of earth, and in
great peace to the Lord. Mean while, turn your purer eyes into this excellens
Psalm, set foot into it, rather walk through it in your deeper consideration:
and then confess, with gladness, what God has done for your soul. May you
not say that God has been, or will be (shortly) all that unto you that the
Psalm (so comfortable) speaks of? for, has not God been, in all remoues,
your standing house to remove unto? verse 1. has he not been your hope from
your youth, nay from your cradle? and have you trusted in him, at any time, in
vain? verse 2. have not the feet of many been taken in the Snare or Net of
Pestilence, and you delivered? verse 3. have not thousands fallen and you
stood? verse 7. and have you not seen your hope, when there was nothing but
destruction to sinners? verse 8, 9. have not the Angels kept the Lords watch
about you in your continual safety to this day? verse 11, 12. Is not the
Dragon of hell, and that roaring Lion of the nethermost hell put under your
feet for ever? verse 13. In many troubles, have not you been quit, and not
quit only, but raised to place and worship? verse 14, 15. and, for length of
days (though not full of days, for I trust there are many behind) you are
not far from David's years of seventy? verse 16. in which space of time, I
doubt not but you make your short life a short draught of the days
everlasting: Finaly God has showed you his large salvation. But these few from
the Text of the Psalm may serve as so many fingers to point to much more,
which your own experience can better enlarge and gather; not to he set down
in a short Epistle. And now to God all-sufficient, I commend the remnant of
your days for his best blessings upon them; upon your Christian yoke fellow,
and upon all the branches of you both. As I am much bound to pray, so I will,
and do daily for the true prosperity of you, and all yours, being

From Clon-bury near Ludlow July 1625. Your good Worships for my best service
in the Gospel, ROBERT HORN.

THE SHIELD Of the RIGHTEOUS.
PSALM 91. VERSES, 1, 2, 3, etc. Verse 1. Who, or He that dwells in the
secret of, etc.
THis Psalm, most comfortable, and (throughout) most excellent, seems to
have binne made at what time the destroying Angel in the days of King David
(having slain with the sword of Pestilence so many thousands in so short time,
as threescore and ten-thousand in less then three days) did, at the Lords
commandment, cease from proceeding to Jerusalem to destroy it, 2 Samuel 24.16.
for, it is very probable, that, at that time and upon that occasion, holy David
indicted this Psalm, as he did the 38. for a remembrance; that so great
salvation might not be forgotten, and that the experience thereof laid up in
the Church as in the Arc, for posterity, might be known and descend to the
Ages to come. The Psalm it self contains (generally) two things; a
proposition of Gods favor in the 1 verse: and the confirmation thereof to the
end of the Psalm: the confirmation is partly from the Prophets words to verse
14. partly from Gods own words, in the verses which follow: the Proposition,
in the first verse, consists of a duty, and benefit promised; and has this
meaning: He that stands by faith in the secret-place of the Lords gracious
providence, has a sure cover and house of rock to come unto when the Lords
storm falls upon the generation of the wicked. And as wearied Travelers,
much spent with the heat of the Sun, repose themselves in the shadow: so
they that repose upon God in the sun-burnings of their weary life, shall lodge
all night in the shadow and refreshing-place of the Almighty; that is, shall
have the same Almighty God for their helper and deliverer till that storm of
difficulty be past. And so, by secret (here) is meant a place of refuge from the
storms of the world under the secret of his providence, who cares for all his
children. Also, by the secret of the most High; some Writers understand the
Castle of his mighty defense, to which his people run, being pursued by
enemies, as the wild creature does to his hole or den for succor, when the
Hunter has him in chase, and the dogs are near. This (then) being the
meaning of that which the Prophet calls the secret place of the most High,
and our dwelling in it, by confidence in Him; we learn, in all troubles, to
cleave to God chiefly or only means, but as underlings to his providence. In
such cases, God in the Old Testament, bids us call upon him, Psalm. 50.15. and
Christ, in the New, does call us to him, Mat. 11.28. therefore, in the day of
affliction, we must have our comfort from God, and our ease in Christ. Eliphaz
tells Job, that if he will return to the Almighty; that is, cast himself
wholly upon him for his help in affliction, and make him his confidence by
faith in his truth; he shall be builded up, to wit, in as good an estate as
ever he had, Job 22, 23. as if he had said; he that pulled thee down in this
abject condition, will set thee up again (as a glorious building) in a more
excellent plight, if thou resign all, thy self, and (all) to him. Asa did so:
for, he rested on God, being to fight against a million of men that came strong
against him: the Text says, that he cried to the Lord his God, and went out
in that name only against that great multitude, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. he was able to
number in his own Army a great many thousands; as of those, who, in the Army of
Judah, bare shields and spears, three hundred thousand; and of those who in
Benjamin, bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand, all
valiant men, verse 8. and yet all these were nothing, or no power (for he
accounted them so, verse 11.) in comparison of that power, and that arm to
which he trusted, even God his deliverer. In this confidence, going forth
against so huge an Army and great Host, he so prevailed (the Lord looking on)
verse 13. that he carried away both the lives and spoil of all that multitude,
verse 13, 14.

So that woman of great faith, after she had passed through the pikes to
Christ, received both the commendation of her great faith, and health of her
possessed daughter, Mat. 15.28. David in many Psalms, professes that he
sought the Lord, to wit, in trouble, and found him; that is, found help in
him, Psalm. 34.4.17. and Psalm. 3.4. and 6 8, 9. it was familiar to him to say;
help Lord, for vain is the help of Man, Psalm. 60.11, the Centurion came to
Christ for his servant, Mat. 8.5, 6. and the Ruler besought Christ for his
daughter, Luke 8.41, 42. Thus it is plain that the Lord is to be sought unto
in trouble, and he only.

He is our Father. Now, natural children do not provide for can do nothing,
John 15.5.

Secondly, we cleave to those in our needs, whom we know to

Thirdly, to use any means of help, and not in a subordination Chron. 16.12.
Job 36.13.

A reproof of those who in their affliction, and when God has to him that
has smitten us; Amos 4.12. our running is from God, not from destruction that
follows us. In days of scarcity, we discredit Gods provision, and shift for
our selves: then stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of secrecy is
pleasant to us, Prou. 9.17. then, we bow down for a morsel of bread, 1 Samuel
2.36. not to God by prayer, but to Satan by evil means. If God visit us with
some sharp sickness, we presently send to the Devil, in some Witch, to help
us, 2 King. 1.2. So when a land is threatened by enemies; if men and weapons can
do any thing, God is little regarded: and we march forward in our sins, as
if we purposed rather to fight rebelliously with God, then christianly, in God,
with those that come against us.

means are to meditate daily; that is, much in the Word; laying up knowledge
in our hearts, the knowledge of the truth and of God, that we may be instructed
in his promises, and persuaded of his power, Psalm. 1.1, 2. for, this knowledge,
well digested, will stay us in the wauerings of many; when by the light of it,
we shall see him that is invisible, and his power that is Almighty: able to
help us when we have the whole world and all the elements against us, and
without whose help, all helps in the world can do nothing for us. Another
mean is, well to observe his providence to which all second causes do
service; and the experience of Gods children who, putting trust in God, were
ever delivered in due time. Another is, to affect God above all things: for,
then we will trust him before all men, it being certain, that what we most
affect, we most lean unto; as if it be profit, we depend upon it; and if
pleasure, we refer all to it. And another is, to consider that it casts an
imputation upon God to call him Father, and not to believe that he will do a
fathers part in providing for us: for, can natural children depend
(altogether) upon their fathers care for their wealth and finding; and shall
Gods children distrust a more able and merciful father that has undertaken to
keep them, and promised, when father and mother shall forsake them, to take
them up? God having (then) promised to be our God; will we be Gods to our
selves, live at our own finding, and give the Lord little or no credit for his
care of looking to us? and what do we better or other, when by making shift
for our selves beyond and against the rules of his word and providence, we take
the care of us wholly from him, and put it in our own hands and keeping?
Therefore to get confidence in God, the way is so to use the means and helps of
our present life, that we forget not, that they are given to us by God, and
become good for us by his blessing: for, (then) we will not trust in them, but
put trust in him that gave them; when we have them we will not depend upon
them, and when we want them, we will believe without them. These are the means,
and this is the way to make God our secret place; but who uses these means,
and observes this way of coming to him? who cares to know by the word,
either his promise, or truth to his children, to make him faithful? Surely, if
we regarded this duty, and the benefit it brings, where it is rightly done;
in a time of scarcity, we would not be so distrustful, nor fear so
immoderately when any Pestilence comes: In our necessity we would not deal
unjustly nor steal; nor when sickness takes us, fare as if death were
presented to us. When we loose a commodity, we would not loose God (as many
do) for the having of it again from the devil in a Coniurer: nor, if a tooth
ache, go from God to a charmer for the ease of it, in some hellish mystery: nor
if a cross come, iuggle it away with mirth; and so turn out God, when we
should turn to God: but with Job; if God should kill us, we would trust in
him, and reprove our ways in his sight. Job. 13.15.

But that which is (here) translated [dwelleth] is as much in weight, as
sits, or is settled; and so, our dwelling in Gods secret, is as much as our
sitting down in it: the meaning is, we must make it our rest, as if we should
say; Here will we dwell.

From whence we learn, that Gods children should not come Secret-place, (as
Guests) to an Inn, but (as Inhabitants) to their own dwellings; that is, they
should continue to trust in God, as well in want as in fulness; and as much when
they wither in their root, as when they flourish in it. So did Job, who blessed
the name of God, not only when he gave him riches, but then also when he gave
him poverty, Job. 1.21. Pro. 30.8. When he made him rich, he feared God; when
he took away all, he charged not God, Job. 1.22. The Prophet David set the Lord
always before him, Psalm. 16.8. that is, before him in prosperity, and not
behind him in trouble: and Psalm. 121.1, 2. His eyes were not in the means, but
lift up to the mountains from whence came his help: He that glories in the
Lord, must glory in him poor or rich, in strength or weakness: Iere. 9.23.
And where some trust in Chariots, and some in horses, Psalm. 20.7. Gods some
(which are not many) must remember the name of the Lord, though they neither
have Chariots to mount them, nor horses to save them:

The reasons: The Text here says, He is Almighty, and our Creed calls him, the
Father Almighty, that is, the all-sufficient God that can as soon make rich,
as suddenly poor; and can as easily make something out of nothing, as he can
presently bring much or all, to nothing: for, as one says, Eius est nihilum,
cuius est totum. Nothing is matter for his power, as much and as well as all
are, that have being. We see this in the sudden change of things: and (first)
of Estates. For, rich Job, how quickly, and in how few days, nay hours, was
he made poor Job; after God had blown upon his estate with his wind of taking
all away? Job. 1.1, 2, 21, 22. And as this is true in the change of estates, so
it is in all other changes by Pestilence, by sickness, and other rods of
God, where all means work by his power, and do his will that moves in them.
For, for the fearful pestilence, and burning coals thereof sent from between
his feet: Whose command is over it, when it rages in one Country, and is not
heard to cry in another? nay, who rules it, and moves in it, when, being in
the same town or city, it is in one street, and in one house, and not in
another? Being in the same house, how comes it to pass, that it fastneth
upon three, or two or one, and not upon all, seeing all eat and drink
together, live in the same common air, and lodge in the same chamber,
sometimes in the same bed? Is not this (also) the work of God?

And does not God (sometimes) in the cure of a disease (which has no great
hardness) so distemper and confound the wisest Physicians judgment that he
shall not be able rightly to discern the nature and proper causes of it? when
he has found them; may he not fail in ministering or prescribing to them? or,
if he do this well; may not the remedy come too late, and when the Patient is
past help? if help come in time; may not the queazie Patient dislike it, and
his stomach rise against it? if he be able to take it; must not God give power
to make him able to hold it? if God give this power; may not the force of it
be gone, or the composing of it be naught? if both be good; yet who must make
them good to him? must not the Almighty, in whose secret he must not be a
Soiourner, but Inhabitant, nor repose for a night, but dwell continually, if
he look that the means shall do him good, which can do nothing but by his
word and blessing that works in them? Secondly, if his blessing bear the
whole sway (as it does) both in want and fullness; if that make rich both in
poverty and abundance, and that only, as it only does; and if that be given
to those that rest on Gods provision in their low ebb, and denied to those
that depend upon themselves in a fuller tide of things: how can but it be
necessary to all that detrue riches and a blessed increase, to wait upon Gods
hand with a continual eye, without distrust of his providence, who only is
able to bless with means, and has power to bless without them? But it is
certain; that neither the having of wealth, nor the commodiousnesse of trades
have or can have any power, but his blessing that makes rich, Prou. 10.22. 1 Chronicles. 29.12. Deuteronomy. 8.18. And therefore, whether we be full or empty, we must
seek our store, and the blessing of it, at God, depending on him, as on the
Father of gifts, both in a mean and wealthy life.

A reproof of those who, in Lords secret, from it. In some cases I confess it
to be lawful, sometimes to chang the air, and for some: but it must be by
those that have no calling of public charge in the place; and by those, who,
being rich, leave some portion behind them to the poor that remain; else,
they fly from a Lion and a Bear meets them: or lean to a wall, and a
Serpent bites them, Amos 5.19. further; seeing the messenger of justice, in
every public calamity, brings the Letters of God to one as well as to
another: how can they secure themselves, who fly, not from sin, but in great
sin, from the same offended God, who (himself in Person) follows the suit
against them? What Sanctuary will they take? and what house of defense against
the Judge of all worlds? Whither will they go from his spirit? and whither will
they fly from his presence? Psalm. 139.7. Is there any place in heaven or hell,
where his writts run not? or goes not his commandment over the large earth,
and wide sea? Some will abide in Gods house of defense, so long as they may be
quiet, and vnthreatned in it: but if there be any danger toward them for a good
cause, they are ready, by a traitorous fear, to forsake it for carnal
refuges: and some, if there be any fair weather in the Gospel and the
Bridegroom be with it; will come to the Marriage Feast: but if the fair
weather in it be turned into storms for the Gospel, and the Bridegroom be
taken from it, as in a day of tentation: then, they go away, Luke 8.11. or go
back, John 6.66. with reuolters and murmurers, and say, with the Messenger of
the King of Israel, behold, this evil comes of the Lord, should I attend on
the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6.33.

in Christ, and troubles for Christ: for, they are taught by the most High,
that will not fail them, nor forsake them, to dwell in his providence; I say
to dwell, not to soiourne in it, howsoever things go. They that truly serve
God, and trust him with their estate, by resting on him, have his word in pawn,
that they shall be provided for, not only when they are in possession by the
means, but when they are out of possession, and means are against them, John
6.5, 6, 7, etc. Dan. 3. and 6. Chapters. Abraham, for our example, had
experience of Gods truth this way: so had Isaac his Son: for, how were both
of them enriched among strangers, and in a strange land? and yet what
likelihood of such a matter, if we consider the effects with the means; those
infidels being aliens from their Religion, and vowed enemies to their Nation?
This is written for our learning and comfort: to teach us to trust God with
all, and to give the key of us into his hands, who can make few things to yield
much, and small things to be of great force, Psalm. 37.16. Nay, who can turn
stones into bread; Mat. 4.3. that is, enemies into friends, and make (even)
those that hate us, to enrich us. If God send any trouble, his children shall
(either) be delivered from it, or preserved in it: if he send an arrow, and
that of the Pestilence, he will send his shield before it: if he make sick,
he is not to be distrusted, neither any other to be sought unto: for he
that makes sick, can make whole, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Whatsoever the disease be, and
howsoever it works, that is not to be respected so much as his power that can
turn up our couch in any sickness. Yea, in a time of common visitation,
though the feet of them, that buried others of the Plague, were at the door
to carry us out, Act. 5.9. yet he that stayed one, going to his grave, Luke
7.14, 15. and raised another, being in his grave, John 11.43, 44. is able with
like power in our sickest extremities and vnlikliest recovery, to command the
shadow (not of theb Sun, 2. King. 20.10.
but of life) to go back till health come. Mean while; if we would be
owners of these comfortable promises: we must neither in a poor estate
practice for riches, without him that makes rich; nor in a sickly life, play
the thieves for our health, not seeking to him that makes whole. And, when the
destroier is broken into a town, and the Plague is come upon it to
destruction: we must more seek to cast out the infection of sin that lies
over the face of that town so infected, then to have the infection it self
removed; seeing that the root must be killed before the fruit will die: so
much for the duty, the benefit promised follows.

Shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. IN this Sentence two things may
be observed: the blessing it self, the shadow of the Almighty; and the
continuance thereof, in the word, abide. The shadow of the Almighty, is that
thick, covert of God, wherein all (that put confidence in him) shall be
shadowed from the Sun of affliction that must needs burn up those, who have
no defense from the heat thereof: and this promised for no short time, but
time of long continuance: for, it is said, that they who take God for their
shadow, shall abide, or (as some read) lodge all night in him in great
security from the fears of life, which as the fears of the night cast
shadows of trouble and of cumbersome darkness upon mortal creatures: the
meaning is, that the godly after those many crimes of their feeble and weak
life, shall, in the Almighties defense, find a most comfortable shadow and
refreshing-place from all tyranny and violence of Men: and not sometimes so,
but ever so.

Heb. 12.6. The Prophet David tells us, that though their troubles were great,
as if they would quell them; or many, so as none could count them; yet he will
deliver them from great or many troubles, that delivers His from great and
small, and all their troubles, Psalm. 34.19. And this made him to set the Lord
always in his eye, who was at the right hand of his slidings: and so, that is,
so assistant and strong with him, that he could not be moved, that is,
perish, or fall for ever, Psalm. 16.8. In the 125 Psalm, the three first
verses, it is showed in what assurance the faithful are that put trust in the
Lord for their safety, when the greatest storm of troubles is up: for, there
it is said, that such shall stand as Mount Sion, that is, fast and immovable
in all changes, verse 1. having the Host of God about them, as the Hills about
Jerusalem, verse 2. by his Angels on their right hand, and by his creatures on
their left. And, though his rod be upon them by Tyrants, whom he will burn
quickly with the fire of his wrath: yet it is so but for a short time, and with
some little smart, for their eternal curing, verse 3. So God, speaking by Esaias
to Israel, his servant, and to the seed of Abraham his friend; bidds them, and
the faithful in them, not to fear, viz. in affliction, either his
deliverance, or their perishment: for, he will use his right hand against
their enemies, and hold their right hand, that they fall not: the right hand of
his justice shall sustain his children, and beat down his childrens enemies,
the wind carrying them away, and the whirlewinde scattering them, Esaias
41.10.13.16. Thus will the Lord be a hiding place to the people whom he has
chosen, to save them in all their troubles, if they set him for their refuge,
Psalm. 91.9.

The reasons. He has promised safety to such, Psalm. 50.15. his fidelity
remains for ever, Psalm. 146.6. therefore, as of him comes our salvation, so
they that trust in him cannot be confounded, Psalm. 22.4, 5.

Secondly, this may be proved by a comparison from the less

Object. But you will say,

Answ. To which I answer, that true it is, David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Job, and
others have had their parts with the worlds children in many grievous sorrows;
partly to teach them, and us in them, that Gods best people have fallen into
foul sins; and partly to testify that by no outward thing it can be known
whom God loves to salvation, or hates to death in this mixed state of things:
Eccles. 9.2. yet to the righteous there is a promise made, that if such storms
fall, they shall from them pass to a perpetual calm; where the wicked shall
go from those storms to stormy fire and tempest and from Plagues temporal to
pain endless, from first death to second death. Again, the sorrows of the
godly are for their purgation; the troubles of the wicked for their torment
only, being gates to those torments, out of which they shall never come, when
God shall send them out from his presence. Gods Plagues of Famine, Pestilence,
and other miseries are his draw nets to gather out of the world by death, both
the just ones and those that do iniquity: yet the good are taken out of the
net of these common evils for the Lords own service, the other, to be cast
away, Mat. 13.48. Therefore, when God sends Sickness, Pestilence, Famine, upon
a Land, City, or House; the net is cast over thee, either as a sanctified
thing to be put in his vessels, or excommunicate thing to be put out of his
kingdom.

Pestilence be sent among us; let us take away our dross by repentance; and
the hottest fire of it can do us no harm, that burns but the dross of sin;
or burns only where the brimstone of some sin, unrepented of does give it
matter of kindling. In the Furnace it self if we serve God as those three
servants of God in Daniel, did; there is such a countenance of grace with us,
and one so mighty to deliver us, that we cannot miscarie, though it were
heated seven times, Dan. 3.25.27. If God break the staff of our bread with
unseasonable years and weather, we must not give way to our fear against his
providence, who has said (and we may believe it;) that he will not fail us,
neither forsake us, Heb. 13.5. whatsoever our troubles are, and though large
afflictions devour us, as the Whale did Jonah; yet God will bring us to shore:
yea, he that spoke to the fish to cast up Jonah, Jonah 2 10. will speak to all
our afflictions, even the greatest Whale of them all that they hurt us not. If
we cry out of the deep to him, he will hear us, and deliver us from many
waters, Psalm. 130.1, 2. In our long journey of afflictions, we cannot but be
sometimes discomforted with the length of the way, and slipperinesse of our
ways: yet let us send to God in our miseries, and he will send to us by his
comforts; and when we go mourning and troubled all the day long, walk before
him, and he will walk with us according to his promise, and deliver us from
all our fear.

Chron. 16.9. Psalm. 7.10. By this we learn what to judge of wretched
worldlings, whose hearts are earthly, and affections on earthly things: for
where the faithful come to God, by faith, in their afflictions, and make his
bosom their place of refuge from them: such make not God their strength in
adversity; but trust in Man, or in the arm of Man for help, when any thing
grieves them; and rather complain of God, then to God in the day of evil.

But Gods defense is not only our refuge in trouble, but our continual and
permanent refuge: and they that give themselves to him to be kept, are
preserved by him; not for some short time, but for ever. He is a shadow, and
continual shadow: other shadows fail, like the gourd over Ionah's head,
Jonah 4.6.8. but this abides constant and sure, or immovable, as God himself.

From whence learn, Moses Psalm: for, there the Lord is said to have been
the habitation, or standing house of his people for ever: even from generation
to generation, that is, from the beginning of the world to that day. And David
says, that this is the blessing of the righteous; the Lord will compass him,
or go round about him with his favor; and be his shield before and behind
against all assailants, and at all times: for else; how should they, that trust
in him, rejoice for ever, if they should not be protected always by him, for
whose continual salvation they continually are glad? Psalm. 5.11. for this
cause, the spirit is said by Christ, to abide in the faithful, as in his
standing house; not where he Inneth, but where he dwells, Ioh. 14.16. To
hypocrites he comes and goes: to true believers he comes and taries; not for
some short time, but for ever: for, he dwells with them, and is ever in them,
verse 17.

The reasons of the doctrine: the works and calling of God are Romans 11.29. and
whom he once loves, unto the end he loves them, John 13.1.

Secondly, He whose name is I am, Exodus 3.14. and nature, I change not, Mal
3.6. does his things by counsel, and all things in good order: and therefore
whom He delivers, He delivers without repentance, or change. Thirdly; if
earthly fathers will never their childrens defense, shall we think our
heavenly Father will? Or, if a kind Host will protect those that come under
his roof Genes. 19.18. Judge. 19.23. will God leave those to spoil, who come
to his house, and take Sanctuary in the castle of his help?

proclaimed, or fearful sicknesses should come. For, what is this, but to
call into question and doubt, Gods immutable counsel concerning the protection
of his children whom he never forsakes? In all rumors of Pestilence and
war, men are distracted, as if God had no providence, and fear shadows
because they make not God their shadow, who has promised to be their abiding
place, and, who (if they would trust him with their lives) should see his
salvation. But because, with Jonah, they set more by the gourd of some present
(though fading) shadow, Iona. 4.10. then by the saving shadow of the Almighty;
therefore does the Sun smite them, and they wish rather to dye then to live,
Iona. 4.8. being forsaken of all but of grievous and despairfull sorrows that
will never leave them.

Kin. 6.27. The Lord himself will be their all-sufficient feeder, and from the
storehouse of his providence will send unto them, Psalm. 37.19, Exodus 33.19.
If he be with them, his provision goes with them; and (though they lack
bread) having him in place, who gives the virtue of nourishment to all their
bread, Deuteronomy. 8.3. how can they but be fed? So, in a time of Pestilence; though
we have no place of refuge, nor shadow abroad in the Country, such as the
richer sort have against that burning Sun of the plague that destroieth at
noone day: we need not to be troubled, having in the Almighties protection, a
better shadow then those Ionahs have of their gourd. For, then the Sun shall
not smite us by day, nor the Moon by night, Psalm. 121.6. In times of peril,
whithersoeuer we go, (not going from God) Gods shadow goes with us; in
prison to be our liberty, in banishment our Country, in war our shield, in
necessity our abundance, in despair our hope, in death our life; and that a
long life, for ever and ever. So much for the proposition of the Psalm, the
confirmation of it follows.

VER. 2. I say; In the Lord is my place of surety.
THe Proposition spoken of, is confirmed by the Prophets words to v. 14. and
(more properly) as was said, by the Lords own words, from thence to the end of
the Psalm: the Prophets words are in his own example, in this verse, or by
application to others, in the rest. In this Verse, having in his own person
found the Lord his special Protector, he speaks thankfully of the same, the
rather to establish others, by his experience, in the like salvation of God: as
if he had said; as I have believed and found, so I will speak in my heart
before God, and with lips before men, Rom, 10.10. The Lord is my refuge, and
shall be my fortress, in whom I will trust, to whom I will fly in all my
troubles. The word that is here translated, his succor, or place of surety,
signifies a cover, or place of defense in some great tempest: where his
meaning is, that when he was wet, or like to be washed with great showers of
trouble at hand, or in doing, he retired himself to the Lord in his
providence, against all that tyrannous and stormy tempest of his cruel
persecution. Job. 24.8. Esa. 25.4. By fortress, the Prophet understands a
place of retire, or some strong fort in wars. As if he had said, as it was
said of Joseph, Genesis 49.23. When the Archers grieved him, and shot against him,
the Lord being his Tower and strong Castle; his bow abode strong, and the
hands of his arms were strengthened by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob,
ver. 24. But further, where he says, My God in whom I will trust: He speaks
that plainly, which before he spoke darkly, or lispingly in a figure, and
says; that he will set none of his rest upon second causes or helps
external, on which all fearful and unbelievers cast themselves wholly for
their refuge in troublesome times; but will depend only and perfectly on God,
whom he makes his confidence, and the castle of his soul in adversity, Psalm.
40.4.

And (here) the Prophers example may teach the Prophets others, that first have
been converted themselves. So Psalm. 51.12.13. the Prophet first prays the
Lord to teach him, and then promises to the Lord to teach others, being first
taught of him: and he assumeth, when God shall stablish him with his Spirit, in
the receipt of that favor by a teaching spirit to turn others to God. The
Apostle Saint Paul, speaking of himself and his other fellow Apostles, says;
that they are (first) comforted of God, that they might be able (in God) to
comfort others in every affliction. 2. Cor. 1.4. as if he had said; till God
had filled their pits they could not be spouts to others, and when their
cisterns were full, their conduits would go; and so they would teach others the
comforts that they had learned themselves. Christ bids, Peter being
converted himself, (not before he was converted himself (to strengthen his
brethren. Luke 22.23. and he that (first) had learned the fear of God, says:
Come children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Psalm.
34.12. So it is plain, that the best conuerters of others are men of
experience, men that have been first converted themselves. Paul's experience and
doctrine put together, wrought mightily to the edification of the body of
Christ. For, as he that has been sick, and cured of an infirmity, being wise
and tender hearted, can better direct, and will sooner help another to avoid
it; or being visited with it, to recover of it, then he that never knew the
remedy of such a sickness, nor eurer had occasion of the cure: so they that
have been cured of sin themselves, and have felt the twitches of a sorrowful
heart, wounded therewith and eased thereof, are better able to prevent sin in
others, or, being in force, to weaken it with teaching, then they who live
still in their sins without all experience, or desire of such a cure. The
reasons.

John, and the righteous Job, speaking of handling and seeing the word of life,
and God of life, do say much more for our learning, then if they had spoken of
hearing only, 1. Ioh. 1.1. Job 42.5.

cold and faint exhortations die in the earn, and that only, or commonly
pierces to the heart, that is earnest and experimental. I mean earnest, not
out of affectation, but earnest indeed, and out of a feeling heart: for, that
gathers with Christ, the other scatters from him.

An admonition to Ministers, and (in them) to the Parents of Romans 2.21. We must
be followers of Christ, if we would have the people to follow us to Christ. 1.
Cor. 11.1. We must make God our hope in trouble, if we would not teach them by
the doctrine of our ill example, to leave him in trouble, for other Gods. If
God send pestilence among us, and we express our distrust in him, by leaving
our appointed standings, and forsaking the Lords watch; how shall we persuade
others to trust in God? When the Captains forsake the Camp, what shall the
common Soldiers do? And when such fly, that is, distrustfully fly; who shall
tarry? The Leaders are as the party colored rods at which they look, and
their example is the color by which they conceive that are followers: and
therefore as those do, so will these do, Genes. 30.29.

A reproof of those both public and private Overseers, who Peter dissemble,
what shall Peter's hearers do? Galat. 2.12.13. It the high Priest be against
Christ, will the high Priests servants be for him? Math. 26.73. Luke 22.56, 57,
58. If the father be a thorn, will his children be grapes? Math. 7.16. If he
be a swearer, will they fear an oath? and if he keep no Sabbath, will they
keep any? Math. 12.33. Such have spilt much Christian blood, which (if their
own vessels had been sound) they might have saved. The same may be said of
careless Magistrates; who, because they will amend no evil in themselves, nor
correct any in others with the sword of their authority; provoke the Lord to
revenge the breach of his covenant in the midst of us, sometimes by
pestilence, sometimes by war, by deaths, by mortality of men and cattle, by
strange years, by diverse diseases, and sundry kinds of death.

The Prophet says: I will say; as if he had said; whatsoever others shall
think or speak, this will I say, or thus am I resolved. It was in the matter
of his confidence in God, when others in their troubles forsook him. And so,
when worldly men sought other resuges, he made the Lord his house of rock in
adversity. The doctrine is:

follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. and when many walk in the broad
way of diverse distrusts, we must keep the narrow way of hope, and faith in
God, distrusting nothing, Math. 7.13.14. when four hundred false Prophets
flattered the King; Micaiah Gods Prophet would not depart from the Lord, by
saying as they said, to have the favor of two Kings, 1. Kings 22.6.12.13.14.
He trusted in God, sitting sure in the good way of his word; and neither the
King on his throne, verse 10. nor the many in another way could unsettle him.
Choose you (faith Joshua to the many thousands of Israel) whom ye will serve,
Ios. 24.15. as if he had said; your numbers shall not make me to digress, nor
if ye serve other Gods, to do so with the company, and to serve them: but I,
and my house; I and my company and small number will serve the Lord. When many
went back, and walked no more with Christ, Jesus said to the twelve, will ye
also go away? Ioh. 6.66.67. as if he had said, when all go, ye must tarry; and
when the world forsakes me, forsake the world to follow me. The reasons:





He has the words of eternal life: and to whom shall we go, if we go from
him? Ioh. 6.68.

work of the Lord, and care not to remember the operations of his hands, Esaias
5.12. Should the godly do so? Should they feeds without fear, Jude 12. because
others do so? or, should they not rather mourn apart with their families; and
(more priuarely) one man with another, till the calamity be at an end Zach.
12.12. the greatest part never understand, nor labor to know Gods ends in
punishing a nation with scourges and snares (shall the godly (therefore) have
as little understanding, and not hear the rod, nor him, who has commanded it?
Micah 6.9. The most trust in vanity: shall the righteous (therefore) put their
considence in a thing of naught? and because, not to be singular is the only
garment (now) in fashion: shall they, that should not fashion themselves to the
world, Romans 12.2. put it on, because they will not be singular in goodness,
nor go alone in the narrow way of life? so, they may (like beasts fatted in all
abundance of iniquity) follow the heard and drove, thinking nothing but that
they are going to the pasture, when it is to the slaughterhouse.

They are here reproved, who think it the best and safest way, Chusa's say;
which way the world goes will we go. 2. Sam. 16, 18. They refuse to enter in at
the straight gate, Matthew. 7.13. and choose the wide gate and broad way of the
multitude, to enter where the most do, and to be where the most are, that they
may not be hit in the teeth with preciseness, and odious singularity: For the
Sabbath, they will rather follow the Devil in a great company to profane it,
then God the Lord, in a small number to hallow it. Their reasons is: they must
do as all the towns about them do: and they say, we do but as every body does,
and all the Country does so as well as we. To whom I amswer with a reverend
Writer; M. Dod on 4. Com.
If they will do as every body does, they must look to speed as every body
speedes, and be cursed for company, if they will sin for Company, Mal. 3.9.

But let us take heed of companies, or of sinning for company. All in Sodom
(save Lot and his house) sinned together, and perished together, Genesis 19. The
whole world (save Noah and his house) as they were buried in one grave of
lusts, so were they buried in one grave of waters. Gen, 7. And the Angels that
fell in companies from heaven, went and were cast down in companies to hell.
2. Pet. 2.4. Further, what moves the Lord so from year to year to strike us
with variety of Plagues, so that for twelve years together the land has not
been without: but this large fellowship in sin? For, do not sinners, in town
and country seek to dash all commandments and rebuks with the force of
example? And because such and such do so, are not their doings a sufficient
buckler to ward off all strokes of the Law, and directions of the Gospel that
teach otherwise, and contrarily? Does not the custom of sin take away the
sense and shame of sin? Does not company give it grace, and the committers
of it boldness? and where are so few doers of good, will it not be thought
shame to do well? and what shame to commit iniquity, when the committers of it
are covered with a thick cloud of so many that praise and do the same things?
sometimes the mountains hide them, or they hide themselves in the practice of
the great ones where they live, whose height is over them as the high hills, and
couers them as the great mountains; and (then) how can they blush?

I will say, and I will trust, and my hope, my fortress, my God: all which
show that this Man of God did apply the former general doctrine of Gods
defense to his own particular case and person; and (therefore) teach,
whatsoever general threatenings or promises we find written in the Scriptures
for our learning, to apply (them more specially) to our selves for our humbling
or consolation. And so, when the word threatens a sin, we must apply, as if
it threatened it in us; and when it makes any promise to believers, believe
that the promise so made, (on condition of the like faith) belongs to us.
For, here every one must be a Prophet to himself, by laying the line of the
word to the state and faring of his own conscience and mind in things. So
David directed the point of his own finne to his own heart, 2. Sam. 24.10.
and with that sword which God sent into Israel (it was of the Pestilence and
mortality for three days) he smote himself that made the people to be
numbered, not Ioab that numbered them, 1. Chron. 21.12.17. and in another
transgression, and at another time; he confessed the wickedness, (that was
done) against himself, that did it, Psalm. 32.5. So Paul does not only write
himself a sinner, but the chief of sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15. Also, what use
Joseph made of his Masters peculiar favor to him in the house, Genes. 39.9.
such we must make of Gods special love to us in his word, as: has the Lord,
in great kindness, magnified his Name toward us by his word? Psalm. 138.2. it
then concerns us with Joseph, in continual thankfulness, to glorify or
send back the praise of that his Name and mercy to him, by our obedience to
his word. That woman of Canaan, which had the grace to be called the woman of
great faith, Math. 15.28. did make good use for an advantage, of that little
favor that was showed sometimes, and to some of the cursed race of the
Canaanites; which was that God made and would make (where pleased him) a
gleaning of them to salvation: and therefore said, that they had some of those
crummes of Gods mercy under the table, which the children had at the table in
plentiful teaching, and strange miracles, as in a full service there. And so
by this little (being thankful for a little) she held Christ, as in the chain
of his word to give her more, Math. 15.27. Saint Luke shows, that Christ
reproved some, who told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled
with their own sacrifices, Luke 13.1. because they stroke others in the
application as sinners, with the severity of that horrible death; not
themselves, verse 2. But Job, a man of another spirit, and taught in a better
school, feared to do evil; because he set Gods punishment before him, which
was fearful; and God in Majesty, from whom none could deliver him, if he
would plague him, Job 31.9.11.23. The reasons:

The threatenings and promises of God are laid down generally

Secondly, life eternal stands in this, that we know the true God 17.3. and
who can know him so, that makes not (first) some proper use of his power to
humble him, and of his goodness to raise him?



Plagues temporal, to try our hearts by the word, how these things have
humbled us; and whether in an holy despair of all power in our selves to help
our selves, they have turned us to God, from whom comes our help, Lam. 3.40.
at all times we should particularly apply to our selves the threatenings written
in the Law to humble us; but specially when the Lord himself enforces them by
some severe chastisements, as lately he did, and begins to do again. A
traveler when he has lost his way, will examine himself where he went out,
and return: So should we do that travel with iniquity in this doubtful
vale through earth to heaven. And because when we should go Eastward to the
Gospel, many of us go Westward to Popery or Atheism, and in stead of going
forward to heaven, go back to hell: o how should we examine (as by the book)
our daily flips and turnings out of the way, not forgetting where we mistook
by any error of our life, and seeking (speedily) to recover the path of
righteousness, Job 42.5.6 That that makes the common Passenger so careful of
his way, is, his fear to loose it. If we that are Christian Passengers were as
suspicious of ours, our care would be greater to hold it; and God should not be
driven to hedge us in, sometimes with burning thorns, as with the Pestilence,
sometimes with troubles of other nature? Hos. 2.6.

lay judgment to the rule. nor righteousness to the balance, Esaias 28.17. but
make a wanton use of Gods mercies, and no use of his threatenings, Deuteronomy.
29.19.20 If he send health, they use it as a weapon against him by an
impenitent and carnal life: if he send sickness, they wax furious or
senseless: and then, let him take health, and let him take all. If he furnish
their table, they abuse his full table, to all wantonness and wickedness: if
he draw their table by a sparer diet of fruits and grain, neither is God
remembered nor sin thought of. If Pestilence be sent, they hide themselves in
vain refuges, not in any sound repentance from it, Prou. 22.3. and when it is
removed, what do they but call for it again by sinning as much, if not more
stubburnly, and in a greater height then ever? For since the quenching of the
last great Pestilence, which in the year 1603. as a great fire consumed in
London, and about the City of London, thirty six thousand, eight hundred
sixty and two; and in some weeks two thousand, yea three thousand and some
odd hundreds a week; I say, since this fearful sword of Plague was put up,
what good effects do we see of that mercy of God in the lives of townes-men or
countrymen since? Is not all forgotten, as if such a thing had never been in
City or Village? we have been remembered every year since, but with warnings
of another kind; and yet who considers? So much for the Proposition
confirmed by the Prophets own example, the further application of it follows.

VER. 3. Surely he will deliver thee from the snare, etc.
HEre the Prophet applies that to the faithful for their assurance, wherewith
he had resolved his own hopes before, which he does by a more particular
recital, both of the troubles that may befall them, and of the means that God
will give for their safe being in them, and happy issue out of them. In this
third verse he speaks of the great affliction out of which God will bring
them, and in the next, of the manner how, and means whereby he will do it: the
affliction that he speaks of is the Plague of Pestilence, which is first
figuratively described, and then plainly without figure. For the Angel of
justice which the Lord had sent into Iewrie to smite down the people with the
sword of Pestilence. 2. Sam. 24.16, 17. is here compared to a Fowler, and the
Plague with which he smote them to a Net. The Angel is compared to a Fowler,
because like a mighty hunter, he ran swiftly, or rather flew throughout the
land, destroying in a very short time threescore and ten thousand, that died of
the Pestilence from Dan to Beer-sheba, From North to South.
, b verse 15. The Pestilence it self is called a Snare or Net, because it came
suddenly upon the people, as the snare upon the bird, taking them, eating,
drinking, walking, sporting, or in their beds fast asleep; that is, thinking
of nothing less then of a change so hasty and near. Where the Angel that was
sent, is called a Fowler that lays snares. The Doctrine is:

Pestilence, or otherwise, a rebellious Nation; flying will not serve. For,
whither shall we go from his Spirit? and whither shall we flee from his
presence? Psalm. 139.7. Nothing can hide from God: not heaven above, for there
is his presence: nor hell beneath, for there is his power, ver. 8. from the top
of Carmel to the botome of the sea there is no cover nor hiding from him, Amos
9.3. He that flees shall not flee away: and he that escapes, that is,
thinks he has so done, shall not be delivered, ver. 1. It seems that
people and Priests in the days of Amos, when the Prophet threatened them from
the Lord with some universal destruction, did lie down in vain refuges which
they sought out, not turning to God by repentance. And these thought they
should be safe enough whatsoever could come, and that he that sent these
threatening snares before him in his judgments proclaimed and already working,
should not by them, take them out of their privileged holes to destruction.
But Amos tells them, that wheresoever they should be hid, God would find them:
and though they used his own Temple for the cover of their iniquities; yet he
would break in by his judgments, and smite the doors, and shake the posts of
the same, till there was no resistance: the last of them, or they that held out
longest, and therefore had more hope, and could make better shifts then others,
should be slain with the sword, that is, have the same reward from the
Almighty in destruction, that those others had. So Edom that would dwell in
the clefts of the rocks, that is, in sure places (as he thought,) or in places
far from the reach of God, found that there was no hiding from him, Obad.
3.4.6. And, enter into the rock, says Esaias to a people rebellious, a people,
that like rebels in a land, take some strong Castles, and hold them against the
lawful and right Sovereign of the country; yet there is no rock of escape
to runners from God, Esaias 2.10. And the high look of Man shall be humbled, and
the haughtiness of men abased, and God only exalted in that day, verse 11
that is, Man shall be pulled out of his holes of shifts, and God shall pull
him out of them by some Plagues, in the day of his affliction.

The reasons: God is every where, and his power in all places; Pestilence that
he sends; sin is the fire of it in our bosoms to destruction, which will go
with us, whither soever we remove, not remoouing from it; that is, from sin,
the cause of it. It is sin that sets his wrath on fire in the burning
Pestilence, or any other Plague: and if it begin to burn, one way or other,
he need not fetch the coals of it from any other furnace then from that of
the corruption which is in our own flesh.

Secondly, if God will do a thing, what can hinder him? and Romans 9.19. for,
what he will do, he will do. Esaias 46.10. then; if he have a purpose to punish
sin, and the sin be not repented of, that he has a purpose to punish; what
creature or help mortal shall deliver it? What can change his mind that is
invincible? and correct his thoughts that are absolute?

Thirdly, the end of all Gods visitations, and of this by Pestilence,

An instruction to confess the Lords power, and how easy it is but let us not
put off (thus) to compound our matters, till he swear there shall be no more
time; by sending out those writtes that must be sealed with our blood. In
David's Kingdom seventy thousand perish, 2 Samuel 24.15. but how? by a little
swelling in the flesh: in how short time? some think in one day: and God could
have done it in one hour: but if it were not done in one day; it was
certainly (all) done in less then three: and how many? the Text says (as
has been said) seventy thousand men. God can make his Host of the least of
his creatures against us: and, if by these he send for our food; who shall
keep it? or if by these, or the weakest of these, he send for our selves; who
shall save us? who can water the earth, if he restrain the bottels of heaven,
or shut the windows of heaven? If he make sick, who shall make whole, but he
that makes sick, and makes whole? What balm at Gilead, what Physician there
can do us good, if he be against it, or except he do it, that is the
Physician of Israel? Ier. 8.22, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Every breath of God, and every
creature made by God, and armed by him, is able to turn our bodies to dust,
and our thoughts to confusion: yet so confident we are of our little, and
proud of our nothing, that we will neither know God, nor our selves: him in his
power to humble us, nor our selves in our weakness, to rise by him.

Pestilence, repose their safety in flying from that place, but not from the
sins of that place; for which, God in that visitation, hunteth both them and
it: as if the swift Fouler of Israel had not his Net of Justice in all places,
to cast over such carnal straglers: and, as if it were the place, (not the
sin of the place) that he meant to visit. But where God becomes the Hunter,
and sin is preserved as the game that he pursues; there is no air so pure,
nor place so free and clear that has not snares of infection in it: if the
place were not infected, the breath of such were sufficient to infect it: and
what other hope is there but that such corrupt and loose mates must needs
poison with their sins the freshest and most sanguine aires? Therefore, if
Pestilence be sent, the way to avoid it, is to avoid all that gross and
foggie air of sin that smites with it, and vapors of corrupt life that
cause it: otherwise, let us be in never so good an air, and dwell never so
wholesomely, so long as sin is in us unrepented of, there is matter enough
for the Pestilence or any other judgment that God shall send.

But the Plague of Pestilence is (here) called a Snare or Net; as giving no
warning, more then the net does, when it is suddenly cast over the birds which
it takes.

The Doctrine that arises from hence is this: as Christians ought in all their
life to prepare for death, so specially then when God sends so short warning
to prepare for it, in his Snare of Pestilence or some other peremptory
visitation. Hezekiah was at all times to expect death, in a well ordered soul;
but then specially he was to put and keep good order in it, when he was sick
unto death; or so, as he must die, and not live, Esaias 38.1. And, if we must
remember our Creator before the evil day come, Eccles. 12.1. much more must we
so do, when it is come: this evil day, is the uncomfortable day and hour of
some deadly sickness that we must in our good consciences be ready for,
before it threaten us; how much more when it works, and has entered upon us?
In the book of Proverbs, this is made the sure note of a Prudent man, that he
sees the Plague; that is, sees it by the eye of providence in a watchful,
and well reformed life; and hides himself from it under the wings of the
Almighty, by a lively faith. And, that which our Savior exhorts unto,
speaking of the last day, shall be well thought of in our sickness, and before
our last hour; that that day come not on us unawares, or suddenly, as the
snare upon the bird, Luke 21.34, 35.

The reasons: then (as you would say) the grave is ready for us; if we should
at all times watch the thief: should we be careless, when he is broken in?
Mat. 24.43. we are sure of our life at no time ( for the Master will come in a
day that we think not, Mat. 24.50.) and is there any certainty of it when
death is in the pot, 2 King 440. and the holds of life are shaken.

Secondly, if we be not armed with repentance when God sends Pestilence, or
other visitation; we frustrate Gods ends of sending them, and may well be
called a naked people, Exodus 32.25. for, his purpose in sending these, is by
them to 1 Cor. 11 32.
cloth us with repentance; that sin be not our destruction, and that the
forgetfulness of death may not bring eternal death. But he peremptorily
cites us, when he sends the Pestilence so immediately and presently before
him: and shall we, in such a case, and at such a time, tarry till a contempt
come and be served upon us; despising that terrible process, the quickest and
smartest that his court sends, or can send forth against our natural life,
or life here? if we will not come to the supper with the last Messenger, when
will we come? Luke 14.17. if we will, being in the midst of the sea, sleep
in the top of the Mast, Prou. 23.34. that is, if we be careless when our danger
is so near, and so great, when will we be careful? and if we sleep then,
when will we watch?

let us fast, and pray, and repent: for, to morrow we shall die, 1 Cor. 15.32.
So of Jerusalem, horribly plagued, it is said: she remembered not her last end,
that is, never thought what might come and therefore she came down wonderfully,
Lam. 1.9. her glorious heaven of all pleasant things was turned into the
darkest sky or night of bitter affliction that ever was heard of; which is
therefore put in a book of Lamentations. And, what did we but pamper flesh, who
should have sacrificed flesh; when God set our last end before us in those
desolate funerals that the devouring Pestilence had caused and made (so many,
and so grievous) in Towns, and Cities, some few years since? What did we I
say, but mind our pleasures, when we should have minded our end: and turn
after vanity, when we should have turned to God? So did the Jews, not long
before they were to be carried out of their own Land, in the chain of the
King of Babel, Esaias 22.12, 13. but this was in the ears of the Lord of Hoasts,
and the iniquity could not be purged from them but by death, verse 14. I pray
God we have not left as much (also) upon the score by our impenitencie, since
the last great mortality, wherein God spared not our souls from death, and
gave our life to the Pestilence, Psalm. 78. 50. Since that time, we have made
some recknings with the Lord by sundry strange and dear years: but (Lord)
deliver not thy power into captivity, nor thy beauty into the enemies hand,
verse 61. Give us repentance for our senslesnesse then, and security now, that
thy people be not given to the sword; and thou be angry, and wroth with thine
inheritance, verse 62.

Then, secondly, let us here learn a good and ready way to Pestilence; or it
shall not come, to hurt us: and where others flee for fear, we shall not
need to flee, or fear: then, it has neither sting to wound us, nor poison to
infect us, nor power to condemn us: and then, preventing it, (not prevented by
it:) it shall but send us thither, whither, but by it, we cannot come. Also,
where the wicked say to death, as the Devils to Christ; art thou come to
torment us? Matthew. 8.29. we shall say to death, wounded to death by the power
of the death of Christ: o death where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55. Let the
wicked fear death that cannot leave sin: let us cease to sinand we shall not
fear the second death. Let them say with Ichoram, is it peace? 2 King. 9.22.
not knowing if it be: we, knowing that it is, and that the welcome day of death
in our godly death, prophecieth not evil but good to us, 1 King. 22.8. shall
say, and may truly say: peace is come, Esaias 57.2. So much for the Plague of
Pestilence darkly described, and under the cloud of the figure, the description
of it without figure, and plainly, follows.

And from the most grievous Pestilence. OR, from the Pestilence of griefs, in
the Hebrew; delivering it by weight from thence: and, it is called the
Pestilence of griefs; because it pierces them through with many sorrows, and
is most grievous to all or most of all that are visited with it: as, by pensive
solitariness, their friends forsaking them, and their neighbors, not daring
to come near them: by the anguish and work of the sickness it self, being
very painful, and so pernicious that it passes presently and terribly to the
vital parts, getting into the head, or working upon the heart (the castle of
life) and destroying there: by opportunity of temptations; the soul in so
dangerous a priuatenesse, being open to Satan and his malicious objections, not
strengthened with the aides of Preachers, or christian brethren: in some, by
sundry pitiful distractions, caused by a hot bath or fire in the brain, and
through the whole body, which makes them to fall into fits of rauing and
madness, in many, by the extremity of pain and shortness of time, in which,
so little respit is left (if any) to dispose their estate to their friends, or
to order their souls to God: and, in whom not? who, by reason of the contagion
that it sends out, dare not take leave of their friends, nor see the children
of their own body, and must die separate, and comfortless? And, is it not a
sickness of griefs, that makes a man's whole acquaintance, and best friends
to forsake him? that hurts trades, and impouerisheth towns? that snatcheth
here and there, emptying not some few houses only, but whole towns, and large
towneships? that breaks and wears men to nothing?

Pestilence of griefs is not to be regarded so little, as some regard it, who
reverence none of Gods judgments. The consideration hereof moved David, and
the Elders of Israel, clad in sackcloth, to fall upon their faces, 1 Chronicles.
21.16. for, when they saw the drawn sword of this sickness, in the hand of
the Angel, ready, with it to destroy Jerusalem, as he had done other parts of
the land with authority from the Lord that sent him; they in humble clothing,
and with their faces to the earth, feared then, as before some great
destruction. Where, if they had regarded it no better, nor otherwise then far
meaner persons (at this day) do, they would neither have feared so much, nor
walked so humbly before it. He profits Psalm. 4 4. Prou. 28.14
in the love of God, that profits in his fear, by considering his
judgments. And therefore he loved much that said: My flesh trembles for fear
of thee, Psalm. 119.120. that is, in my imperfect state here, when thou
threatnest, I fear; and my heart is moved, when thou art a little moved. For,
fear makes way to love, and love, as it increases diminishes fear. But
wherefore is the Pestilence in this Scripture called most grievous, and else
where in the Scriptures, the most terrible Plague, Deuteronomy. 28.59, 60. Ezech.
14.21. If it were no more to be regarded? It is one of Gods curses, Deuteronomy.
28.45. and is any curse of God light, or lightly to be respected? The Lord by
Amos complains of the governors and people of Israel dwelling in Samaria,
that none of his strokes (whereof the Pestilence that he sent among them was
one) could turn them by repentance, Amos 4.10. Would he have complained of
this as of some strange thing, if the Pestilence, considered in it self, had
not been a forcible outward means to work in them this repentance and turning
to God? The Reasons:

The desolations it works are fearful, and the distractions

Secondly, the finger of God is to be regarded in any stroke; Pestilence?

Thirdly, of the four valiant men that the Lord will send to revenge
Pestilence is, and is said to be one. Ezech. 14.21. And if one, then to be
feared, not desperately but profitably when it comes.

Then, the foole-hardinesse of some is no way tolerable, who but fall into
evil, Prou. 28.14. For, as moderate fear works tenderness, so want of
fear causes hardening. The godly, though they have greater confidence and more
boldness in the changes, then such audacious fools can have; yet expel not
godly fear, but make the Lord their fear, by fearing to amendment, when such
trumpets are blown in the kingdom, Amos 3.6. And (therefore) they cleave to
God and unclasp with sin, fearing his judgments, and feeling his loving
favor, when the other go on still, and are punished, Prou. 22.3.

Pestilence walks, there are great sins and grievous that make way for it,
in Town and Country: which is true, and would be considered in every other
judgment of God that is strange and grievous. For, where he so visits, he is
forced by Man's impudency in sinning so to visit. As the world grows in
wickedness, so of the seed of sin it brings forth, according to the
growth of that ill weed, a like growing and proceeding in Plagues and
Judgments. God has new punishments for new sins, and strange Plagues for
strange offenders: the storehouse of his judgments can never be emptied. It
(therefore) much concerns Christians well to observe the works of God,
whether they be done in mercy, or justice, in his Church: and if he execute
justice in it, whether after the common rule, or extraordinatily. For, if his
strokes be other then usual, the sins so visited, are more then common and
ordinary. This meditation will make the godly wise, in such variety of
judgments as have within these few years showed themselves among us, to
fear, not them so much (though they be all fearful, and fearfully wrought)
as the more fearful sins of the State and Times that caused them; nor
(only) the rod, but (chiefly) the striker. But because we saw nothing
extraordinary in so long and strong a Plague, as so much and terribly wrought
in London and all England, so few years since, and do see nothing but common
matter in those varied Plagues, which (the years after fearfully and
successively followed that; therefore We are not wise to consider our end,
Deuteronomy. 32.29. And it is to be feared that we are given up to the hardness of
our heart, to walk in our own counsels to our deep destruction, Psalm. 81.12.

The deliverer (here) is the Lord: for, it is said, He, that is, the Lord will
deliver thee, etc. and the deliverance is from a most grievous stripe of Gods
hand, in a Pestilence of griefs. The Doctrine is:

The Lords deliverance is only, or chiefly to be trusted unto in most
grievous afflictions. This was spoken of in the first verse: the words, (shall
abide under the shadow, etc.) the first Doctrine there. He is for a shadow
against the burning heat: and his Name a covert for the storm, and for the
rain, Isa. 4.6. that is, in all weathers, hot or cold, he will be our defense
and hiding place. For this cause David gives him the special name of a
deliverer, Psalm. 18.48. and 144.2. and godly Iehosaphat made him, and the tower
of his name, his and his peoples (only) Shield and Sanctuary against the
united strength of Moah and Ammon with other their partakers, 2. Chron. 20.4, 5
6. etc. He that keeps all our bones is a good keeper, not one of them is
broken. Psalm. 24 20 and who will not there put his treasure, where it is sure
to be kept? and trust him with all, whose administration saves all? Satan and
his ministers (like Hunters and Fowlers) lay their snares and nets to entrap
us: but God breaks the snares of the ungodly, and heweth all their cords
asunder that seek our hurt delivering us; or, under the lap of his providence,
in his secret place, hiding us, Psalm. 32.7. The Reasons:

That God only or chiefly is to be trusted unto in most grievous Psalm. 60.11.
Nay vanity, 62.9. or as the house of a Spider, Job 8.4. Now, what is lighter
then vanity? and sooner gone then the Spiders house? Such is all repose in
Man, when we go from God to him; and from his word to man's help. Hope is said
to be the anchor of the soul, Heb. 6.18.19. Cast we this anchor on man, and
no sooner shall a storm rise, but it falls away. Cast we it on any creature,
and it can be no surer then the creature it self. Cast we it any where under
the clouds, and it will prove uncertain, as all things under the Sun: but
cast we it on God, and let it enter within the veil, And it stands as mount
Zion that cannot be removed. When therefore we go not directly and first to
God, nor to the key of the means by him taking all at his hands; all helps of
men are vain, and couers of men but Spiders houses.

And secondly, it is no better then witchcraft, to seek the prevention
Pestilence, or other disease) from any person or means, before, or out of God,
who has promised to turn up our couch at all such times, If we rest on his
blessing, 2. Chron. 16.12. 2. King. 1.2, 3. For if we seek to means, and not
to God, or to God in means without repentance, we put trust in them and not in
God (which is a kind of witchcraft;) and so shall be sure not to be delivered,
having him and his host of the means against us. Also, where God is not
reconciled, and where means be used, not to serve his providence, but to
cross his power, both God and means will work to our destruction. And so, if
our faith cannot teach us; the incounuenience of trusting to any for our
deliverance in dangers, but to God only, or chiefly, may and should.

rested on, that is, his deliverance, and him the deliverer. Psalm. 50.15.

refuge, who should be first sought: and who, when they should come directly to
him, are taken by the way in the snares of worldly fears, shifts, and
confidence, as has been showed already.

put trust in God. For, when man's help fails, and means are wanting, they
have a Deliverer. If God send the uncomfortable Pestilence, and they be as men
forsaken and helpelesse: if the Physician will not come near them, and their
acquaintance may not: yet in all this solitariness of visitors and sickness,
they neither want company, nor lack comfort, having God for their Physician,
and Gods Angels for their visitors. Where, for a supply of worldly comforts,
they have store of heavenly: the promises of the old and new Testament are in
bed with them: and they have in their keeping, restauratiues of the holy Ghosts
own compounding; the Lord draws near to their tabernacle, and his word is
near in their hearts. Also, he sends his Spirit and heals them: or he
cheareth them with such a draught of his grace, and so comfort, and is with
them by spiritual supplies in corporal straites, that they want nothing;
their faith is strong, and their patience untouched: and in those comforts,
which they then, and there receive, they walk with Elijah, till they come to
the Horeb of Gods presence by death, passing thither with a joyful heart and
head lift up above all surges and waters, 1. King. 19.8. Whatsoever our
afflictions are, if we make God our refuge in them, they are but exercises that
keep away sickness, and bring health, even that which makes us strong in
God: and we may say of them, as Iosuah and Caleb of the Anakims, They are bread
for us, Number. 14.9. that is, they spiritually strengthen us, as bread does the
heart of man, Psalm. 104.15. Hence it is that the godly lie down in so great
security, when their enemies being men of great authority and means, are in
fear; having their foure-hundred men with Esau, to guard them, Genes. 33.1.
Yea, a poor seely creature, that has no abettor nor deliverer among the
sons of men, and is like a low hedge that every man goes over, having this
confidence, which is to trust in God though he kill him, is not dismayed with
any thing, and has permanent and substantial comforts; when the Giants of the
earth, like that Giant of Gath. 1. Sam. 17.4, 5, 6, etc. (notwithstanding all
the confidence which they have in their worldly munition, and other means of
safety) have not an hour of true comfort in all that thick clay, Habac. 2.6.
more then Golijah, whose Sun went down at noone unto him, after the Lord had
stricken him in the forehead with a simple stone, 1. Sam. 17.49. So much for
the great affliction, out of which God will deliver his children. The means by
which he will do it follow.

VER. 4. He will cover thee under his wings, etc.
NOW the means by which God will deliver his people in their affliction, are,
the wing of his favor and truth of his promise, his favor is here spoken of
in a metaphore, taken from the Hen, which gathers her young ones under her
wings: and this similitude our Savior himself uses, speaking of the like
affection to his people, Math. 23.37. the meaning is, that God is to his
Church, as a Hen to her chickens when any danger is near. For, then he
spreads the feathers of his favor over her: and then he carries his tender
Church on high upon the wing of his providence from troubles at hand, Deuter.
32.11.12. Esaias 46.3.4. The Hen, when any danger is toward her young brood by
some sharp tempest, or aires, or devouring birds of the air, casts her
wings abroad for their preservation: So when any thing is threatened to Gods
little ones by the tempests of the time by boisterous aires, and by Satan's
outrage in wicked persons, those impure, (not fowls of the air,) but beasts
of the earth, God (very presently and most graciously) draws them into a
secret cover, as it were some broad wing of safety from all injuries of men
and devils. And this he does by an extraordinary work, or ordinarily by his
word in the mouth of his servants, which is the wing that he spreads over
them, and call by which he clocketh them to himself in this world. The
Doctrine that arises from hence is:

God still watches his Church to hide her in his providence against all
troubles and harms: Math. 7.24.25. But the people that trust in Jehovah, are
so builded: and he attends them with his eyes, Psalm. 32.8 and at every turn
helps their wanderings. He goes in and out before them himself, and knows
all his own by name, Ioh. 10.3.4. He has graven them upon the palm of his
hands, that is, he can no more forget them, then a man can forget that which he
has continually in hand: and their walls are ever in his sight, Esaias 49.16.
that is, he always looks upon them to remember them with some turns of his
favor: and how can they be better watched or surer kept? Men that watch a
City, must sometimes sleep: But he that keeps Israel will neither stumber
nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4. The Reasons.

We being members of his own body, and the apple of his own eye? Zachr. 2.8.

Hen that are ever ready to succor her young, does prove that as his care is
always watchful for their safety, so his power does never sleep while their
safety is in question.

Job, in the top of Gods favor and loss of all outward things, does more
wring them, and more unsettle them, then the whole did him, who (yet) yielded
to God when the storm was at the worst, saying: though he kill me, I will
trust in him, Job. 13.15. that is in God, who has broken me, almost unto
death. Some bind the help of God so to one friend, that if they loose him,
they count all lost with him: some so limit his sto^e to one years crop, that
(failing of that) they fare and take on as if his whole storehouse were
emptied: some, so rest in these uncertain things of health, beauty, riches,
worldly credit and favor, this and that child which thy love, rather above
God then in him, that, if he take away one or more (as they be affected to one
or many;) they dispairefully give up all, and never look for merry hour
again: and some, if God cast them down by sickness that he may take them up
by his gift of health, fret and charge God, as if there were no heaven
hereafter. These, and the like fearful and unbelievers (both) discredit Gods
providence, and falsify his truth: for, how can they, that be thus minded,
believe that God has a continual eye of care over them, and large wing of
defense for them when changes come?

A comfort to good Christians, teaching them to expel distrustful Mat. 16.18.
Wisdom has builded her house upon so many and sure pillars of Gods defense,
that the whole and every stone in it stands as mount Zion, Prou. 9.1. Psalm.
125.1. that is, every Christian as well as the whole Church of Christians, is
partaker of the safeties of Sion. Every true Christian is a living stone in
this house, 1 Pet. 2.5. and therefore if any such Christian, as it were stone,
should be pulled down, the whole would come after.

Quest. You will say: but, they are wronged,

Answ. To which I answer; first, for their wrongs, that they shall not be
overcome, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and Christ denies not but Men may kill their bodies;
yet the comfort is: they that kill their bodies, cannot damn their souls:
when they have gone so far, they can go no farther, Mat. 10.28. Wisdom
foresaw all this; and therefore did she build her Castle so strong, Prou. 9.1.
If (then) the world be thy enemy because thou show thy self in a good
cause, fear it not, nor all that it can make against thee. for, he that is in
thee is greater then he that is in the world, 1 Ioh. 4*4. his power is always
exercised for thy preservation: he that set thee on work will help thee: and
who is so mighty as the Almighty? If God send sickness, (say it be that of
the Pestilence,) which is always fearful and (for the most part) deadly;
and, if this sickness, so sent, light upon thee; thou have no reason to cast
away thy confidence, in the greatest terrors of it: for, if (with David when,
by Absalom, his rebellious son, he was banished from the Arc and Tabernacle
thereof at Jerusalem,) thou resign up all into Gods hands, thy life or death
as pleases him, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. thou haft as good assurance as may be, being
kept by that visitation, as by a chain, from the Arc of the public
Ministry, and from the Tabernacle thereof, the great congregation; either to
be restored to the earthly Jerusalem, the house in which the public Minister
and people praise God together; or, by thy preferment in death, to have thy
soul carried up to the Jerusalem above, where thou shall praise him without
ceasing (perfectly) in his own presence with Angels and Saints innumerable.
Though men forsake thee, God will tarry with thee by his comforts in thy
flesh, and by his spirit in thy heart, John 14.23. when thy house is shut up,
God (that cannot be shut up) will provide a large walk for thee in the
pleasant gallery of thy good conscience: when men write, Lord have mercy on the
door, he will show mercy within doors: when men keep thee dark, he will
give thee light: when they close up the windows of thy chamber, he will set
open the windows of his Kingdom: and, when they go from thee, he will come
unto thee, and sup with thee, Apoc. 3.20. When God restrains the fruits of
the earth by keeping in his rain, or by giving it in excess, with the breaking
open of the floodgates of his waters; he has his Boaz of secret providence,
as (long ago) for godly Ruth, Ruth 2.8 9. so (still) for his faithful
children that they may eat, and their souls may live. And, when the wicked,
who have not God for their hiding place, shall, upon the brute of every
calamity and cross coming, run hither and thither as men without hope, or
distracted; thou, knowing in whom thou have believed, may hide thee with the
feathers of Gods truth and faithfulness, and go to thy Father, Luke 15.18.
the words that follow, are, in effect, the same that the words are, which we
lastly heard, and the repetition is safe for us, Philip. 3.1. for, therefore
does God speak twice that we might hear him once: and because, through our
imperfect state of faith, we come fearfully, as upon the waters, with Peter to
Christ in long, and great troubles, Mat. 14.29, 30. therefore are the words
doubled that we might have the stronger consolation. So much for the first of
the means by which God will deliver his people in affliction. The second, and
more principal follows.

His truth shall be thy shield and buckler. BY the truth of God, is meant the
truth and faithfulness that is in all his promises; or the truth of his
promise, and truth in his word. He that has promised is faithful: but if I
would know how much he has promised, to whom, and under what terms; I must
bring all my considerations to his word, as to his only or best seal and
standard. By it al his truth is allowed as under seal, and measured truly as
at a just standard, and this truth is one with the word, or with Gods truth in
his word, John 17.17. Also; this truth is called the godly man's shield and
buckler, because it is as a shield and buckler unto him against all the
arrowe-heads and thrusts of affliction, and so wardeth the blows of those
crosses that come in the Pestilence, in sicknesses, in malicious enemies, and
in other troubles of body or mind, that they shall not strike him to death,
or turn him to hurt; taking, in his defense by faith, the promise and truth of
God for his shield and buckler.

So, the meaning is: they that keep within the compass of truth of God Lam.
3.22
cannot fail, and what he has promised, shall be done. Blind Balaam, in his
Parable, could say, showing how true God is (always) of his word: has he said
it, and shall he not do it? as if he had said: may it be that Gods words and
deeds should not meet? or, will any believe that he cau say one thing, and
do another? or, if he lack not will, does he want power to do as he says?
for, has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? shall any thing hinder his
purpose, or weaken his power? So, where by Hosea the Lord says I am God and
not man: Hosea 11.9. what can his meaning be, but that, being God, he changes
not like one of us, and repents not like man? In Malachi, he puts himself
to the trial, asking the sons of Jacob if it were not so: for he says, I
change not, and ye sons of Jacob are not consumed, Malac. 3.6. as if he had
said; I promised, not to consume you: and you can tell I have kept promise with
you; for ye are not consumed to this day; so, I change not, your selves being
judges. Now, as God repents not; so his gifts and calling; that is, the
peculiar endowments of his elect, linked together (unseparably) in their
salvation, are without repentance; that is, are never taken from them, Romans
11.29. And, he that has promised, is faithful, I. Cor. 10 13. says the
Apostle: his meaning is, that he is not (at times) but (always) so: or, always
just in word, and ever faithful. Men's promises are yea and nay; his promises
are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. when it is said it is done, if he speak the
word; but we say and vn-say; and so, say and do not. The reasons:

I am truth, John 3.33. and John 14.6. that is, to be true, or (rather) to be
truth, is of his being: and therefore to deny his word, is to deny himself:
but God cannot deny himself: and therefore God cannot but keep his word.

Romans 3.3. for, he is righteous: nor be hindered by weakness, for he is
Almighty, 1. Ruth 21. Apoc. 1.8. He promised the land of Canaan to Abraham; and
all the rebellions of his children could not make him to falsify his word; but
at the time appointed, they received the promises, and inherited the land: so
he promised Isreal's deliverance from Egypt, and return from Babylon; and he
brake not an hour with them: and when the fullness of time came that God
should send his son, he sent him: Gal. 4.4. and when it was time he should
come, he came: as he kept touch with Abraham for a son, Genes. 21.1. so he
kept his word truly with us for the sending of his own son.

cause he has no greater to swear by, but because he changes not, as an
oath is immutable, Heb. 6.18.

An admonition, not to distrust God, any way, where he has that nothing shall
be wanting unto them, Psalm. 34.9. let not such doubt, in the wants of many, to
be provided for. In the wilderness, he plowed the heavens for his children,
and fed them with the bread of heaven. Psalm. 78.24. so, they that followed
Christ were fed by miracle, in the fail of means, Ioh. 6.11.12.13.14. If the
furnace of Pestilence be heated seven times, yet God can make his children to
walk in the fire of it without hurt, as his three servants did in the fiery
furnace, and were not touched, Dan. 3.19.25.27. and, when thou can see no way
through the red sea of thy many and great troubles, the deliverer of his people
can make one, Exodus 14.21.22. stand still in the mean season, and thou shall
see the salvation of God, verse 13: believe that God will do what he has
promised; and what he has promised, he will do unto thee. But, that thou
may not mistake by that hope that makes haste, which is the hypocrites
hope, and not that branch that grows upon the tree of faith; remember that
the Lord is otherwise to be found in trouble then he has promised, and that
his promise is no other then that which is written in his word, Psalm. 119.114.
and 73.17. they that know not it, know not what he has promised, nor wherein
he will deliver them: for, it only is Gods mouth and Oracle to his people in
troublesome times. They (therefore) who have been ill hearers or despisers of
the word in their good days, when the evil day is come, and God meets with
them in the burning Pestilence or some other way, as he does with those that
contemn his service, or carelessly serve him, Exodus 5.3. cannot tell whither to
turn, or what to do: for, they cannot raise themselves with the truth of God,
which they know not: and they must needs sink under his judgments which the
feel. Let them consider, that never care to read in the word, their soul may
fall into trouble: and where is their comfort in trouble, when the word is so
strange a Gospel to them? Gods shield is in his word, and Gods truth is his
word: being (then) ignorant of the word, in the day of thy affliction: where is
his shield to defend thee? and his truth, to be thy buckler of defense against
Satan's accusations that pierce thy soul, and the worlds-armies of vexations
that gall thy flesh?

if we will be followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. for, does God
keep all his promises? then, we learn to be just in ours, and like our
heavenly Father, Mat. 5.45. That we may be so, we must take heed of that
rashness of mouth which is in many; whose mouths talk of vanity, and their
right hand is a right hand of falsehood, Psalm. 144.8. that is, who promise
largely, shaking hands upon the same; and keep no promise. But a Christian
should keep his promise, though to his hinderance, Psalm. 15.4. and, he that
will be a follower of God, must follow him in the true performance of his
sayings. And, (here) as Peter said to Ananias; whiles it remained, appertained
it not to thee? that is, was it not in thy power to give it, or to keep it?
he speaks of the money that he (dissemblingly) gave, Act. 5.4. so before the
word go out of our mouth, we are at liberty to promise, or not; but, when our
word is past, our lawful word is our bond in heaven to all our promises:
which, if it hold us not, we lie not unto men, that is to men only, but unto
God: know (therefore) that Gods law binds a Christian to keep his oath, and
lawful promises: and that, though man cannot, God can and does take hold of
our words so soon as they go out of the doors of our lips. And, though man's
law meddle not with trifling promises; Gods law condemns for idle words, Mat.
12.36. which would be considered of those that follow not God, but the wind
in their promises: And, what constancy is there, in the wind? so much there
is in such men's promises. Hence it is, that as when the wind blows, we hear
a sound, but nothing that we can hold: so when promises are made by some, we
may hear sound of words, as of wind; but, beside words that we cannot hold,
there is nothing to hold by but a blast of promises that change with wind and
weather. And so, as words are called wind, their promises are no better. But
this is meant of promises that be lawful, and in our power: for, unlawful,
are better broken then kept. I call them unlawful, when they tend to another
man's hurt, or the Commonwealths hinderance: as when a true Man, in his fear,
promises to a Thief that will spare him, to bring him such a sum of money,
at a day, the promise is not to be kept, because it is to the commonwealths
hurt to feed such a viper in the bosom of it, and not (only) to his own
particular loss. And David speaks not of the general, but of a man's own
hinderance in the case of keeping promises, bound with an oath. Also, we may
not hurt our brother, whether we be in bonds to that harm, or at liberty.
But, though it be to our own hurt, and an oath be gotten of us (though
deceitfully) to it, we must do as we have sworn; that it may appear we have a
greater feeling of Gods dishonor then of our own loss and hinderance. Other
descriptions of the Plague of Pestilence follow.

VER. 5. Thou shall not be afraid of the terror by Or fear not any night
fear,
night.
THe Plague of Pestilence is further described, and here by a figure of the
effect; being called terrible, specially in the night: because by the help of
the darkness thereof; that which causes great fear at other times, strikes
with greater fear then. For, the night is a solitary season, and
solitariness increases fear, and as light causes boldness, so darkness is
cause of fear. When God strikes with the Pestilence, that stroke of his hand
is terrible at all times; specially in great towns and in the night, when
(environed with uncomfortable darkness) they shall have fit time to consider
how suddenly, and how many God peremptorily cites to their graves by that kind
of death; when they shall hear such groaning voices, and so many fearful
shreekes and outcries of men and women, old and young (almost) in every house
round about them, with the doleful noise and long tolling of bells for those
that are dying; and when, at midnight in some Cities, to the woeful groans of
the visited shall be added the dismal voice of the buriers of those that die
in that sort, saying: bring forth your dead. This terror is noisome in the
day, but the night makes it worse. Therefore God to add to the sharpness of
the vis^tation wherewith he visited Egypt, when his people went out, inflicted
those strokes at midnight. For, the text says, that in that night there was a
great cry in Egypt; because there was no house where there was not one dead,
Exodus 12.30. It would have grieved them in the day, but it grieved them much
more in the night. So Christ, to make his terrible coming more terrible,
says: There shall be a cry as midnight; the Bridegroom comes, Math. 25.6.
at midday it would be fearful; it will be more fearful at midnight, the
time when (commonly) all are asleep; but the godly shall be delivered from
these cries of the night, at least, from all the fears of them, and of the
night it self. For, the Pestilence it self is fearful, and the night makes
it more to be feared. From whence we may learn two things.



Exodus and Matthew, prove the same; and the godly are exempted from it. For the
Lord promises such, that they shall sleep, viz. without fear, Leuit. 26.6.
and David by this privilege of Gods children; lies down in hope, and dwells in
safety, Psalm. 4.8. Job says, that (then) the godly shall not fear, or that
they shall sleep without fear; but the wicked shall so fear, that their eyes
shall fail, and their hope be as the giving up of the Ghost, or as a puff
that suddenly vanishes, Job 11.19, 20. And why should Solomon tell the
Scholars of wisdom, that if they slept they should not fear, or be made to
fear, and that their sleep should be sweet, Prou. 3.24. if the night were
not fearful, and the godly were not sure to be freed from the fear of the
night? or, why should the godly man bind the commandment upon his heart when
he goes to bed, that it may watch for him when he is in bed, Prou. 6.22. If
there were not fears by night, or fears of the night, that without such a
watch about him might hurt his sleeps, and hazard his soul? To be short; for
this the wicked are said to lie down in sorrow, Esaias 50.11. as the righteous
lie down in peace, Psalm. 4.8.

But the godly have been troubled and much shaken with terrors by night: Job
himself was feared with dreams, and astonished with visions. Job 7.14.

I answer, where the godly are said to be exempt from the fear of the night,
fear; but to free them from all cause of fear, or inconvenience by such
fear. For, it is not said in the text, that they shall not fear, but they
shall not be frighted, or made to fear by any such terrors; and the meaning
is, that that fear shall not prevail against them, as it does against the
wicked, who from the darkness of the night pass to utter darkness, or it may
correct their mistrust in God, but not ouerwhelme them with an horrible dread,
as it does the unrighteous. The reasons of the doctrine are:

First, the text calls it the fear of the night, or the night that fear.

Secondly, experience (which is a sure teacher) manifests as fear more by
night then by day.

Thirdly, then our enemies and evil persons are most ready to

An instruction at night before we go to bed, by humble and watch of his
providence for their safety. For, where are such fears, there should be great
care had for the having of his munition against them, Psalm. 55.17. and what
greater security, then to sleep in the arms, that is, keeping of our
faithful Creator, 1. Pet. 4.19. but, if the Lord keep not the City, and
every room, and person in it, all other keepers and watchmen watch vainly,
Psalm. 127.1. If he watch not the body, who shall keep it? and if he leave the
soul, who shall give good thoughts unto it? Let us (therefore) in the day by
well doing, in the night by prayer commend our selves carefully to God for his
protection: and we shall have good Angels for our keepers, good rest for our
bodies, and Gods good Spirit for the guest of our souls. Without this we shall
sleep in Satan's bosom, and become Satan's husbandry for execrable lusts,
Math. 13.25.26. For, the watchman being departed; the enemy will come into our
field by night, and sow tares of unclean affections, where that watchman had
sowed good desires, as it were, good seeds in us for the harvest of life.

A reproof of those, who for want of prayer, leave the field of fears the
night brings with it, that God may give leave to Satan, and his unclean
spirits to haunt their chambers and sleeping rooms, being kept with no better
watch, that thieves may come, and robbers by night and kill them, Obad. 5 that
their dreams may fright them, and their own beds be ra^kes unto them, that
fire may take into the rafters of their very bed-roomes and burn them, their
house, goods, and dearest children with them to destruction. That darkness is
clad with fear, and that such fear is much strengthened with the priuatenesse
of the night, they little consider these dangers and a thousand more in which
they sleep, who take not their sleep at Gods hands by prayer for their
safety, nor deliver the key of the house to him only, who (only) keeps
Israel. If such complain that they have broken sleeps and much unquiet rest,
where others sleep soundly and without fear: what marvel, seeing by such
brutish forgetfulness of God and neglect of themselves, they sleep not in his
favor who gives his beloved sleep: Psalm. 127.2. Acts 12.6, 7. Sometimes the
best may find their sleeps unquiet, and dreams fearful: but in these
outward discomforts, they have that peace that the wicked know not, the light
of Gods countenance is upon them, and they have much joy of heart; where the
other lie in darkness and sorrow, and can neither find rest in their beds, nor
comfort in their ways, God being their enemy, and themselves out with
themselves. Lo (then) the blessed fruit of those that get leave of God by faith
in his providence, to use his bl^ssings, in respect of their woeful estate, who
taking them in the nature of usurpers, without prayer, lie down in no peace.
Another description of the Pestilence follows.

Nor for the arrow that flies by day. THis sickness is further spoken of by
comparing it with a flying arrow: or, arrow shot by the hand of a strong
Archer, which comes speedily, and pierces deeply: sometimes it kills
presently, and (commonly) before it be seen. So Gods swift arrow in this kind
of death, as it destroys terribly and without mercy; so it kills suddenly
and without warning. For, some it has taken away in the midst of their
sports; as they have been playing at the tables, as they have walked in the
streets, as they have passed by the way, and when some said peace, 1. These 5 3.
and least thought of death: even then this infectious arrow pierced to the
heart. The sum of all is. When God sends the Pestilence, or any other
judgment in some haste, to a land or private place, it comes as an arrow out
of a bow.

Where we learn, that Gods messengers and servants sent in Pestilence our
selves do know, how soon it is taken: how small a matter brings it: with how
little a wind it comes: and how suddenly it passes to the head, and pierces
to the heart. Seventy thousand in less then three days, and in a land not
very large, died of it. 2. Sam. 24.15. So, Exodus 12.29.
when God would show his power, by death upon the great army of the King of
Ashur, he smote by an Angel in one night, an hundred, fourscore and five
thousand, Esaias 37.36. At another time he slew three and twenty thousand in one
day, 1. Cor. 10.8. And because Herod would not give glory to God, he was
presently smitten by an Angel in all his glory, Acts 12.23. The reasons.

He that so quickly made man of the dust, Genes. 2.7. can as Pestilence or any
other destruction, if he speak but the word; and how soon is a word spoken?
it presently comes. He is the Centurion of this great host of all the
creatures, If he say to one go, he goes, and to another come, he comes, Math.
8.9. Psalm. 105.16.31.34.

Secondly, he can send by his Angels that swiftly execute his fly about them,
Psalm. 103.20. or, he can command the devils, who in an instant (commanded by
him) can as well corrupt the air with Pestilence, as the rivers with blood,
Psalm. 78.44.49.50.

Thirdly, God has power and may command: and (commanding)

An admonition speedily to turn to God, who is able (so speedily) to turn us
to destruction, Joel 2.12. For, should we not meet him with an army of
prayers, who can come against us so quickly, and so strong with armies of death
in the Pestilence, and other innumerable diseases? Luke 14.32. He can send to
us by flying messengers: and shall we not seek him by speedy repentance? Amos
5.6. It is not long since his arrows flew among us, and he (yet) has his
quiver full of them, to trouble our aires again, and with a fresh charge to
shoot at us by the contagious Pestilence, in Town and Country: should we not
therefore dread to make God our adversary; or, (being made our adversary by
sin) should we not agree with him quickly, Mat. 5.25. who can so quickly
destroy us if we stand out proudly against him? If he find disorder and
impenitencie in our houses, or selves, he can visit for it with flying arrows,
and punish it (when he is disposed) with present death: and should not this
constrain us to expel sin and iniquity, every private person out of
himself, and every faithful public person out of his family and government?
should it not move the Christian householder, christianly to order both himself,
and others under him, whether children or servants by the word, bringing them
to Sermons more carefully, and more orderly to prayers at home? for how soon
God can take us away, we have heard, how quickly he will, we know not: also,
should it not persuade the public Magistrates, with the sword of his office,
not lightly to pare away, but utterly to cut off all proud and rotten sins
that abound: yea, soundly to correct to a reformation, all public and gross,
both enormities, and offenders; as swearers, drunkards, fornicators, prophaners
of the Sabbath, disobedient to Parents, and authority, with such like, seeing
he bears not the sword in vain? Romans 13.4.

I pray thee have me excused, Luke 14.18. If we be not ready, it will take us
as we be: and when it knocks, if we will not open, it will cast us open. The
godly prevent this hardening, by living so, that is, so repentantly and holily,
during their short time here; that, when the flying arrow of death, sent from
the hand of their supreme Lord, shall make toward them, they are ever in fit
state to meet their Savior. To such, present death is prepared death, as it
was to Simeon and Anna, who waited for Christ in the Temple, Luke 1.25.36.3^.
and they cannot dye suddenly, that dye so. Contrarily, the careless, and they
that put off death, by turning these flying, into creeping arrows, can have no
such hope in their death, which comes as a thief to their house, Matthew.
24.43. and not as a Messenger, to bid them to the Supper of the great King,
Luke 14.17. They will not unclasp with the comforts of their dear life for
the toilesome life of mortification and preciseness in Gods service: for, they
are lusty and strong. Therefore their death cannot be good nor comfortable,
but irksome and violent, of which they are overcome: not yielding to it as the
Saints, but mastered by it, as they who say with Julian; Galilean, thou have
prevailed, so he spoke of Christ, and so speak they of God, when they find he
is stronger then they.

A reproof of those, who, when God shoots the infectious arrow of Pestilence
at a Town or City, promise to themselves safety; because they dwell far
off, because that part, in which they inhabit is free, or because they dwell in
the Country, and not in the Town. For, cannot God reach them wheresoever they
dwell in the East or West? Is his arm shortened? Does any arrow miss that he
shoots? and he that went progress from Dan to Bersheba, in a running plague,
and in less time then three days: can he not in few hours go a little way
and visit further from a Town, then five, six or seven miles? where is their
safety (then) in such a case, but in turning to him that threatens them? And
how can they avoid this arrow, but by watching (still) the fall of it in their
penitent lives?

Neither is this only true in the arrow of the Pestilence, but in every arrow
of his quiver, if he shoot at us by enemies, by mortality of men, by murraine
of cattle, or by cleanness of teeth, and leanness in all our quarters, what
can ward any of these arrows, but repentance, and our turning to God? He that
will avoid an arrow, must turn the face, and not the back unto it; and he
must look toward God, and not from him by impenitencie, that will reconcile
him. A further description of the Pestilence follows.

Verse 6. Nor for the Pestilence that walks in the darkness.
We have in this Verse two effects more, whereby this Plague of Pestilence is
further described: the first is that it walks, that is, works strongly and
forcibly to death, in the dark or night; or, it spreads secretly and
closely; as they go unseen that walk in the dark. The meaning is, when God
in an intended mortality of people, sends forth this plague of death, they
whom God has appointed to it, shall not be able, by any providence mortal, to
avoid the secret work of it in themselves, or theirs, and the darkness that
hides it shall find them.



Again, that which is here spoken of the Pestilence that walks in the
darkness, that God will deliver his children from it, at least from the sting
and malice of it, come it never so secretly, is true of all other evils,
closely but justly, sent from God as punishments, or subtly plotted by men as
snares in the dark, that is, as snares laid privily for mischief: for, the
godly shall not be taken of them.

Esau had spoken in counsel against Jacob, was known to Rebecca, and told to
Jacob Genesis 27.41, 42. The counsels of the King of Aram were no counsel to the
King of Israel. 2. King. 6.11. Saul determined to slay David, but Jonathan told
him of it by three warning arrows, 1. Sam. 20.36, 37. And there were certain
Jews, who bound themselves with an oath to kill Paul, there were more then
forty, that had made this oath of blood against him, Acts 23.12, 13. Yet Gods
watch was nearer then they thought; and he hewed those snares in sunder, by
Paul's sisters son, who told Paul what was devised against him, and by how
many and how resolutely, Ver. 16.20.

Our own days can speak as much in this matter, as the days of old can tell
us; for were not the days of Queen ELIZABETH, days of miraculous
discoueries? Could Esau that Roman Aramite, intend any thing (though never so
secretly, as it were in his private Counsels) against the Jacob of England, and
she not hear of it? and did not the Ravens of the Valley pick out the eyes of
many of her despisers? Prou. 30.17. After her Grave, wherein she was buried in
peace, and in the days of a just gracious King; what snares have been privily
laid, and miraculously known? How closely did the Powder-traytors, walk, like
the Pestilence in the darkness? In their self-will they dug into a wall,
Genes. 49.6. thinking, through, it to have undermined the fast ground of those
happy times; but they might as well have plowed upon the Rock: therefore they
turned from that counsel, and removed the Snare to a celler under the
Parliament house, where they hid it, with themselves, so cunningly, that it
passed the wit of man to conceive how it could have been found out. A great
furnace (as it were snare) was provided under ground and secretly to have
consumed at once, and to small shiuers, the most honorable assembly of
Christendom, with one deadly thundering burst: it came almost to the birth;
the bow was drawn; the arrowe was upon the string, Psalm. 11.2, 3. The candle
and match were ready; and we could not say, Yet forty days, no nor so much
as one full day, and we should have been destroyed, Ion. 3.4. Then God took us
as a brand out of the fire, Zechar. 3.2. and sinking (as he did Peter) by the
hand; Math. 14.31. So were we delivered: they communed together to lay the
Snare privily; many meetings they had about it: and so secretly they did all,
that they could say; who shall see? Psalm. 64.5. but God caused their own
tongue to fall upon them; a Letter of their own bewrayed them; and the Lord so
inspired, that is, so with wisdom, and a spirit of divine interpretation, his
holy King, that out of the cloud of one dark sentence in that same Letter, he
pointed, as with the finger, at the mystery. And so the Lord saved us, at that
time, from the greatest Pestilence that ever walked in the dark. Many and
deep were the counsels that the Leaguers of Rome have held against these two
unmatchable Princes; much has come from the deepnesse of Satan against them;
and what treacheries? how dangerous and detestable, devised against them by
brands of hell, in the dungeon of hell? yet from them all has the Lord
delivered us, 2 Timothy 3.11. The reasons:

If this were not so, the wicked, being in a confederacy and of darkness,
should be too hard for Gods children, who walk in the light; that is, in
their simplicity; and not in craftiness, as Satan's Factors do.

Secondly, for this (partly,) God is said to be the Watchman of Israel, or,
Isreal's keeper, that will neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4. this Israel
is his Church, over whose safety he stands Sentinel day and night, to
reveal to the same, (as her wakefull and surest Intelligencer) the pits which
they dig in secret for her that lay wait for her soul.

that which has wings will declare the matter, Eccles. 10.10. that is, it
shall quickly come out, as if it were carried upon wings, or by the swiftest
foul that flies. In that detection by Mordecai, Hest. 2.21, 22. heaven it
self became the Watchtower for a heathen King: the Treason was to be executed
forthwith, and when the King should go next abroad, and it was no less then
the killing of him by two that kept the door: but Mordecai heard it, who sat
without like a forlorn Person: and informed Hester of it, that is, presently
informed her, as the divine providence had informed him, she told the King,
and they were hanged (both) on a tree. Such haste God did make, even to the
succor of a Pagan-Monarch: and will not his arm be ever as long to the
defense of a Christian King and state? Then; what security can men have in the
secret committing of that, wherein God himself will be their detector; and
wherein two cannot keep counsel, though one be away? I would that whole Roman
Pestilence, which (still) walks in the darkness, would consider this: or let
them remember (which is yet fresh in the memories of many) how many
conspirators (these forty years past and upward) have gone to their own
places, with their blood upon their heads; and let them not forget, how lately
the Lord himself became a reuealer of some conspiracies with a celestial care
of Prince and Country, as if he should have striuen to have excelled himself
in miraculous mercies toward us more now then ever.

Mole-warpes, whose books, and other motives to sedition, walk as the
Pestilence in the dark; for, where the Godly can see nothing, his eyes behold,
his eyelids consider, Psalm. 11.4. That is, God sitteh not idly in heaven,
but sees all that is done on earth, either wit^ open eyes, or as if he winked:
for sometimes, he discovers a secret presently, as with open eyes, and makes
us see it: sometimes not presently, but at lesure, as if he would take time to
bring it to light: but even then, his eyelids consider or he deferreth the
matter, as if he slept; that is, his bright eye is upon their first thoughts
that devise this evil in their hearts. There is a league and kindred of
wickedness among bad Subjects, and they join with Sampsons Foxes, if it be to
carry firebrands to burn the corne-fields of the Church, Judge. 15.4, 5. but
the foundation shall be cast down, that they have laid craftily, and in the
dark, Psalm. 11.3. or, as the untimely fruit of a woman that has not seen
the sun, Psalm. 58.8. so shall all their unjust counsels be: their policies
shall fail, and their purposes come to naught, and, he that sits in his
Temple in heaven shall bring them out of their holes, as he did Faux and the
rest of that impious consort that wrought with him at the wall, and in the
celler, that grave of powder, made for the burial of the Gospel: an untimely
end shall meet them, and the pit which they dug for others, shall take
themselves: but the souls of the righteous shall escape as a bird out of the
Snare: for, it shall be broken, and they shall be delivered, Psalm. 124.7.
Another effect of the Pestilence follows.

Nor for the The word signifies a cutting, or sore biting: and such as makes
a common slaughter, or universal death.
destruction that wastes at noone day. FVrther, this Plague of Pestilence is
called the destruction that wastes at noone day, as before it was called the
Pestilence that walks in the darkness, because (where God sends it) it
smites down in death at all times, and in all aires, and seasons: whether at
midnight, or at midday: in an open, or close sky: in the purest aires, or in
the foggiest and most troubled. Some Writers affirm that it is called the
Pestilence that walks in darkness; because in the dark it works more
violently then in the day, the air being made groser and thicker by the
coldness of the night, that is, apter to communicate it more fully and with
more force: and that it is called the destruction that wastes at noone day;
because at the time of the noone-sunne, the pores of the body, as they are more
open in the day, so they are most open, and more penetrable at that time of the
day: but these two effects of the Plague of Pestilence; walking in darkness
and wasting at noonday; are spoken of to let us understand that for this, or
any other kind of warning that God shall give us by any of his rods; al times
are a like with him, night or day, darkness or noonday: also, that, in
delivering the righteous from the fearful Pestilence or any other punishment
of his hand, he cannot be restrained by any impediment of weakness in him, or
strength of the disease in us, be it day or night, summer or winter: for, he
can as easily and soon cure a grievous, as slight sickness; and as presently
save a man from death, as any sickness can bring him to it: the rod is in his
hand, and the work of it in his power, to smite with it to a correction, or to
death: and, he that can do what he will, can do the same when he will: for,
his power is over time that made it.

Pestilence walking in the darkness, and destruction wasting at noonday;
that is, of punishments, ready at all seasons to come against us when we sin
against God: we learn, that as men offend, early or late, night or day, God
has Plagues at hand to send upon rhem at all hours: the darkness shall not
hide them, nor the light show them any way to fly from him: if they escape one
judgment, another shall be ready for them, and the last (if they continue
stubborn) overtake them to destruction, as the red sea did Pharaoh, and his
armies, Exodus 14.28. Zophar, in Job, shows that from what Plague soever such
flee they flee but from bad to worse: from iron weapons that may strike them
down, to a bow of steel that will strike them through, Job. 20.24. Or if
they flee from the sword that may cut them, they shall meet with arrows that
will kill them.

Esaias the Prophet says, there is no escaping to such; for if they flee from
the noise of the fear, they shall fall into the hole of the pit; and they that
come out of the pit, that is, that come out safely, the snare shall take them,
or the snare of death (that will hold them fast) shall be upon them. So that
(here) they are waylaid by three kinds of destruction Fear, and the Pit, and
the Snare: fear coming from enemies, the pit from sicknesses, the snare from
the snares of death, that shall compass them; so as they shall not escape,
Esa. 24.17, 18. The meaning is, that the hand of God can no way, be avoided by
sinners, in one destruction or another; and the Prophet alludeth to the taking
of wild beasts; who, if they get from the dogs, as it were the noise of
fear, may fall into pits made for them, and there be taken: or avoiding these,
run into a snare, and there be hampered and held till their throat be cut.

In Amos also we read of such a matter; for who would not think that a man
escaping to his own house, from a Lion that followed him, and from a Bear
that met him, should be safe and well? But in that house, there is a Serpent
that bites him to death, Am. 5.19. Therefore there is no security but in God,
or by turning to God in our coming home to our Father: The Reasons of the
Doctrine are:

One of the names of God is; The Lord of Hoasts; and the Lord, who if he will
have an enemy to come upon a Land, need but to Lisse for him, Esaias 5.46. Or
famine to afflict the Land, need but to call for it, Psalm. 105.16. If he do but
send it comes, be it Pestilence or Sword, Leuit. 26.25. What shall I say? He
has Armies of Judgments, and huge hosts of plagues to meet with sinners in
their way, till he have either humbled or destroyed them. He has sharp
arrows in his Quiver, a glittering Sword in his hand, a revenging hand in his
wrath, and noisome Pestilence among his treasures: and therefore what hope to
rebel, without assurance to be destroyed? Luke 19.27.

Secondly, God should want a part of his glory, if he were not Adam out of
Paradise as soon as he had sinned, Genesis 3.24. lacks not power to turn
sinners into hell, with all that forget God, Psalm. 50.22.

A conviction of all notorious sinners, who bless, that is, flatter They shall
have peace, though they walk in the stubbornness of their heart, adding
drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. These would seem to make question,
whether God be of any such strength, or be able to bring any such troops into
the field against them: or, if he be, whether he will use them according to his
threatenings in his word, to their deserved overthrow, sinning so against him.
These make falsehood their refuge, and have their part in the drunken peace of
that hypocrite who said; My Master does defer his coming: Math. 24.48. that
is, he will not come these many years, if he come at all; either to account
with sinners, or to visit for sin. And what shall I say of these men, but
that they encourage themselves in an abominable thing, promising peace, where
there is none, Ier. 6.14. But if any dye of the Pestilence, let such look to
be first: and if any go into captivity, to be first that shall go captive:
and if leanness enter into any, to have it enter into them as soon as into
any. Indeed, they (oftentimes) escape with life, in such difficulties and
straits of time, when their betters do not; yet they live (but) to fill up the
just measure of their certain damnation; that no torment may be wanting to
them, when they shall suddenly, and when they least think of death, chop into
hell.

his strong watch) to observe us at all times, night or day, when we do evil:
then, when we see his watch charged, sometimes in the night-pestilence,
sometimes in the noone-plague: sometimes in unseasonable years by no rain, or
by rain in excess: sometimes in great scarcities of grain and fodder; Let us
humble our selves in prayer and repentance, standing with these, in the gappe
and breach that Gods hand has made, or may make by such calamities sent among
us for sin and for iniquity. And let such Repentance and Prayer stand, as
Aaron with his holy Censer, as in the case of Plague: So the Lord may be
entreated, and his Judgments may leave us. But for such as seek no relief in
the armory of these Christian exercises against the changes that come, but
behave themselves in days of mourning, as when God makes the hearts of men
merry with his cheerful countenance: Let them go whither they will,
Vengeance looks for them at every door; the Plague by day, and the
Pestilence by night is ready for them, day and night they are environed with
fears; at their tables, and upon their beds, snares upon their meat: a curse
upon their sleep; and Gods anger in all their ways.

And here let us take heed how we provoke the Lord, by our stubbornenesse under
his other rods, to bring the Plague again, I mean of Pestilence: which,
while it kept some order among us, as his watch by night and ward by day; how
can it be forgotten, how many, not by hundreds but by thousands, a week in
England, it committed close prisoners to worms and darkness in the earth? or,
if we have forgotten that; let those that go about their sin closely,
remember the Pestilence that walks in darkness: and such as sin openly,
not forget the destruction that wastes at noone day.

A reproof of those, who when this sickness is in a town; messenger sent
from God, and messenger, that is not avoided by the change of the place simply,
without some other change. Secondly, that they remove not with a doubtful
conscience, but with good warrant to depart. Thirdly, that in such departure
they break not the bonds which should be between man and wife, the parents
and their children, Christian householders and their Christian families. And
fourthly, that they have no public calling in the place from which they
remove, as of Magistrates or Pastors. For, then they cannot depart with good
conscience, nor forsake their standings without sin. Thus far has the
Pestilence been described by some effects, now the godly man's safely in it,
and in other troubles, comprehended under it, follows.

VER. 7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand, etc.
GOds deliverance of his children, and their great safety in such troubles as
have been spoken of, is propounded in this verse, and repeated in the tenth.
The first is affirmed simply here; and further proved in the two next verses,
as by a vehement asseueration, verse 8. and infallible evidence verse 9. In the
first there is a Prolepsis, or preventing answer to an objection. For, some
might say: how can I be delivered, when so many thousands are not, who, on
every hand of me fall upon the edge of the Plague that destroys without
mercy, in darkness, and at noone day? To this the Prophet makes answer,
saying: Though thousands, that is, great numbers, and ten thousands, that is,
numbers without number so fall, being cut down with it, or other diverse
diseases, and sundry kinds of death, on the left hand and on the right of his
servants, yet he can deliver them. For, with him it is no more to save his
people when thousands die then when two; and when ten thousands perish, then
when ten (only) are cut down for the grave. In a time of Pestilence; he is
able to pass by the houses of the faithful as well when a whole town is
visited, that is, when no street or lane is free, as when a few houses are
shut up: and as well, if three hundred should die in a week, as if only
three. Now, as God is able to do this; so to advance the credit of his power in
the faith of his children, he performs it oftentimes in their outward
safety, always in their salvation which is best of all.

From whence we learn, Noah and his household went safely into the Arc,
Genes. 7.1. and God set not Sodom on fire till he had delivered just Lot,
Genes. 19.16.22. 2. Pet. 2.7. when the Lord terribly plagued the Egyptians,
his enemies: he mercifully spared Goshen where his people were, Exodus 8.21.22.
and 9.6.26. and 10.23. and 11.5.6.7. and when Jerusalem was taken, Exodus 12.23.
Jeremy was provided for, Iere. 39.11.12.18. So God dealt very mercifully with
Daniel and his fellows in the captivity, Dan. 1.19. And when the Lord sent
five men, that is, Angels in the shape of men, to destroy the careless City;
He sent a sixth with a writers ink-borne by his side, to set a mark of
passover or special deliverance upon all those who mourned for the
abomination, Ezech. 9.4.6. And what has he done less for his godly servants
in any age? The reasons.

Luke 1.68. He showed his word to Jacob: But did he deal so with every
nation? Psalm. 147.19.20.

the glory of the Lord to deliver the righteous, as it is the masters credit
to do for those that faithfully serve him. Or, if he should not honor those
with deliverances, who honor him with affections; the heathen, (or those
without) might say: where is now their God? Psalm. 115.2.

Thirdly, He numbreth their hairs, Math. 10.30. and will he if he will have
them, will he not deliver them?

Object But many godly have been taken away in the common destruction?

Answ. Indeed, have no hope. For, they have faith in God, from whose love
nothing can sever them: Romans 8.39 and are not as the wicked, who put all their
faith in changeable things, with the loss of which they loose God and all.

A comfort to the godly in the mortality of thousands, seeing they know in
whom they believe, and for what: for, they shall not perish, though never so
many perish, that have faith in other things. And this doctrine is now
necessary even in our days of health: for, these good days may wear away,
the Pestilence may reign as it did, and another trial may come; and then will
it be needful to be well seen in these and such like merciful promises,
that our faith may not fail us, nor our hearts faint within v^ when the evil
day comes. Neither would this be remembered only in the case and days of
Plague, then to be armed with that faith and true boldness that puts fear
out of doors: but it would be remembered (further) in all other changes and
troubles of our mortal life, that God only may be our fear, and we may put
all to him with full assurance, in the wauerings of many. As in the days of
famine, if there should come such a want of bread, that thousands must pine to
death, yet that must not so discomfort any child of God, as to make him to
doubt how it can be true, that in the day of famine he shall he fed, Psalm.
37.19. For though God do not make windows in the heaven, 2. King. 7.2. he can
feed him. When our handful of meal is gone, his truth remains, who can
feed without bread, or with it miraculously? 1. Kings 19.8.17.12.14. Ioh.
6.7.13. The like may be said of the miseries of war, and of all miseries and
Plagues earthly. For whatsoever temptations there are between heaven and earth
from the flesh, world, or devil; as diseases of body, rebellion of children,
loss of goods, and of good name, crosses in husbands, wives, servants, with
all other vexations and crosses of mind or body, from the least to the
greatest, from the pain of the little finger to the pangs of death; in all
these, though the ungodly know not what to do, the godly have hope: and though
the wicked fall by thousands, the righteous are not shaken. Is there not
comfort to the righteous in all this? And do they serve God for naught, to whom
the Lord makes such precious promises?

light is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97.11. But the light of the wicked
shall be put out, Prou. 13.9. that is, this safety is proper and belonging
only to godly and religious persons; whose privilege it is, when thousands
fall, not to stagger: where the wicked (contrarily) because they will be the
children of darkness by sin, shall be sure (with the putting out of their
candle) to inherit the blackness of darkness with sinners. That it is the
peculiar lot of those that love God and follow his truth, thus to be
established, Solomon is witness, who speaking of a sinner that does evil an
hundred times, that is, does sin much and long; says, that though God
prolong his days, or defer his punishment, yet he shall be as a shadow, (and
what is more uncertain then a shadow?) because he fears not before God:
where it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, that is, where they that
have been religious in their life, shall be happy in their end, and never be
removed, Eccles. 8.12.13. God makes his Sun to shine upon the inst and
unjust, yet the shine of his favor is upon those that do reverence before him:
and where the outward excellency of the ungodly has a speedy end, as a light
quickly blown out; the light of the righteous rejoices, Prou. 13.9. to wit,
as the Sun to run his course; Psalm. 19.5. or is steadfast with increase, as
the light of the same Sun, That shines more and more unto the perfect day,
Prou. 4.18.

A reproose of those, who in a time of mortality, fear unseasonably Plague in
one week, Anno 1603 and 1604.
and for some weeks together not many fewer? There is a profitable and sober
fear in Gods children; which is the fear of sin, and of these days of
sin: but this carnal fear of worldlings, who have drawn little or no power
from religion, is rather the fear of death, then of sin that caused it, Romans
6.23. but this has been spoken (...) This is the deliverance propounded, the
same further proved follows.

VER. 8. Doubtless, (or only) with thine eyes shall thou behold, etc.
WHat was before propounded, is (here) earnestly affirmed concerning the
deliverances of Gods people in days of trouble, when thousands fall. For the
Prophet says, Thou shall behold these Plagues upon others, to wit, with eyes
of faith and seeing: or God will lay them before thee, and not upon thee;
provided that thou fear before his anger, and love his goodness. And he
speaks of seeing, because the experience brings peace unto the godly and many
good things: but then they must have eyes to see his judgments, and an eye of
faith to observe his love: his judgments upon the wicked, and his love to
them. Where the Doctrine is:

Gods children must not pass over Gods judgments upon others David marked
diligently, as it were with a Selah, Gods proceedings in mercy to him and his
Church, Psalm. 32.4.5.7. for where he had done any notable thing for his people,
or for his King, he (as it were) foulded down a leaf at it, and committed it
to tables of memory. Neither lost he by the hand: nay the observation was
gainefull to him, for it ministered great courage to him against that brauing
monster Goliath. 1. Sam. 17.37. Abraham (also) was comforted in God by the same
observation of Gods former ways, when out of him, he could have but small
comfort to offer to death his best son Isaac, in whose blood the whole world
might seem then to have been drowned, Genes. 22.3.8. Further, it was the
practice of that excellent Author of 119. Psalm, who in like case of Gods
special doings, meditated in his precepts, and considered his ways, that is,
carefully considered them, or wrote them down. The flesh is dull in these
matters; therefore David summons his soul unto them; saying: O my soul praise
the Lord, and forget not all his benefits: Or, let no benefit of his be
forgotten, Psalm. 103.2. as if he had said; write them up in thy memory, and
let not thy forgetful sense keep the book of them, or trust not thy senses
with them, but write them in thy heart. In another Psalm the same Prophet (for
he was a great obseruer of things in his time) does not only pen these
mercies of God, as in a book for his own memory, but calls others to the
meditation, as if he would help their remembrance (also) by reading these
things out of his book to them, and therefore says: Come and behold the
works of the Lord, Psalm. 46.8. as if he should have said: I have noted them,
and do you observe them: As if one of us should say to another: Come and see
what times have been, and how they be changed; what sickness reigned once, and
what health reigns now; what want of fruits at some times, and what
abundance at other. This year great storms of trouble, and the next a great
calm of peace, v. 9. The reasons:

his high Acts should not be forgotten; as where he has been extraordinarily
good to his people, or severely sharp to his peoples enemies, Deuteronomy. 6.12. and
25.17.19.

Psalm. 111.4. and shall we, by our neglect of them, frustrate his ends?

and shall Gods threatenings not move us, nor his loves make us thankful? Shall
a heathen Monarch keep a Chronicle, or daybooke of good turns done to him by
his subjects; Hest. 6.1.2. And shall Christians keep no memorial of so
wonderful things done to them by the sovereign Lord of all worlds?

Lastly, the faithful consideration of Gods judgments upon Habac. 3.2. Exodus
14.31. Judge. 5.1. Psalm. 78.35.40.42.

A reproof of the slumbring multitude, that pass no observation Let him
thunder maruellously with his voice, Job 37.5. it is but a voice that passes
by, and when the earth is moved, they are not moved. If he bring the sea out
of his place (as lately he did) to punish our disorder: what great thing does
he worthy noting? His justice in punishing with so long and fearful a Plague,
is not in our minds: and we have forgotten his marvelous goodness in the
discovery of the Powder Plot, which is past, as if God had done nothing. The
earth has trembled under us, the heavens have been unquiet and much
distempered over us: our houses have been tossed and shaken with winds: the
staff of our bread has been broken: the enemy has threatened us at our
doors: and God has taken away the wise man and the Counselor: yea the
righteous perish; and who has considered? Esaias 57.1. Has the Lord done any
thing, to wit, in our opinion in all this? or, have we learned ought by it
more, then if nothing had been done? Have not his wonderful works lately done,
deserved the pen of a ready writer in every of our hearts? but we have
prepared them, not as books of remembrance, but as graves to bury his
kindness.

An admonition to Gods faithful Ministers; the louder God Esaias 58.1. For, he
has placed us in the watchtower of his Church, that we might have an eye to
his judgments. The like admonition to all the faithful, to observe Gods
doings, and to use the eyes that he has given them, to see his works, and not
to behold vanity. It has been said of the righteous, that they see the
Plague, that is, as they thankfully score up blessings when they come, so they
dolefully record the curse when it comes, Prou. 22.3. Neither do they see it
only, but hide themselves from it in a pure heart, and innocent life: where
the wicked, not fearing the shot of God, neither the artillery of his
judgments, go on still, to wit, after one fashion, and in their old way of
impenitencie and hardness, till they be destroyed. Good men will deeply
imprint Gods doings; and be sure to have an arc of providence, builded by
repentance, to flee unto when a flood is sent: the wicked (having no such
consideration) stand naked by sin in the face of every storm that is sent,
and perish in it. The sum of all is this: they that be Christians indeed,
must and will take a true inventory of Gods favors and judgments, and set
down in their minds by deep observation, as with a pen of iron, what he has
strangely done, where Christians in face only have no such notes about them of
his strange acts, and forget all his works, as if they had never been. Let us
(therefore) not forget Gods acts, his strange acts: neither Gods works, his
fearful works, worthy to be had in remembrance. And put it in your books
what he did so lately; one year in a spring of no rain, and the next year in
a summer of so much rain: take your bill, or book of tables, and write what
God did scarefully in that great Plague, Luke 16.6.7.
and strangely in removing it. Also, what desolations he made by the sea, in
those West-country floods: or, if we have forgotten, let us remember how God
set his heaven as brass against our faces of brass: and made it to weep day
and night in rain of long continuance, because we would shed no tears for
our sins. Let us not forget the signs which he sent among us, and which have
not been few: nor his tokens on earth, nor his wonders in the sea: nor what
strange lights he has set with his own hand in the firmament: nor what a
grave was made for us by Spaniards once, and once by men of our own nation;
and how we were (at both times) delivered, and they thrown in as our ransom:
nor how often the sword has been set to our very heart, in practices against
our mother in Israel and our father now.

Gods end in causing the righteous to see the Plagues of sinners, Lord knowing
whereof we are made, Psalm. 103.14. does dispense with his own right, to bear
with our infirmities. So he did not only bury the Egyptians in the sea, but
did it, his people looking on, Exodus 14.30.31. who saw them to go down
(quick) to those graves: and David says, When the wicked shall perish, thou
shall see* Psalm. 37.34. His meaning is, that the wicked shall die strangely,
and that the godly shall see their strange death: they shall perish as God has
said, and the other see it, that they may not doubt: or, they shall perish that
God may magnify his truth upon his enemies, and his people see it, that he may
be magnified in his children. The smoke of Sodom mounted up as the smoke of a
furnace, and Abraham must see it, Genes. 19.28. Sedome was wicked and
destroyed, and Abraham the friend of God beheld her destruction. Likewise, the
five Kings of the Amorites, appointed to the sword, could not be hid; but were
found, and brought out to be executed before all Israel that same day, Ios.
10.24.26. it must be done, and Israel must see it done. For, the man of power
shall be destroyed, and the man of wisdom, the righteous man shall see it,
Psalm. 52.5.6. The reasons:

Our graces of faith, patience, perseverance, spiritual fortitude, passive
part of the soul, then it: So the Lord chooses in such cases, to confirm and
settle us, rather by seeing then by hearsay. He that is able to say, that he
is an eyewitness to a thing, may better resolve himself and persuade another
in that thing, then he that can only say, he heard it.

Secondly, if God did not thus to bear with his children, by will not see the
fall of his people; and his people shall see the salvation of their God.



Pestilence or other public visitation bearing with them, and not suffering
them to come upon the scaffold where others are cut off by death; should teach
them, from such matter of his patience toward them and severity to others, to
gather benefit to their amendment, and not boldness (thereby) to do evil,
Romans 2.4. If God be terrible in his works; that is, if he visit with a
wonderful Plague, with strange sicknesses and years, with disorderly springs
and summers, with dearths and death, it is that the world, the godly (at least)
should worship him, and sing unto his Name, Psalm. 66.3, 4. or, that they should
turn to him, and not turn wantons. For, they are not spared by chance, or
because they are worthy: nor do they ouerliue the calamities of those; who in
times of mortality, come sooner to deaths house then they, that they should
flatter themselves in an evil custom, because God has been more favorable
to them then to these: but they see the destruction of others, in their own
safety, that by such a sight they may be made more fearful to offend, and
more careful to please God in his commandments now, then before. And this
good use must all Gods children make of his sparing hand to them or theirs, not
carrying the grace of it into wantonness: for, God does it in love to their
benefit, and they must apply it in wisdom to the cure of their unbelief and
purging of their wickedness. Some, (as if the Lord did punish at adventure in
such cases, and not directly for sin) hold on their prouocations, neither
changing their skin, nor altering their spots, Ier. 13.23. And these are more
sensles then the sensles beast: for, the Beast fears exceedingly when he
sees one of his fellows knocked down before his face, and pitifully roareth
out when he senteth his fellows blood: but these are sensles of Gods strokes
lift up upon men like themselves: and are not moved where the beast is so
greatly moved: neither pity Christian blood. It is said of the waters, that
they saw God, and were afraid, Psalm. 77.16 and of the earth, that it beheld his
lightnings, and shook, verse 18. these see him in his judgments, and fear
nothing: and (in times of Plague) behold him in many deaths, which are
lightnings before their own death, and shake never a whit. But Gods children,
being taught in a better school, must make another and a better use of his
patience toward them, and judgments in the world; not imputing their safety
to chance, or proudly to their worthiness, as if they had been no such
sinners as they upon whom the tower of those deaths fell, and slew them Luke
13.4. but ascribing all to God that spared them, and confessing before him, and
the sons of men, how justly he might have done as much, or more to them, but
that he would have them to live to praise his name, and to confess his truth,
that had made them to follow others to their graves, who might have followed
them to theirs.

Secondly, this example of Gods bearing with us, should be an ten thousand
tale^ts, we must not tak our brother by the throat, in the hundred pence, Mat.
18.27, 28. nor, where God sets us at liberty for great matters, imprison our
brother for a trifle: my meaning is, where God bears with our weak faith,
and accepts us in it, notwithstanding that we will not trust him further then
we see him; nor without some paune; it is our part much more to bear with some
things in our weak brethren, being men as we are subject to like infirmities
James 5.17. he that is strong ought to bear the infimities of the weak, Romans
15.1. the Apostle says ought or must: as if he had said; it is his duty and
part to bear them. And one of the commendations, and not the least, that
Eliphaz gives to Job is; that he strengthened the weary hands, and knees that
bowed down, Job. 4.3* 4. as if he had said: he refreshed them being weary;
and being weak, was a pillar of stay unto them; or he was tender of them, and
did not break them in their brusings: for, the way thus to bear, is to have
tender bowels: which the Apostle Saint Paul intimates, where, in doing of this,
he bidds us to consider our selves, Gal. 6.1. as if he should say, that this
consideration of our frailty (if it be impartial and earnest as it should be)
will make us to practice this duty with meekness: for, then we consider our
selves in them, that their case may be ours, and that as they have fallen, so
may we: but when we consider that God, in reproouing and afflicting man, does
descend to his weakness, Psalm. 78.39. and that Christ became like to us in all
things, that we might be touched with a sense of others infirmities, as he was
of ours, Heb. 4.15. how can we but handle their Soars gently, and with the
spirit of meekness, whose wounds bled before us, and should not be strained
but bound up with our tenderest compassions? And (here) spiritual men should
remember that they were once carnal: and old men not forget that once they
were children: they that have passed the temptations of youth, should call to
mind what difficulties they met with in the passage: and they that have
gotten the shore, think of the sea which they have escaped: for, thus
beholding others in the glass of themselves, (not as they are but as they have
been) they shall be better able to show this meekness to all men; because
they themselves were in times past, unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving
lusts and diverse pleasures, hateful, and hating one another, Tit. 3.2, 3.

But when God visits his Church with a Plague, we may not call it (as here)
the Plague of the wicked, and if he (then) make us (rather) to behold it in
others, then to see the work of it in our selves; it is that we should be
the more compassionate toward them in that humiliation: where we learn to show
pity to those whom God has, any way, humbled in his Church: for, we must
behold their miseries otherwise, and with other eyes then we see the Plague of
the wicked. Moses had this pitiful and tender heart, whom the glory of a Kings
Court could not make to forget his brethrens burdens, Exodus 2.11. Heb. 11.25,
26. So though Ruth might have gone back to her country with her sister-in-law;
yet would she not let her mother-in-law go alone in her affliction, but went
with her (foot by foot) in all her trouble from the Land of Moab to the Land of
Israel, Ruth 2.15.17. Daniel, in the captivity, was in no bondage himself,
but highly in favor with the King; yet so long as Gods people were in
distress, and Gods Temple in desolation, he could not be merry, but sorrowed
and wept, Dan. 10.2, 3. and Zealous Nehemiah, a great man in the Kings Court
and favor, and in an Honorable Office very near the Kings Person, could not
hide the grief of his heart from breaking forth in his countenance, nor take
any comfort in those great Honors he held from the Kings immediate Grace and
bounty then, so long as his brethren were in adversity, and the house of the
Sepulchers of his Fathers lay waste, Nehem 2.2 3. the like tender bowels had
worthy Vriah, unworthily dealt with by David, 2 Samuel 11.11.15. and Mordecai a
man of sorrows for the sorrows of his Nation: and Hester the Queen, who was
in great heaviness for Mordecai and for them, Hest. 4.1.2.4. The reasons:

We should be followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. and practice mercy, as he is
merciful.

Secondly, that affection which is natural to the eye does teach

Thirdly, we are one another members, 1 Cor. 12.27. now members of one body
should (all) suffer together, and rejoice together, v. 26.

Fourthly, if we believe the communion of Saints; we cannot Plague: and that
which is spoken of the whole, holds, in every member: therefore; if a
neighbors house be visited (as in time of Pestilence) it should move us as if
ours were so: if our neighbor be in trouble, as if we were troubled in him:
and if he mourn, as if we sorrowed.

A reproof of the incompassionate and unloving priuatenesse Plague, as with
Gods own Key. For, some have had no bowels in them at such times, to help it
with prayer, or to relieve it with victuals: and have esteemed it their best
policy and part, to keep their people and markets from it. Such, behold the
Plague of a Town as David's flatterers beheld his trouble, who beheld it a
far off.

pray one for another, but specially in trouble; and one member help another,
but chiefly in that members need. So, when the Lord visits with Pestilence a
Town or City, in that case of sickness and restraint of trades: the rich
(whose store God has blessed) should, in an odor of liberality to the poor
there, offer that Sacrifice to God, which the Apostle says was offered to the
Lord, in him, by Epaphroditus, An Odor that smells sweet, a Sacrifice
acceptable and pleasant to God, Phil. 4.18. And to provoke them the rather to
this duty, let them remember that it is the exhortation of the Holy Ghost by
the same Apostle; While ye have opportunity do good unto all, Gal. 6.10. Now
is the time, and they that have this worlds goods, have the fit time of doing
it: or, what can they tell, if God will ever put such an occasion into their
hands again, neglecting this? So much for the Prophets earnest affirmation:
the evidence spoken of follows.

VERSE, 9. Seeing thou have made the Lord (which is my refuge.) Even the most
High thy habitation.
THe evidence, for further proof of the secure estate of the Righteous,
casting themselves upon God, is in the Prophet himself; who, out of his own
trial assures it; calling the Lord his Refuge. As if he had said: because
thou have done as I did, who ran to the bosom of the Almighty in times of
temptation; thou have as good an evidence, or the same for thy safety that I
ever had: which is, that God will be their refuge, who make him their refuge
in trouble, and will deliver them. This is his meaning: and to trust in God, is
not to say so only; but by faith, and with the amendment of our ways, by his
word to do so.

Asa did so, (as we heard) when an host of ten hundred thousand came against
him, and the Lord took him to Sanctuary, and put them to slaughter, 2. Chron.
14.11, 12. The Apostle Saint Paul, notwithstanding that he was environed and
begirt with many and long afflictions on all sides, yet safely passed through
them, as his Master through the multitude, who had brought him to the edge of
an hill to have cast him down, Luke 4. 29.30. for, he had committed himself to
a good keeper, who never suffered him to take shame, seeing he believed him, 2 Timothy 1.12. or (as here) made him his habitation. God himself says by Samuel:
them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. that is, them that honor him
with trust, he will honor with safety: and David prays with assurance not to
be confounded, seeing he trusted in him, Psalm. 25.2. So, the three servants
of God could say to the King; the God whom we serve, or in whom we trust, is
able, and will deliver us, Dan. 3.17. viz from the fiery furnace, and out of
thy hand O King: as if they had said: we serve God, or we believe God; and
therefore shall most certainly be delivered from the furnace by miracle, or
from thy power by death, verse 18. the Scriptures are plentiful in this
matter. I say then: them that trust the Lord, mercy shall compass on every
side. The reasons:

Where God is trusted, he sets store by his credit to do for he cannot
deny himself, or suffer his truth to fail.

Secondly, they that trust in God, and make him their confidence, better then
sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22. and more then all burnt offerings, Hos. 6.6. If God
have delivered them from one furnace or kind of death, by Plague or otherwise,
they will shine in a better life, like pure gold, to the glory of God their
owner; having praise in their mouth, and not sin in their right hand: they
will make a penitent song with Hezekiah, Esaias 38. and a confessing Psalm with
David, Psalm. 116. and having been careless of the word before, become
(afterward) careful both hearers and doers of it. To be short, they will set
themselves to serve God by that same word, having received those gracious
favors (as it were) wages for their service: and being resolved thus to turn
unto God, and thus to put trust in his mercy, how can he deny them? How can
he turn from them, and leave them? besides, they cannot truly trust in him,
that cannot comfortably with repentance do so: and what contrite sinner was
ever rejected by him? Psalm. 51.17. and who (ever) was confounded that (so) put
trust in him.



David (therefore) in danger, and Christ in death, commended their spirit into
Gods hands, Psalm. 31.5. Luke 23.46. So the godly do not build towers to
themselves, but make the Lord their tower of defense. This tower is on high,
far above all troubles and Plagues: and they that rest in this highly mounted
castle of Gods protection, cannot but have both the higher and better hand of
all enemies and changes mortal. But this has been much spoken of already.

delivered, saying, The Lord, even the most high is my habitation, but trust in
worldly refuges as has been said: for, such have no promise nor hope by it
that God will deliver them: which may be spoken (also) of all proud persons,
whose egg being hatched in a Pharisees nest, use to say in their distress:
because I am worthy, or have showed my self wise, I shall be delivered. These
men, when their troubles and sorrows come to a head, entangle themselves the
more by their striuings, as birds in a snare, and for the adversity they are
in, their evil conscience cannot be persuaded, it is Gods loving visitation,
but the hand of some enemy upon them, which they shall never be able, either
to avoid or endure. A just recompense to all those who promise to themselves a
larger Patent in comforts then God will seal, and shorter in troubles then he
means to give unto them. And what marvel (then) if that yoke which is easy
to all that make the Lord their habitation, be full of straightness to all
that will be an habitation to themselves; and if it gall the very neck of
their sonles?

But is the Lord the deliverer of all that make him their habitation? serve him
may come into trouble and be afflicted by the strokes of God and men, as well
as they that serve him not. In Luke we read of a daughter of Abraham that was
bound by Satan eighteen years, in the chain of a very lamentable infirmity,
Luke 13.10.11.12. David Hezekiah, and Job were visited this way, as appears
by their stories. And God begins his anger (sometimes) at his own house,
and visits first there: but there is great difference between the righteous
and the wicked in these visitations, whether we respect the cause, effects, or
end of this hand of God upon them. For, in love he lays his rod upon the
righteous, which he does not when he breaks the wicked and sinners with his
iron rod. Also, the tribulations of the godly bring forth patience, which
patience begets experience, and experience the hope that makes not ashamed,
Romans 5.3.4.5. but no such things are to be seen in the tiring Plagues of the
ungodly, and for the end of God in this matter, there is great difference to be
put between the visitation of Sion to humble his children; and the destruction
of Sodom to plague his enemies. A father may correct his child and servant with
one rod, and after one manner: yet he loves his child as his child, and his
servant as is fit; or, he loves him as his child, though he chasten him as his
servant. So in a common visitation by Plague, famine, strange diseases and
deaths, the Lord may and does strike with the same rod of common visitation
both his children and enemies, yet his children he corrects in great love
and for their great good, but consumes the sinners, and where are they? and he
takes away his children, but not as he cutteth off the wicked in the
continuance of his anger, Ierem. 15.15. His children he whipeth sometimes with
death, because by some unpurged evil they have provoked him; the other he
punishes with everlasting death, that he may be avenged of his enemies, and
eased of them that hate him. It is our duty (therefore) when God begins any
public visitation to submit presently, and presently by repentance to purge
for the disease that causes it: that is, for sin that abounds. For, if we
strive with God, by our prayers and conversion to him, as Jacob; we shall
(then) prevail as Jacob, who (therefore) was called Israel, Genes. 32.28. Thus
we have heard the deliverance of Gods children largely, the same repeated
follows.

VER. 10. There shall no evil befall thee; neither any Plague come nigh thy
dwelling.
THe promise made to the righteous of deliverance in all their dangers and
fears, is here repeated. For, by evil the Prophet means (though more
specially the evil of Pestilence) yet (generally) any other evil of smart,
caused by the evil of some. And (says he) this shall not befall either the
person or habitation of the righteous. His meaning is, (which must be
understood,) that God will so direct their heart, and guide their way, that
they shall not stubbornly or maliciously provoke him to plague them, as do the
ungodly. Now where there is no evil of sin (so) committed: how can any evil
of punishment come, or come to hurt them, that so unwillingly offend;
punishments being ordained for wilful sinners, and evils for them that evil
do? This I conceive to be the Prophets meaning in these words; wherein a
gracious promise is renewed, first to the godly man's person: and (then) to his
house or Tabernacle. To his person God promises by his Prophet, that no evil
shall befall it, that is, (as has been said) he shall so order his heart, and
direct his ways by the grace that is given him, and so avoid the cause of
evil with the occasion, that he shall not run upon the sharp of those
plagues, that (so commonly) run the ungodly through to destruction; but he
must (then) avoid the occasion, and take away the cause. From whence we learn:

That to avoid plagues, the way is to avoid those offenses, Solomon telling the
foolish and scornful, why they lay under so many plagues, and Gods storm was
so upon them, gives this reason: they turned not at his reproof, Prou 1.23.
that is, they were plagued because they sinned: or, evil befell them, because
evil was in them. If ye consent and obey (says the Lord by Esaias to his
people) ye shall eat the good things of the land, Esaias, 1.19. that is, in your
obedience, good shall come and not evil: or lock for good and not evil: for
there shall be none, where ye give occasion of none. And the Prophet Zephanie
exhorting the people to repentance, bids them to search themselves before
God make inquisition: Zephanie 2.1. or to drive away the chafe of occasion,
before his wind or fan come, which will purge them with judgment, because
they have not purged by repentance. For this (says the Prophet) ye must do
before the decree (as a woman with child, Zeph. 2.2.
or woman ready to travel) bring forth: and what will it bring forth, but a
day of anger and great destruction from God, which is the seal of his writing?
Therefore before this writing be sealed, and the decree bring forth; do ye
drive out the cause of the Lords wrath, (says he) that his wrath do not drive
you to destruction, when it comes as a tempest against sinners. The reasons:

God is a righteous Judge, who will send no Plague where is no Plague; nor
visit with evil, but where are evil doers. And if a wise father will not
punish where is no fault: God (only wise) will much less.

Secondly; as afflictions come not by chance, see Job 5.6. So Lam. 3.30. No
suffering but for sin, that is, for sin unpurged and unrepented of: and
therefore no sin, no suffering.

A terror to these days and manners in which we live. For, with God, look
for but the Lords coming in anger, and with great Plagues against it? And if
the evil of sin brought the last great Plague; how can we but look for a
greater in the same kind, whose sins are more and greater now then ever? Or,
is it the best and only way for the avoiding of Pestilence, sickness, famine,
war, and death, with other notable judgments and strange Plagues to avoid
the cause with the occasions for which they are sent: then what hope can we
have to be long free from all these, whose hearts are so carnal, and ways
without repentance? by all kinds of sin, old and new, we have run our
selves into great debt to God and his justice; and what can we look for, but
that he should speedily and fearfully require it in our destruction one way or
another? the sins of all ages are derived to us, and our land is the sink of
them all at this day. For what contempt is there every where of God and his
holy word? in his service what disorder and negligence? his blessed name how
fearfully and commonly is it blasphemed in all tongues and mouths? how are
his Sabbaths violated? and how is Gods day made the devils day by an universal
profaneness? how is the land filled with outrages and strange slaughters?
what shedding of blood openly by frayes and quarrels, closely by extortion, and
cunningly by poisons? Incest, adultery, fornication with their In-mates, go
through the land: and when was there greater, or like excess in apparel and
building as now? How much of the patrimony of the land goes away in smoke and
fumes? and how much do these smoke-mongers consume daily in that which does
them no good but great hurt? theses are common: so are robberies, oppression,
and the spoil of the poor: lying is become a science and art of great gain;
and for false witness in judgment, strengthened with perjury and bold
swearing; what is it but an office of friendship and filthy hire? These and
the like sins are the sins of our age and nation: we keep them in our
bosom, and hide them under our tongue: and how can we think to be spared in
such consciences and delight of sinning? how can it be but that as one cloud
follows another till the Sun consume them: so judgment should be after
judgment, till we be consumed, either by the coming of the last day, of by an
end of Englands best days, except repentance, that Sun of our sky, that
expels (where it has a strong and right work) all mists nay clouds of
sin; turn all into a clear heaven unto us by other manners, and a better
conversation in Christ? there is small hope to avoid a disease, and not to
forbear the things that bring it: and who can hope to be in favor that cares
not to please? So, how can we think to avoid any Plague, fostering the plague
of sin? or hope turning against God (which we do by impenitencie) to have
credit with him? Therefore (as I said) in these manners, and in this state of
sin, we prepare our selves and are ready for any destruction that God shall
send, not to avoid it (not avoiding the cause) but to perish in it, whether
Pestilence, sword, famine, or other death.

But must we (if we will prevent the Plagues that are sent) Exodus 32.25. we
must strangle our sins, if we would not be strangled in them by Gods
judgments, having stained our vessels, we must cleanse them by repentance: and
favor nothing that may bring us out of favor with God. And specially let us
think of this when any judgment begins. For, if we put iniquity out of our
hand, and let no wickedness dwell in our tabernacle: we shall lift up our
faces without spot, to wit, of shame; we shall be steadfast, and shall not
fear, Job 11.14.15. and 22.23. The wicked think of nothing this way, either
when a Plague is begun, or has long wrought: but as a man overcome with his
wine, cares not in what dangers he lies down, Prou. 23.34. nor where he
makes his pillow; so they are indifferent (so strongly does the wine of sin
work in their heads and whole man) whether they be in a storm or calm:
whether God be with them or against them: whether it be peace or destruction
that comes from the Almighty. But, such in stead of preparing for God, prepare
for the curse of God, to which they make haste; and in stead of reuersing
evils, bring them.

Here we (further) see, that sin is the only cause, as of the Plague, Plagues
and miseries that lie upon our bodies, souls, or consciences: sin is the only
thing that God burns up in the wicked, and purges in his children by his
corrections: for, take away sin, and ye take away the cause of all
punishments, which is only sin. God drowned the old world in a sea of
waters, but first they were drowned in a sea of sin: Genesis 7.11.12.21. and
Sodom, burning in lust, was burnt with fire; Genesis 19.24, 25. There is a Cup in
Gods hand mixed with red wine, and they drink of it, who have made up their
measure with their scarlet, or red sins: yea the dregs of it are powered out,
but always upon those that are frozen in their dregs, Psalm. 75.8. Zeph.
1.12. If God send a wasting Pestilence upon a Land, it is because that Land
has sinned against him: and sin is (though not the natural yet) the provoking
cause thereof: so the Scriptures teach, Exodus 5.3. Ier. 29.18. 1. Chron.
21.1.14. Psalm. 106.28. Deuteronomy. 28.28. Ezech. 16.46.47. 1. Cor. 11.30. Leuit.
26.14.15. If (therefore we serve God coldly, or not at all: if we be
rebellious to him and his Ministers: if we trust to creatures in the streights
of troubles: if we serve God superstitiously after our own ways, not after
his word: if young and old in our streets horribly swear, and blaspheme: if
our fullness of bread cause pride and contempt: if we eat in the leaven of
bitterness, and drink the wine of violence and wrong, at the Lords Table: and
(lastly) if our Magistrates revenge for themselves with the sharp edge of
their authority, and not for Gods dishonor, and the contempts of his truth; how
can it be but God must needs break in by Pestilence, or some other way, and
lay out sins upon us? I say some other way: for, he does not visit (always)
after one manner, and with one kind of judgment; but diversely, and with
sundry sorts of Plagues. When (therefore) God begins his judgments among
us, let us impute them to the right father, the uncorrected and raging
wickedness of the land; and not to a wrong cause, as most do. Some, when a
contagious disease is sent, are careful to purge the body, which is not to be
omitted; but have no care to reform the soul, which should be first done: for
the cause of all infirmities is in it. If God send troubles, they take them
away by policy, but not the cause of them by repentance: and, when God
scourges a nation, they look at the rod, but little regard the striker. So
much for the promise made to the godly man's Person; that which is made to his
dwelling, or those that dwell with him, follows.

Neither shall any Plague come nigh thy dwelling. We have heard that no evil
shall come to the Person of the godly man, to hurt him: for, the Lord, will
enlarge his footing under him, and put his own arm between him and the
grave: if he be straightened any way; he that sees him through the Cant. 2.9.
chinks of the door, will when (he sees time) open a wide door unto him of
large deliverance: and after many sea-blasts, bring him to the haven, or rode,
where he would be, Psalm. 107.30. Now the Prophet shows that not only his
own Person shall be safe, but his dwelling also, or dwellers with him, for his
sake: for, the house is taken here, by a figure, for those that are in it: and
so his meaning is: when God shall visit for sin, with any of his sore
Plagues; both the righteous man, and the righteous man's family, and household
shall be safe and sound. The Doctrine is manifest in the Text; which is,

That a good man's family shall be safe for that good man's the walking in his
ways, Psalm. 128.1. and, for that man's sake, the promise goes farther, as it
were in alonger chain, to his wife and children verse 3. not staying at him.
God promised Abraham, that if ten righteous persons could be found in
Sodom, he would not destroy it for the tennes sake, Genes. 18.32. and so long
as Lot was in the City, or till he, his wife and daughters were gone out, he
could do nothing against it, Gen 19 12 22. Cursed Cham, for his good fathers
sake, had his safe abode in the Arc, during all the time of the flood: his
fathers sincerity was his security, or Arc or harbor against it, Genesis 9.18.
Heb. 11.7. Labans house was the better for Jacob, Genesis 30.27. and so was
Potephaers for Joseph, Jacobs son, Genesis 39.3. So the Lord gave unto Paul,
that is, kept in safety for Paul's sake, all that sailed with him, Act. 27.24.
and they were in all, two hundred, threescore and fifteen souls, besides
himself the sixteenth verse: 37. the only person for whom, all the other were
saved. The reasons:

written in heaven, Hebrews 12.23. that is, as the first borne of men, first
open the womb; so these first open the womb of God, as his first borne: viz.
the womb of his council concerning his Saints, and the womb of his open
works, (such as are his creation and providence,) concerning the world: for,
for their sakes he first made this universe, the beauty of it, and variety in
it: for their sakes, and till the number of them be accomplished, it stands
to this day; and but for them, it should presendy receive the doom of fire.
Now, as God spares this world (generally) for the faithful that are in it, or
are to be in it before the dissolution: so more particularly he forbeareth
towns and houses, for his childrens sakes that be in them, or make request
for them, as Abraham for Sodom that they may be spared.

Mat. 18.20.

Genesis 18.26.28.29.30. James 5.16. Exodus 32.10. Genesis 20.7.

candle and direction, but amend their lives (somewhat) by their copy? and,
how can it be but iniquity must needs be (somewhat) curbed, when it is so much
and evidently reproved by the righteous deeds, of good men?

that by obedience to him and the reverence of his name, men may not only put
dangers from themselves, but be means of faluation to others, when dangers
come, 2. Sam. 20.22. Eccles. 9. 15. Now, to deliver one soul from death is a
praise worthy thing: how much more, to deliver, or to be means to deliver, a
whole town or City? but this the Lord will do for their sakes, by way of
honor, that honor him in his commandments: thus will he bind the
preservation of many to the neighborhood of some few that fear him: and thus
will he manifest to the mightiest and most, how much he loves his own: and can
there be a greater spur to godliness and bridle from sin, then this? It
seemed an unreasonable thing to one of the servants of Nabal, that David and
his men, having been a wall to Nabal and his shephards both by night and by
day, should be railed on (as he was) by his Master, 1 Samuel 25.14.16. and he
could not but say; evil will surely come upon him for it, verse 17. And what
greater honor then to be justified by an enemy? or to be well spoken of; our
enemies being judges, Deuteronomy. 32.31. but such honor shall they have, whom Gods
favor to them does make the means of his sparing mercy to others: it shall be
confessed, and they shall not deny it, one day. And should not this encourage
us to get the favor of God by his scare; that such favor to us, may, by some
glimps of it shining upon others (for our sakes) in certain temporary
blessings, either procure their favor, or some good speech of us, to our
instification, when they that hate us, speak evil of our ways?

A reproof of those who charge the godly, as causers of the Plague of
sickness, famine, or sword, which was not laid to the charge of Religion and
Christians then. So Elijah was charged to trouble Israel, who was a most
worthy Prophet and worshipper in Israel, 1. Kings 18.17. and Micah that never
prophesied ought but good, was charged never to prophecy good but evil to the
King, 1. King. 22.8. Also, he that raised the widows son, was said to kill
him, 1. King. 17.18. and in our own days; they that stood up in the breach,
have been said to make it: and they charged to have been troublers of Israel,
who did help to deliver Israel from her troubles: and to have preached
sedition, who spoke peace to the land. As well might they be charged to pull
down that build up, and to destroy that edify, and to tread down the Gospel
that are means to raise it.

Noah entered first, Genes. 7.1.7. He was sure to be one. So, when God sends
whole floods of his judgments, the Noah's that walk with God, Genes. 6.9. may
boldly and first enter into his sesecret place (as it were Arc of invisible
providence) and there dwell confidently. For, he that shut the door of the
Arc and made it fast after Noah and his company, when they were once in,
Genes. 7.16. will make fast the bars of their gate, and secure them with Lot,
when he has pulled them into the house, and shut to the door, Genes. 19.10.
If the Pestilence should come in some great fire (as sometime it did,) so that
the sparks do fly throughout the land; yet having our buckets in a
readiness, such as the Israelites drew up water with, in the day of their
calamity, 1. Sam. 7.6. we have means to quench it when it shall take in our
own houses, and also like good means by promise, to preserve our neighbors
houses from burning, if it threaten theirs. And the same assurance the
righteous have in all other alterations: then what can be more comfortable and
more necessary in the evil day? So much for the larger proposition of Gods
deliverances, the more restrained and particular follows.

VER. 11. and 12. For, he shall give his Angels charge, etc.
Having more generally propounded Gods deliverances; the Prophet now speaks
of them more particularly and specially, by telling the godly that the Lord
does put his Church to the Angels to Nurse, who must bear her in their hands,
and see unto her that she take no harm. For, what is this, but a more
significant and special declaration of Gods favors to the righteous? which may
be considered in the persons by whose ministry they receive such favors, the
Angels: and the perils from which they are kept, in the hand of those Angels.
For the Angels, it is first to be noted, that what they do herein, they do it
by a charge or calling, verse 11. and then in what manner they do it, verse 12.
For their calling unto this service in the Churches safety, it is expressed in
this word He, by which is meant God, the giver of the charge, and Lord of them.
And this charge is given to the Angels over one person, and not to one Angel
only to be over him, according to the bold fancy of the Church of Rome: the
godly are compared to infants, the Angels to Nurses, the impediments in their
way to heaven, to a stone of offense. But to return to the persons here
charged, the Angels, the word Angel is a name, not of their substance, but of
their office; which is, that they are sent forth, or sent a latere, from God to
men. So it is said in the Psalm: He makes his spirits, Angels, or Messengers,
Psalm. 104.4. their substance is to be spirits of an invisible nature and being:
but to stand in the presence of God day and night, that is, continually,
waiting to go forth with his commission, when he will send them, is the office
and holy effect of their nature and being: and so, not of their substance, but
of their office and ministry. Now where the Prophet says He, that is, God
shall give his Angels charge, etc. his meaning is, that they are called of God
to this service, and appointed by him, before they (thus) minister: or, he
calls and they serve, and gives the charge and they obey it.

From whence we learn, Simon and Andrew two brothers; and James the son of
Zebedeus, and John his brother did not deal with the net of the Apostleship,
till they were called from catching of fish to catch men. But after Christ
said, follow me; they left all and followed him, Math, 4.18.19.20.21.22. Christ
himself had his Commission sealed to him by him that sent him, before he
would publish the decree, which was, that the Lord had said unto him: Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Hebr. 5.5. Psalm. 2.7. Moses was
unwilling and drew back when God called him to the office of a deliverer,
Exodus 4.1.2.3.10.11.13. yea, refused and put off till God was angry, Ver. 14.
And when God called Gedeon to deliver Israel, he was not forward to commend
himself to the place, as ambitious seekers of places are at this day, but
reasoned much with the Lord about his going, before he went, Judge. 6.12, 12,
14, 15, 16, 17.36, 37. The Reasons:

Saul, when there was some goodness in him, modestly hid himself, 1. Sam.
10.22, 23. But the peerking Bryer did sarre otherwise, in the Parable of
Jonathan, Judge. 9.15. Secondly, to go without a calling, is to go without
warrant: and not to enter by the door as Christ did, but corruptly, some other
way, Ioh. 10.1.

Aaron, nor fet their license from Christ. The like may be said of all corrupt
intruders in the Commonwealth: who take their places as a farm for money, and
where God has shut the door, open it with a silver Key. Paul could call
himself an Apostle of Christ, 1. Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.1. But whose Apostles are
these? Moses and Gedeon were sent of God, but who sends these?



To keep thee in all thy ways: they shall bear thee up, etc. THe manner of
preserving the Righteous, must be by a kind of watch or keeping; and by a
nursing of them up with the hand, or a bearing of them in their hands. In the
first, it is showed upon what condition, they shall be so watched and kept;
namely, so long as they keep themselves within the bounds of their calling,
and depart not from the ways that God has set them to walk in. And in the
second, it is said (but in a figurative speech) that they shall bear them in
their hands; or, hold them fast, as Nurses do their little ones. For, the
Angels are not bodies, neither have hands. And the Prophets meaning is; that
the Angels of God as Nurses, hold the Faithful in their hands, as children,
and save them as little ones from falling. The kind of speech is taken from
nursing Mothers, or Nurses, who hold their young children so fast in their
hands, or safe in their arms, that they cannot fall. It may (also) be taken
from persons, who have things of worth in their hands; and therefore will not
neglect them, but carefully look unto them. The sum of all is: The Faithful
are by Gods appointment, kept, as with a watch, in their ways; and guarded
with troops of Angels, that have not only a general care, but a particular
for them.

The Doctrine from hence is: the godly cannot but be surely Angels about them
for their safety: for these watchmen sleep not, and this guarde about the
righteous is spirit and not flesh. The guarde of Kings is a strong wall: But
what are men? what are Kings, or a guarde of kings, to the Angels that keep the
righteous? and the^ how strong is their wall? Jacob a feeble person, with a
weak family, Genesis 32.11.31. was safe enough against warlike Esau. (his cruel
brother) coming against him with 400. men; ver. 6. say his coming had been
with four hundred thousand: the reason was, he had many Angels to keeps him,
ver. 1. and one had been enough to have kept him and a whole country with him
against four hundred Princes, with their Companies, greater then Esau. So,
when the King of Syria had sent a very great Host, to have compassed and taken
a weak City, where Gods Prophet Elisha was; it would not be: the Prophet
tells the cause why. There are (says he) more with us, then be with them, 2.
King. 6.16. He spoke of Angels, who were, and appeared stronger to save the
City, then all that came against it: The Mountain was full of them, ver. 17.
In the 34. Psalm, ver. 7. David assures us, that these heavenly powers encampe
round about all that fear God, to deliver them: and that they keep them, that
is, safely keep them, and every bone in them, ver. 20. The men of Sodom came
(in no small company) to the house of Lot, young and old compassed it, and all
people from all quarters made head against it: But what could they do unto it
or to him, so long as his Keepers, (the Angels) were in it, and about him?
Genesis 29.4.9, 10. They shut the door; and (after) Lot might go in and out at
his pleasure, verse 14.

This was Gods hedge and wall about Job, and all that he had, Job 1.10. and
none could break over it, or break it down, to touch him, till God gave
leave, verse 11.12. While there was a fourth with the three servants of God in
the furnace, that was made so exceeding hot; the cruel fire could have no
power over their bodies: no, nor over an hair of their head to burn it, or
over their coats to change them: and (which was wonderful,) the burning fire
could not so much as leave any smell of fire upon them, Dan. 3.25.27. This made
Christ to admonish the wicked, to take heed how they despised, or sought to
hurt, the weakest servant or child his Father had. For, though he be weak in
himself, he is not so in his keepers, the Angels, who always behold his
Fathers face in heaven, Math. 18.10. that is, stand ready, looking when he
will send them to strike with death the proudest adversary that that poor man
has. And Christ is said to be that ladder of Jacob upon which the Angels
descend and ascend in the protection of his Church, Ioh. 1.51. Genes. 28.12.
because (for his sake) they minister to the heirs of glory, and by him (the
ladder) descend to us, in our continual saftie; which is as sure as his own
seat in heaven, and stands like mount Sion against all storms and winds of
men. The reasons:

Angels of God? and then how can that perish that is committed to keepers so
mighty and faithful?

record, and (as it were) delivered to them in writing in one Psalm, They
keep all our bones, Psalm. 34.20. in this, they keep our very foot, putting
it in security ver. 12. and else where, our whole man and every member. And
can a charge so precisely and so particularly given and taken, be neglected?

Thirdly, their manner of keeping us, as it is set down in the Angels cannot.

Fourthly, our protection is delivered with a charge to the Angels I charge ye
that ye look well to all these little ones that I commit to your keeping: see
that none of them perish: and use your power in the safety of them all.

First, here is matter of thankfulness throughout all the Churches, Spain
could do nothing against us, that came to destroy us, and to root out our
memorial: for, the Lord kept our coasts by his Angels; and what could they do
against such keepers? should not this be remembered? and should it not be
remembered how the Angels have encamped about and defended this Realm against
so many hosts of devils, and diuels-children, that (more then 60 years) have
sought by innumerable engines of Treason and threatenings of death, to have made
it a Sepulcher of Christian carkesses, for the Gospels sake, that is yet among
us? And, let it not be forgotten what the Lord did so lately by his Angels, in
the mouth of our Sovereign, for the discovery of the powder plot. Thus, we
have been, and are at this day kept safely by the Lord, in the hand of his
royal Angels; for which grace of his, what can we give to him (less,) then
praise in our mouths, and obedience in our lives, continually?

Plagues that come, whether of sword, famine, or contagious Pestilence. They
that walk in the ways of the Lord, (when others run out) have promise, (in
a common evil) of particular safety, if it be expedient for them: the Angels
attend them for that purpose: and the Lord knows how to deliver them (as he
did Lot,) when he means to turn a whole Sodom of filthiness into ashes,
Genesis 19.16.22.29.2 Pet. 2.7.9. If God send Pestilence, or famine, or any other
evil: in the hotest Plague, and greatest dearth that he sends; they need to
fear nothing, that have reverenced his truth, and done his will, keeping
themselves unspotted of abuses, and sorrowing for the abuses they could not
help: for, having such Leaders as the Angels are, they shall not walk where
the Plague walks; or if they do, they shall walk in the air of it without
danger, having, in these mighty ones about them, so strong a counterpoison
against it: and when some dearth is sent: the Angels will, one way or other,
see them provided for; that the Scripture may be fulfilled which says: do
good, and thou shall be fed assuredly, Psalm. 37.3. So, when any other evil
comes: God will not forget the loialty and good services of his people, who
has put them all down in a better and more lasting book of record, then was
that which Assuerus kept for a remembrance of such Subjects as had deserved
well of him, Hest. 6.1, 2. but will defend such, by his Angels, as he has
marked, with favor, for special deliverance in the evil day: or else, how
should so many of the godly and few of the wicked escape in a town, visited
with the Pestilence; seeing the sickness is as infectious to one as to
another, and seeing that, at the first beginning of it (and before it was
known, or suspected,) both one and another, went (indifferently) together into
the house then infected with it? The case is plain: the good Angles bear as
many in their hands, as God will have them to deliver from peril of death, or
common infection at such times.

Object. You will say; it often falls out otherwise, Pestilence: for, the most
wicked have been delivered from it, and the godly taken away.

Answ. First, it must be remembered what was said before: Plague, they are
delivered from a greater by it; even a Plague of Plagues a most accursed life,
full of sin, fraught with miseries, and dyings without end and number. And
for the wicked, though they escape them, they are not delivered properly, but
repriued for a time, to be more tormented hereafter, either with that very
death, or with some other of a more horrible kind, or with everlasting death
in hell: or, they are reprieued till another visitation, or to their day of
assize, in their deaths-day or day of general judgment. But, to make the joy
of the righteous full: let it (further) be considered that the good Angels are
stronger to save, then the evil are to destroy: for, are the evil great in
power? the good, are greater then they: the good having the favor of God,
which the evil have not: are they old and subtle to invent hurt? the good are
as old, and more wise to prevent it: can they cause Pestilence by venomous
exhalations and dearth by some tempests? the good can purge the air that they
have poisoned, and make a calm where they made a storm: are they strong and
full of might: as they are full of might, so they are fuller of fear, and
fear abateth strength: also, the good are stronger then they: and void of
fear, because without siune, that causes fear: do both work from God? yet
they work with great difference: the good as voluntaries, the evil as sl^ues,
the good well, the evil like themselves; the good with their right hand, the
evil (weakly) with the left; the good for their fathers honor, the evil for
their own honor to Gods reproach.

Cor. 11.10. (our women now are, and are not ashamed:) the meaning is, all
things must be done and spoken reverently and fitly where such witnesses are
by; and if so: then, how great is the impiety of some Christians; Christians in
name, and beasts in life; whose mouths, not only privately but at public
tables, send forth so many corrupt words of so ill a favor and example to
modest minds and ears? and whose impure life is no better then a Pageant or
stage of dishonestie and villainy to all that observe them, or are near them?

The condition, upon which the righteous are thus watched and kept by the
Angels, is, that they keep the way; that is, the good and right way which is
appointed to them to walk in, keeping within the bounds and circle of their
vocation: for so long as they neither use evil means, nor neglect the good of
their safety, following the word, the Angels are charged to keep them.

Luke 4.10. when Jacob was in the straight way that God had set him; Angels
were found with him in it, Genesis 31.3. and 32.1. and, David says, that the
Angel of God, or Gods Angles (the singular for the plural) encampe about those
that fear God, Psalm. 34.7. that is, that walk in the way of his fear; or, so
long as they fear him. So after Christ had foiled Satan in those three
head-temptations that are spoken of by Saint Matthew, and Saint Luke, walking in
his fathers path through them all; it is said, the Angels came and ministered
unto him, Mat. 4.11. Mark 1.13. Also, they that mourned for the abominations
that were done in Jerusalem, a City of blood, and of corrupt judgment
(because that so to do, was to be in a way wherein Angels are set and minister
for the welfare of the righteous) were privileged by a saving Angel: or,
Christ in him, from the destruction that was then made, Ezech. 9.4.11. The
reasons:

The Angels can do no service where God is not served: but Balaam, Number. 22.22.
not as deliuerers, but as enemies.

Secondly, if they should keep us when we are out of our way;

Thirdly, all Gods promises are with condition, that we keep the simple shall
not err by it, Esaias 35.8.

If (then) we forsake the way of Gods truth, and of our lawful Pestilence,
sword, or famine: for, if we have erred from his statutes, and return not at
the call of these or the like perswaders to repentance; we disclaim our
privilege in the safety of the Angels, and cannot, with comfort, fly to Gods
promise: for, that has no hope for us, it being certain that none can have
his protection that walks not in the way to it, that is, by faith and sound
repentance. If sickness should be sent, (and the same of an infectious
nature,) if enemies, if famine, should come: many, or rather all would expect
Gods protection, and say; Lord help: but, if such be not in the way thereof by
his fear, but in strange ways by audacious sinfulness, their expectation is
vain, and they have no promise to be heard when they call, in the day of their
necessity. Esaias 1.15. Prou. 1.24.28. Micah 3.4. Ezech. 9.9.10.

stubbornness of their heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, Deutronomie 29.19.
but GOD will not be merciful to such, verse 20. neither will the merciful
God of his people, and righteous GOD of the earth take such by the hand. Job
8.20. They may have the evil Angels for executioners, and the good for their
destruction, but not to wait upon them, as keepers in their way, Jeremy
23.17.29.20. and 6.15. and 5.12.14.15. This would be considered at all times;
specially when the judgment is begun, or has, for some time, continued.

Some, where the Plague of Pestilence has broken out as a furnace of flaming
fire, in a Town or City, do (for all that) most desperately increase the
wrath, as it were fire, by adding further matter of new sins unto it, that
there may be no end, till all be consumed; and some, when GOD denies his
blessing to the fruits of the earth by some pinching years, power out
themselves to as great excess of riot by large drunkenness, and other
intemperancies, as if the years then served as well, as ever: but let such
know, being out of the way of the good Angels, that they are in the high way of
the evil to be destroyed one way or other, then, or at some other time, with
first death, or with first and second. So much for the keepers of the
righteous, the Angels; the perils, from which they keep and deliver them,
follow.

That thou dash not thy foot against a Stone. IT is (further) said by the
Prophet, that the righteous shall dash against no stone; that is, that no
danger shall hurt them: and that their head shall not only be covered by
these heavenly watchmen, but their very feet put in security; which shall be
lead in all their ways: at every step, the Angels shall hold them up with both
their hands, and (as it were) take them up in both their arms, that no stone
offend them. By stone is meant, figuratively, any danger of any kind to soul
or body; and so the Prophets meaning is; that though the godly stumble at some
hindrances (as it were) stones of offense in their way to salvation, or in
their outward ways; yet God, by his Angels, will (so) put under his hand, that
they shall not fall utterly, or to hurt them. For, he that cares for the
basest member in the body, the foot to preserve it, will not neglect the
noblest parts to keep them: and he that cares for the body, will care
greatly for the soul.

The doctrine that arises hence is: no affliction in body, soul, or name can
hurt the righteous. More particularly: neither Plague, famine, nor sword, nor
touch of their credit, nor other cross shall pull them from the protection of
the Angels, that will defend them, and every member of them, against all
injuries of men and devils: yea against all extremities of Plague, famine, or
sword. In the book of Genesis, Joseph's brethren cast him into a pit: the
Merchants buy him, and fell him to Potiphar: his Masters wife accuses him: his
master for her complaint commits him: the Butler does not remember him; yet
Joseph is hurt by none of all this, but furthered to preferment, Genes.
37.24.28. and 39.1.17.20. and 40.23. and 41.40.42. When David was called by the
King of Gath, to go with him to battle against Israel, the Princes of the
Philistims made him to go back, with purpose to disgrace him, 1. Sam. 29.6.7.
but was he disgraced by it? Surely, if he had gone forward, he had been guilty
of the blood of the Israelites, (his brethren,) and of Saul his Lord: if of his
own motion he had gone back, the Philistims might have charged him, and
dealt with him as with an enemy. But being as it was, that disgrace turned to
great good unto him, and he dashed not his foot against it. Solomon the son
of David speaking of the righteous; does not only say, that the Lord will be
his confidence, that is, (generally) his sure defense, but (more particularly)
the cover of his foot; which shall not be taken, viz. in the Net of evils,
Prou. 3.26. And, the Apostle Saint Paul confesses that he was troubled, but
not in distress, 2 Cor. 4.8. as if he had said; troubled, but not overcome of
trouble; or perplexed, but not without help in that perplexity: there is a
like saying in Psalm. 37.24. where the Prophet shows that a good man may fall,
and not fall utterly, or utterly be cast down; that is, to such a dashing or
breaking of him, that he shall never be able to rise again: the reason is:
the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand, or keeps him by his Angels, that bear
him in their hands. So true it is that nothing can hurt the righteous; that is,
indeed hurt them, or hurt them at the last. The reasons:

Romans 8.28. be it plenty or want, health or sickness, Plague or no Plague:
and, how can that that always works good, and the best, turn to hurt, where
it so works? If the Plague work speedily, it speedily sends us to heaven, and
what hurt is that? if some short reproach here bring endless glory hereafter,
what hurt does it to be evil spoken of in such a kind and manner? if our
troubles conform us to Christ, and Christ, for such conformity to him in our
troubles, love us more dearly and more to salvation, what loss have we? God
(sometimes) casts down, that he may raise up: wounds, that he may heal:
accuses of sin, that he may forgive us our sins: and troubles our
conscience, that he may quiet it; and is there any hurt in this?

they profit by their sins, as wisemen by their falls: he accuses them for
sins past; and they more fear sins to come: he buffereth them with
infirmities; and they are less proud, and more prayerfull: the more he shakes
their faith, the faster they hold it, as the wayfaring man his cloak in a
tempestuous day: and what hurt do they get from Satan in all this? nay what
good do they not receive from him in this and in all things else; God
ouershooting him in his own bow for his peoples benefit? so true it is that
God makes the Devils to serve the elect, when they mind their own service,
and the utter overthrow of all that serve the Lord.

Thirdly, the sting of harm is taken out of all the crosses that

It is not denied but afflictions may befall the Righteous, but it Mark 16.18.
And if a Viper leap upon their hand, they shall shake it off without hurt,
Act. 28.3, 5. As long as we have sin in us, the rod is necessary, and he is a
bastard that is not corrected by it, Heb. 12.8. Sometimes our corruption has
no other remedy but the bitter of afflictions; and sometimes afflictions are
preuentions of sin, as many let blood to prevent sickness, before they be
sick; so, we are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned of the
world, 1. Cor. 11.32. Many are hurt by fullness, and God keeps such low and
needic. Riches make many proud; and therefore God denies riches to all of his
whom he knows to be subject to this swelling. Many that have children
cocker them up to damnation, making them Gods, and God an Idol: that his
children may not do so, God oftentimes gives them none, or takes those they
have: and they that are blown up with vain praises, many times, meet with a
storm of slander upon their names to humble them. Sometimes, God tries us by
afflictions, how much we will suffer for him, and how patiently when he
deals in such rough manner with us: oftentimes, he sets us up as his
mark, to shoot at; that the arrows of his quiver may pierce into us, to
prove what is in us: and as Peter was bound in prison with two chains, and
shut up as fast with a strong watch, and iron gate as malice could devise for
the safe keeping of him, till he should be brought out to the people, the next
day, Acts 12 5. which was not in any displeasure to Peter on Gods part, but to
make his deliverance more glorious, verse 18, 19. so the Lord may, and does
(sometimes) shut up by Pestilence, and a persecuted life, as with chains in
prison, his dearest Peter's, and with troubles keep them in, as with an iron
gate; not because he loves them not, but that he may show his greater power,
either by delivering them into the liberty of this life, or of the Saints, in
the life to come. Besides, S. Peter speaks of a fiery trial, or judgment
that begins at Gods own house; not to consume it like dross, but to purge
it like gold, not to destroy it, but to build it with more glory and
excellency, 1. Pet. 4.12, 17.

Pestilence, why should we not bear, that is, patiently bear the correction
that cannot hurt us? or, why should we (like mad Dogs, as some do) being
our selves infected, go about desiring, to bite others with an infected tooth?
some say, this comes from the disease: but I say it comes from a desperate
unquietness in men of cruelty; or, if the disease cause any such distemper,
it will be corrected much by patience in Gods children. Say the Pestilence
could hurt the righteous; is that sufficient warrant for them to hurt others by
the same? If God lay it upon them justly, may they unjustly lay it upon others?
And, as in the stroke of Pestilence, so in the stroke of the heart, by anguish
of spirit, why should Gods mourners be impatiently cast down? when in their
sharpest fits, and hottest furnace they shall dash against nothing that can
hurt them; if a fourth be with them in all that fire, whose form is like the
Son of God; (as there is always such a Deliverer with them in such fires)
Dan. 3.25. What do they fear? or, are they impatient to sow the seed of
tears, that they may bring their sheaues with them? they mourn, that they may
be comforted, Math. 5.4. Does this trouble them? their afflictions are the
medicines that heal their sins. Would they not have their sins cured?
tribulation brings forth patience, Romans 5.3. This is the mothers own child
in Gods children; and will they by their frettings and impatiencie, beget other
effects, as it were some monster upon her? Afflictions cause sorrow for sin;
sorrow for sin causes repentance; and repentance brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness. Romans 6.22.
Does this gradation displease them? and if this do not, what can? for this is
the worst that God intends to us by our crosses. And if we bear the worst,
that is, this: what great thing do we? the like may be said of all other the
like afflictions under beauen? for, to the righteous, they are but fire to
their gold to purge it, and honor to their persons to set them in a higher
room, Luke 14.10. and can it be any burden to their patience, to shine in
their faith, as in fine gold: and being on the low ground, to be bid to sit up
higher? Whatsoever can come, God will provide for his little Church, though the
earth be moved, and though the mountains fall into the midst of the Sea, Psalm.
46.2.3. if her nursing fathers forsake her, and her Nurses leave her; they
shall perish, but deliverance shall come to her from some other place, Hest.
4.14. the day will come, wherein (with joy) she shall draw water out of the
Wels of salvation, Esai. 12.3. and God will take the bridle of bondage from all
her persecutors. Is there not matter of patience, yea of great thankfulness in
all this? So much for the first special proposition of Gods deliverance by the
Angels, the second follows.

VER. 13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Aspe, etc.
David (in this second special proposition of Gods deliverance by the Angels)
speaks of a further benefit, by them, to the righteous, then he had spoken
of: before he said, that they keep them from harms: Here he faith, that they
do not only keep them from harms, but make them able to soil all those
that would harm them; be it the Lion of the wilderness, or the roaring Lion
of hell, be it Man or Beast. And this he speaks by his own experience, who,
by divine assistance, slew first a Lion, and then a Bear, 1. Sam. 17.36.
neither prevailed only against these, but subdued, in battle, all his strong
enemies: and vanquished all powers against him, on earth, and in hell. Having
this experience himself, he assures all that walk in the way of the good
Angels by a good and wel-ordered life, that they shall walk in no dangerous
ways, but (every step) in the protection of God, and so, as no creature
(though otherwise, cruel and venomous) shall be so to them, but gentle and
without offense: Or, if they will needs thrust forth their venom, and (in
their fierce kind, set upon them, they shall be subdued to them by the Angels,
that keep them. And this, (speaking of the Lion, the Adder, the young Lion, and
the Dragon) he sets down in a phrase of superiotitie, saying; They shall
tread upon them, or insult over them as conquerors. Some Writers restrain
these words (co^paratiuely) to the Plague of Pestilence; meaning that the godly
shall prevail against it, though (in the nature of it) it devour like a Lion,
and bite deadly, as an Aspe or Adder: yea though it be fierce, and rage
fiercely like a young Lion, and kill by a kind of tearing as Dragons do. But I
take the Prophets drift to be here, in an hyperbole or superlatiue speech, to
show, that the righteous are not only secured from all harms which may come
by the Pestilence whereof this Psalm does specially entreat) or any other
cuil, be it open (meant by the Lion, and young Lion;) or secret resembled by the
Dragon and Aspe:) but that they shall tread down to confusion by the Angels,
that is, by their ministeries, every power and enmity that is against them,
whether of Satan, or Satan's members. None of them shall hurt or destroy in all
the mountain of Gods holiness, Isai. 11.9. and they that seek the
destruction of the righteous shall (themselves) go into destruction.

The Doctrine from hence is: Genesis 3.15. that is, has quite destroyed his
power, and spoiled him in that part where his life was. And now he is but as a
vanquished enemy to all true Christians, who in their head, have and shall
daily trample him under feet, Romans 16.20. A young Lion roared at Sampson, and
he rent him as one would have rent a Kidde, having nothing in his hand, ludg.
14.6. The Text says, that the spirit came upon him: that is, that by it he did
it, in the ministry of the Angels that made his hands to do it. This did
Sampson a figure of Christ; and they shall do more then this, that are in
Christ. For, as the Seventy returning with joy, said to Christ, even the Devils
are subject to us, through thy name, Luc. 10.17. So the godly through that
name, have (even) the Devils in subjection to them; which is more then to have
power over one Lion, or all the Lions of the wilderness. This was prophesied of
by Hosea, Hos. 2.18. and promised by Christ. Marc. 16.17, 18. and Ezechiel
speaking of the protection of the godly from wild beasts, says: they shall
dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, Eze. 34.25. that is,
when others are tossed, as upon an unquiet Sea, their Soul shall dwell at
ease, Psalm. 25.13. And Daniel was without hurt among the Lions; when they that
loved not God, and hated him, had not one bone whole, nor member vn-torne,
after the Lions once had caught them, Dan. 6.22, 23, 24. How did Elisha, being
but one weak and unarmed Man, lead a whole weapned-band of Aramites, blind to
Samaria? 2. King. 6.18, 19. They could not resist him, or the Angels that were
with him. And so, one godly man had power over a whole host of sinners. The
reasons.

God says it shall be so, and therefore it is: for what he says, is done,
though (yet) to do: or has he said, and shall he not do it? Nam. 23.19.

Secondly, all the creatures before the fall (all save the good Angels) were
under the dominion of man, and became hurtful by sin. But the sins of the
Faithful are all pardoned in mercy and Heb 1.3.
purged in Christ: the Hos. 2.18
covenant is renewed with them; the sovereignty they lost restored to them; and
man reconciled to God in Christ, is as he was when he was first made good
holy, and righteous. Then, he is adopted by God, and becomes the heir and
lawful Lord of all the creatures. For his renewing of the covenant with us, is
a renewing of the Covenant between the creatures and us: and when they are in
covenant with us, what hurt can they do us? and when we are in covenant with
God, what service can they deny us?

Heb. 2.8.1. Cor. 3.22, 23.

Adam. For, till the Lord renew the writing which we have blotted by our
sins, and hew out (as it were) two other tables, Exodus 34.1. for those that
we have broken, Exodus 32.19. All the creatures are our enemies, ready (when
God will give them leave) to revenge his dishonor upon us; the fire by
burning, the water by drowning, the earth by burying us alive, as it did those
wicked men who gathered themselves together at the door of the Tabernacle
against Moses, and against Aaron whom God sent, Number. 16.3.22. If war be
threatened, though it be a good thing to prepare our men; yet it is a better
thing, and more safe (first) to prepare for peace, by our peace with God. For,
then, either we shall have peace, or a prosperous war; either no enemies, or
none to hurt us: and they that rise up against us shall fall down before us.
If we would avoid the spoils and losses that may come by fire or water, by
hurtful serpents, and unseasonable years, by overmuch rain, or by want
thereof; we must deal faithfully with their Lord and ours, submit to him, and
they will take up with us, serve him and they will not hurt us. If we would
tread down that roaring Lion that goes about, seeking whom he may devour,
1. Pet. 5.8. or, walk upon him and go over him, as men do over the graves of
the dead; we must, by the new man in Christ, get our part, as in his
temptations, so in his ouer-commings; or, we must be followers of Christ in his
patience, if we will be followers of him to his victories, and vanquish the
devil. He that will reign with Christ must live like a Christian, and war
as he did, that means to triumph as he does. Further, would thou have
dominion cuer the creatures, specially over those that may do hurt? Labor to
rise by sound repentance, from that first fall, by which they have gotten above
thee, and hold thee under, so they that now subdue thee, shall be subdued unto
thee.

This is the Privilege of the Faithful, a privilege proper to true
Christians, though enclosed from them by some Popes, to whom it no way
belongs: and namely, by Alexander the third of that name, who treading on the
Emperor his Master, Anuo 1174.
Frederick Barbarossa, and spurning at him, blasphemously alleged this very
Scripture for his wretched deed.

A reproof of those Christians, who fear too much, as some Prou. 22.13. and
they should dye no other death.

But, must we walk upon a Lion; and may we fear our destruction by a Mouse?
Must we trample upon a Dragon, and shall we fear a simple fly? That which is
full of poison shall not hurt, and can that hurt that has none? Must we keep
the field against Devils, and shall we loose it against men? or, have
Christians entered into maine battle with Satan in most grievous temptations:
and shall we prove such weak Christians, as not to endure a light skirmish
with him in a few short encounters? This concerns not those pitiful souls,
which (being greatly cast down in grief of spirit, and having many breakings
upon them) do sometimes go aside, and (sometimes) become fretting and
tumultuous within for the very anguish and pain that so greatly presses them.
For, such impatience was in David the man of God; and such diversity of
affections has been found in the best, during the present great affliction. At
one time they have thought themselves very strong in God, and at another, so
weak and so cast down, that they could not possibly rise; but in all this
they had a smacke of Man in them, and their flesh was weak: yet their spirit
was ready; and waited on God, not making haste, but possessing their souls
till he delivered them. It is not so with these unsettled Dastards, and
run-awayes, who are ready to cast off all: if Satan nibble but a little at
their heel, Genesis 3.15. If the Gospel of the Cross begin to lay some restraint
upon them, they will be zealous no longer: and when a great man looks strangely
or awry upon them, for their good ways, it is as if a Lion met them; therefore
they presently turn out of those ways to walk in a way that shall less
offend. These are the fearful and unbelievers that this Scripture censures;
who for every little wrinch or foil, go lame of all courage in good things;
where the godly resist unto blood, never forsaking their weapons, till death
drive them out of the field, imperious death that cannot be resisted.

Pestilence (when God sends it) prey upon one and other without respect, like
a roaring Lion; and bring the strongest as soon as the weakest to the earth,
like a mighty Lion: though it bite like an Aspe, making no great wound, but
procuring strange effects: and though also, as a fierce Dragon, it crush and
shiuer in pieces the flesh, and very bones of men of strongest constitution;
yet the cruelty of it is conquered to the godly by their prayer of faith,
which quenches the violence of it in town and Country. If enemies threaten
our coast; by it, they may stand in the hole and gappe, where Gods hand has
made the breach, and do as much as all the Charets and Horsemen in a Kingdom,
Psalm. 106.23. If Satan himself rage and be unquiet in never so many terrible
and threatening objections to the soul and conscience of a dejected sinner; yet
is Satan but as a Drone-Bee to him, humming-without a sting: that is without
power to do hurt, in all his malice and deadly evil will.

Object.

An. To which I answer that for the Godly, it seems so: Apoc. 12.15.

And (here) let no child of God look for any long quietness; for, if he
seek Gods face in righteousness; Satan's malice to God, and envy to the
salvation of man, will keep him doing. Besides, there is a perpetual law of
hatred between the hell of Satan and the heaven of Gods Saints, between the
seed of the woman, and the devils seed and progeny: and, who having a
Serpents head under his feet, can hope to be quiet and without trouble? For,
will he not (though his head be fast) fling about with his tail? So what
peace, so long, and while we have under our feet, in Christ, that compassing
and winding Serpent, the Devil? Will he not be still nibling at our heel, and
twyning about us in one temptation or another? Yet all this is but to exercise
the Righteous; not to hurt them, which he cannot do. And (therefore) let no
godly man, for this, be discouraged to proceed in the way and course of
sanctified life: for, the Lord will either command the earth to drink up his
afflictions, Apoc. 12, 16. or, healing his plague, cause his face to shine, and
glory to appear in the darkest shadow of adversity. So much for the first
speaker, the Prophet; the second and next speaker follows, which is God: who
by immediate voice confirms the former proposition of his favor to the
faithful.

VERSE, 14. Because he has set his love upon me, etc.
THe Prophet having assured the faithful of Gods favor which extends to all
those who make him, by faith in him, their confidence: God himself (now)
vouchsafes to be speaker in the end of the Psalm, and to loyne with his
Prophet, by way of Post script, in the same, for further confirmation. Because,
or seeing he has loved me, says the Lord, etc. that is, as my Prophet has
said, so I say: they who desire in sincerity, and with good affections to serve
me, shall have good assurance from me, that I will be their deliverer in
troubles, by the Angels at my right hand, and by all the creatures at my left.
I will remove their fears; hear their prayers; bring their persons to honor,
and their souls to heaven, where (at last) they shall be glorified in soul
and body. This is the substance of that, wherewith the Lord concludes the
Psalm in words, spoken from heaven, to faithful men. And, they contain
duties; and promises made to those that do those duties.

Jeremy (and every Minister should have it, and no other then it) let him
speak my word faithfully, that is, report it truly, Ier. 23.28. having it in
his lips, and not buried in him, in a habit of knowledge, void of use. This
agreement between God and Moses did show it self in all his ministry and
service: who (therefore) received testimony, that he was faithful in all the
house of God, Heb. 3.5. So, what God spoke to Micah, that (and no other, nor
otherwise) Micah spoke to Ahab. 1 Kings 22.14. Balaams answer to Balack, was
good, if he had spoken it with a good intent, and honest heart: I cannot pass
the commandment of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind: and
what the Lord shall command, that will I speak, Numb. 24.13. for, so it should
be, that we may be able in the whole work of our Ministry truly to say: this
say not I, but thus says the Lord. Our foundation must be Jesus Christ: and,
if we be good builders, we will lay upon the same, not the hay of our own
devises, but the gold and silver of the pure word of God, committed to us, not
invented by us, 1 Cor. 3.11.12. so should our agreement be with the Lord in
our teachings, as David's was, and as Moses his was said to be. The reasons:

Gods Ministers are his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 6.20. and therefore

Secondly, if Ministers hold not this agreement; their great

Must there be such a sweet accord between the Lord and his day and night,
Ps. 1.2. not the knowledge that puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. or which so fills
them, that they become as a full run that will not sound when one knocks
upon it: but the knowledge of the truth in love: for, they must so know that
they may teach knowledge, and teach such knowledge that God may seal to it
when it is delivered. But how shall the ignorant in the Ministry, and they
that cannot carry the Arc upon their own shoulders, do this? how shall they
teach others that have not learned themselves? or teach agreeably to God; who
know not his mind by his word, nor what is agreeable to him, nor what is
contrary? O, that these men knew, or would know their fearful estate in this
their great ignorance: but what the blind said for himself, that say I for
these blind, leaders of the blind: Lord that they may receive their sight,
Mark 10.51.

A justification of those in the Ministry, who spoke the words Pet. 4.11.
for, such must needs speak according to God, speaking his word: which they
do not, who not richly enough satisfied with his doctrine, in whom we are
complete, Colos. 2.10. make their Sermons, through an unnecessary muster of
foreign Authors and readings, somewhat like to that Inn at Beth. lehem, that
had no room for Christ, Luke 2.7. Our Savior contented himself with the
testimony of the Law and Prophets only in his teachings: after him the
Apostles did the like in theirs, Act. 26.22. so must we do: and speak the
word, or according to it, if we will speak safely, or so, as that may be
sealed with divine authority that comes from us in the Pulpit: the duties,
and promises made to those that do them follow.

The duties of the faithful, are in affection, or effect: duties of affection
are the love of God, and knowledge of his name: the duty of effect is prayer:
the promises annexed are; deliverance in trouble; desence and safety; the
hearing of their prayers; Gods being with them in their troubles; honors,
life, long life, and days of salvation: for the duties of the faithful, the
first of them is love: for, the Lord, being speaker, says:

Because he has loved me etc. BY love (here) is meant the love that causes a
strong dependence on God: a mighty vehement, firm, and fervent love: or, such
love as is between young-married couples, Genesis 34.8. Deuteronomy. 21.11. they desire
to be much together, and much to talk together: in absence, one to hear from
another, and one to send to another. So they that love God firmly and
fervently, as the word imports here; do greatly desire his presence in the
assembly, and (more specially) his more familiar presence in heaven: or they
would be with him in his glory: and now in absence do much desire to talk
with him by prayer to hear from him by preaching, as it were by letter: and to
receive his loue-tokens, that is, Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, whereby
precious promises are confirmed unto them. This is the affection that the
faithful do set upon God.

Where we learn, Esa, the man of God: when ye come to appear before me, who
required this of your hands? Esa. 1.12. It was because they loved outwardly,
not in heart; or in a manner, not thoroughly, and seemingly, not so indeed. For,
God never liked a full hand and an empty heart. And therefore when he taught
his people by Moses, how they should love him, and not loose the labor of
their love, he willed them to love him with all their heart, with all their
soul, and with all their might, Deuteronomy. 6, 5. that is, to love him with all
their powers, and with all they could do.

This was repeated (afterward) by Joshua, who succeeded Moses in the throne:
where he bids the people to take diligent heed, that they love no otherwise
then by cleaving to God, and serving him with all their heart, and with all
their soul, Ios. 22.5. It is the same in effect that Moses had said before
him, and has the same meaning; which is, that God is not bound with every
affection, but with the cord of that, which is drawn from the service and
entirenesse of a heart that wholly and chiefly is directed to him. This the
Prophet Micah calls a walking with God, Micah 6.8. when we so love him that
we go no farther then he does; and yet go as far. And so did Enoch; who
(therefore) was said to have pleased God, that is, by faith and true repentance
to have pleased him, Heb. 11.5. for, can two walk, together unless they be
agreed, Amos. 3.3. Now, he that so pleases God; does (doublesse) love him
with all his heart: and such a lover was Enoch: when an expounder of the Law
asked Christ, which was the great Commandment in the Law; he said to him: thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, Mat. 22.37. what Moses (the shadow) had spoken, the same spoke
Christ, the John 1.9.
light; that thus, under two witnesses it might stand sure, that God requires
in his service, not seeming, but heart-whole Lovers. The reasons:

That which is given grudgingly, or of necessity is not accepted Cor. 9.7 Now,
if man regard not an unwilling gift, and God require a willing heart in all
that is given and done to him: then, the love wherewith we love God, must be
free, not forced love; from a ready, not grudging mind: hollow affections are
odious to men, and a friend expects from his friend some good will. Will
that, which is odious to man, be pleasing to God? or will a friend look for
true kindness from his friend, and will not God from us? is God less then
man, or any friendship like to his.

in whom we live move, and have being, Act. 17.28. that gives us all good
things, and can free us from all evil. This is God that made all, and has
power over all. And therefore who but God, and who in comparison of God
deserves so to be loved, and with such love? How much have some Parents loved
their children, and some friends their friend? yet these were but creatures,
and the love placed on some of these creatures, was but kindness lost: but God
is creator, and the love we set on him so infinitely worthy is infinitely
rewarded: and therefore how much and greatly is he to be loved more then all
persons and things created?

Ierem. 9.3. and are cold suitors in those matters, which are not found, but by
those who seek them in the zeal of fire. But he that loves God truly and
with all his heart, loves earnestly and always in good things, Gal. 4.18. he
is no vnmedling Politic, like Gallio, Act. 18.14.15. but if religion suffer in
the fire, he will burn with it. Many will say they love God; the swearer, the
drunkard, the abominable adulterer, the most horrible sinner; and yet examine
their love at the touch of their affection to goodness, and his holy Law, and
ye shall find them professed haters both of him, and his counsels; neither
caring for God, nor godly person, or counsel. Also, despisers of Church
assemblies will say they love God; when yet they neither care for his
spiritual presence at Church, nor to obtain his glorious presence in heaven:
nor to speak to him by prayer, nor to be spoken unto by preaching nor to
read his word, as it were letters, nor to receive his tokens: that is,
Sacraments. But can a woman (truly) say she loves her husband, when she loves
not his presence, nor cares not to come unto him? when she despises his talk,
and scorns his tokens? when she had rather hear of any then of him, and, when
no man's coming is more unwelcome, nor more unpleasing to her, then his?

An instruction to put difference between the true love of the Jacobs voice,
and Esaus hands, Genesis 27.22. the godly love God in his righteous Commandments
to do them, in his godly Ministers to do for them: hypocrites will pretend to
love God, and yet neither regard his word, nor Ministers: the godly burn with
anger, as with fire, till sin be consumed, as dross; hypocrites are not
moned where God is angry: and such are called peaceable men, men of great
temper and charity: but the charity of such is cold to God, and their temper is
not moderation, but damnable luke-warmenesse: for, a true Christian is a true
lover; loving where God loves, and hating where he hates: that is, loving
righteousness, and hating iniquity, Psalm. 45.7. A true lover, loves God in
his word, John 14.21. and Gods word in the assembly: and he that loves
perfectly, loves Gods children, Psalm. 16.3. where the wicked love his enemies,
making him their enemy. Now to love Gods children, is to love as Gods children
do; that is, to love God for himself, and true goodness for him: so to love
Gods enemies, is to love, with Gods enemies, malice, pride, covetousness,
uncleanness, drunkenness, unrighteousness, and every evil way: briefly; to
love God, is truly to love him both in deed and word: not in deed only, as
that son in the Gospel, who said I will not, and yet went, Mat. 21.29. nor
in word only, as that other son, who said; I will Sir, and went not, verse
30. for, can we say, that either of these loved as they should? and what then,
shall we say of thousands that love not so far? And this is the duty; the
promise added, follows.

Therefore will I deliver him. WE have in this word therefore; which is a word
of inference, but signal not causall here; an effect of mercy in God, offered
to all that truly love him, or in love with faith, cleave fast unto him: which
is, that they shall not be loosers by any affection to him in the care of his
service and commandments: for, as they love him in his truth, so he will
deliver them in their troubles. And he says therefore, making such deliverance
the consequent, not meritorious effect of their love to him. For, no man's love
is so strong that it can bind God by the work done: only he rewards his
own graces with favor in his children and with the wages of mercy. He might
command without wages, and we should obey without hire: yet he requires not
our service, without our benefit: and, if we love him as we should, he will
deliver us as he has promised. He will leave (a therefore) in our hand, such as
is in the Text, for our better assurance; that is, if we love him, we shall be
delivered.

David was a true lover, he loved the Lord to do him service, and God the Lord
loved him to do him good. When he called upon him in his days, that is, in
trouble; his ears were never out of the way of his prayers: God heard his
voice, and inclined his ear, as if he should lay it to his mouth, to hear
him, Psalm. 116.1.2. And, it is promised to his seed, that if they prove such
lovers, he will show himself such a hearer of them in their troubles, and a
like present Deliverer, Psalm. 89.21, 22, 23.25, 26, 29, 36, 37. The thing is so
clear, that a good man asks this question according to the Scriptures; if
(ever) any were confounded that put trust in the Lord? Sir. 2.11. As if he
should have said: it cannot be showed that any such ever was. But this point
has been handled before, more then once: and the book of the Psalms, and
whole book of Scripture is large in this matter. The reasons.

If a woman could forget her child whom she loves, God will not forget those
who love him, Esal. 49.15. And if a friend will take his friends part in
adversity: God will (much more) deliver his in trouble. For (here) he has
spoken it, and we may rest secure upon the suretiship of his promise and truth,
that cannot fail us in any extremity.

were impossible, it must be, because their enemies are stronger then he,
which were monstrous. For who is equal to the Lord in the heaven? and who,
among the sons of the mighty, is like to him? Psalm. 89.6. and who can do as
he does? Psalm. 86.8.

An admonition to Christians, that would have Gods protection Romans 8.35, 37,
38, 39. If God wound him, the same loving God will cure him with the oil of
his favor. If he send forth floods, nay whole seas of trouble, that same Arc
of his loving favor will keep him, from drowning in those troubles. If his
wrath burn like fire, his favor and love will quench it. If he send sickness
into his body, and the iron into his soul: because he has a favor unto him,
and loves him; be will send health to his body, and speak peace to his
soul. Where God loves, and whom God sauoureth; there, and to them, what can
come but good? Romans 8.28. His anger is but a fathers anger, which is not anger
but love: and his strokes, the correction of a father, which is not to hurt,
but to make better. The godly have left this recorded under their experience in
all ages, Jacob, Joseph, David, and a cloud of such witnesses, Genesis 32.10. and
45.8. Psalm. 118.18. Psalm. 103.17, 18.

A comfort to all that truly love the Lord, whether Kings, or Psa. 2.11. But
God has given his word, that no troubles shall rise above them, come the
enemy on never so fast, and raise he troubles against them never so high. The
waters could not prevail against the Arc: so, neither shall the waters, Genesis
7.17, 18.
or water-floods of combined enemies abroad, or seditious spirits at home be
able to do any thing against the Sacred Arc of religious Sovereignty. For,
God will not violate his truth, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his
lips, Psalm. 89.34. Has he promised, if thou be his lover, that he will be thy
Deliverer? then, love God with thy heart, and set no troubles to thy hearth
for, thy troubles and troublers shall fly, as the mist before the Sun,
scattering it. Abraham loved God, and he loved him greatly, and more then any
thing beside: God (therefore) twice delivered him (in the matter of his Wife;)
once from Pharao, Genesis 12.17.20. Again, from Abimelech, Genesis 20.6, 7.14.15,
16. The heart of Jacob trusted in God: therefore Laban could not but do him
good, Genesis 31.29.42. and Esau could not hurt him, Genesis 33.4. Saul had David
fast in Keilah, 1. Sam. 23.7, 8. but, what could he do against him more then
Stephen Gardner, and the other Butchers of the Shambles of Rome could do
against the Lady Elizabeth, in the Tower, and Keilah where she was shut up?
These things rightly considered; can any doubt that God is as good as his word
to those that love him, and that he will keep his promise with Kings? So he
discharged Queen Elizabeth of her prison and troubles together, and set a
crown of pure gold upon her head.

The love that we can show to God (the best of us, and the best of it) is but
weak and simple; and yet, God esteems of it, and rewards it with a promise of
deliverance in troubles.

Exodus 35, 22, 23, 24, 25. Two mites are little, and a cup of cold water is
less; and yet these offered with the hand of a willing heart, either by
Disciples, or to a Disciple, in a Disciples name, are esteemed great matters,
Luke 21, 2, 3. Math. 10.42, And the Apostle says, if it be a work and labor
of love; he says not a work and labor of charge, that is done to God; he
should be unrighteous if he should forget it, Heb. 6.10. that is, if he should
do so, he should do otherwise then he has promised. The reasons.





to that a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2. Cor. 8.12. If we
do what we are able, though it be small that we are able to do, it is
welcome to God, Deuteronomy. 16.17. Two young Pigeons, Leuit. 12.8. And two small mites
are as good an offering (where there is no more) and as well accepted, as
richer matters from richer persons? Some may offer a Lamb to the Altar; and
the poorest, whose heart God has made willing cannot want a mite, or the worth
of a young Pidgeon to offer to it, that is, thou must help forward the service
of God, if not with the purse, yet with the mite of doing somewhat toward it,
some other way: and thy work will be accepted. All the members in this body
have their necessary use, and can do something; the poor as well as the
rich. The head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you, 1. Cor. 12.21.
Let Papists and Pharisees then praise and only praise rich alms; Christ makes
more account of the Widows two mites, then of all that they give. O therefore
what a comfort is here to a poor, if true Christian: seeing that even the
poorest he that is such, cannot be unfruitful altogether, or without use, in
the work of the Lord; and that God, rich in mercy, rewards even in a poor
soul, weak love, and poor doings, where a heart is not wanting to do
better, and to love more earnestly, if he were able. This may comfort him, in
the evil day when it comes, and it may come he cannot tell how soon, For, if
Pestilence should be sent, if some other destroying sickness should come, or,
if troubles should arise for the Gospel, which he professes; herein he may
dwell safely, that he has not been wanting, to his power, in any furtherance
that he could give the Gospel, or to the Professors and teachers of it for Gods
sake, who will not forget his work and service that he has done, and and who
gives the full cup of life for a cup of cold water.

A terror to those, who being able to do much in the service Remember this,
ye that forget God, he may bring you down in trouble, though now ye be aloft
in a flourishing estate of wealth and peace. Suddenly ye may be made poor; or,
if your riches remain with you, you may bear this voice, a voice very
doleful and bitter to all that are rich in their Mammon, and not rich in God;
O fool, this night, thy soul shall be required of thee, Luke 12.20; or, this
night, that is, very shortly and terribly, they will fetch thy soul. Then:
what grief will it be, and death to remember, what good ye might have done,
which ye neglected to do in your wealthy, and healthy days? They that turn
many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, Dan. 12.3. Now, whether is
better, to shine as Stars in heaven, or to burn as brands in hell? Ye
(therefore) that could have spent hundred, by your yearly coming in (and have
spent some, vainly) and not one, nor near one in all your life, to the
furtherance of Gods service, by doing something toward the Arc of a teaching
Minister in the place where your chief house stood, and family did continue;
Ye that by your countenance and place, might have turned many to righteousness,
and yet loved so hotely for your selves, and coldly for God, that the winning
of souls was none of your care, but rather the gathering of riches and
friends: and ye who, having Tenants and followers, might have constrained them
by a wise eye, to have kept the way with your selves, to Gods house, and good
order in Gods house, being assembled there; had rather go with a few then with
your train thither, and rather leave them, that were in the assembly to their
own foolish ways; then watch over them for the ways and duty of reverend
worshippers at Church, during all the time of prayer and preachings then: ye
that have (thus) neglected to do good, or gloried to do evil, being
(therefore) not lovers of God, but rather haters of him; What will ye do, or
say, when the day or hour comes that ye must go from house to grave, Psalm.
49.14. and leave your riches to others? verse 10. Surely a good conscience, in
those matters, will be more worth then all the goods, Manors, or Lordships ye
had or desired more then the love of God, in which only is true happinenesse,
and peace, Ye have refused to serve him that gives the best wages; and did
choose rather to serve for trifles, then for an inheritance; and for
corruptible things, then for eternal; therefore God gave you these small
things, dealing with you, as Abraham with the sons of his Concubines, who
gave them certain gifts or moueables, and sent them away, Genesis 25.6. For so
these and these only are your portion, hold them if you can: the inheritance
is Isaacs part, and the right of the sons. And now, what will ye do when ye
can live no longer? to dishonor God, and to honor your selves, your children,
or kindred above him? your hope cannot be in him whom you loved so little and
coldly; and who is a most bountiful Master to all his followers and lovers,
giving them (here) for their spiritual repast, the royal feast of a good
conscience, and in heaven Kingdoms for their service; for imperfect obedience,
perfect glory, and for short troubles long life: but now as Elisha, a Prophet
in Israel, said to Iehoram the King of Israel, Get thee to the Prophets of thy
father, and to the Prophets of thy mother, 2 Kin. 3.13. so, in times of
Pestilence, and in the hour of death, ye must go for comfort to your lands,
and Lordships, and large heaps in which ye trusted; or to your drunken cups,
fellowship, companions, and such Prophets of your fathers house, the Devil:
God will not look to ward you, nor see, that is, know you, in that hour,
verse 14.

But does God thus remember every little thing that is done to Luke 17.80.
and yet God rejects not our weakest love. Men may deserve much at our hands,
and sometimes do; when (nevertheless) we reward their good with evil: for
their friendship, become their enemies; and fight against them without a cause,
Psalm. 109, 4, 5. We should do good for evil, and pray for them that hurt us,
Mat. 5.44. We (contrarily) do evil for good, and hurt them that pray for us.
Is this to follow God, or to be like Christ? even a heathen Monarch, Assuerus
by name, may condemn such. For he kept a book of records, wherein were
written all the memorable good deeds that his Subjects had done unto him,
hating to be unthankful, Hest. 6.2.3. But so far are many Christians, at
this day, from keeping any book of thankfulness in their heart, or of records
in their houses with this Pagan King; that they rather blot out all good deeds
with present evil will; and no sooner receive a good turn, then they
(instantly) bury it, that it may never rise up to giuethankes to the giver.
The second promise and duty follow.

I will set him on high, or mount him, because, etc. SOme alteration there is
in the duty; the promise is of deliverance from troubles, as before. For, to
set up on high from dangers, is so to free the godly from distress, that
neither their enemies on earth, nor wicked spirits, that are their enemies, in
the air, shall be able to touch them with any mortal wound. The speech is
taken from the manner of fortifying, used in wars: where, for more security,
towers of defense were set on high rocks and hills. Such fortresses, or
mounted-houses of safety will God provide and establish for those that know,
that is, confess his name; when enemies vex them, or plagues threaten them,
or troubles draw near unto them. By the name of God is meant his holiness,
and excellency; or whatsoever things he is known by on earth, as men are by
their names; as his titles, works word, properties, and (sometimes) himself.
Mat. 6.9. And, to know here, is not barely to know, but to know with faith:
nor, is it bare knowledge, but acknowledgement: when, knowing the power of God
over us, and care for us, we confess and believe the same, with a resting
thereupon, in all our troubles? Before, we heard of believing in God: the
Prophet here, or the Lord by him, speaks of knowing, because none can rightly
put confidence in God that does not know him: as Psalm. 9.10. for, why do men
so much and usually, trust their rich friends, but because they know they can
help them, and are persuaded they will? and why serve they great men rather
then poor men, but because, in like manner they know that great men can
prefer them, where poor men cannot? so, they that know what a rich rewarder
God is of the least things done to him in his service and worship, and how able
so to do, cannot but love and serve him.

Now, where the love and knowledge of God go (thus) together; David to
Solomon, his young son is: First know the God of thy fathers, 1. Chron. 28.9.
as if he had said: chiefly, and before all things know this, or know him in
his power, and be perfect in the book of his goodness, that is, know his power
that thou may fear him, and his readiness to help, that thou may set
thy love upon him. He adds; and serve him with a perfect heart; that is,
uprightly, and as he will be worshipped, which none can do that knows not
the laws and manner of his service: and so, sound and sanctified knowledge is
the mother of christian devotion; not Popish ignorance. Certain wicked
worldlings are reproved in the book of Job, as contemners of God, the reason
is; they desired not, or they cared not for the knowledge of his ways, Job.
21.14. and how could they (then) but be irreligious in heart, and impious in
behavior? for, not knowing Gods power, what should contain them? and ignorant
of his kindness, what could allure them to be other, or to do otherwise? Did
that land love God, wherein by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing,
and whoring they brake out, and blood touched blood? It is out of question it
did not, and why did it not? the Prophet tells us: there was no knowledge of God
in that land, Hos 4.1, 2. And where men know not God, what can be looked for,
but all impiety against him, and unrighteousness against men? where men know
not his goodness to love him, not power to fear him, what will they not do?
And (here) one says well, That an ignorant heart is a sinful heart; and a Man
without knowledge, a Man without grace: for, without knowledge, the mind is
not good, Prou. 19.2. And, if the mind be not good; what can be good; it being
certain, that what the mind is, that the man is? The scornful, and they
that took pleasure in vnrighteosnesse, could take no pleasure in God, and what
took the taste of God so and so much out of their hearts, but the ignorance of
his ways? It is said, they hated knowledge Pro. 1.22. and could not abide
counsel, ver. 25. The reasons:

God cannot be beloved, where he is not desired: for, no desire; Igneti nulla
cupido.
knowledge; no desire. And therefore they that do not know him, cannot love
him.

Secondly, we cannot love, where we cannot trust; but faith the the thing be
so or no? must not the heart be assured? and can there be assurance in the
heart without the knowledge we speak of?



by the nursery of religion, which makes the godly partakers of the divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. should as freely and truly love God as his household
children can, and, (which is incredible,) better then the most do that have
their education from him, and breeding under him by his word, and Sacraments?

An admonition to the godly, so much as they desire to love go from strength
to strength, till they appear before God in Zion, Psalm. 84.7. that is, at
Church, in the assembly; or, (as it was foretold by David) run to and fro,
that knowledge may abound: where others (finding no such delight in the
banqueting house of Gods graces,) though the Arc of teaching be placed, near
them, in a Preachers mouth, as in the Tabernacle thereof, will take no pains,
and have no desire to come unto it. David danced, with all his might, before
the Arc, 2 Samuel 6 14. for, David was bred in the knowledge of God, by his
Testimonies: but scornful Michael despised him for it, verse 16. for, Michal
was brought up in Saul's Court, where God, and the knowledge of God, were great
strangers. They that, in the captivity, knew Jerusalem, preferred her, and the
God in her, to their chief joy: they that knew not Jerusalem, neither
Ierusalems-God, said in her day; raze it, raze it to the foundation thereof,
Psalm. 137.6.7. So, they that know God, and his goings in the Sanctuary, Psalm.
68.24. will love his presence in the beautiful assembly; the spiritual
Babylonians, that know neither him, nor them will neither seek the Lord nor his
face, Psalm. 105.4. but, calling Jacob, the castaway, and Zion the place, which
no man seeks after, Ier. 30.17. cast of God, and his reverence: and, when
they should sit under the Preachers chair, set themselves in the chair of
scorners, and so become, (rather) despisers of God, then lovers and followers.
This would be thought of before the decree come forth, Zeph. 2.2. that when it
is sealed with Plagues for sin, by Pestilence, wars, dearths in the Land,
or some other way, we may be spared with those that love the Lord unfeignedly.
Now is the time to seek to know God, that we may sinde to love him: and when
other days shall come; those times will be rather for our rejoicing then
discomfort, because we have obeyed, and loved him; or, because we have
publicly at Church, and privately at home served him: honored him in his
word, and reverenced him in his Sacraments: profited by his counsels, and
turned at his corrections.

Quest. But some may say;

Answ. I have told, Solomon tells you, that you must seek it; that is, use much
industry and pains to get it, Prou. 2.4. or seek it, as you would seek for
silver, which you will readily do; and search for it, as for treasures, which
you will nor fail to do. It is a jewel, and we must think none so good.
Now, what pains will a man take to find a jewel, and what care to keep it?
more plainefully should we seek this jewel, and more deeply hide it in our
hearts, then all jewels, Matthew. 13.44. If (then) we mean to be owners of this
excellent jewel of heavenly knowledge, we must cry for it by prayer, call or
enquire after it by conference, seek it by reading, search for it by
meditation, and incline by hearing to it: then shall we find knowledge, and
understand the fear of the Lord, Prou. 2.2.3.4. The last duty follows, and
diverse promises (also) made to the doers thereof.

VER. 15. He shall call upon me, etc.
BEfore it was said that he who loved the Lord with faith, and knew him by his
testimonies and word, should be delivered: it is (now further added, that he,
that will obtain so great favor, must keep the path of the means unto it;
and call in prayer, if he will be answered by deliverance. But this must not
be every kind of prayer, as appears by the joining together the sentences,
but that prayer, or strong cry of the heart in prayer, that is joined with
knowledge, and stands in love: that is, he that will pray with hope, must
both know the Lord, confessing his goodness; and love him with relying on his
truth. For, in the law, the blind and lame were rejected, Mal. 1.8. So now, the
blind sacrifice of ignorant prayers, and the lame of praying weakly, and
without the affection of confidence in God, are no reasonable service of him?
Gods children speak with vehemence, saying, Abba Father, or twice father; and
not softly, as afraid, but loud with assurance; for they cry, Abba Father,
Romans 8.15. knowing that what God has pledged to them by his promise, he will
not violate. Also, they pray with understanding: knowing that all that pray not
with knowledge, pray with loss For, they cannot watch the success of their
prayers, nor tell how they speed, not knowing what they prayed for And without
this experience who can be thankful? and without thankfulness, what can
the hope be, but loss? H^ that is not thankful for an old good turn, loses
a new: and therefore prayers in a tongue that men understand not (such as the
prayers of the ignorant in times of Pop^ry were) are prayers of hinderance, not
of comfort, or profit.

The Doctrine (therefore) that arises from this context is; they Tim. 2.1. By
supplication is meant that kind of prayer, or thing in prayer, whereby we
crave the turning away of evil things from us. Prayer, or obsecration is, that
wherein we desire all good things necessary for us. Intercession, that, by
which we pray lovingly for our friends, and charitably for our enemies: and
giving of thanks that, which upon the receipt of a favor, goes, with praise
in our prayers, to him that gave it. Now, he that will see the salvation of God,
must do all this. In all these, he must talk with God as did M^ses: and he
may talk with him, as with a friend bringing good affections to the words of
his prayer. In the 50. Psalm, and 15. verse God promised deliverance to his
children in the day of their trouble: but with the condition of Prayer, as
here; Call upon me; as if he had said; if ye will have my help, or, if ye will
have me to help you, pray. So, Christ our Savior, promising ease, that is,
deliverance, to all, who, for his sake, are laden with troubles, and labor of
wrongs; bids them to come to him, as if he had bidden them to call upon him,
if they will be cased, Math. 11.28. And the Lord will be found, but it is of
those that seek him with prayer, Math. 7.7. Iehoshaphat so sought him, and
found his help against the children of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, 2.
Chron. 20.10.22, 23, 24. And, Solomon, in the Dedication of the Temple,
desires God to incline to his people in their distress; that is, when in
peril and terror, they confess their sins, and make their supplications to
him, his prayer is that he would deliver them: but it is with condition, as
before, 1. King. 10.31.33.35, 38, etc. For, there is no such means of access
to God as prayer; neither does he answer, out of the heaven, to any thing that
we prefer to him, so directly, as to prayer, and he delights in the soul
of his sacrifice more then in all burnt-offerings. If the great waters burst
in, it is prayer that must cast up a bank of stop unto them, Psa. 32.6. Many
times God delivers without prayer; (which should make us more thankful, but
not less diligent to use the exercise hereafter) but prayer is Gods own
ordinance, that binds him to deliver us. By it, he gives us his earnest, or
somewhat in hand to confirm unto us the light of his salvation in this
mid-vale of darkness. By it we have a sanctified right to the creatures, 1.
Tim. 4.5. By it we receive the key that opens Gods treasures, and pulls down
his mercies upon us. Math. 7.7. By it we come into the Presence, and have
speech with him that is greater then all Princes, Genesis 18.22, 23, 24, etc. By
it, if God be ready to strike, we hold him back, as it were, that he cannot
execute his judgments, Exodus 32.10. and by it, we confess that we receive and
seek all good things at Gods hands, running to him in our wants, and rejoicing
in him for our welfare. If (then) we look to be delivered in trouble: in
trouble, we must pray to the Lord our deliverer. The reasons.

Not unto us (Lord) not unto us, but to thy Name be glory, Psalm. 1 15.1.

Secondly, it is of the Commandment and Ordinance of God that we should pray,
that is, call on him in our troubles, Mat. 6.9. And what good Christian will
not make conscience of Gods Commandments to keep them, and Ordinances to do
them? we make conscience (or should) of killing and stealing, because the Law
says, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal. So it is Gods Commandment
that we pray in our troubles: and shall we be troubled, and not call upon God;
that is, pray unto him, as we are commanded?

Thirdly, prayer is a part of his service, Psalm. 50.23. and the Psalm. 14.4.
Now, is prayer a part of his service, and shall we refuse in our troubles to
serve him? that is, in them, to pray unto him, and to call upon his Name? And
as it is a part of his service; so it is a mean of our salvation, Joel 2.32. I
say then: desire we to be saved? or if we long not to be damned, let us pray.

Fourthly, a benefit is worth the asking, and we make suite to

An admonition (therefore) to be frequent in this duty which It is Gods seal
upon our hearts, Cant. 6.8. and the earnest of his Spirit, left in our hands,
2. Cor. 1.22. for which we read in Zachary; of a Spirit of grace, and
supplications, Zach. 12.10. from it atiseth that friendly exchange that is
between God and us; we sending up ou prayers to him, and he sending down
his blessings to us. It makes the righteous in calamity, to go upon other
feet, then the feet of Daniels image, which were partly clay, partly iron, Dan.
2.33. for, they walk not staggeringly upon their doubts, but upon fast ground;
knowing that he is faithful that has promised. Nay, if they be to fight for
life and death, being cunning at this weapon of prayer; they neither care for
the devils malice, nor distrust Gods loving kindness; but (then) believe most,
when they see least, and show greatest courage, when there is greatest cause.
In a danger (otherwise incurable) and when worldly wise men know not what to
do, and when all their cunning is gone: the godly (that give themselves to
prayer,) know both what to do, and where to find succor: for, they continue
calling upon God, till those raging and untamed floods of trouble be gone, and
God send deliverance from his holy habitation in heaven.

Our God whom we serve, will deliver us, Dan. 3.17. but the God whom we never
served; and therefore cannot in justice deliver us, but suffer us rather to
perish in that flame, that burns up the ungodly, as dross. And since a
confession that there is a God stands not without a prayer of confession due
unto him: they denying the one, how can they but be deniers of the other? And
denying God, how can they with comfort look for the salvation of God? Let them
consider this, who neither at home, nor in the assembly, once a week, call
upon God: or if their lips go, their heart is not in the business of prayer.
Some cannot pray, but in the Church: and some will not pray when they are at
Church: what difference between such, and deniers of God? One sort salutes him
not at all, and the other with lips, without a heart. Further, if God should
again send some contagious death and mortality among us: what good could
these unprofitable limbs in the Church do, for the remoouing of it? what is
the King and his throne better (I am sure much worse) for them? for though they
cannot, not care not to establish it by their prayers, they can weaken it by
their finnes: and send again for the Pestilence; though, when it is come, they
can neither help to cure it, while it rages, nor the skarre of misery and
desolations that it leaves behind it in particular places, and in the common
state, when it is gone. And now, that the bloody Esau: of Rome prepare with
such cruelty, and numbers to devour poor Jacob: what can these do, but
strengthen them, and weaken the righteous as they do by horrible Atheism? They
cannot deliver themselves: and (which is worse) they cannot but draw the Gospel
with us (further) into bondage. Let God threaten our harvest and corn fields
with ill weather and forcible tempests; what good do these, wanting the key
wherewith Elijah shut the heaven, and opening it wider and further by their
blasphemies? And, as they do no good; so, as doers of great harm, by
provoking the Lord with their monstrous villainies, they increase the wrath upon
England. Nehem. 13.18.

But (further) the Lord (speaking of the righteous) says; He shall call upon
me, that is, he shall go to no other for help in trouble. Which was the
practice of the Fathers in the old Testament,

For God so commanded, Psalm. 50.15. and the godly, yea every Psalm. 32.6. So,
Psalm. 34.6. The poor man cried, and the Lord, that is, he to whom he cried,
heard him, and saved him out of his troubles, Thus did good Iehosaphat, and the
chief of Judah with him: for his eyes and theirs, were to God only; not to
Abraham, or any Saint departed. 2. Chron. 20.12. And in the New Testament,
Christ directs us by form, Math. 6.9. and charges us by precept, Mat. 11.28.
to come to no other then to God, not to him otherwise, then as God. The reasons.

For our approach to any other, then to him that is God, there is not either in
the old or new Testament any commandment, or practice: and the prayer taught
by Christ, (the most perfect and best that ever was taught) does prove as much.

Secondly, the object of our faith must be the subject of our Romans 10.14. That
is, to him only we must pray, in whom only we believe. But this is no other
then God.

Thirdly, none can help as God can; and none can where he

Fourthly, Christ has put the matter out of question, who says, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, Math. 4.10. Out of
which answer, I reason thus: Prayer is a service and worthy of God: but we must
worship and serve God only; and therefore pray to him only.

It taxes Popish Liturgies,

Exceptio 1. But they say, (that so call upon the Saints) that they pray not to
them to help them, but to speak for them; not to be Saviors, but Mediators.

Repl. But the Apostle tells us, that there is one Mediator (he speaks of no
mo) and therefore but one (only) between God and Man, 1. Tim. 2.5. giving
instance in Christ, both God and Man. His meaning is, that God the Father has
made to Christ the Son a Deed of gift of being that one Mediator between
him and us: and that every gift and grant that is made passes in his name; and
whatsoever is recovered to us, pertaining to redemption, is entered in the title
and right of him, and given to us, because we are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. This being the Apostles meaning touching
that one Mediator, who is Christ: to entitle other Mediators to his office, is
a point of forgery; and point that argues all Papists of a great offense
against the chief roialties of that only sufficient and most mild Mediator
between God and us, the God and man Christ Jesus. Besides; he that will take
upon him to be Mediator, that is, in this manner, to be Spokesman between God
and us: must be (perfectly) able to save all them that come to God by him, Heb.
7.25. but what creature (be it the mother of Christ, though, otherwise, a most
blessed woman; be it (I say again) the Mother of Christ, or any other that
have died in Christ, or for him) is able to save a soul? and, if not able to
save a soul, then not allowed to be Mediator for it.

Exceptio 2. But they further say: Saints are Mediators of intercession; and
Christ, and he (only) the Mediator of redemption.

Repl. But this answer is no other then that which was confuted before: and, it
is a distinction without a difference; like to that answer of the Physicians
wife (and it was a wise one:) pepper is hot in operation, Bishop I^-will
against Har-ding.
and cold in working: as if operation and working were two things: So (here)
mediation and intercession (but one thing and two names) are made diverse, that
differ not: for, what difference between a Mediator, and Intercessour? Is not
a Mediator, one that labors between party and party? and is not an
Intercessor the same.

Exceptio 3. But who, that has offended the Prince, comes directly into his
sight, and not by some way made for him, by his Nobles, or some in favor about
him?

Repl. Be it so, and be it granted also, that we dare not come to God offended
without a Mediator: have we not a Mediator, who (as has been said) is able to
save all that come to God by him? and what need we to care for the favor of
Noblemen, or other, when we are sure of the Kings eldest Son, whom the King
himself so loves?

Exceptio 4. But it is presumption in a mean person, to come to the Kings
eldest Son without a Mediator?

Repl. It may well be so, and want of good manners too, if we speak of earthly
Princes and suites: but it holds not in this question: for, we are invited to
come to Christ boldly; and by him to his Father. Now, what presumption is it to
do as we are commanded? was David, were our Fathers, was the Centurion, the
Publican, the lost Son presumptuous? that so did, Psalm. 51.1, 2, etc. Mat.
8.5, 6. Luke 15.25. and 18.13, If the Prince shall appoint one, by whom, and by
no other, we should put up our petitions to him: should we not do it by him,
and by no other? But God will have us to offer our prayers to him by Christ:
and, shall we offer them to him by the Saints? shall we do what he has not
bidden us, and shall we not do what he has commanded?

Exceptio 5. But the Saints are merciful.

Repl. Though they were while they lived, and now in glory, be merciful; that
is, generally desire the good and glorification of their fellow members: yet
where is it written, that they particularly do this, and severally for every
member? or, how can the Saints that are in heaven know our necessities now? Is
not the contrary (rather) plainly testisied by Esa, where he says; Abraham
is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not? Esaias 63.16. or do the Angels know
our thoughts? I am sure they have no ears, with which they can take our words.
And, for their mercy though it be great: was ever like affection found in
Saint or Angel toward us, as was in Christ, who dispensed with his glory for a
while, and laid down his life for our sakes? Or, must he be entreated
himself, who is appointed, under scale, by his Father, to make intercession
for us? The High Priest under the Law, was the figure of our merciful
High Priest in the Gospel: but, when was ever Mediator made by the people unto
him? or any joined with him? or any means used to appease him? And shall not
the figure and truth agree? but I leave the further debating of these points to
those that write purposely of them: and pray all those that have received the
love of the Truth, in this matter to enter their suites in a right title, that
is by Christ only, and not amiss, with the mowles and Backs of Rome, by
Angels and Saints. So much for the duty; the promises follow.

And I will answer him. IF we call, God will answer; if we pray, that is, pray
as we should, he will hear presently, and thoroughly, as with both ears: when
we cry, as men in danger, he will be with us, and our helper at hand: which
cannot be but a great spur e of encouragement to prayer, and to prayer that
goes not out of fained lips. To hear (then) in this place, as in many other
places and Texts of holy Scripture, is to hear with favor; and readily, with
an open ear.

the Lords ears are open unto him; Psalm. 34.15. and his hand is near, to save
him, verse 18 the like in Psalm. 145 18. again, they that are saved, that is,
delivered from dangers by their prayers, are heard when they pray: but
whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, that is, truly worshippeth him by
his word, is so saved, and so heard, Joel 2.32. let such an one but call, he is
answered; and pray in distress, and he shall be delivered: for, God is rich
unto all, or a hearer of all, that (so.) call on him, Romans 10.12. that is, he
shall not only avoid the wrath that is threatened; but, (as an ouer-plus)
enjoy the merits that come. So Noah and Lot, calling upon God, were not only
delivered from the storms, of their time, but received great blessings. And,
David that was delivered from Saul, was made next King to Saul. In times of
persecution, when the Sun became black as a pot, and the heaven of the
Church was covered in showers of blood; Christians were not only (many of
them) pulled out of the fires of those Sodom-ages, but had also in their
prisons and dens, and dark dungeons sweet hearings, and joy unspeakable. The
Host of Israel was so discomforted under Joshua, in the taking of Ai, that it
is said the hearts of the people melted away like water, Ios. 7.5. The people
(no doubt) cried to the Lord, but he heard them not; the reason was: an
execrable thing was done in the Host, verse 11, 12, 13, So, many ask and
receive not, because they ask amiss, Iam. 4.3. and David, though always
beloved, was not always heard when he prayed: the let was in himself, and no
want in God. The reasons.

Though a kind father love his son dearly and tenderly; yet

Secondly, if there should be any unreadiness in God, or let in Kin. 7.21. and
these two in God, ( Iachim, and Boaz in him) cannot be sund^ed.

Thirdly, experience of times, and examples of persons, whom

An instruction (therefore) when our prayers return without give, or did
defer to give at that time, for causes and purposes best known to himself.
It may be that our manner of asking was naught; desiring our deliverance more
greedily then his gloric, and outward things more earnestly then his kingdom.
And, in this search let us imitate the wis^dome that is often to be found among
worldly men. For, if they having a suit to the King, or some Noble man at
Court, miss of the success and issue they hoped for: they beginn to take
themselves aside in the matter, and to reckon with themselves in what
circumstance, point, or points they sailed, that the business went against
them: and, having found their ouer-sight they seame by it, to be wiser against
another time. So, when in dealing with the Lord, in our prayers, we find that
our cause sals to the ground, and we are not heard, as we expected: we should
reason with our selves (religiously) for what offense, in matter, in manner, or
of our persons, God has dismissed us without hearing, or refused us in the
prayers that we made unto him: and having found the fault to be as (if we seek
as we should) we cannot but find to be (all) in our selves, and no blame in
God; we should further learn to amend that fault, and to beware of all such
untowardly coming to God hereafter. Psalm. 66.18.
If we pray in our sins, or (without repentance) in any sin, we must not
look to be heard; nor, if we pray without the putting away of wrath, and the
leaven of bitterness. If we ask not temporal deliverances and blessings with
a reservation to Gods will, we must look to be denied; much more, if we ask
things that God has forbidden, as his vengeance upon our enemies, their fall,
and our rising by it; we deserve not only to be denied, but to be heavily
plagued for our profaneness. And, if we would not be put back with shame,
when we put up our supplications to the throne of God, we must keep in with
him: at least we must not provoke his wrath by such a general vnreformednesse
in tongue, and manners, as reigns at this day. For who, that means to obtain
his request at a man's hand, will wilfully provoke, and displease him? Let us
learn this for our selves; that if Pestilence come, or some sickness
contagious, or a dearth ever the land, or some other affliction; we may have
hope, when they, who (sin wilfully) can have no boldness; and therefore must
needs despair, or have small comfort in their prayers, when in trouble they
call upon God.

A comfort to those who labor to take all impediments of Psalm. 11.4. that is,
the godly in trouble, may think him absolutely gone from their help, and that
he is deaf in heaven at their prayers: but when he winketh at the ways of
those that vex them, he sleeps not in them; neither, when he takes day with
his afflicted, and puts them to a new-hearing, does he forsake their cause or
them in adversity; but only taries the time, when he shall see it best, who
(only) knows when it is best and fittest for their deliverance. Gods eyes
are not so shut at any time, but he sees under them what is done in the earth:
and when evil is devised against the righteous, the bright eye of the Lord is
upon the first thought, and imagination thereof. It does not (presently) seem
so to us, because he takes leisure and respite to bring things to light: but
whatsoever we think or judge to the contrary, so it is. And this, The Bishop of
London D. King in a Sermon preached the 5. of November. 1608. at White Hall.
The "sometimes Reverend Father of this Church, and Right-worthy" trumpet of
the Gospel, has justified plainly and clearly in Gods" severe watch over the
Powder-traitors, saying: That he went" with them in the whole course thereof:
that he saw them, when" they trudged to Doway, and gadded to Spain, and marked
the" hissing of the Be of Egypt to the Fly of Ashur: and noted all" the
intelligence that passed between the Leiger Jesuit in England," and the
Leigers of Flanders and Spain: yet he bewrayed" nothing of this at first, but
sat as with his eyes shut, and let them" run on, till they had run
themselves to perdition. After, he" showed that he slept not in so great
danger toward us; but brought all to light, and what the wicked had done; which
he manifested by their own confessions, and by public example, as upon an hie
Stage. So when he seems furthest from hearing, he hears the very silence of
his servants prayers, Exodus 14.15. Psalm. 55.17. And therefore the comfort of
the righteous abides firm; which is, that when they call they shall be
answered, first or last, and always in due time. So we have spoken of one of
the promises, another follows, which is of deliverance; but otherwise then
has been spoken of.

I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him. BEfore, we heard of
deliverance: but (here) it is promised, in a strange manner, to the righteous:
and that is; that God will (as it were) put himself into their troubles, to
make himself a party in them: and (so) be their deliverer: for, by his being
with them, is not meant (only) his being so by an infinite Essence, and
general providence; (for so he fills all things, and is with all his
creatures;) but his being with them in a more special manner, and more
particularly, by his Spirit of promise and comfort in their troubles: it being
certain, that the souls of the righteous sometimes eat, and drink, and feast
with Christ; and at other times cry much, and ask many watchmen for him,
before they can find him, Cant. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. The meaning (therefore) is: that
God will as soon be foiled (himself) by the trouble of the righteous, as
suffer his children to perish in them.

From whence we learn, Mat. 14.30.31. Psalm. 89.19. He is always present with
his Church, but more familiarly, in great troubles: as a good father is always
affected to his child; but more tenderly, in some grievous sickness. And as
a King does show a more loving countenance to his household servants at one time
then at another; (sometimes) frowning, and (sometimes) smiling upon them: so
the King of all the kingdoms of the earth, does not (ever) alike graciously
show himself to his dearest people, (though he be never from them, more then
the King from Court;) but sometimes in the smiles of his mercy and sometimes,
frowningly in displeasure, he looks upon them. Yet, howsoever mortal Princes
may change their favors; God will never leave his children. The Prophet David
set the Lord always before him; Psalm. 16.8. that is, committed his ways in all
matters to him, or made him Arbiter of his paths: and his reason was; he was
at his right hand, or his ready hand, who always hedged him in with his power
against present evils and dangers to come. When they that were humbled for
their rebellion against the words of the Lord, cried with faith to him in their
affliction; they were instantly delivered from their distress, Psalm. 107.12,
13. God was within call, and so near, that if they had, in that case, but
sighed to him, which is a lesser matter then to cry; he could not but have
heard, of whom the Prophet says: My sighing is not hid from thee, Psalm. 38.9.
And when the three servants of God were in the fiery furnace, God was with
them in it to preserve them; Dan. 3.25. and in the Kings heart to bring them
forth: for, the King spoke and said; Shadrach, Meshak, and Abednego, the
servants of the high God, go forth, and come hither, Verse 26. Thus God, as a
partner in sort, communicates with the righteous in their troubles, being at
hand to save them from all adversity: The Reasons.

Where God is said to be with them in trouble, Zach. 2.8. Acts 9.4.5. Zach.
12.10.

Secondly, when such are in trouble; he remembers that they Psalm. 27.10. Esa.
49.15.

Thirdly, the contrary would too much discomfort his people, Esa. 42.33. That
is, further grieve those, that are much afflicted already.

A reproof of the fearful in religion; who dare not be seen Acts 18.17.
But, what if thou be troubled for thy well guided conscience in good matters?
has not God promised his presence in such troubles? or, will he promise to be
in place, and fail thee? and, if he come to thy help; is not his goodness
infinitely greater then man's malice, and his arm stronger to save, then man's
to destroy? Many (whom I cannot call ill men) are unreasonably afraid, when God
sends the Plague of Pestilence, or a plague of rain and waters: but who has
power in these Plagues? and who has promised to the righteous, his comfortable
presence in them? Therefore, put trust in God, walk with him in thy good life,
and shrink not from his Commandments: and if Pestilence come, fear it not;
for if ^^ou miscarrie in it, God will miscarrie with thee: and, if a Famine
pinch the land, care not for it; for thou shall be fed, or God will want power
to feed thee, Psalm. 37.3.

Job 12.18. He has builded his house strong, as upon seven Pillars, Prou. 9.1.
that is, the godly whom the wicked would pull down, are surely and strongly
founded in his providence, and so safely kept in his hand, that none can pluck
them from thence, Job 10.29. And as the righteous shall most certainly be
delivered; so, all that vex them shall perish: for, look what safety is to
this house, and them that be in it: the like peril is to this hous's enemies,
and all that come against it; God being, as a wall of defense about his people,
so a wall of fire against all that molest them, Zach. 2.5. When the Disciples
were in the ship, there was a great tempest in the Sea: but, Christ being with
them in the tempest and ship, immediately there followed a great calm, Math.
8.26. So, whatsoever tempests or seas of trouble come, as long as Christ is
with us in them, we need not despair of any calm of deliverance, be it from
Famine, Pestilence, the sword of the enemy, or any other noisome Plague: I say
so long as Christ is with us, and we devoutly with him in the ship of our
Church Assemblies; calling upon him, and doing reverence to his name. But let
us be sure, as he is with us in trouble, so to be with him by faith and
holiness, in all our troubles: he to deliver us, we to serve him.

This shows, that the best shall have troubles, yea great troubles: Many, and
great, many times, are the troubles of the righteous, says David, Psalm. 34.19.
And how can they but feel trouble, that have many troubles? Now, what David
said, that same said David's Lord: for Christ, speaking to, and of his, said: in
the world ye shall have afflictions, Ioh. 16.33. as if he had said: this world
is a sea; and they whom my Father has given me out of the world, Ioh. 17.6.
are as so many sloting Barks or Boats, tossed upon huge waves of trouble,
having winds and sea against them, till they put into harbor: or, there is no
end of troubles, till ye enter into the rest of God. Also, this that Christ
said, says the faithful witness of Christ, Saint Paul, All that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12. he says, all,
excepting none. And, if we shall but point to the opening of the fist seal,
and, in the vnsealing of that mystesterie, take a short view of the infinite
number of the souls of them that were killed for the word of God; and which
(therefore) lie behind the Altar, crying night and day to God, with the voice
of the blood of Abel, that he would require all that blood at their hands that
shed it;, Apoc. 6.9, 10. how can we be ignorant, that it has (always) been
the portion and lot of those, that truly loved God, through much tribulation
to enter into his Kingdom? Act. 14.22. If (therefore) being professors of the
truth, we have not suffered some troubles and rubs for the same; it is not
sealed unto us, that we are right professors; and our profession is but as a
Deed vnsubscribed. For, true godliness draws troubles to it, as the
loadstone does iron: and it is not possible (in these days) sincerely, and
with good conscience to serve the Lord without some affliction. The Apostle, or
Christ by him says of the Church of Ephesius (when she was something worth:) I
know thy labor, and patience, and other works: as if he had said, that (when
she was at the best) she had great matter offered for her labor and patience,
Apoc. 2.2.3.
and other virtues by the things she suffered for his name and testimony. And
(to conclude) what part of the world, what age in the world from the blood of
Abel to our times, has not heard of the cruel martyrdomes of Gods Children
for the cause of goodness, and of the true service of God? All which show
plainly that the best and godliest in all times, have been under the rod and
scourge of troubles for their Zeal in good things. The slaughters in Spain and
Italy (the two chief seats of the bloody inquisition:) the huge fires of
England, France, and Flanders, into which they cast such multitudes of those
that would not fall down before their golden image, Dan. 3. 10, 11. do
proclaim to all the world how great and many troubles have followed goodness
of late years, besides the times of the Emperors, In the ten first
persecutions.
which our Church-stories have left (all) wading in blood. The third promise
follows.

And honor Or, glorify him, and, make him glorious.
him. THis is the third promise, which is not (simply) of deliverance, but of
deliverance with honor. And so, by an increase, more is promised, in these
words, then before to the righteous: which is, that God will not only deliver
them, but gloriously do it, in their greatest troubles; and, in an overplus of
his favor, (after) raise them to honor, as he did Joseph, Job, David, Daniel,
and others. And therefore, where the Lord says, I will honor him; it is as
much as if he had said, I will always deliver him, and sometimes set him in the
chair of honor. This may well be the Lords meaning in this third thing
promised to the righteous. For, all that are delivered, are not so preferred:
it is enough that some are, and it is certain that they that are not; that is,
that have not these glories temporal, shall yet receive (when they have served
their time) glory everlasting. The words deliver the Doctrine plainly.

I will honor him says the Lord:) Now, if it be God that must give honor, or
bring to honor; we learn that outward honor is Gods blessing, and the gift
of God. It is he that raises the poor out of the dust (of baseness;) and he
that lifts up the beggar from the dunghill (of contempt) to the seat of
glory, says Annah in her thankful song, 1. Sam. 2.8. And Solomon Gods own
King, tells us, who set him in the throne of his Father David; where he
confesses that Kings are set in the chair of sovereignty by God. By me
(says he) meaning God, who is there made speaker; Kings reign, Pro. 8.15.
that is, sit on their thrones or benches. And by my power and gift, or (as it
is in the Text) by me Princes rule and Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth:
that is, not only the scueraigne but subordinate authority is from me, and
by my purpose and will. David speaks plainly in another Psalm, telling us,
that to come to preferment, is neither from the East, nor from the West, nor
yet from the South: that is, from none of the quarters of the world, but from
God, that made it, Psalm. 75.6. For, it follows in the next Verse, but God is
the Judge, or, God the Judge does dispose the risings of men, who puts down
one, and sets up another, Verse 7, that is, barreth from honor, or brings
to glory. The blessed mother of our Savior has a like saying in her Song,
making the Lord the putter down of one, and the exalter of another, Luke 1.52.
And though a man be borne to honor: yet it is from God, both that he is
borne, and that he is borne Noble. If he (after) adorn his high place with a
good life, God, for his singular good, has advanced him: but if he prove
wicked, as Saul, he is not exalted with favor; and it is but for the greater
fall of the house, that it is builded so high, Mat. 7.27. Easier had the
judgment of that person been, if he had been but a shrub in the
Commonwealth then, being a Cedar in it, to have had so terrible a downfall. It
is certain (therefore) that God is the author of Nobility and Soucraignty. The
reasons:

In themselves, they be great blessings: but, all blessings, great, James 1 17.

Secondly, Kings, and Princes, and Nobles, are names of order:

Thirdly, God that made the heaven, made the different orders Colos. 1.16.
Angels, and 1 Cor. 15.41.
Stars of heaven: and therefore that God that made the earth, made the Nobles
and Princes of the earth: for, that which was done in the one, was done in the
other, and by the same Deity and power.

An admonition to Nobility and Great ones, to take their honor Dan. 2.33. That
they may so do; they must labor for that honor which is from God, and to
which there is no ascending, but by stairs of his scare: for, he is a good
Gentleman, and Nobleman of a good house, that adornes his high place with the
Ornaments of repentance, and sanctified life: and though a man be borne to
honor; yet not his birth, but his New Birth gives him his title to it. They
that hold their honors otherwise, are but usurpers, not holding them in
capite, that is in Christ, by serving him. And here it would be remembered, that
Nobility (though a blessing of God) yet is but an unclean thing (as one well
Master Perki^s on the Creed.
says) if they that be borne unto it, be not newborn to Christ by holiness:
and that, noble blood before men, is stained blood before the Lord, till the
blood of Christ sanctify it. Neither let the greatest think that God has
lift them up to pull him down, that they should say: God has advanced me,
therefore I will do what I list; who should rather say: God has advanced me
that I should honor him, not my self with my noble parentage: for, shall I
dishonor the Lord with his own gift? or, having received honor from God, not
seek the honor which is of God? let all (therefore) whom God has set up,
labor to get a good interest to their noble-birth and places by their
new birth in Christ: for, better never to have been borne, or to have been
borne beggars then unborn to God by regeneration.

Mat. 4.8.9. and they have bowed to him, in all devilish practices, for a few
vain titles, and a little vaineglorie, which shall not credit them, but (one
day) turn to their greater shame before God and his mighty Angels. The like
may be said of all great Persons, that honor not God in his word, and
righteous Commandments: their honor is not sealed in heaven, having not
learned of Christ to receive and give honor, John 8.49.54 they have stained
their promotion to the pit of hell; and they shall receive the meet recompense
of their error, that is, for their short glory, shame endless.

Again, is all honor and degrees of place from God? then Romans 13.1. chiefly
that which is kingly: as all waters come from the sea, specially the great
rivers. David trembled to violate the skirt of Saul's garment. 1 Samuel 24.6. these
profane the blood of Kings, and touch them as far as their lives, by their
cruel Ministers; as in the two French Henry's. and our English King John; and
think they may lawfully, and meritoriously so do. And therefore the late In
his answer to certain scandalous Papers.
Earl of Saluburie said well, speaking of Rome: that she would play so long
with the temporal Soueraignety of Kings, that it would be the glorious work
of Kings to break down her walls, and strongest defense; and, (let me add)
to burn the Whore with fire. The fourth promise follows.

VERSE, 16. With long life will I satisfy him, etc.
A Fourth promise made to the righteous is, that (when it shall be good for
him) he shall be filled with days, and live to old age: As Gedeon was buried
in a good age, Judge. 8.32. and David dyed full of days, 1. Chro. 29.28. and
Job very old, after he had seen his sons, and his sons sons for four
generations, Job 42.16.17. It is like the Lord made this promise to the
Faithful, at what time the Angel cut down so many in Israel, with the sword
of Pestilence: for, the godly might (then) fear themselves very much, that
they also should return to their dust in so great a mortality: but the Lord
heals that fear with his promise of a long life to those that fear him,
and, with faith, call upon him: as if he had said: ye shall not (only) live at
this timer but (when old age shall be a blessing to you) live long, and go to
your graves in a ripe and good age; your head being decked with gray hairs, and
your heart filled with righteousness.

This is spoken of the godly, such as excel in goodness: And therefore the
doctrine is; Abraham for a blessing: Thou shall go to thy fathers in peace,
and be burted in a good age, Genesis 15.15. That is, thou shall be satisfied with
the multitude of many, and good days, and live long, and comfortably here.
When Solomon exhorts Wisdoms scholar to hear and receive his words, that
is, to hear them with fruit and diligence; he persuades it with no other
promise then of a long life, and comfortable estate, in the years of age and
peace, Prou. 3.1, 2. and 4.10. And the Apostle by the promise of the life
present, 1. Tim. 4.8. must needs mean the promise of long life, as the best;
being (as is intended) set in the best and most excellent way.

Object.

Answ. The obedience of the best is but in part;



Secondly, length of days, or long life, considered in it self, Prou. 3.16.
how much greater, where age and goodness meet? the worm would not die; and
they gladly would live longer, that live miserably: Yea, the godly, who (of all
others) have the greatest preferment by death, are loath to lay down this
tabernacle. And wherefore all this? surely, because life is sweet, and to fly
from death is natural to man and beast. Now if life be so sweet, thus fraught
with troubles: how good and sweet is long life, filled with the joy of the
righteous, and flowing with rivers of peace?

Thirdly, who wears a more honorable ornament then he, Phile. 9.
gray head crowned with virtue and Christian graces? and who is more richly
clad, then he that is clad in silver hairs of age, with robes of innocence
and righteousness? Esa. 3.5. If the one be a blessing; that is, to wear a
crown and gorgeous clothing: the other is a double blessing, that is, to be
apparrelled gorgeously with the new man, in newness of life.

All old age (then) cannot be called happy; nor all happy that Esa. 65.20
full of days, and empty of grace? knowing many in my time, and never knowing
God, or my self to this day? Is not the blessing here turned into a curse? and
have such attained to that age, which Solomon calls the crown of glory,
being found in the way of righteousness, Prou. 16.31.

A terror to vicious old men that have nothing but the hairs Rise up before
the hoare head, Leuit. 19.32. For, they discharge the reverence of young men
toward them, by growing in years of sin. Or, would they have young men to
honor gray hairs, wherein is nothing but contumely and dishonor? So, where
God has annexed honor, they untie it; where he has bound, they undo. Which
is not spoken to animate young men to contemn gray hairs in any, though never
so vicious. For age deserves honor, by Gods ordinance, in the worst: not that
they are worthy, but because it deserves regard, as does the calling in a
bad-liu'd Minister. Honor therefore they must have; though not the double
honor, due to those who are old and godly, and who have lived long, and long
good. The last promise follows.

And show him my Or make him see it.
salvation. TO see Gods Salvation, in the Prophets phrase, is to know, by
experience, how great it is in our own Salvation; and therefore some read; I
will offer him my salvation, giving the meaning, rather then the words. Here we
see it darkely as in a glass, 1. Cor. 13.12* Hereafter, we shall see it, as it
is. Here we see it by faith, and Christ with it, by the b Gospel, also by
feeling; when we perceive the power of Christ, Ioh. 8.31, 32
and spirit, which Christ sends to work mortification in us, and true
holiness, Ephesians. 3. Phil. 3.10. And these two sights of salvation are offered
to the inward spiritual eye, here: hereafter, we shall see more further: God
calls this salvation, His, because, he is author of it, and gives it. Or,
because it is from Him, and by his gift only. But (first) this show of
salvation in the eyes of our mind, shining brightly to us through the dark
cloud of troubles, does, in this life, much cheer us up in afflictions: and
this meditation of the life to come, is as Sugar in our cup, to sweeten them
with.

The Doctrine is, that the consideration of eternal life, which by hope we
wait for, Moses, where with he sweetened the waters of Marah, that is, the
waters which, for their bitterness were called so, Exodus 15.23.25. for, the
tree of life, cast into these bitter crosses of our troublesome times here,
does very much alter these waters of Marah, and make them pleasant, that is,
sweet to our mind and spiritual ^aste: with this confidence David laid up
his flesh in hope, Psalm 16.9. that is, thinking to dye, was comforted much in
death, and had great security in his flesh: knowing that it should stand before
God; and that the same Lord that watched over him for the present, would guide
him to immortality. This taste of the promises was in his mind, and would not
go out of his hope; and therefore doubted not the salvation that God had
showed him, with the like resolution. Moses spiced the rebukes of Christ to the
taste of his soul, and endured the cross patiently: because he knew by faith,
that better riches were prepared for him then the treasures of Egypt, Heb.
11.24, 25, 26, 27. The text says: He saw him that was invisible: or, God had
showed him his salvation. This was it that stayed all quiuerings of flesh in
those notable worthies, spoken of in the eleventh to the Hebrews: they knew
that they so rested in the hands of God, that no death could pull them from him
and they had an eye to the recompense of reward: thus they comfortably digested
their crosses, by feelin the life of salvation. The reasons:

They knew that God did call them by such troubles, as by the Act. 14.22. to
his rest: and that for short afflictions, they should have long life in his
presence, 2 Cor. 4.17. or, they considered that all troubles temporal were to
them, in mercy, but as worme-wood, or some bitter thing to waine them from the
breast of the world, that they should, not mind earthly things too much: which,
rightly considered could not but carry their love to better things prepared for
them in another world: and, loving their other life; what would they not endure
to come unto it?

Secondly, the best were most miserable if they had hope only Cor. 15.19. but
because their hope is led forward by better promises in matters which they see
with spiritual eyes; therefore they faint not in afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.16.

Thirdly, the prise incourageth those that run, so to run pains that we
can take in coming to Christ? it is the Apostles own comparison, 1 Cor. 9.24.

Pestilence be sent, if sharp sicknesses, for our trial; if death threaten
us; we have a remedy set by us that will cure all these, and that is, the
salvation that we wait for: for, by it we know that the worst that these, or
any other troubles (like these) can do, is to prefer us to our inheritance
and liberty; where (here) we serve but a ward-ship, and are encumbered daily.
These make our way for us to salvation: and when we duly consider this, how can
we be moved?



Prou. 1.27. and their end draw near? the sight of salvation cannot comfort
them; for that cannot comfor them that they cannot expect: and the fear of
damnation must needs trouble them; for, that cannot but torment them that they
must needs inherit as their portion for ever.

that eternal life is the gift of God: or his only work and gift: therefore
is it called by Esaias (as here) His salvation, Esa. 25.9. and of the Lord he
says: He will save us, Esa. 33.22. he and no other. The most blessed Virgin
calls him her Savior. Let the Papists note, that she must have a Savior: and
this must be, and be no other then God, her Savior. It is that grace of God
that brings salvation, says Saint Paul, Tit. 2.11. that is, It is God, who
by grace, or the doctrine of grace, in the Gospel, brings it. And to spare
further labor in a matter wherein both the Testaments are so plentiful, the
very words of the doctrine, are the same Apostles own words: The gift of God
is eternal life through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. where he shows that
salvation is a gift; and what is freer then gift? and given of God for Christ:
that is, a gift whereof the author is God, and the purchaser Christ, the Son
of God. The Reasons.

For, when Adam was once fallen from Gods image in Paradise, and being driven by
guilty conscience, had fled to the weak succor of leaves and bushes for a
hiding place against him, and the storm of his justice; the good Angels could
not but abhor us; and the other creatures, how could they but become enemies
to us? and therefore no will in them to have saved us, if they could: only,
the fountain of mercy, God the Father of Christ, and our Father in Christ,
looked toward us, and his eye (only) pitied us in this blood of our
pollution, Ezech. 16.5.6. then he made his covenant of Salvation with us in the
seed of the woman, by a person that should come of woman; that blessed seed
that should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. That is, Christ that should
destroy the devil, and has already destroyed him. In all this, what have the
creatures done? Nay, what could they do?

Secondly, he only is giver of life, that can raise from death to Acts
3.12.16. Acts 9.34.40. or he that will give life, must deliver from death: but
none can save from death, but he that has the keys of hell and death, Apoc.
1.18. this is no creature. Also, none can save from death, but he that can
deliver from sin, that causes death. But what creature can so do? what
creature (...) can deliver from an infinite sin?

Esai. 43.11. and 61.10. and 12.2, 3. Ioh. 10.28. Act. 4.12. And surely, if he
did not save us, who (only) is the Savior, our days would be short, and cut
off (quickly:) for the torments of hell, Satan, and our own corruption swaying
us thither; but the the arm of Gods salvation, able, (and only able) to
ouer-master Satan, and our own unruly Old Man, does both stay us from
destruction, and keep us in the path of life.

Zachary in his Canticle, calls him the horn of Salvation in the house of
David, Luke 1.69. That is, the strong and mighty Savior in that house. But
they make Zedekijahs horns, 1. Kin. 22.11. horns of iron, and instruments of
vanity, to join them, for the battery of the Kingdom of Satan, with this
horn of our salvation. To his good will they join their freewill, and their
good works to his great work, and to his intercession, the intercession of
Angels, and Saints departed, and set their posts by his posts, Ezech. 43.8.
putting their old cloth in his new garment, wherein is no breach, nor defect.
But he that made this wedding dinner, is a King, Math. 22.2, 3. And what want
is there at a Kings Feast, specially, at the marriage of his elder son? and
what shot do Kings take of their servants when they have feasted them?
therefore, they pay nothing that sit down at this Supper, Esai. 55.1. Apoc.
22.17. neither bring any dish unto it, that is, dish of half purchase.
Eternal life (as has been said) every part and whit of it, is the gift of
God.

to lose salvation, is to be in worse case at our death then the beasts that
perish. For, when they die, their misery ends with them: but, when reprobate
man dies, his misery begins that shall never have end. For, he has millions
of years (without end) to live in flames of misery, and torments of hell. His
worm dies not, and his fire never goes out, Mar. 9.44. O therefore let us
enter into cares so to serve God, and please him in our lives now, that when we
come to him for an opening, he may not refuse us, with a, Verily I say unto you
I know you not, Mat. 25.11.12. that is, for any of mine, or any that I have
determined to bring to salvation, being no servants of mine, but the servants
of sin. Let us spend the time that remains so as we may be able to give a
good account for our hours, when it shall be asked, how we have lived here.
And let us so live, that is, so to God in his fear, that when we die (and die
we must) we may die with much peace, and in his favor and love, entering into
our Masters joy. The Author and Giver of life give us grace so to live, and so
to die, that we may live to him* and die (happy) in him, for his righteous
sons sake, Christ Jesus: to whom, with the Almighty Father, and eternal
Spirit be rendered all Majesty, might, and glory, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of all the doctrines handled in this Commentary.
Out of Verse 1.
Doct. 1. IN all troubles, we must clean to God chiefly, or only for help;
and to means but as underlings to his Providence. p. 2 Doct. 2. Gods children
should not come to his dwelling place, as guests to an Inn; but as Inhabitants
to their own dwellings. p. 5 Doct. 3. No affliction shall be able to prevail
against those, who make the Almighty their hiding place. p. 10 Doct. 4. Gods
defense never fails his children. p. 13
Out of Verse 2.
Doct. 1. The best way for Ministers to turn souls to God, is to teach them
by their own experience. p. 15 Doct. 2. Christians must run to God in all
extremities, when multitudes turn from him. p. 18 Doct. 3. We must apply the
general promises, or threatenings of the word, to our own particular estate,
for our consolation or humbling. p. 20
Out of Verse 3.
Doct. 1. When God is minded to punish with the Pestilence, no flying will
serve. p. 24 Doct. 2. As Christians ought in all their life to prepare for
death; so especially then, when God sends so short warning to prepare for it
as in the time of Pestilence, and such like Visitations. p. 27 Doct. 3. The
Pestilence is not lightly to be regarded. p. 30 Doct. 4. The Lords deliverance
is only or chiefly to be trusted unto, in most grievous afflictions. p. 32
Out of Verse 4.
Doct. 1. God still watches his Church, to hide her in his Providence against
all troubles and harms. p. 36 Doct. 2. The Truth of God cannot fail, and what
he has promised shall be done. p. 39
Out of Verse 5.
Doct. 1. The work of this grievous sickness is dreadful. p. 44 Doct. 2. The
night considered in it self is dreadful. p. 44 Doct. 3. Gods Messengers and
servants sent in this deadly sickness, or any of his visitations for sin,
are swift and irresistable. p. 47
Out of Verse 6.
Doct. 1. No policy of man shall be able to do any thing, where Gods wisdom
works otherwise, and contrarily. p. 50 Doct. 2. God will disclose to his
people, what his peoples enemies shall devise privily as in the dark against
them. p. 50 Doct. 3. As men offend early or late night or day; God has plagues
ready to send upon them at all hours. p. 54
Out of Verse 7.
Doct. When the wicked are plagued, Gods children shall have deliverance or
comfort as good as it. p. 58
Out of Verse 8.
Doct. 1. Gods children must not pass over his judgments upon others with a
careless eye. p. 61 Doct. 2. God does dispense with his own right, to bear
with our infirmities. p. 62 Doct. 3. We must show pity to those that God has
any way humbled in his Church. p. 68
Out of Verse 9.
Doct. He that makes the Lord his Deliverer, by putting trust in him, and by
believing his Word, shall be delivered. p. 70
Out of Verse 10.
Doct. 1. To avoid plagues, the way is to avoid those offenses, with the
occasions that bring them. p. 75 Doct. 2. A good man's Family shall be safe for
that good man's sake; yea, the wicked fare better for the godly that live among
them. page. 79.
Out of Verse 11. and 12.
Doct. 1. We must not presume to serve in the weighty callings of the Church
without a warrant from God. p. 83 Doct. 2. The godly cannot but be surely
watched and strongly kept, having the Angels about them for their safety. p.
85 Doct. 3. Good Angels are our keepers. p. 90 Doct. 4. No affliction in body
soul or name can hurt the righteous. p. 93
Out of Verse the 13.
Doct. 1. All hurtful things and creatures are by God in the hand of his
Angels, made subject to the faithful, and put under their feet; be they men,
wild beasts, or devils. p. 99
Out of Verse the 14.
Doct. 1. Ministers must in their teaching, agree with the truth of of the word
of the Lord that sends them. p. 104 Doct. 2. Every love pleases not God but
that which is vehement and sound from a hearty lover. p. 106 Doct. 3. The
lovers of God need not doubt of his protection in any trouble. p. 110 Doct. 4.
We can loose nothing that we do to God or for him in his service. p. 112
Doct. 5. God is not loved where he is not known. p. 116
Out of Verse 15.
Doct. 1. They that will pray aright and with good assurance must know God and
love him. p. 121 Doct. 2. God only is to be prayed unto. p. 125 Doct. 3. If we
be not heard in our prayers, the fault is in our selves. p. 128 Doct. 4. The
godly have the Lord (always) a present deliverer in great troubles. p. 132
Doct. 5. Outward honor is the gift and blessing of God. p. 136
Out of Verse 16.
Doct. 1. Long life is a blessing where it is garnished with grace. p. 140
Doct. 2. That eternal life is the gift of God. p. 145

