OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. Certain Sermons, By ROBERT HORN.

LVKE 12.21. So is he that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in God.

GALAT. 6.10. While we have (therefore) time, let us do good unto all men, but
specially to them which are of the household of faith,

LONDON, Printed by Ber: Alsop for JOHN HODGETS. 1619.

TO THE WORTHY JUSTICE OF CHESTER Sir Thomas Chamberlain, Chief Justice of
his Majesty's Council in the Marches of WALES.
Right Worshipful,
I Have presumed under your worthy Name, to send forth a few Observations (such
as they are) on the Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus: A Scripture that may
well beset by the Preacher to an age of such fullness of sin as ours is: An
age and time, wherein ungodliness, Preface to the trunesse of Religion.
which (as the (a) L. of Plessis once said) was wont but to whisper men in the
ear, and lispingly to speak between the teeth, does now most boldly, and
without all blush of shame, with open mouth, call upon both Bench and Pulpit
for protection. Dives has many sons at this day, sprung from his loins of
cruelty, and the contempt of the poor: and for his brethren among us, they be
not Luc. 16 28.
five only* but more then five hundred; all which, living in no fear of God
or death, and impudently in all the deeds of sin, require the sharpest edge
of Discipline, Gods and man's. Therefore and toward the reformation of so many
as God shall incline to read with some conscience the ensuing Discourse, I
have (to my poor skill) done somewhat in this fearful Parable of Dives. That
little which is done, is according to the Scriptures, and humbly commended to
your Worship by One that does love and reverence You for the good parts of
Justice and Piety, which are noted to be in you by those that know you; and
appears by this, that you spare no travel, and accept no faces of men, or
letters in matters of public hearing, whether in Term or out.

And who can but commend this mind of yours in so scarce a world of just and
painful Magistrates? Your piety in Gods matters is testified sufficiently and
plainly by your exemplary obedience to Gods Sabbothes: where your good
affection to the Word, in a loving affability to the Preachers thereof, is
observed and reverenced by as many as truly know you. And for the integrity of
your mind in Court causes, you have as many witnesses as the Court has ears.
And indeed how can Justice badly follow that has so good fore-leaders? I write
not this to give titles: only in your person (Sir) I desire to stir up
others of like place to bear you company in so good a way of piety,
integrity, and in corrupt justice, if they be behind. Also my desire is, by so
true a relation of so many good offices and effects of your chief Stewardship
in the Marches performed among us by you (matters which have a good report of
al men, and of the truth it self) humbly to provoke you to go forward in this
narrow path, wherein sofew now walk, of sincere and conscionable Magistracy.
So shall you one day hear this comfortable saying: Mat. 25.21. (c) It is well
done good servant and faithful. But I may not say much in the Preface, where
so little is said in the Book it self: and therefore to conclude, I say, good
Sir, g^t ground of the common enemy daily, as I trust you do, and keep what
you get. Let no man, let nothing pull this hope from you, unto which you are
entered, till you have finished the days of your faith here, and the Ancient of
days take you to those days of endless life, which He has prepared in His
Kingdom of glory for all that love and wait for his coming, as I doubt not
you do, and pray you may do so still, and with increase, that is, more and
more to the true good of your several charges, and the sure good of your own
soul; for which he prays, and will pray: Who is

Your Worships humbly to be commmaunded, for his best in the Gospel, ROBERT
HORN.
From Mrs. Danets house near Ludlow. the 19. of May. 1619.
OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS.
Luc. 16.19.20. etc. There was a certain Rich man which was clothed in purple
and fine linen; and fared well and delicately, every day, etc.


THis chapter is chiefly directed and written against Pharisaical covetousness
and delicacie; exhorting to liberality, and a care of the poor, and this
under two parables; the first of the Steward, who did wisely, though not
justly: Luc. 16.1.2 etc. the other of the rich man and Lazarus, v. 19.20. etc.
The parable of the unjust Steward does not warrant any pickery or unfaithfulness
in stewards; but only does implie, that as he made him friends unjustly; so
we should both justly and wisely make us friends of this Mammon of wealth, v.
9. by dispersing abroad; Ver. 9.
that the fountains of our liberality may run over to all that need, Prou.
5.16:

The Pharisees, that were covetous, hearing this, Ver. 14.
v. 14. thought that Christ spoke foolishly, and dangerously in so saying, they
could not endure that their sore of covetousness should be touched; and, when
his hand came near it, they put it from them with a scoff, and mocked him:
they would never believe but any man might serve God, and gather riches; or how
should the Commonwealth stand? and how should one man be above another? or,
would he have all men alike? as if they had thus reasoned against him, as
against one that spoke both absurdly and impiously. Ver. 15.
But verse. 15. he tells them, that desire of riches and love of themselves, had
so blinded them, that they saw not where they were, nor in what dangerous
ways: and that because they held themselves wise, therefore they judged him
foolish, and his doctrine (that was wise) ridiculous: but that that pleased
them, God abhorred: and so he comes to the Scripture, now read, v. 19. which
I take to be, not any story or thing done, but as was said, a parable where his
chief purpose is to dissuade these Pharisees from cruel hardness and a carnal
life by the example of this rich man, hung up (as it were) in chains in hell
for a terror to others, because he fed himself curiously, and fed not poor
Lazarus.

And here under the persons of the rich man and Lazarus, we have two sorts or
states of men; such as were then in the world, are now, and shall be to the end
of time. In both which, we may note their different states, and that which is
common to them: their different states are here on the earth, or after they
left. It in their lives they differed very much, and after their deaths, much
more: for, the rich man was finely clothed, or clothed with soft and gorgeous
raiment: and for his fare, it was delicate and of the best every day. v. 19.
the beggar and Lazarus was vexed with sores and hunger, desiring the coursest
bread, or crummes of bread that fell from the richmans table. v. 20.21. After
death, the beggars soul was glorified in the bosom of Abraham, being carried
thither by the Angels: but of his burial there is no mention. The richmans
body was gloriously buried in the earth, and his soul pitifully buried in
hell. v. 22.23. and this is common to both, that they both died. v. 22.

Thus stands the scope and sum of these five first verses, Luc. 16.19
and the sum of all is to advise men to spend their goods well, and not upon
their lusts: not to forget mercy, and to be liberal to Christ's poor, that
their fountains, that is, their estate and possessions may be blessed unto
them Prou. 5.18. But, let us return to the rich man, and hear what is said of
him.

There was a certain Richman, etc. The text speaks of a certain rich man,
but without any name; or of a rich man, not named: because (as one says) God
takes no care of the wicked, neither remembers their names. Doctr.
Where we learn that sinners are in no credit with God: the wicked, and him
that loves iniquity, does his soul abhor, says David, Psalm. 11.5. that
is, such are so far from having credit with him, that he hates them; and not
superficially, but from his very soul. Yea, they shall well know that he
hates them, by raining upon them the rain of snares, of fire and brimstone,
and stormy tempest* v. 6 he whose countenance beholds the just, v. 7. will
not suffer sinners to stand before him. Ps. 1.4.5. Job says, God will not take
a wicked man by the hand. Job 8.20. Jobs meaning may well be, that he will not
give him so much countenance, as men give to a man, when they give him their
hand? or he will not offer them his hand; and if they offer theirs, he will
pull away his: sure it is, that as he will not cast away a perfect man, so he
will not help the evil doer. Job. ibid. He that made the remembrance of
Josiah as honey in all mouths, Sir. 49.1, put out the memorial of Amalek;
Exodus 17.14. and he that said to Moses, I know thee by name, Exodus 33.12,
says to all wicked doers, I know you not. Matthew. 7.22. and 25.12.

God has threatened to dishonor them: 1. Samuel. 2.30. And David, Gods king
and follower, Reasons.
will make no mention of them. Psalm. 16.4. Secondly, they be the enemies that
he will root out, and who, except he mean to dissemble, (which vile affection
is far from God) will countenance those, whom he means to destroy? Thirdly,
other-wayes God shall should do as much for the children of wrath as he does
for his dear children; and that which he has forbidden as evil, to speak
good of evil, Esa. 5.20. himself should offend in, which once to think, were
blasphemy. Fourthly, shame is an inseparable companion of sin, as glory is of
goodness: which should not be so, if sinners should have credit with God, who
should receive shame both from God and godly men.

Uses. Tim. 5.25. and this hope will fail them, as it ha^^ ^^ne many, who for
a while spread as the green bay, Psa. 37.35. and after a little while, were
cut down as the green grass, Psalm. 90.5, 6. Hest. 7.1.8.9. to day in great
grace at Court, to morrow, or before night in great disgrace in prison. In the
turn of the wheel, turned from honor to baseness, and from open liking to
open contempt.

A comfort to the righteous: Prou. 10.7. that is, rotte above ground, as his
carcass does under; the memorial of the just shall be blessed, and their
glory Mat. 26 13.
without end.

He that has the keeping of their names, will preserve their good name as sure
as he does their salvation: therefore is it written, that they shall be had in
everlasting remembrance. Psalm. 112.6. And is it not so? Is not Naboths name now
in all mouths better then either the cursed name of Ahab that was sold to
sin, or the carrion-name of Iezebel that was given to dogs? and who does
not now more honor Mardochas that was so poor and despised, then he does
insolent Haman, whose name so shone for a time, lightened with the glorious
beams of his Princes countenance upon him? And what comparison now between
Peter, Paul, James, with other Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, and their
persecutors; the one so simple in the world, and the other so great?

Which was clothed in purple, etc. But now again to this rich man; who is
described heers by his clothing, and by his fare: for his clothing, it was too
curious, and with too much pride and affectation; else both color and
finenesse might have been tolerated in so rich a man: for it is not unlawful
for great men to put on other, that is more costly, both apparel and colors,
then poor men may. But this man put on pride with his apparel, and wore his
garments as the effects of a lofty mind, with the contempt of the poor: or,
he wore strange apparel, and such as stood altogether in the putting on:
therefore is his apparel censured, and he for wearing it.

Where learn, that all intemperance in apparel, Doctr.
and abuse of apparel, is unlawful to all: as when it is other then belongs
to the sex, Deuteronomy. 22.5. which may cause, and be leader to some horrible sin:
when it is costly, that is, above our estate and means, with excess, or with
stretching of the cloth, 1. Tim. 2.9. when it is light for the fashion or
color; called, Prou. 7.10. whorish apparel, and Zephan^ 1.8. strange raiment:
when it is not made according to temperance and shamefastnes, which is the
Apostles fashion, 1. Pet. 3.3. but according to every new fashion that comes:
when as here it is put on and worn with the impeachment of hospitality, and
other charitable deeds to the poor: for, so attiring our selves, we after a
sort unclothe them; and wearing our apparel with such contempt, wear out
theirs. And lastly, when it is worn, as the ensign of an arrogant and hautie
mind: such was the flaring apparel of the daughters of Sion, so much and
sharply censured by Esa. 3.16.17.18.19. etc. And God will cloth such, for their
garments of glory, which garments of shame. Reasons: they that wear such
apparel, forget their Christian calling, which is, to walk soberly. Tit.
2.11. Secondly, such put their heaven in their apparel, and make it their
happiness, not to go modestly in their clothes as Saints, but curiously and
finely in them, as this rich man: thirdly, such make nets of their apparel to
intrappe themselves and others in it: and not only nets of wantonness, but
sponges to drink up both their own, and the poores provision.

A reproof to the manner of attiring used in our days, Dives? They that cannot
spare a penny to a poor man, can find enough to spare for their great ruffes,
and silk shooe-strings: even seruing-men, and servant maids, that receive but
small wages, have a common hand in this vanity; and by their apparel it is
hard to know, who is Dives, and who Lazarus. It is but a simple maid that
wears not as fine linen as her mistress: and that man is as no body, and of
no fashion, that is not as soon in the fashion as his master, or, (if he be
sober in his clothes) before him: How near does this come to the curious and
unmerciful apparel of this rich man? therefore it is not curiosity in
Ministers to deal in these matters, but a necessary and charitable labor in
them to press them to the full in their Sermons and exhortations: for, though
fine garments be Gods gifts, and the riches of the earth, Gods goodness, yet the
abuse of these to all proud and vnsober couerings; is our shame. Our apparel
was given us to hide our nakedness; Genesis 3.21. which nakedness came from our fall
and sin: and shall we glory in that, which at first was, and to this day, is
the cover of our shame? Is it seemly that a thief, saved from the gallows,
should be proud of the halter that should have hanged him? or if this be
unseemly, as little and ill does it become Christians to be proud of that,
that should as much humble them, as the halter the thief? What difference
then, I mean for any good or sound matter of rejoicing, between thy proud
clothes and his poor halter? Adam, in his innocence, though naked, needed no
cover; his nakedness being then so full of glorious brightness, or as the Sun
in his strength: our apparel, the brauest we put on, would have as much
obscured it, as a dark cloud now does the comfortable Sun: but ever since
sin entered; all is contrary: and what should have been our glory, is now
become our shame. Therefore to make so much of our shame, and with so great
neglect of better duties to our neighbor and the poor, so to trim it, what
is it but an intolerable and cruel vanity? Again, who would glory of the
rags that are wrapped about his wounds? Our attire, what does it but hide, in
our bodies, the wound of our f^ll? and what glorying then of our proudest
cover, there being no better matter in it? The world, while it was young, was
simple and plain, now in the dotage of it, it is clothed with double, not
garments only, but hearts, Prou. 31.21.

Our fathers kept sheep, Genesis 43.2. we, their children, scorn to wear the
w^oll: the garments that God made to Adam and to his wife, our first parents,
were coats of skins. Genesis 3.21. Christ's garment was plain, and simple
without seame. Ioh. 19 23. and many, whom the world was not worthy of, wandered
about in sheepe-skinnes. Hebr. 11.37. that is, in leather coats, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented: which I speak not, to bind all, rich and
poor, to one kind of apparel without difference; or as if I thought that rich
men might not put on more rich attire then other men: but justly to reprove by
the word, and by such examples of holy men, all fond affectation and lightness
this way. Jacob knew his sons coat so soon as his other sons Joseph's
brethren, brought it to him. Genesis 37.33. He knew that it was the same coat
which he made to his son Joseph. The coats of fantastical men and women of
the fashion, at this day, cannot be known to be coats of Gods making: for,
bring them to God, and the Poppets in them; and will be s^y. These are my
sons coats? or may not the devil rather say; These are my sons; for I
made them these coats? But my speech of these vanities rather craves a
reformation then any imbittering; and therefore praying all humorists in
apparel to consider betimes, and before the decree which is gone forth, be
sealed with some notable judgment, what God by Zephans has threatened against
all that are clothed with strange, that is, monstrous garmets; which is that he
will visit for them, by a cutting off of man and beast, Zeph. 1.8. I leave,
what might be further spoken, to consideration, and come to a second use.
intemperance in apparel be censured by the word; then it is not true that the
Scripture medleth not with apparel, neither has any measure to make it by:
for the holy Ghost (as has been showed) does in it, send us a most fit
measure for all the garments we put on. And where some, that say to their proud
coats and vpstart fardingales, as Saul to Samuel, honor me before this
people, 1. Sam. 15.30. are of opinion that the apparel is not to be regarded,
but the heart; here we see, that the apparel is the surest showing sign and
inscription of the foolish heart that wears it. Indeed, the intemperance of
all our strange apparel is from our heart; but when our heart has once laid
it upon our back, we may read an intemperate heart there: and so long as the
leaf is green on the top of the tree, we know that all sap is not gone
down to the root. Therefore, when we see such streamers of pride in so many
garish tires and attirings of men and women, and of women specially; we may say
there dwelles a proud heart, a vain heart, a wanton heart, and a heart of no
modesty or good stay. Such was the clothing of this rich man; which is
therefore branded by the holy Ghost, under the names of purple and fine linen,
and under the daily and wanton use of such pride swollen clothes. Herein, there
is no doubt, but he offended greatly; but herein expressly and principally,
that in all this waste and glory of apparel, he was cruel to Lazarus: and in
this, he has but too many followers at this day, who carry all good
housekeeping with them in their trunkes to London, or some other great City or
Town that they purpose to live in, and not at the Ephrathah of their own
home, Ruth. 4.11. And here it is true which is spoken by one; that there war
never good house kept by Gentlemen, since the Tailor measured their land by the
yard. So much for the Rich man's clothing, his sumptuous fare follows.

And fared sumptuously, every day. What, every day? and that sumptuously, or
choisely every day? this was a double sin: one, that he was given so much to
his bel^y; another, that he was given so continually to it: one that he fed so
curiously and daintily; another, that he fed so, not at certain times, but
daily: and by such filling of the belly with meats, and stuffing of the head
with drinks, made himself altogether unfit for any good duti^s in his
calling. I do not say but the cup may sometimes ouerflow: and that a Christian
may be more cheerful, and feed more liberally at one time, then at another.
For, even Christ at a marriage in Cana, approved a more liberal and full diet,
then at another time he would have done, Ioh. 2.9. But how does this justify
that fulness of bread which was Sodoms, and this rich man's sin? Ezech. 16.49.
Or, how does it warrant at any time, any eating out of Gods fear? and if no
such eating at any time, how much less then any comonnes this way? Two things
therefore are reproueable in this voluptuous rich man. The first, that he was
so curious for his belly: the second, that he was every day so, for which his
soul is in hell.

Out of both which we learn, Doctr. 1.
that all abuse of meats and drinks to excess, is a sin to hell. In the
13. Chapter to the Romans, the Apostle of the Gentiles, Saint Paul, having
exhorted such believers at Rome as had put on the armor of light, to keep the
path of life; says, Not in gluttony and drunkenness: as if he had said, these
are out of your way to salvation: walk therefore honestly, that is, in
temperance, and not in these, if you mean to be saved, Romans 3.13. From whence
it must needs follow, that they offend to damnation, who drink as much as a
Horse, and not so soberly as he: and who make it their exercise to eat and
drink: eating as beasts, who eat all the day and part of the night. But the
same Apostle speaks plainly as much, Phil. 3.19. telling the Church to which
he there wrote, that their end is damnation, whose belly is their God. For,
these are the unclean hogs that the Devils of intemperance enter into, and
carry with violence into the great deep, Luc. 8.33. So Esau, loving his belly
so much, and the blessing so little, is sir-named profane, or one that could
not be saved, Hebr. 12.16. And, what does our Savior mean, Luc. 2^.34, so
carefully to forewarne his disciples and followers with a take heed, that your
hearts be not ouercharged with surfeiting and drunkenness; if he had not held
these to be strong lets to salvation? They that are married to these; say not as
the other ghests did, who refused to come to the great supper of Christ; I pray
thee have us excused; but without all blush of shame, we have married wives,
and therefore we cannot come: Luc. 14 20. That is, we will neither be good nor
seem good. And for this, some have not unfitly compared our Tap houses and
Tauernes (as men use them now) to the law of the ass in Sampsons hand, which
laid the Philistimes heaps upon heaps, Judge. 15.16. For the world has slain
his thousands, but these have slain their ten thousands, 1. Sam. 18.7, and not
with a mortal wound, but with an immortal to eternal death. But that all
abuse of the creature to excess is a sin to hell, may further be proved.

The reasons. For (first) it is a waste of the good creature, abusing that to
sin which might have comforted many, perhaps, have saved the lives of some.
And what are such but thieves to their brethren, Prou. 3.27, and murderers of
their brethren, and themselves? He that robbes a man of that which is his, is a
thief: And such thieves are they that eat the poor, that is, that which is
theirs, at their tables of excess. So he that keeps away the oil from the
lamp, puts it out as well as he that quenches it with water: and such are
they, who devour that bread which is the poor man's life: their hand is in his
blood as well as theirs, who oppress him to death by taking away his bread.
Now, do thieves and murderers offend to damnation: and do not voluptuous
thieves, and murderers offend so too? Secondly, such an abuse of the creature
oppresses the heart with surfeiting and drunkenness: and how can the heart so
oppressed, and person living in such a trade of exceeding, look to be saved?
Thirdly, it is flat idolatry, making the belly a God. Old idolaters turned the
image of a beast into God, and these new, turn the image of God into a beast.
But idolatry is a sin; and are not idolaters sinners unto hell? Fourthly, it
is a chain to adultery to draw it in. For such eaters in excess, and
drinkers out of measure cannot be Prou. 23.30.33.
chaste persons; or there is no sleeping in these, and watching against
adultery: and who can lay on more fuel but he shall have a greater flame?
Ier. 5.8. Now, cannot adulterers without repentance be saved? and shall not
that that makes adulterers, be a sin to damnation?

Here we see in what a fearful state they stand of wretchedness, house where
the dead are? Prou. 9.18. Death is in the pot: 2. King. 4.40. Hell and death in
their drunken pots: but if we will not be damned with such mates, we must not
follow their damnable wales; that is, their pottes of excess, and pipes of
smoke: and where such live to eat, we that would not be judged such, must eat
to live to God. There are many Esaus now, and their number is without number
that hunt all for the belly in the wide field of an Epicurish-life: but we must
be of another number, and follow another course that mean to follow the Lamb,
or to be the first fruit^s to God, and to Christ: Apoc. 14.4. And we that have
the hope of the Saints, must separate from such, always in affection, and as
much as we may in body; self, as we delight in their company on earth, we
must look to bear them company in hell. Let them consider this, who can take
no such delight in the fellowship of the Saints, as they take pleasure in the
large fellowship of those drunken companions, who like a spreading canker
infect Town and Country. It may be, if we run not with them unto the same
excess of riot, or be not combined in fellowship with them, when they thus
pour out their heart to wickedness, they will speak evil of us, 1. Pet. 4.4:
yet let us turn from such, if we would not be turned into hell with them, and
with this rich man, one of the company: for better be evil spoken of for good
deeds, then well for bad.

A terror to all that make it their trade to eat and drink in excess: days
of Nee they ate, they drank, that is, they did both excessiuely: Luk: 17.27;
and as they were drowned in such excess, so they were in the waters that took
them away. So Sedom, burning with such lusts, was burnt with fire, and burns
now in hell fire, Jude. 7. Christians are called to serve in the hall, not in
the kichen; to serve God, and not that which carnal men make their god, the
belly. We must put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14: and shall we think to
put on him, and to keep on flesh? The body is but the garment of the soul:
and is the garment better then the body, the body then the soul? Or is not the
body more worth then raiment? and so the body less worth then the soul, being
but the raiment of it? Why then is there so much care for the belly to feed
it, when the soul is so little cared for, to save it? specially seeing that in
such care of our bellies, and little care of our souls, we can have no hope to
be saved? Let them consider, who give their time and souls to this ungodly
love of meats and drinks in excess. There are that gather by the Omer, and
eat by the Ephah; Exodus 16.36, that is, where one dish were enough, they must
have ten: and plain Master Nabal must feast like a King, 1. Sam. 25.36.
Though there was odds between Beniamins mess and his brethrens, five for
one: Gen: 43.34, yer now men fare but coursely, except they fare better, or as
well, as far their betters do. The sin of Eli his sons has taken hold
upon these days, wherein the custom of our temperate Ancestors is not kept.
For mean persons are not contented with sod flesh: they must have Manna and
Quails, sod and roasted too, or they fare not well. 1. Sam. 2.15. In our
quaffing cups, we sacrifice to health, and speak of healths, when we prepare
for nothing less, and the contrary follows; wherein we do as some of the
heathen did in the days of sacrifice to their idols for health: for
sacrificing for health, they banqueted drunkenly to the prejudice of their
health. But take we heed of the pottage so red, Genesis 25.30, that is, of the
wine when it shows red in the cup, Prou. 23.31: and of our morsells when they
bait us with their pleasantnes in the dish, least with Esau (that was
profane, and a cunning hunter of these things) we think the time long, till
we have eaten and drunk away the blessing. One tells a tale of a certain
Bird, which has the face of a man, and yet is so fierce of nature, that
sometime in her hunger she will prey upon Man. This Bird (says my Author)
coming to the water to drink, and seeing a face in it (which is her own)
like the face of that Man which before she devoured; in great sorrow for one
slain by her so like her self, she never after either eats or drinks, but
beats herself to death. I will not justify the tale: but me thinks all
drunkards and great deuourers, (not for any want, as that Bird, but for wanton
and damnable pleasures) should conceive great sorrow; greater then that Bird
did, for killing of one; not like themselves, but their very selves. Me
thinks, if they would see that face in their cups of wine, and glasses of
strong drink, the face of that Christian man, whose graces and virtues, so
many in one man, they have been the death of; they could not, (having reason,
which the Bird we spoke of has not, and being greater murderers by far) but
pierce themselves through with many sorrows, not to death, but to true life by
sound repentance. Or, how can they hear either of a strong man, or a sober
man, or a wise man, and not be wounded with stings of horrible fear, in the
loud cry of their consciences, telling them that they have slain so many men
in themselves? And may they not say: of wise, we have made our selves fools;
of strong, weak; of sober by calling, drunken and more then brutish by the
custom of sin? But when they shall enter into meditation of a far worse
estate, by such lusts in the body cruelly pulled upon them to damnation, if God
be not merciful to them; nay if they be not merciful to themselves to weep
presently and bitterly for all their vnsober conversation, and turn to God, in
a just hatred of a course of life so murderous and ungodly: I say, when they
shall think rightly of their estate so pitiful and terrible, caused by
themselves; how can they but be amazed with a horrible dread, and so pass the
rest of their days in fear, that they come not into condemnation?

But (specially) this cruel rich man was condemned in that which he did,
because he did it with the contempt of the poor. Then, though a man go not
apparelled as this man did, nor fare as he fared, that is, sumptuously or
choisely every day: yet, if with him, he forget to stretch out his hand to the
needy, he may be damned as he was: though he have not that which he had, yet if
he lack that which he had not, namely, the care of the poor, he may go to
hell. For, there are more ways to hell then one: and the unmerciful, as well
as the thief and murderer shall go thither. Not only he that gets his
goods ill; but he that spends them ill and wantonly, or holds them in
couetously and cruelly, when there is need of his mercy, shall bear his
condemnation, whosoever he be. We may see it here in this rich man: for we do
not read either that he gate his riches and wealth ill, or took any thing by
oppression from the poor and Lazarus; it was sufficient matter to his
condemnation in hell, that he did not use his riches well, and to the relief
of the poor in misery.

Where learn again, Doctr. 2.
that Christians (if they would not be damned) must not only not oppress the
poor members of Christ, but relieve, and do for them in their necessity, as
God has dealt the measure unto them of his power and gift to do it with. For
the sentence of the great day proceeds against the damned on Christ's left
hand, in this form of words: Depart from me ye accursed into ever lasting
fire. The reason is given: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I
thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not:
naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
The Judge does not say; I was hungry, and ye took away my bread: and thirsty,
and ye deceived me of my drink: or, I was harbourles, because ye made me so:
and naked, for you kept away my clothes. Nor does he say; I was sick, and ye
afflicted me, nor ye cast me into prison; but I was sick and in prison, and
ye came not to me. So the inhabitants of Meroz were accursed; not for taking
part with the enemy, but for not taking the Lords part against his enemies,
Judge. 5.23. And the axe is laid to the root of every tree that brings forth
no good fruit, though it bring forth no bad, for the cutting of it down to
death and hell, Mat. 3.10, though Christians, who should be trees of
righteousness in the Church, as it were garden of God, bear no evil fruit, yet
if they bear no good, there hangs over their heads an axe of cutting down:
Our good works cannot save us; but our evil, or want of good, are able to
condemn us. This plea in man's Court, that we have done no man harm, is good:
but it will not hold in that Court, where not only the evil done is judged,
but the good undone must be answered for. To this agrees that prouerbiall
speech of Solomon: He that turns away his care from the cry of the poor, he
says not, he that makes him cry, shall cry himself, and not be heard, Prou.
21.13. That is, though he fall into such misery as shall make him cry, and
that to God and man for help; yet neither God nor man shall help him. So it
is proved, not only that we should not hurt the poor, if we will be saved; but
that, (as their needs shall require) we must help them, to our best ability,
if we will not perish with the cruel that cannot be saved.

The reasons are. Every breach of the commandment deserves hell and second
death: Gal. 3.10, and this is one: Secondly, and more particularly; to omit
this duty when there is cause, and we have ability, what is it but with sin,
to keep in our hands that which is Gods part, and the poores portion; and so
to be guilty of, both sacrilege against God, and robbery against men? Prou.
3.27. When God makes us rich, he makes us but rich Stewards, with a charge not
to keep the Masters goods in our own hands, but to give them to the proper
owners, the poor. Neither is it robbery only to neglect this service of God
to Gods poor, but a kind of murder: Ecclus. 34.22, or a killing of those by
cruelty, whose lives we might save by alms. If then, either theft, or
sacrilege, or murder, or all three deserve death eternal; then that which is
all the three, not to minister to the necessities of Gods poor, deserves it.
Thirdly, the unfruitful tree is cut down for the fire. Math. 3: 10, and so
must all unfaithful, that is, vnworking Christians be for hel-fire.

A reproof of those who think and say, Luke 16.1, 2. For the earth is his,
Psalm. 24.1. and these things that are in it he has delivered under account to
rich men, as to his Stewards, to lay them out; not as to Treasurers, to lay
them up; or, if as to Treasurers, to lay them up: yet so to keep them, that
they be ready always to bring them outfor the service of their Sovereign, and
the good of their fellow servants: or, if these earthly goods were theirs, were
it lawful or reasonable to use them, against the glory of the bountiful
Giver? If my Prince should raise me to honor, were it tolerable, were it not
vilany to turn it against his Crown and Honor? or, if a man should give me
a dwelling house in the midst of a Town, might I set it on fire because it is
mine? and, may I kill a man with a weapon, because the weapon is mine own,
wherewith I slew him? Did Noah well to be drunken with the fruit of his own
Vineyard? Genesis 9.20, 21. And who knows not that a man may abuse his own? and
that he should do, (not all he may) but what he lawfully may? But to put the
matter out of question: He that is Lord of all these things, of whom we hold
in capite, that is, in chief, has but leased them out to the sons of men:
and he that is Master of this great house, wherein we are but Tennants for
lives, as has pleased him to set our term therein, has committed his goods
to wealthy men, but with a limitation to uses appointed by himself, who is
absolute, and may do with his own what he will, Math. 20.15. He is the owner,
and sovereign owner of all, and we have but leases in these things from Him,
and that with certain reseruations: As first, that we make no waste or spoil:
for we may not consume these good things on our lusts. Secondly, that we
perform the Lords service, keep his Sabbaths, as it were Court-daies, and
appear in the assembly, when the people come together to worship before the
face of Iehoua. Thirdly, that we do not deny him his rents, the praise which
is due unto his name: and when he sends to us by the poor his receivers, that
we send to him by them the fruits of his own ground, by dealing mercifully
with them and not evil entreating them, as did those cruel husbandmen in the
Gospel, whom therefore the Lord of the Vineyard destroyed, Math. 21.34.35.36.
etc. For the godly poor are his Baliues, and the gatherers of his rents, who^
he sends to us. Fourthly, that we acknowledge our homage by submitting to his
laws, and the orders of his Court. Fif^ly, that we abuse not our Lords land
and goods to the maintenance of his enemies; as they who feed the bellies of
the wicked, and starve his poor. Sixthly, that we pluck not up his
quichesets, and join land to land, till there be no more room, Esa. 5.8, or
place, to wit to be taken for our money. And lastly, that when any service is
to be done for him, in the Church by the Minister, and in the commonwealth by
the King and his Ministers, we give willingly unto Caesar his tribute, and to
the Minister his tithes. Failing in these, the Lord of our wealth and lives may
take these leases from us, and pronounce all the estates we hold of him,
forfaited and void by misbehauiour. So he dealt with his Steward, from whom he
took away the office and place which he abused, Luke 16.2.3. And it is his
great mercy, that he does not, in like sort, presently enter upon us, and our
estates, who have so often and long by sundry misprisions, deserved a casting
off. Now (then) let us give all these considerations their due respect, and
say, if these things may be called our own, for the which we are to give to
the Master so strict account, when he shall say by death, to every one of us;
thou can no longer be Steward, Luke 16.2. which being so, men have small cause
to be proud of this, that God has set them up in worldly riches and greatness.
For, to whom much is committed, of them much shall be required again, Luke
12.48. The more men have, the more men have to answer for: and the more
wealth, the more bills of debt to further, either their salvation or
condemnation by Gods just judgment.

An admonition to all, commanded, Deu. 15.11. He that gives all, commands us to
give to all that stand in need. Esaias so says, and shows why. His reason is:
the poor are our flesh, Esa. 58.7. Brethren are near; but our selves are
nearere. One brother may do for another: but who is so unkind that he will not
do for himself? It is a fruit of the spirit to cover the naked with a
garment: Ezech. 18.7: but sign of an ill spirit to uncover him, or to keep
his cover from him: And he is no good man who having two coats, will not give
one, rather then see his brother perish for want of one, Luke 3.11. Our
Savior, who being rich, made himself poor to make us rich, will have us to
give alms of such things as we have, Luke 11.41. That is, he requires us to
give alms, either in money, or in that which is money worth. And therefore, in
Luke 12.33, he bids us sell that we have, that we may have to give to such as
need. For some might say, I would willingly give something to Christ in his
poor, but I have nothing to give. Therefore says Christ; you say you have
nothing to give; but have you nothing to sell? no corn in your Barn? no
stuff in your house? If any, rather then your brother should perish, sell it,
and when it is sold, give it to him. Neither does Christ simply command this,
but with promise of a recompense, who may command without it. For he says:
Give out of these bags, and I will give you other and better bags. And it
is sure, if we lay up a penny in heaven, we shall find a pound there: he that
scatters there shall find a large increase. If we sow anything upon Christ
Jesus, the seed of relief that is cast upon him, is bestowed upon a thankful
soil; it will return with usury what we lay out upon it. Christ is no barren
ground, and a cup of cold water sown upon him, will rise to the great harvest
of a cup of glory. Also and further, for the temporal return, the Lord by
Esaias tells us, that, If we refresh the hungry and troubled soul, he will
satisfy our soul in drought, and make our bones fat; and we shall be like
springs of water, whose waters fail not. Esa. 58.10. Here are very large
promises, and he that makes them is faithful, for is it not a great blessing
of God to be provided of springs of water in a great drouth? is not the fatting
of the bones, in some common leanness sent upon others for a punishment,
something worth? Is it not good providence to lay up that in our days of
plenty, which will be sure, not only to come again, but to watch the time,
when for our need, it shall be most welcome to us? and who would not give, so
to receive again? But all this is promised here by the Lord under the broad
seal of his word. And why should we (then) be so slack in the liberal
laying out of something for an evil day? why should we fear to cast our bread
upon such waters, where it will be found again? and to make God our
pay-maister by giving to his poor, Prou. 19.17, seeing all that we so give
shall be repaid so surely, and with such increase? But further to provoke us to
a work of charity so gainful, and so commanded: let us remember that it is
not only a deed of mercy, but work of justice to give to Gods poor: so
says David, Psalm. 112.9; where he tells us that a good man is always doing
good, and that his righteousness, that is, work thereof abides ever; and not
for a while, or for a few good fits. By righteousness, he means the work of
mercy to the poor, which he calls not changeable, but constant mercy: and
he calls it righteousness, because it is not an arbitratie but commanded duty:
nor at our own choice, which we may do, or leave undone; but straightly
enioined. And therefore as the rich have right to the maine estate by Gods
bounty; so the overplus, and that which they may spare, is the poores by virtue
of that donation. That therefore which they may spare is not their own, but
the poores; from whom, if with this rich man and merciles, they withhold the
crummes of their superfluity, with him they may cry, when there shall be no
bearing. Look I am. 5.1. I tell thee, the poor have as good right to the
waste bread of thy estate, as thou have to the full table it self; and it is
ratified to them by the same authority, that the larger portion is sealed unto
thee. But here stands the difference as M. Io. Down. who has written fully
and excellently of this argument, in his book of beneficence.
one says; God has given unto thee thy riches immediately, but to them he
gives theirs mediately by thee. But to proceed a little farther: Christ Jesus
in his last day of judgment, will pronounce that to be done to himself which
is done to his poor, Math. 25.40: and contrarily, that to be taken from him,
which is denied to them, v. 45. Now tell me, if Christ himself should come to
beg lodging of thee, would thou not give him lodging, and (if need were)
the use of thine own bed? When a poor Christian does as much, it is all one,
as if Christ did so by him: and therefore what thou deniest to a Christian, thy
Savior will take as denied to himself in that Christian, and say; Forasmuch
as ye did it not to the least of these, ye did not to me; therefore shall ye
go into everlasting pain, as the righteous shall pass to life eternal, Mat.
25.45.46. But, lest any should think himself not to be charged with giving
because he is not rich, the Apostle S. Paul shows that this duty belongs
both to rich and poor, Ephesians. 4.28. Where the poor laboring man is commanded
to practice love, and the duties of love upon his needy brother. And if we
would have an example for it, we have a good one in the poor widow who cast
her two mites into the coffer of the poor, which was all the substanc^ that
she had, Mar. 12.43.44. God will have the poor (therefore) to spare somewhat
of their poverty, to the comfort of Christ in his needy members. Now, if these
arguments and examples cannot move us; let us know that the judgments are
certain and will come, that are threatened against all merciless rich men,
such as Di^es here. The Lord so abhors this cruelty of turning away from
the poor, that he threatens it, as one of Sodoms sins, with fire and
brimstone from heaven, Ezech. 16.49. And as he that gives unto the poor shall
not lack; so he that hides himself from him, shall have many a curse, that
is, many a plague from God, Prou. 28.27. One is, he shall beg a drop of cold
water in hell, and it shall not be given him: Another, and that which
contains all miseries, plagues and curses is: he himself shall cry, and
not be heard, Prou. 21.13. A pitilesse eye that will not visit his brother, and
a merciless ear that will not hear of his brother in his necessity, God will
not spare, and good men will not pity: and so that shall be verified which
James faith, and threatens to such, or the holy Ghost by him: There shall be
judgment merciless^ to him who has showed no mercy, I am. 2.13. The fruits
that he reapeth, are such as the seed which he has sown: He has sown the
seed of cruelty, and he shall reap it: he loved not mercy, and his judgment
shall be without mercy: he would not open his gates to the poor; and God who
opens his gates to them, will shut them against him: he would not give them
the bread of his dogs, and God will not give him the bread of heaven. He
hated the poor, and he that loves his poor, will hate him: he denied the
crummes which Lazarus asked, and could not have in hell that drop of water
which he asked, So much for that which is spoken of the rich man while he was
upon the earth; that which is spoken of Lazarus, follows.

Verse. 20. And there was a certain Beggar, named Lazarus.


This poor man may be the pattern or mould of that other state of men which
we shall have always with us: but so, as by neither states of rich or poor,
it can be known or judged whether a man be loved or hated of God, Eccles. 9.1.
For no man can say: This is a rich man, therefore God loves him.

My reason is, the one of these was rich, and not loved; not because he was
rich, but because he was naught: The other was loved, though poor; not because
he was poor, but because he was good. So that this diversity of states is
indifferent, and from God: provided that the rich man become lawfully rich, and
the poor man be made poor as Lazarus here, by sickness and sores, not by
any intemperate spendings.

And this teaches that poverty and riches are not simply evil, Doctr. 1.
but by abuse. Abraham, Isaac, Joseph, Job, and others were rich men, and yet
good men: And Ruth and Lazarus were poor, and not evil. Paul an excellent
Apostle, and yet a poor man, 2. Cor. 4.8: Also, Peter, a worthy Apostle, said
to the poor creeple; Silver and gold I have none: and rich Solomon was a
figure of the riches which we have in Christ.

The reasons. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: 1. Sam. 2.7: or, the
poor and rich together, as passingers who coming from coutrarie quarters,
meet in one mid way: and so he that is rich to day, may be poor to morrow:
but what follows? The Lord is the maker of them both: That is, he that made
them, makes this change in them, Prou. 22.2. Now what God has made, or does
make cannot be evil. Genesis 1.31.

Secondly, it is good that some should be full to give, and some empty to
receive what is given, Deuteronomy. 15.11. And if no man were in want, who shall be
served? and who would do service, as now, necessity compelling them? or, how
could mercy be showed, if there were not any to exercise mercy on?

Thirdly; God that by his law has forbidden to steal, does by the same law
allow to a man his interest and peace in that which is his, Exodus 20.15. And
if he have such title to it by Gods allowance: his having of it cannot be
simply evil.

An instruction, contentedly to bear a poor estate,

This secondly, should excite us, if we have wealth, were) by using our wealth
to his dishonor, and by trusting to the broken staff of riches. Trust not in
robbery, says David; and if riches increase, trust not in them, Psalm. 62.10.
As if it were robbery, and so it is, and that against God, so to do. Solomon
likewise bids us not to lean to our own wisdom, that is, shifts or fetches:
as if he had said; though you have wealth in abundance, and the world at will,
trust not to that; for what trust is in that? but make God your trust. Some
take their wealth of God, and thank the devil for it; by giving praise, with
Belshazzar, to their gods of gold and silver, Dan. 5.4; not to the true God who
gives them their gold and silver. Some also in necessity, will bow down to
sin, in one false trick or other, to help themselves. Such care not to lie
and to dissemble, and to swear falsely, or to swear anything for an
advantage: and some having abundance, trust their whole weight unto it, as to a
staff that will never fail. But God breaks that staff suddenly which they
think will hold ever, and in a moment, they are turned out of all. I need not
to go far for examples; we have inowe, dead and living; and let the living
lay it to heart, whatsoever the dead did. And now (more particularly) for
Lazarus.

Lazarus is described here by certain attributes, and effects. The attributes
are, his miserable condition of life: his name: and his sores. The effects are
proper to himself, or out of himself in other. The proper effects are, he lay
at the rich man's gate house, and desired a refreshing from the crummes, or
leauings of his full table. The miserable condition of this poor man was, that
he was driven to beg. The text says, there was a certain beggar. God would
not have a beggar in Israel: that is, he would have none so much neglected in
Christian Israel, as that he should be compelled to beg, or (begging) to go
from door to door. Therefore, that Lazarus was thus forced to beg, was the
fault of the time, not his, who (being full of sores) could not otherways do.

Which again teaches, Doctr. 2.
that it is a corrupt time and state where the poor are not provided for, but
by begging at doors. David says, He never saw the seed of the righteous
beg, Psalm. 37.25. David never saw it; and in a Church well ordered, it
cannot be seen. The poor ye shall have always with you, says Christ, Ioh.
12.8. He says, the poor, but not the begging poor: and the text of Deuter.
15.4, is commonly alleged against beggars in Israel according to the old
Latin reading: but that the Israel of Gods Church should have no such in it,
may further appear by these reasons.

The reasons: for first, it proclaims the shame of Christians, that should
provide for their poor in other manner, that is, charitably at home, and not by
clamor at doors.

Secondly, it opens a gappe to rogues and vagabonds, who under the color of
begging, will be of no certain Church or civil company, but in nature of
Outlawes: and so as rotten arms and legs, ready to drop from the body, they
seem members, and are not.

Thirdly, Gods ordinance is, that the members of the Church should have their
particular lawful callings in it, and not live like wanderers or strayes in no
calling. Lastly, there is not only a law in Moses, but a statute in England
against it, Elizab. 39. Now if all this be so intolerable, it must needs be
confessed, that it is a corrupt time and state, wherein an abuse so
intolerable, is not reformed.

By this it may be judged, Lazarus here, and yet our shame should be great if
it were no other ways;) but strong and sturdy beggars, men and women, who can
give no good account of their wandering life: Yea, many married under a hedge
(if at all) are suffered without all shame and good conscience, to increase the
Church and Commonwealths store with the seed of bastardy, and unclean
copulation. Does not this both preach to our ears, and prove to our faces,
that somewhat in the Church, and somewhat in the Commonwealth is out of
course? Or is order respected, and good law executed as it ought, where such
ungodly dissoluteness is neither restrained, nor looked unto? O that the sword
of excommunication, and the Magistrates sharp sword of justice were walking
here: that both would acquit themselves (as they are ordained) for the cutting
off, or amendment of such offenders: which I can but pray for, and so proceed:
the name of this poor man follows.

Named Lazarus. We heard that the wicked rich man's name was not spoken of, we
hear what this godly poor man's name is. For it is here set down in Gods
register, and said to be Lazarus. And so we see (as was observed upon the 19.
verse, the first doctrine) that where the righteous have an honorable
memorial, the wicked have none, or of no good savor; but as a snuff, burning
in the socket after the last flame of life. But this has bin already spoken
of. This good man's name is Lazarus, or Eleazar: by interpretation, Gods help.
We say to our beggars, God help you; but God says to them that be godly, and
beg; I will help where man will not. And here we learn that the righteous,
Doctr.
though poor, are respected of God: so are not the wicked, though rich.
Abraham the father of belieuers, and himself an excellent belieuer, had not
one foot of ground in the land wherein he was a stranger; yet how rich became
poor and vnlanded Abraham, by Gods favor? Who was greater with God then he?
and who was called the friend of God, as he? Esaias 41.8. Ruth was very poor;
yet being poor and godly, how carefully did God look unto her, as in his own
person; and how richly in marriage, did he bestow her? Ruth. 2.8.11.12.15.16.
and 3.10.11.15. and 4.10.13. And does not Annah, in her song, say; that God
raises up the poor (she means the godly poor) out of the dust, and lifts
up the beggar, that is, beggars such as Lazarus the beggar was, to set them
among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory? 1. Sam. 2.8. If we
would have more examples, there are a cloud of them in the holy story. The
scope of which, containing the covenants that are between God and his Church,
given under the broad seals of the old and new Testament; does show plainly
and fully, that the righteous people in whose heart the Lords word is, are sure
always of comfort and safety from him. And therefore in sundry Psalms, as
119.1.2, and 112.1, such are called blessed; because he that has called them,
will bless them. With this, David made his pillowe, when he lay down to
sleep: Psalm. 4.8: and in assurance of this, both David, and the seed of David
had great confidence, in their greatest adversity; knowing that they could not
but do well, or be in safety whom the Prince himself will countenance, Hest.
6.6.11. Therefore the same David, speaking of a righteous person, promises
him, that the Lord will be his shield and buckler, Psalm. 91.4. Now, if God be
the shield and buckler of the righteous, then they that strike at them, must
strike through him, before they can come at them.

The reasons. The righteous are called Gods house, or temple, that is, his
house of holiness: not which he sets out to Tenants, but keeps in his
own hands, and dwelles in himself. Now, will a man suffer his enemy to beat
his house down upon him, because it is a poor one, if he can choose? But God
can choose: and he that is righteous, though poor, is Gods palace; and what
fear then that he shall not be kept? or who dare offer to pull down Gods
house; the palace which he respects so much, and not be sure himself to be
pulled in pieces, when it shall stand? for he that is a wall of defense to his
people, will be a wall of fire to his peoples enemies, Zechar. 9.8. and 2.5.
Secondly, the righteous, though poor, have Gods image in them, and are as
those children that in most things resemble their father. Now, if men love
those children most that are most like them; will not God much respect his own
image, or rather himself in a true Christian? Thirdly, true Christians, and
new creatures in God, are Christ's full brothers by father and mother. For by
the mothers side they partake with him in flesh, and in spirit by the fathers.
Now if such be full brothers to Christ; then are they dear children to God in
Christ, and he that is so well pleased with him, in him, cannot be displeased
with them. Nay, if Christ's half brothers (as I may say) partakers of flesh as
he, and coming from his creation, as men, Apoc. 3.14, have so many shun shines
of his common favor in outward things; shall not the children that are
begotten with the word of truth, and have a better nature poured into them then
these sons by creation have, be far more respected then they? and shall
they not have the double blessing, who have issued from the womb of God, in
the regeneration? Fourthly, God said to Abraham, and what he said to him, is
spoken to all the faithful, in him; Fear not Abraham, neither be afraid ye
seed of Abraham, I am your buckler, and your exceeding great reward, Genesis
15.1. Now he that is so to the righteous, must needs be much unto them, and
much tender them. Fifthly, the Lord has made a covenant with such as are godly
(though they be poor, so they be poor and godly) of his salvation and
blessing: and sooner shall his covenant of the day and night be broken, sooner
shall it cease to be day and night in their seasons, then he will violate the
covenant he has made with his people of their safety and peace, Ier.
33.16.20.21. But we see that God has kept his word more then five thousand
years for day and night: and will he, for that which is more dear unto him by
his own mercy and the merit of his Son, go from his promise to the
righteous in their salvation? For salvation belongs to the Lord, and this
blessing is upon his people, Psalm. 3.8.

An instruction if we would have Gods favor) to love and follow righteousness:
David: He has chosen the man that is godly, Psalm. 4.3. Not every man, but the
righteous man: and he knows, that is defends the way of the righteous;
where the way of the wicked, neither so known, nor assisted by him, must needs
perish Psalm. 1.6. If then we would have a sure nail in Gods safety, and not
waver or doubt when many are shaken, we must thus be established. And who would
not be preserved, when thousands perish? Even Balaam would die the death of the
righteous, Number. 23.10. He that loved not righteousness, desired to die as the
righteous: but because he desired his last end, whose beginnings and middle to
it, he never cared for, he had his end, not in peace as the righteous, but in
blood: For he was slain with the sword of the children of Israel among the
cursed Midianites, Number. 31.8. It is always thought to be the best husbandry
(and for worldly husbandry it is) most to affect that, that will be sure to
do us the most earthly good: and therefore if silver be offered, we prefer
it before brass; as we do gold before silver, if we may have it. And he were
but a fool or mad man, who running for a crown of gold, would be cast behind,
for the taking up of every pin or point that might be laid in his way. This
good husbandry would be seen in our care to be good, the only way to be
happy, and safe in dangers: and that other folly and madness would be avoided in
out race of religion, as the apparent loss of our crown of glory, 1. Cor.
9.24.25. etc. And here let us know and remember, that gold, compared with the
way of righteousness, is infinitely worse then it; yea^viler then the basest
copper compared with the finest gold, and the vilest clay set in like
comparison with the purest silver. And what comparison between a crown of
gold, and the crown of righteousness? Or, were it folly, yea madness, for pinnes
and trifles to lose the prize of an earthly crown: and is it not greater both
folly and madness for the trifling pinnes of this life to lose the crown of the
next? and for uncertain rest, or rather certain unrest, to adventure, nay
lose all surety of true peace and sound happiness, here and hence? The Apostle
S. Paul, when he speaks of the happiness of our other life, magnifieth the
same far above all temporal felicities, both for worth and continaunce; and
therefore calls it a far most excellent, and eternal weight of glory, 2.
Cor. 4.16.17. To be excellent is much: to be most excellent is far more: and
more yet, to be far most excellent: but that which is added of being an
eternal weight of glory, surpasses them all, as it is said of the virtuous
woman by Lemuel, or Solomon in the Proverbs of Solomon, Prou: 31.29. Salvation
then, which the Scripture calls the salvation of God, being so excellent, or
far most excellent a commodity, besides temporal safety, and other blessings
temporal into the bargain; should incite us to become holy and righteous as
Lazarus, that we may find the fruit which he did, though we have not his name*
that is, may find Gods helpein deed, as he had it, in name and deed.

A comfort to those whose consciences are upright and set in the care of
religion. Habakukes course, and tremble at the word, shall be in Habakukes
case, and have rest, that is, security, in the day of affliction, Haba. 3.16.
Such are a house built upon the seven pillars of God, Prou. 9.1. And that which
is so built, and by so wise a builder, must needs stand in all weather and
changes, Math. 7.25. Wicked men are as chafe and dust that are driven away
with a small wind of adversity: Psalm. 1.4: but as possible it is for a man
with his little finger, to ouerturne a mountain or high hill, as to overthrow
the hopes and quiet estate of the righteous, Psalm. 125.1. The gates of hell,
and all the devils in hell cannot prevail against a true Christian, Math.
16.18, whose best welfare and safety, is not as a cottage builded on rotten
props, but as a castle that stands on mighty pillars. Let the wicked then,
with their fellows in evil, Job. 21.15. Mal. 3.14, blaspheme the good way of
righteousness, saying, that it is to no purpose to be so godly, and precisely
religious; and that they are more wise that take more liberty: here we see
that the righteous have a foundation, and that he who has builded them as
mount Sion, is that maisterbuilder, whose work abides ever: All the hairs of
their head are numbered, Math, 10.30. True it is, that the rain and floods may
beat upon this house, and it may leese, as did Peter, Math. 26.70.72.74, a few
tiles in the wind; yet can it not fall, for it is grounded on a rock, Math.
7.25. God has not promised that we shall have no troubles, if we be godly; for
who has more? and Lazarus here had many; which wise do me foresaw, and
therefore made her house so strong: but the truth is, that the good will of him
that dwells in the bush, will keep it from consuming, though it do not from
burning, Exodus 3.2, and that though troubles beat upon us yet they shall not
sink us. Thus the Apostle of the Gentiles was persecuted, but not forsaken:
and thus we also may be cast down, and not perish, 2. Cor. 4.9. So much for
this poor man's name, Lazarus: His sores follow.

Full of sores. The sores of this poor man were not few, but many, and over
all his body. The text says, he was full of them: the meaning is; his body was
filled with ulcers, biles, and running sores: so sore that he could not work,
and so neglected that he was made to beg: which the more aggrauates this rich
man's churlish and inhumane sin; as also the sin of the Church or place,
wherein such cruelty was showed to one in Gods image And so this rich man is
condemned, and the Church shamed, that should better have provided for one so
full of sores. And it is not to be doubted but that for such a purpose, his
general sores, his great hunger, and lame limbs are so precisely remembered:
who therefore should have bin relieved with the common purse of the Church or
Parish in which he lived: they should have sent to him; and at home provided
for him: therefore they are censured here as merciles, that they did not so.

And this teaches, that such Lazar-persons in a Parish, Doctr.
as are full of sores, sick at home, house-pent, or bedridden, should be visited
with the mercy of a common collection: or, they that are appointed in such
cases Overseers, should come home to them, in person, see their wants and
miseries, and accordingly provide for them out of that that is gathered for
such uses: for seeing they cannot come to us, is it not necessary we should
send to them?

And that there should be such a common collection made, may be proved by
the Apostles charge to the Church of Corinth, which, in that Church, is given
to every Church and Parish now; That every one put aside by himself, and lay
up as God has prospered him: to wit, for common gatherings, 1. Cor. 16.2.

Also, that there should be such sending to the poor, without coming: for it
is plain by another charge given in this very matter, by godly Nehemiah, who
willed the people, in the day of their feast, and after they themselves had
eaten and drunk of the best, to send unto them for whom none is prepared,
Nehem. 8.10. He says, Sexd it: He says not, Let them come to your doors to
beg it. But some cannot come; and Lazarus (here) with much ado came to the
rich man's gate. Such should be visited by the godly rich in their poor and
homely holes. So Job, he that is called the Father of the poor, for his
mercies to the poor, did not only feed and clothe those whom he knew to
be hungry and without cover; but, lest any should perish, whom he could not
hear of, he enquired with his tongue, and used his eyes to see them, Job
31.17.19. Such an Ouerseer of the poor was this merciful man in his days.
Christ, also, speaks of visiting the sick, and in prison, in his last doom
of judgment; and pronounces sentence of damnation against those that had not
lo done, Mat. 25.36.43. Where it appea^eth to be a necessary duty in the
richer Parishioners, not only to help those that, in great extremity, come
unto them; but to enquire of those that cannot come, and have more need: and
lest they should fail in pity, to go to their houses and see them: For when
they go thus with Moses, to look upon their burdens, Exodus 2.11, by that
stronger attractiue to pity, (seeing) they cannot but be more moved to be
merciful. And therefore S. James speaks of visiting the fatherless and
Widows in their adversity, Iam. 1.27. not only of relieuing them when they
come; but of seeing them, and seeing to them, when they cannot come: for he
knew, and would have us to know, that to see the poor and sick in their
pitiful houses and need, will more stir a man in his bowels of mercy,
then bare hearing can. And indeed it must needs be more profitable, and more
work upon us, when we see our own wretched condition in their chain: that
is, that which God might have laid upon us, and has translated to them, then
if it were but reported to us: for we may doubt of the report; but need not
when we have seen: also, they may speak of less; but we shall know all when
we see it our selves. And, and we are bound in the chain of a commandment,
thus to visit the poor and sick, that is, with our own eyes to do it, and
not in a borrowed fight, with others eyes, may further be proved.

The Reasons. For, (first) it is made by Saint James a special property of
true Religion, Iam. 1.27. and, if a special property of Religion, then they
that do otherways, are (improperly) religious.

Secondly, were are naturally unmerciful, and except we see, we will not
believe: therefore for this cure of our hard hearts, it is needful to go home
to the poor, bound with fetters of sickness to their beds or houses, that
we may see with our own eyes, and not darkly, as through Spectacles, by those
whom we send.

Thirdly, this duty unperformed, they may dye for want, as Lazarus at the rich
man's gate: and if they do their blood will be required at the Parish hands,
which, for not looking better to them, have shed it. I tell you, the King will
be answered for a Subject: and God will not lose a Christian.

Fourthly, without this, we are strangers to our brothers love: and if we be;
and so, or by being so, shut up, to wit, in an uncharitable hardness, our
compassions from him, by not coming to him, how can the love of God be in us,
says Saint John? 1. John 3.17.

Not sufficient therefore to give at our doors; but we must enquire, or
hearken after such as are in want; specially poor and sicke-house keepers,
chiefly those of the household of faith: and hearing of them, we must send unto
them according to our store. For love is painful, and ends not in a
pennie-almes, but is rich in good works, 1. Cor. 13.7. 1. Tim. 6.17. Charity
binds us that are Christians, to more then to the giving of a penny by the
way, or of a piece of bread to beggars at our door. For our Savior Christ,
charging the unmerciful on his left hand, that they had neglected to do good
where they owed it, to wit to his poor; speaks of more then of feeding the
hungry, or of giving them a cup of drink. For he says further: I was naked
and ye clothed me not, a stranger and ye lodged me not; sick and in prison,
and ye visited me not, Math. 25.43. In which particulars, Christ's meaning is
to show that mercy is to be exercised in all these, and that the doing of one
of them, or of two, excuses not a Christian. Therefore holy Job did not only
not ea^e his morsells alone, but made the poor to drink of his fountains,
and warmed the naked with his fleece, and received home unto him the wandering
stranger. This did Job, the father of the poor; who well deserved the name.
And so should all rich-christians do: and such be, or may well be called,
Fathers of the poor, as Job was. For as a natural father provides not only
bread for his child, but raiment, lodging, and other necessaries: so rich and
able Christians should as fathers, not only do one but all of these duties to
Gods poor, as to the children of God, and their brethren in him. All cannot
do all this, and some that have the best mind, have the fewest means; yet
let such offer their two mites, the gift of their good will, and it will
suffice. And now to move the unwilling to a work of such import, and so
commanded; let them first consider that the case of the poorest may (God knows
how soon) be made theirs. They are rich to day, they may be poor to morrow:
and who shall give to them, who (when they were able) would give to none? Prou.
21.13. May not their own measure be returned? may they not justly be served
with it? Math. 7.2.

Secondly, God in both Testaments requires this duty under great penalties: if
he had not, it is our debt to him, who gives us all: and should we not pay it?

Thirdly, we are members one of another: 1. Cor. 12.26, and will one member see
another perish, and not succor it? Or when we are full, shall we think no man
is empty? When are in our warm house, that none is harbourlesse? that no man
is sick, when we are whole? and no man in trouble, when we are at rest? And
because we have abundance, that no man feels want? Shall nature teach one
member to help another? and shall not grace, or the bond of grace, bind the
members of Christ, one to relieve another?

Fourthly, the reward is great, for a cup of cold water the cup of glory, Math.
10.42. And shall we we not have respect to the recompense of reward? Hebr.
11.26. To lend unto men upon usury is forbidden, Psalm. 15.5. but to lend so to
God, by giving to his poor, is commanded, Math. 25.27. Of all vsuries, this is
safest, and has the richest return.

Fifthly, we are but stewards, not owners of the goods we call ours; and they
are matters of trust from God, and not of private interest to those that have
them. Now shall the steward turn into his own profit, or bury in his own
pleasures his Masters money, and not come to his account for it? The steward,
that did so, (as we heard) was reckened with: Luke 16.2, and such unjust
stewards shall be sure to hear one day; Give an account of thy stewardship,
Luk ibid.

Sixthly, God gives us the example, who gives abu^dantly to all: and should we
not be followers of God? Ephesians. 5.1. Should we not be merciful, as our heavenly
father is merciful? Luke 6.36. Nay, he that died for us feeds us, that is,
spiritually feeds us with his body, and will we not feed him with our meat?
He clothes us with his righteousness, and shall we think it much to cloth him
with our cast apparel? He has prepared for us in heaven; and will we do
nothing for him on earth? Now what we do to poor Christians, we do to him:
and what we do to him, must be in more then in a piece of bread given him at
our doors; we must lodge him, and clothe him, and do other things unto him:
freely we have received, freely we must give, Math. 10.8. So much for this
poor man's sores; the effects, by which he is further described, follow. The
first is.

Which was laid at his gate, etc. In the greek; Who was laid prostrate, or all
along at the rich man's gate house. It is like, he could neither stand nor sit,
he was so full of sores. And where we read of the rich man's gate house; it may
be gathered he had a large and stately house: a house of great receipt, and many
in house, besides his train of servants, and the company of dogs he kept.
And though all these had house-roome sufficient, and enough for the belly, yet
a righteous poor man full of sores and hunger, lying at his door, could have
nothing. For (as follows) though he desired but crummes, he could not have
them. What can the rich man say to this? that he saw him not? He could not go
out of doors, but he must see him: for he lay at his gate. That he was able to
work? He was full of sores, and could not. That he had no such need?
wherefore then did he beg crummes, and not the whole bread of the rich man's
table? That there were many, and he could not serve all? We read but of one,
even Lazarus. That he might have gone to other house^ to beg somewhere? It
seems he could go no further, by his lying along in the place, and his speedy
death there: that he might have chosen to come thither? Necessity drou^ him;
and hope to find something, where so much was stirring, inui^ed him: the rich
man fared well, and sumptuously, every day. This rich man (therefore) is
without all excuse; as his dealing was without all mercy toward so poor a man.
But where one so respected of God, is so humbled by him at a Churles gate,
Doctr.
we learn that it is nothing strange, God should begin his visitation at his
own house. Saint Peter says, The time is come, that it must beso, 1. Pet.
4.17, and Christ: Our friend Lazarus sleeps: Ioh. 11.11. That is, is already
dead, v. 14. So when the destroyers were sent against Jerusalem, their charge
from God was, to begin at home, at his own Sanctuary, Ezech. 9.6. And when
the Lord would visit the proud heart of the King of Ashur with his
destructions; he professes to do all his work, to wit, of visitation upon
mount Sion and Jerusalem, his own city and household people first, Esaias 10.12.
Ier. 25.12. The bitter cup of indignation, spoken of by Jeremy, was prepared
for many Kings, and a large people and world of men; but who must drink first?
and to whom was this cup of desolation by the sword first sent? Was it not to
the city where his name was called upon, Ier. 25.29. and 49.52. Was not
Jerusalem plagued first, and many and great nations after her? So a poor man
here is sore visited, and the rich man spared till his turn come.

The reasons. He that is the Master of a family, will have an eye to his own
house before strangers. So he that is the Lord of his people, will first look
to his own household people, and after to the strange-children. He will first
nurture with correction his own sons and servants; and then smite with
destruction and plagues all that are forth of his house, being not sons nor
servants, but enemies.

Secondly, it more justifies the Lord, when he will not spare sin at home;
so near him; and cannot but more silence the enemy when God shall visit for
his sin. For he has less to say against him when his own have not escaped.

Thirdly, God will not have his children condemned with the world; therefore he
will chasten them, when he spares the world, that is, sinners in the world, 1.
Cor. 11.32. He will pull them in betimes, and because he lou^s them, deal
sharply with them, Hebr. 12.6, when the wicked shall go free: as a father
seeing two boys fighting, whereof the one is his own, will correct the child
that is his, and let the other pass.

Then, exception of the cross, Psalm. 89.32.33. Joh. 16.33. For as the mother
that waines her child, lays wormwood or some other bitter thing upon her
breast to make the child to leave it so because, we are too much affected
naturally to the world, that is, to the lusts of those profits and pleasures
which are therein, except we be wained from it by some miseries and crosses
here; therefore has God laid upon it the wormwood of calamity and troubles,
to the end that we (his children) might not too long hang upon the breasts of
it for weak and vain matters, or that which is but the simple food of
worldlings. What if God had for any long time, spared the use of his rod and
staff toward David, his own King. Psalm. 23.4. He himself or another in like
case (if not he) tells us: before I was afflicted I went astray, Psalm. 119 67.
The Lord laid this rod away, but for a little space, by giving him some rest
from war and troubles abroad; and so soon as he awaked from his afternoones
sleep, he beheld a sight, such as Adam after his sin, saw; who saw
himself naked, and ran from God, Genesis 3.7.8. 2. Sam. 11.2.3.4. Again, till
God brought him to his Sanctuary to school; how foolish and ignorant was he,
and how like a beast before him? Psalm. 73.17.22. Are we better then David? or
could not David be ruled without strokes, and can we? Therefore necessary it
is, that judgment which begins at Gods house, should (if we be of this
house) begin also at us.

A terror therefore, in their mind, or outward members. For except they can
make sure, that they have no sin, it is fearful to be at such ease. And if
judgment be ginne at Gods house, either they are not of that building, or his
judgments must beat upon them. Besides, continual quietness and peace in a
sinners state, proves that the strong man has possession, Luke 11.21. But
where a Christian is once made, there is no end of stirs in the body, or
war in our mortal bodies, the flesh lusting against the Spirit, Galat. 5.17,
till one side yield: which is never seen in the children of regeneration, till
corruption, that goes not out but with the going out of the last enemy be
done away. Further, we are senseless of sin, except God make it bite, as if
he gave it teeth by his corrections: and if our hearts do not smite us, as
David's, him, 2. Sam. 24, how merrily do we go away with sin, carrying it as
easily as Sampson did the gates of Azzah? Judge. 16.3. Now, is it terrible to
live in sin with so small remorse of mind and conscience as they do, whose
ears God has not opened by his discipline? Then it must needs be a terrible
thing for men, consisting of flesh, to feel no crosses.

But must judgment begin at Gods house? loves? Amos. 3.2. The branch that
bears fruit he purges, to wit, with his corrections, that it may bring forth
more fruit, Ioh. 15.2. That is, the Lord of his own vineyard comes with
crosses, as with a pruning knife in his hand to pare us, and to dress us (that
be branches,) that being yet but weakly fruitful, we may be made fit to bring
forth fruit plentifully in duties of piety to God, and of love to men. And for
these outward things of ease, credit, and a wealthy life, what are they but
medicines for the disease of sin? Therefore he that dieteth his children will
give them these things, rather as medicines to heal them, then as meats to
fill them. For no good Physician will prescribe that use of medicines that he
does of ordinary meat. He that comes to a man's house, as a stranger for a
night, is better used for the time, then he is that shall be heir. For
oftentimes the one sits down at table, and the other waits: yet who is
greater, the stranger? or he that shall be heir of all? So for these strangers
that have some few nights lodging in Gods Church, howsoever here they may be
more made of for outward things, and for some short time, then the children of
the house, or then the eldest son; yet the father has no such care of them,
nor meaning to them as he has to his own, to whom he will leave the
inheritance: and they shall depart as strangers, when these shall abide in the
house with him for ever. And as Abraham gave certain gifts to the sons of
his concubines, and sent them away from Isaac, Genesis 25.6: so to these, not
children by adoption but sons by creation only, the Lord will give these
small things for their child's part, and at their death, send them away from the
true Isaac, Jesus Christ, never to have any part in his salvation: never to
dwell any longer with him, to whom the Father says: Son, all that I have is
thine, Luke 15.31. We see it here in this rich man and Lazarus: For though
Lazarus waited for a while, not at the table, but gate of this churlish rich
man, who sat at table in his great hall, and had great abundance of these
earthly things; yet when Lazarus received the inheritance prepared for him, he
was sent away as it were to his own place; and as a stranger to God and Gods
family, departed from him, and it for ever. For the first news we hear of him
after his death, is, that he was in hell in torments: that was his place, and
thither he went. Hitherto of the first proper effect, the second follows.

Verse. 21 And desired to be fed with the crummes, etc.


A second proper effect concerning Lazarus; who (greatly) pinched with the
cross of ponertie, and having deadly sores upon him, and a grievous hunger,
yet breaks not out by impatience, as our beggars would; but humbly craves
some relief from the very crummes of the rich man's table. He craved not any
variety for a sick and weak stomach, nor would choose his alms, as some
that come to our doors now, who have more need of the Magistrates discipline
then of that they ask: but begged only some of the cast bread, and
(questionless) would have bin thankful for it.

By whose example our poor are taught to be contented with their alms,
whether of crummes, as Lazarus; or of gleaning, as Ruth. Ruth. 2.2.3.

The reasons. Men should submit to that estate that God has laid upon them;
and being poor, Doctr. 1.
not disdain to stoop under the low gate of a poor life: the best way to
make men merciful, is to make our selves by humility, capable of their
mercies.

Secondly, if servants must be contented with their wages, (perhaps less then
they deserve): much more beggars with the alms that is freely given.

Thirdly, the contrary were to walk stubbernly against God, and therefore to
provoke him to walk stubbernly against them. For their poverty is his
chastisement: and therefore, despising what God shall send by it, they contemn
the rod, and him that sent it.

A reproof of our unthankful poor, poor should speak with prayers: Prou.
18.23, That is, submissely, as they that entreat: but now they speak as the
rich; not humbly with prayer, nor dutifully with thanks, but with proud and
insolent replyings. For they answer rowghly, and not with a gentle tongue, when
they have not what they would. These are not cast down before the Lord: for
then they would in better behavior, cast down themselves before men. Nay, but
such set themselves rather to wrestle with God, who will therefore bring seven
plagues more, and seven times greater upon them, till they be either humbled,
or destroyed, Leuit. 26.21.24. If their poverty cannot humble them, nor their
misery make them stoop; (where yet Pharao, and Haman, and Benhadad in their
afflictions became humble and stouped unto those who they knew, could help
them); the Lord has other means to make them perceive who he is, either by
plagues on earth, or by that plague of plagues, their just damnation in hell.

Lazarus here desires but to be fed with crummes, yet it does not appear by
the text that any man gave them to him; rather it is evident by that which
follows, that no man did. And so the master of the house, being cruel to
the poor; the servants (for like Master, like servants) would give him
nothing.

Which teaches, Doctr. 2.
that as the Master is, such (commonly) are the servants. If the ruler hearken
to lies, that is, admit them into his ears and receive them into his heart,
all his servants will be wicked: Prou. 29.12: That is, as ready to tell them,
as they to hear them. And whither should filthy channells run, but into
sinkes fit for them? When Caiaphas was against Christ, his whole household, men
and maids, were against him, Math. 26.69.71.73. Ahab, a wicked King, had as
wicked Courtiers, who did so generally humor him in the hatred of Gods
Prophets, that Eliiah thought there was never a true worshipper left in Israel,
1. King. 19.10. If Herod be moved, all Jerusalem is moved with him, Math. 2.3.
And Jeroboam, an idolator, made all Israel idolators, 2. King. 3.3. So Queen
Marie a Papist, made the land Papists.

The reasons. They that serve, are led much by those whom they serve; and many
seek the face of the ruler, Prou: 29 26. That is, as men are men, and
compassed with flesh, they desire and study, in corruption, to gratify those
in evil that for evil can reward them.

Secondly, inferiors are evil by nature; and being so by example too how can
they be good?

Thirdly, if they be not inclined as their Masters, they cannot hope to have
their countenance: and the greatest number will rather lose Gods favor, then
theirs.

An admonition to Masters to be good themselves, as the Judge is, so are his
officers, good or evil, Syrach. 10.2. Therefore Christ, when he would see good
fruits of a family, begins at the tree of them in the Master, Math. 12.33.
Abraham, given to hospitality, his wife was so too, and so was Lot, brought up
in his house, Genesis 18.6 7.8. and 19.2. Where the Master is godly as Joseph,
the servants will be godly, as Joseph's chief servant, Genesis 43.23, or s^eme so:
but wicked Masters, as Absalom, have wicked servants, like those of Absalom,
2. Sam. 13.28. So where the Master is a Papist, the servants must be Papists,
or favor Papistrie. And where he is neuter, or lukewarm, they must be
indifferent. As the boby bends, so must the shadow: children and servants in a
house, are commonly shadows to the mind of their Parents, and other
overseers. These are the party colored rods they look at, and their
examples the color they conceive by, Genesis 30.39. Thou swearest before thy
little ones; and they hear thee well enough: for even these little pitchers
have ears: and must not they swear as fast, when thy example teaches them?
Thou do not reverence Gods word, or Ministers: and will thy servants and
children do better? Thou have tenants, and they see thee no way truly to
countenance good things, nor to be angry at evil: and will they hate the
evil, and choose good: or do not they mark what countenance thou give to
the Preacher, and what words against him? And so as thou pipest they dance. in
what way thou leadest of zeal or coldness in religion they follow; naturally in
coldness, hypocritically in zeal. Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin is
Master, and Prince there: and they shall answer as sinners for themselves:
and as examples of sin, for others. Nor let them say they go to hell for
nothing, when in two regards they go thither: one for being evil, another for
making others evil. So much for the proper effects that concern this poor
man, that which (out of him) concerns others, follows.

Yea and the dogs came and licked his sores. Yet the dogs (whose nature is
to bark at strangers and not to lick their sores, but to make them sore
showed more pity in their kind, then either this Master, or his men. For
these gave him their tongues, they would not give him their crummes: these
supled his sores, they no way slaked his sore hunger. These bestowed what they
had, they would bestow nothing. These were pitiful to man; they were cruel
to poor man, and inhumane to Lazarus, a godly man. Which could not but proceed
from the Lord, and be his own deed, both to testify against, and to convince
the unmerciful, and more then beastly incompassionatenes of such cruel
wretches. For here the kind nature of the dogs shamed the hard hearts of men:
and God opened their mouths, as he did of Baelaams ass, Number. 22.28.19, to
reprove their m^ister. Or, God taught these dogs kindness, to teach their
master mercy.

And here we are taught that God, Doctr.
for good purpose, does oftentimes make unreasonable creatures his witnesses
against reasonable men So fire and Lions, the fierce fire, and the hungry Lions
showed mercy, when the King and Princes of Babel and Persia would show none to
Daniel, and Daniels fellows, Pan. 3.27 and 6 22. Thus also, when Israel would
not know God by his Prophets, he taught them by the Ox and Ass to know him,
Esaias 1.3. So providence is taught by the Comes, Prou. 30.26: order by the
Grasshopper v. 27: diligence by the Spider, v. 78: and timely repentance by the
Turtle Swallow, and Crane, that know and observe their time, Ier. 8.7. In the
book of Micah; when Israel would not hear, God turns him to the Mountains
and hills, bidding them to hear, Mich. 6.1.2. And Solomon makes the Ant, the
sluggards teacher and the Ant-heape, his school to learn in, Prou. 6.6. Thus
reasonable men are schooled by unreasonable creatures.

The reasons. By this means, God does show them what they should do; and
shame them, not having done as they should. Now shame often times moves us,
when the words of the wise can do nothing with us.

Secondly, proud persons must be humbled, before they will learn, Esa. 66.2.
But what better way to humble them, then to convince and shame them by such
simple Teachers as the Ox and Ass, and other, both unreasonable and sensles
creatures are? For may they not then say; What fools are we that must have
such to teach us?

Thirdly, man must have one or other to teach him knowledge, or to condemn
him, if he will not learn: and God has not left himself without witness,
Act. 14 17. Where therefore, his Ministers cannot teach man by his word, the
other creatures by their order must, that there be no excuse. And now what can
he say, when the creatures without reason observe their makers law; and he that
has reason, and the teaching which they want, will not?

An admonition to reasonable man, not to despise, Use. ^^.
nor yet to neglect the schoolings that God gives him by his other creatures.
Not to be unmerciful, when some dogs have bin merciful. Also, when beasts
tender their own kind, not to forsake his. And when God puts the song of
his praise into the mouth of all creatures, even of the hills and mountains,
of the fowls of the air, of the trees of the forest and of the dragons and
worms that creep upon the earth, Psalm. 148, not to suffer his praise to go
out of his mouth. For shall i^ not be shame and sin to him to be dumb, when
these are so hie, and loud? And what witness can they give but of his just
condemnation* if where they declare his glory he bring by his wickedness, by
his cruelty, by his profane life and most v^ine behavior, nothing but shame,
^eproch, and contempt to his name? God (as was said) never left himself
without witness, no not in the blind world of the heathen; how much less can
he want witness now in the new world of grace, where the light is ten times
clearer then that of the Sun? and where besides the dark stars of the
firmament, we have the clear glorious Sun-light of the Gospel to walk by? If
then, being taught (as we are) in the common and private school, that is, both
by creatures, and by the word, we profit not more to obedience, or a better
life; not only the word (that we have so long heard) will judge us, but even
the creatures, that do so well in their kind, will with open mouths witness
against us. And let me tell you, that if the Esaias 1.3.
Ox know his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib; and we that have reason
to make us men, and the Gospel to make us Christians, neither will know, nor
regard to know our owners fear, or Masters glory; it cannot be but these
simple drudges, the Ox and Ass, will in their obedience, give in a fearful
evidence against us, one day. Also, we that have our beasts obedient to us in
the six days, and yet (as rebellious children worse then beasts) are
disobedient to the Lord on the seventh, what can we say? For when we spoke to
them they heard us, when we whipped them they obeyed us, in all our business
they attended on us: and yet we listen not to God calling us by his word; we
neither profit by his chastisements, nor attend on his commandments. How can
we answer this? how can we deny so plain a matter as this? And when these
shall speak against us with the voice of their testimony, what will we
allege for our selves? And what will be our defense? A fearful thing
therefore, not to hear such Schoole-maisters as these, nor to be better by
precepts of this nature, in such Monitors, as these are.

But does God make unreasonable creatures his witnesses against reasonable men?
Luke 19.40. That is, if it could be supposed that man, in bearing witness,
would be partial to mankind; yet God could have witnesses, many and sufficient
against him, in his other creatures without number. Or if man should not accuse
man, nor a man's conscience himself; yet neither should God be without
witness, nor man without accusers, or (for failing) innumerable accusers of
another element and creation. O then, how careful should we be now by keeping
good conscience in all things, Hebr. 13.18, to stop those mouths that
otherways we shall be sure, by walking against God and not in his fear, to open
wi^e against us in the day of vengeance, and year of recompense from the Lord?
Esa. 34.8. When the Israelits contended with God, and murmured against him in
the desert, they might have considered how he but spoke to the Sea, and the
great Sea did presently hear him; though it were to divide it self, as it were
to receive some deep wound orgash against course, to give them way. Ex. 14.21.
So when they rebelled for water; they might have learned obedience of the hard
rock; for when Moses smote it, Number. 20, 8.11.
he should but have spoken to it, it was not rebellious, but presently gave
them water in abundance. These were Gods witnesses, and shall be men's Judges;
because by the light in them they could see no better to obey, having so clear
a torch of example to lead them. And so we if we profit not to good order by
the seemly order of the unreasonable and insensible creatures that serve God
in their kind; shall have witnesses enough against us out of that simple host
or muster. The winds and Sea obeyed Christ: for he rebuked the winds, and said
to the Sea, be still, and presently they obeyed: the winds ceased, and the Sea
was calm, Mar. 4.39. Now if angry persons hear this, to whom it is said; Be
angry, and sin not, Ephesians. 4.26, and yet will not be calmed by the word,
putting away wrath; the winds and Sea shall condemn them. The beast that will
drink no more then it needs, may depose against those that sit at the wine
and strong drink all day long: The Ant that prepares her meat in Summer,
that is, while it may be had; condemns those sluggards and idle, destitute of
understanding, who neither Summer nor Winter, care for any thing, Pro. 30, 25.
The locusts that go forth by bands, that is, strongly tegether, and not
weakly by few in a company, are witnesses against the divisions of
Christendom, that (separately) make themselves a prey, when (jointly) they
might make a beautiful army, v. 27 And the Spider that labors so busily
about her web, and takes hold of her thread with such industry and constancy,
is a shame to the slothful in their vocation, who take no hold of Time for
any good purpose under the Sun. v. 28. Lo here, who may be our teachers, or
will be our accusers, though man should say nothing. Let us therefore, among so
many witnesses, walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise: so I come to
that which is common both to this rich man, and Lazarus.

Verse. 22 And it was so, that the Beggar died, etc.


That which was common to the rich man and Lazarus, is, that they both died.
For in the beginning of the verse it is said, the beggar died: and in the end
of it, that the rich man died also. Now to die, properly, is to have the soul
severed from the body: and so all must have, poor and rich that die. This
poor man was bitten to death of the dog of hunger: and the other rich man,
though he felt no hunger, yet could not avoid the dart of death; for both the
poor and rich died.

Where we learn that the state or condition of the poor and rich is one
concerning death, Doctr. 1.
and that the Law of it is universal. One dies as well as another, the wise
man as the fool: Eccles. 2.16: and all flesh is grass, Esa. 40.6. The flesh
of poor men and the flesh of Kings is grass; and both cut down by death, the
coursest grass, and the finest flower of grass. Death is the worm in every
gourd mortal; Ion. 4.7: and Princes die like other men. Psalm. 82.7. The point
is plain by the experience of all the ages both of time, and persons past: and
therefore the Prophet in the Psalm. 89. V. 48, makes this question, What man is
he that lives, and shall not see death? As much as if he had said, No man
living but shall. So Saint Paul, It is appointed, as by a Statute of
everlasting Parliament, and appointed to men, that is, to every man, to one as
well as to another, That they shall once dye, Heb. 9.27. And dust shall return
to dust, as it was. Ecclesiastes, 12.7.

Behold we the famous men before us, that governed the people by counsel, and
in whose doctrine were wise sentences: or consider we those great ones that
we read of, who commanded the sea and dry land, making the beasts of the
earth, the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air to serve for their
delight; are they not (all) turned to their dust, and is not all their glory
fled as a shadow. Hat not just and mighty death covered their large bodies
over with those two very short words, Hic ^ac^t, Here lies, to wit the body
of such and such a Monarch, Potentate and Emperor of the earth? Was not the
grave their house? and did they not all make their bed in the dark?, Job.
17.13.

Some of their iourneyes in this pilgrimage of life, were shorter, some longer;
but was not their grave the common Inn where they lodged at night? and what
difference in death between them? ^ucar, Dialog.
Among many dead Ghosts (as it is in the fable) one would needs know which was
Philip King of Macedon; Answer was made, He that has the balde head is
Philip: All have balde heads, says he: he that has the slatte nose is Philip,
says the other: Al have flat noses, says he; He with the hollow eyes is he,
says the other, and that has the bare ribs, and rattling bones; but all are
such, and have such, says he: Then said the other, I perceive then there is
no difference in death between the beggar and the King. In a cast of Counters,
one has the place of pounds, another of shillings, a third of pence, and every
one as he that casts the account shall think good to lay them; but put them
all into a bag, and what difference is there? So what difference between
those that are worth thousands, and those that are worth nothing, being once
put together in the common bag of the earth? Solomon in all his glory was not
so glorious as the Lilly, says the second Solomon: Math. 6.29. And what is a
Lilly? or what eternity is there in that flower of grass? It is said that
every Lilly has his worm in his root: and can we think that the Lilly of
flesh is without? Surely the worm of death gnawes upon us so soon as we begin
to live in the womb, be we borne poor, or of Princes: and, when we come into
the world, innumerable petty deaths are sent upon us for transgression. Worms
eat us alive: and we are but worm^s meat, being in our house of corruption.
That which has some show to day, is to morrow rolled up, and laid aside in
the clodde of the earth.

Abraham was the friend of God in his generation, Sampson was strong, and Job
just, and none so wise as Solomon: and yet death has rolled up all those
Worthies, and buried their bones in Golgotha. Since the fall of Adam, there is
no entering into Paradise, but by the burning Seraphims: or blazing fittes of
death, Genesis 3.24. It was said to Adam, and the same may be said to all that
come of Adam, Thou art dust: Genesis 3.19. That is, thou art but matter for the
earth, and for death that reigns over all flesh. Finally, as in the parable,
the Laborers came into the Vineyard, Math. 20.1.3.5.6. so shall those
Laborers go out, some at one hour, some at another; some in their infancy, or
dazon of day. Some in their third hour, young; some when they are men, in
their sixth and ninth hour; and some when they be old men in their eleventh and
last hour. But all must go out of this vineyarde of life that live; and the
longest day of the longest livers life is but till night, the night wherein no
man can work, John 9.4. I conclude therefore, that all are mortal, poor and
rich.

The Reasons. It is just that God give to every one the wages of his works:
but the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. and therefore just it is, that he
who sins (and all are sinners should dye.

Secondly, sin ^^^nt ever all, and death by it, Romans 5.12. and therefore all,
rich, poor, and all must die.

Thi^dly, God say de to Adam, In the day that thou eatest of the tree which I
have forbidden thee to eat or touch, there shall dye the death, Genesis 2.17. Now
Adam did eat, and what was said to him, was spoken to all Mankind in him:
and therefore not he only must dye, but all must dye that were in his loins.

Fourthly, we are all one man's sons, Adams; and have one mother, our common
mother, the earth, Job. 17.13.14. And whither must Adams sons go, but
whither Adams sin sends them? and to whom is the child to be brought, but
to his own mother?

Fifthly, Austen.
one calls life a sickness, and he that has the sickness of life, how can
he choose but dye?

Sixthly, by death God declares his power, seeing that by it he translates his
Elect to life, and that eternal: therefore is death called by David, The way
of all the living: 1. King. 2: 2. and by H^zechiah in his song, The door of
the grave: Esa. 38.10. For as me^ enter into their houses by the door, and go
to their places by the way: so do they pass to their graves by death, and
remove to their Country by the same, as by their common way. One uses this
comparison; As the herb breeds the worm, and the worm (so bredde) eats the
herb that is bredde in: so sin brought in death: and death brought in by
sin, destroys sin to the righteous, the sin that caused death. If sin
had not been, death had never been: and yet to the Elect, deaths being, only,
does away sin; not because they die, but because they receive that grace in
death, and not before they dye.

Seventhly, there is a common subjection to death, that the godly by such
subi^ction may learn to make the more of Christ, and of their salvation by
him, when they shall perceive that, that which they so much abhor and, fear
(I mean death in kind) is by his dying made no death to them, but their door
to the kingdom of heaven. Heb. 2.14 15.

Lastly, the law of death takes hold of all; that the godly being under the
arrest of it as well as others, though not under the tyranny of it as the
wicked, might enter into life by that gate, by which Christ their head passed
to his glory; the gate of putting off this mortal and earthly house, in death.

But do the rich dye as well as the poor, shall lie down together in the
dust, Job 17.13, 14, 16. Here the poor man dyed: and dyed not the rich man as
well as he? Does not this sword devour one as well as another? 2. Sam. 11.24.
Is not the mouth of it the grave that receives rich and poor? and what is one
heap of dust better then an other in the dark chambers of the dead?
Difference of persons serves but for this life; after it, all go to one place:
and great men play better parts on the high stage of this world then meaner
do; but when the play is done, on goes their own apparel again, the common
wear of mortality, and all are clad alike with corruption and worms. Who
considering this as he should, does not see and confess, that there is
neither profit nor worth in these vain things? And who seeing and confessing so
much, will be so proud of that which is nothing? M. Carew on this text. What,
says one, do great possessions and this greatness, to be rich in grounds
avail men, when a piece of ground of five foot must contain them? What
better for their stately houses, when bound hand and foot, they must be put
in the strait house of a simple coffin? What better for their rich apparel,
when a sheet of no great show must shrowde them? And what does their dainty
fare, and sweet meat profit them with the sour sauce of repentance? Wealth
they may have, but no wealth can buy them of death: for here it is said, A
rich man dyed. All rejoicing therefore, and swelling above others, by reason of
this earthly glory, is very vain and unworthy a Christian that is redeemed
with a price, for better things in an inheritance that fades not.

But further, If the Law of death be universal, Vs^. 2.
then it is no inheritance to be here; and (here) we have no continuing City:
that is, we have no state of perpetuity in those earthly Cottages: The term
we have in them is short and simple, compared with our enduring house in
heaven. Our warning out of them begins with the first moment of our natural
life: for so soon as we begin to live, we begin to die: and the place we
have, has no foundation; where the place we shall have, is sure and eternal.
And should not all this move us to take present order for another, and better
life? He that knows he shall remove out of the Tenement he has, within a
quarter or half a year, is very improuident, and weak witted, if within that
short bound of time, he prepare not some other house to come unto. So for us
that inhabit these houses of clay, seeing our warning is shorter, and our
change may be sooner then half a year, or quarter (perhaps to morrow,
perhaps this present day or hour) how improuident and simple are we, if we
care not to assure unto us another and far better house, then those we have
here? that we may say with the Apostle, We know that if our earthly house of
this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given us of God, an house
not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. 2. Cor. 5.1. But some say
with Peter, It is good to be here: Math. 17.4. as if they should say, No where
so well as in these corruptible possessions, and therefore they build
tabernacles in them; not one for Christ, one for Moses, and one for Elias; but
for this child and for that. And so, as there is no rememberance of death in
their doing; I say no remembrance of death: for due thoughts of death will so
distaste them of earthly things, that they will find small relish in them,
and be ready to say with Esau; Lo I am a^mos^ dead, and what is this
birthright to me? Genesis 25.32. Where contrarily, promising to themselves long
life, (and their lease may be out to morrow,) they lay up all their treasure in
their barnes and full bags, Luke 12.19; not caring for their other house till
this be taken from them.

A reproof therefore to those, Adams children should sicken and die? How will
such be able quietly and with any peace to bear the coming of death, the Lord
himself, when they are so aghast at the approach of these his purueiers, or
petti-deaths, whom he sends before to prepare for his coming? How have such
remembered every day to look for death? and every hour to prepare to die? or
rather how have such forgotten to esteem of every day as of their last day?
and to prepare for every hour as for their dying hour? But of this I have
spoken largely in my Sermons of life and death, specially the first and second
the^e.

Thus we have heard that it is common both to rich and poor to die. Yet, in
the order observed in the text, this poor godly man, he that was in such
misery, pained with such hunger died first. It was to hasten him to glory, and
from the evils he endured here.

And so we secondly learn, Doctr. 2.
that the deaths of the righteous are their gain, or a speedy taking of them
from evils present, and to come. So says Esaias, the righteous, that is, they
that love righteousness, and have it imputed, are taken away, or gathered from
the evil to come: Esa. 57.1: That is, both from the evil of sin, and from
the evils that come by sin: and this taking away is in their bodies for the
grave, in their souls for glory. Thus was 2. King. 22, 20.
Iosuah taken away, a good King, and a good King, young. Evils were near,
therefore was he taken from those evils and plagues at hand. Enoch also, he
that is reported of, that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5, was for his great gain,
walking among sinners, taken up to God. Genesis 5.24. And thus the Lord shows
himself to be a rewarder of them that seek him, Hebr. 11.6, or that walk
with him, as Henoch did. The blessed dead that die in the Lords, as Christians;
or for the Lord, as Christian martyrs, are taken or have rest from their
labors, that is, evils present, says S. John, Apoc. 14.13. And when the
cheeks of the godly are blubbered with weeping for the evils they see, and
evil things they suffer of the unworthy world, God does not delay, by taking
them out of the world and to himself, to wipe all such tears of pain and
crying from their eyes. Apoc. 21.4 Esa. 25.8.

The reasons. The Lord remembers whereof they are made, and knows that (as
dust) they will quickly be moved with the wind of long troubles: and therefore
will not contend for ever with them, that is, ouerlong, l^st the spirit should
faint before him, Esa. 57.16. Also, if the rod of the ungodly did rest always
upon them, they might put forth their hand to wi^kednesse; Psalm. 125.3. So
should God lose his good subjects, which he will not do: and therefore will
not suffer them to be tempted above that they be able. 1. Cor. 10.13.

Secondly, the world is not worthy of such. Hebr. 11.38. or, the righteous are
a blessing that the world cares not for. Now, a blessing unregarded, or used
unworthily, may (worthily) be taken away. Where therefore the wicked set so
little by the righteous, God does hasten to take them away for their plague,
and the everlasting good of his children.

Thirdly; in this life the godly have nothing but loss upon loss: as the
loss of their good labors, the loss of their good name, and the loss of
their time here. Besides, for their afflictions, their death only makes an end
of them; life and misery being as two twins, that are borne together, and must
die together. And is it not then the great advantage of the righteous, and
their great preferment by death, that by it they are drawn out of so many and
fatal evils, into the blessed rest and glory of God, in the which they shall
continue ever? So long as they abide here in their tents of war, they must
not put off their harness at any time: day and night they must lie in the
field, expecting a battle, wherein is no time of truce. For if Satan be
overcome at one time, at another he will set upon them: only death ends the
battle, not to his avail, but to theirs. They that die in those battles are
overcome; in those other the Saints never overcome till they die: and is not
their death then, their undoubted advantage and gain that so die?

But does God take away the righteous speedily and soonest, because the world
is not worthy of them, Lot being departed out of Sodom, fire and brimstone
will come quickly after, Genesis 19.17.23.24. For the wheat being gathered into
the barn, what shall be done with the tares? shall they not (being bound up
for the fire) be set on a burning? Math. 13.30. When the godly Lazarus is dead,
not long after dies the ungodly Dines: but Lazarus is in Abraham's bosom, and
the rich man in hell in torments. As Soon as Noah is in the Arc, the world
that mocked him, is in their grave of waters, and most of them in their center
of fire. Therefore, when the righteous perish, the wicked (behind them) have
great cause to howl and weep, but no cause to laugh or be merry, except this
may make them glad; that making no good use of their happy ends, their own
unhappy end is not far off, that waits for them to damnation. Now, consider
this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you. Psalm. 50.22. Let Lazarus, let the godly be regarded while they
live with you, lest (for your contempt of such) God take them to bliss, and
send you to hell. Or if God remove some young, and in their tender bud, sparing
you in your threescore, and stubberne root; know, that it is done of the Lord,
either to bring you to repentance: or if you will not repent, to harden you
further to destruction.

Further, is the death of the righteous, the righteous man's gain; Then let not
the godly man fear to die, Christ in life and death is his advantage. Philip.
1.21. That which is bitter to worldly men is pleasure to him: that which is
woeful to them, is joy to him: that which brings them into misery, draws
him out: and what takes him out of the prison of life, casts them into the
prison of hell. No marvel then if the wicked be loath to die: but great marvel
that the godly should fear to die. For, for the wicked, (specially the rich,
such as this rich man); here they are well, and cannot hope that their remove
shall be to better, or so good: and therefore their change to a place they know
not whither, and to a life, they know not what, must needs much trouble them:
and no marvel, if they who know no better life, leave this against their
wills.

But for the righteous, that are called in hope and to better things in Christ;
it were strange seeing, their dimittis is in peace with Simeon, that with
Simeon they should not desire the day of liberty, 2. Tim. 4.8, which is the
day of their death: and that they might be loosed, to wit from their fetters
here, to be with Christ. Philip. 1.23.

This life to them is but a very vale of tears, and they be in the world as
Jacob in Labans house. Genesis 30.31.
How then can they so much love this vale, and Labans house, of so many and
continual vexations, as not to desire with the change of the place, a change
in these matters, miseries and conditions of mortal life? Who would not depart
with Jacob, and desire to depart with Simeon, in such a case? Luke 2.29. Genesis
31.17.18. Death in it self is full of bitterness, and by nature to the nature
of man, The very king of fear, Job. 18.14. and who looking upon death with the
visour upon his face, and armed with sin, will not give back at his
approach, and say, O stay me a little? Psalm. 39.13. But when death shall be
considerd with the advantage, that is, as it is to the righteous, and as Christ
has taken from it the visour of fear to them, and to all that love his
coming: the day of death, as the day of the Jews deliverance from Haman,
cannot but be a feast day, and a good day. Est. 8.17. a day of deliverance from
the Haman of hell, from the power of sin, and powers of darkness.

The Apostle considering this, desired to be gone: shall we think in a
desperate mood, as they that care not which end goes forward? No, but he did
it upon good and just grounds, knowing the happiness that waited for him, and
which waits for all that have his thirst to be with Christ.

The fear of death is natural: so children fear to go in the dark: but the
fear of it, for it self, is weak: For many times death passes with less
pain then the torture of a limme. But the death to be feared, is the death
that has sin in it: and the reason of the fear, because sin that brought
it, is fearful.

Now the godly man's death is no such death, having the teeth of sin pulled
out of it, that it cannot bite; his death is but his sleep in his bed, and
rest from his labors: and therefore to him to dye, is no more then to go to
his rest at night; or having escaped the sea, to come to the haven where he
would be, Psalm. 107.30. And who would fear so to do? But their best
preferment is, where (here) they are absent from Christ, there they shall ever
be with him: where (here) they please God weakly, and offend him daily; there
they shall both please him, and enjoy pleasures with him for ever: and where
(here) they are strangers, there they shall be at home in their own Country
and proper air, with the whole blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

So much for that which is common to the rich man and Lazarus, and for their
different estates on earth: their different estates after they left the earth
follow.

And was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. The difference that was
between the rich man and Lazarus after their death, was greater then (before)
in their life here: for Lazarus went to heaven; It is said that the Angels
carried him, as in their hands thither. The other went to hell; It is said,
he was in torments in hell. Here he that could not be brought by the meanest
in the rich man's house into the wicked rich man's kitchen, is carried by the
angels (which for that purpose attend the godly at their death) into the bosom
of Abraham, that is, into the glorious heaven of Gods presence, where Abraham
is, and whither all Abraham's children come. He that could have but the dogs
here to bear him company, has now the welcome company of the Angels to atte^d
him. He whom no man regarded, the Angels now honor: And he now feeds on the
tree of life, that could not have the offals of the Rich man's table to feed
on. Is not this a great change? But such honor had he; and such honor have
all Gods Saints.

Further, in these words, and in Lazarus, two things may be considered; as, by
whom he was carried, and whither. He was carried by the Angels (says the Text)
that is, by those spiritual, heavenly, and most excellent substances, that
minister before the glory of God continually: for these glorious spirits, Gods
good Angels, and those flames of fire his Ministers do, by divine
commandment, minister to the heirs of salvation; diversely whiles they live,
and sweetly at their death, Heb. 1.14.

The place whither Lazarus was carried, is Heaven; called by a kind of
Periphrasis, or kind of speech, Abraham's bosom, or the bay of rest from all
storms below.

And so we see that the glory of the godly begins in their death, as the
glory of the wicked ends in theirs.

But to return to the Angels; and in brief, to tell you what they are, as the
word tells me; they are substances created without bodies: the time when, was
within the 6. days, the place where, was in heaven. Of these an innumerable
company fell quickly, and together, (for as they were made within the 6. days,
so within that time they fell; and these we call (now) Devils; that is, Angels
by their creation, but devils by their fall, for which they are Chained up in
utter darkness, Jude. 6. The other Angels, which (also) are innumerable, stood,
and ever shall stand by grace in the purity and righteousness, wherein their
Makers hand (at first) set them

And these are the Angels that this Scripture speaks of, which are called
Angels for their service and ministry: for in their substance they are
spirits, and in their office Angels, Psalm. 103.20. and 104.4. And Angels
because they minister to the righteous in their life; and at the end of their
life, as here to Lazarus.

Where we learn; that the good Angels are, by Gods ordinance, Doctr.
ever about the righteous; that is, about their paths in their life, and at
their beds in their death, to do service to them.

Thus three Angels came to Abraham, Gen* 18.3. And the same three to deliver
Let, Genesis 19.16. An host of them met Jacob in his way, Genesis 32.1.2. to lead
him* and a like field of them was about Elisha in his distress to help him,
2. King. 6.17. When Christ was borne, a great multitude of Angels, like Armies
of men, were heard to praise God, and to sing to men, Luke. 2.13. Diverse Angels
appeared to Esaias. Esa. 6.2. One says 6. but sixety times six Pitch about the
righteous, Psalm. 34.7. In the old Testament, there is a cloud of such proofs,
and good store of them in the new. So true it is, and so certain, that the
Angels have a charge from God to keep the righteous in all their ways, Psalm.
91.11. That is, in all their righteous ways to attend them. The little ones
have their Angels, Math. 18.10. Both little ones in Christianity, and little
ones in years: the Angels are their Rockers.

The reasons. Christians are a royal Priesthood, that is, spiritually, Priests
and Princes, And Princes must have their guard, 1. Pet. 2.9. Worldly Princes
have their guard at Court; and Christians that are Princes, have Angels for
their guard in the Court of the Church, where they serve day and night.

Secondly, innumerable evil Angels are about us, and dangers hang over us: and
therefore if the good Angels did not watch over us, and tarry with us to
encounter the bad; If their shield were not before us to cover us, and their
persons at our back to save us, when dangers are near; how is it possible in
so great malice of the enemy, and multitude of dangers, for Gods little ones
to be in safety? I say not but God can save without them; but I speak of His
ordinary way.

And in this sense; If the good Angels did not keep us, how soon would the
evil that bear us such hatred, tear us in pieces, and devour us? How could
our little Children ever live to be men in so many casualties of a childs
life, if these blessed Spirits did not day and night keep them, and every
part in them, and every bone in them? Psalm. 34.20.

Thirdly, the righteous are members of that head, which the Angels worship,
Heb. 1, 6. and honoring the head, how can they but serve the body? or doing
the one by Gods commandment, how can they but do the other by it? Psalm. 91,
11.

This is a point of singular both privilege and comfort to the righteous:
Mardocai, a despised Jew, to have so great a Peer of the Empire as Haman was,
to hold his stirrup? to be set upon the best of the Kings horses by him, and to
ride triumphantly through the City, while he lackyed by? Hest. 6.10.11. Then,
how great honor for such poor wretches as we are, to have such glorious
Peers as the Angels are; not one but so many, nor for some one hour, but so
continually and still, to wait upon us? The poorest Christian (if a true
Christian) has greater roial^ie by these heavenly gardians and their high wall
about him, then Solomon in the mids of his two hundred Targets, and three
hundred shields of beaten gold. Solomon had great glory by these; but the
members of the true Solomon, have far greater by the Angels about them in all
their ways.

And as their privilege is great hereby; so who can tell what a comfort it is
for Christians in distress to have such about them, not only while they can
scarce breathe under the hot pursuits of their deadly enemies, but are ready
to breathe out their last gasp on their death-b^ds? for in danger will they
not say; We fear not though ten thousands should beset us? Psalm. 3.6. And at
their death; They that be with us are more then they that be with them? 2.
King. 6.16. Our souls are in a sure hand, being kept by the Angels; and they
(as careful Nurses) will order all our ways. Indeed the good Angels do not
appear ordinarily: No more do the evil, and yet we doubt not but hurt is
done by the one: and why should we doubt that our help is by the other? Let us
put on those eyes wherewith Elisha saw the mountain full of horses and
charets of fire about him, 2. King. 6.17: and in all dangers we will see as
much, and in the mids of death, our sure redemption. For we shall see the
Angels that carried Lazarus to heaven, ready to carry us thither: and if they
carry us thither, who shall pull us thence?

A terror to the wicked that oppose unto Gods little ones. For neither they,
Senacherib do with his great host of men, aided (it is like) by as many devils
as men against Hezekiah, Gods King? And spanish Senacherib, in the year, 1588,
what could he do with his great host of ships, assisted with what the devil
and all the devils Angels could do against Elizabeth of England, Gods Queen?
Was not Senacherib of As^ur overthrown by an Angel? 2. King. 19.35. And did
the Senacherib of Sp^i^e speed better? When the three servants of God were
cast into the furnace, seu^n times heated, the Angels that kept the flame from
them, turned it upon those that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed^ego. Dan.
3.22. And God shut the mouths of the Lions by his Angel, while his own
servant was in the den, but opened them when he was brought forth, and his
accusers cast in; his and the Lions had the mastery, and brake all their bones
before they could come at the bottom of the den, Dan. 6.22.24. Thus we see the
defense of the righteous, and the danger of their enemies: and what can the
devil and his instruments do more then they have done against them? Is not
satan with his Angels sent away confounded from their deathbeds, when God by
his Angels receives their souls, as the soul of Lazarus here? or did God so
guard Lazarus then; and does he not so, and as strongly guard and encompasse the
souls of the godly now?

An instruction to Christians not to carry themselves irreverently at any time
in their words or ways, because of the Angels. So the Apostle S. Paul would
not have women uncovered in the assembly, because of them. 1. Cor. 11.10. If a
noble man were in place, would we uncivilly carry our selves: and shall we
forget our holy calling in the worthy presence of the Angels: shall we make
their waiting upon us tedious unto them, by behauing our selves otherways in
their sight, then beseems their high persons, and the honorable birth of a
Christian. And now, that we are (all of us) before God in the Ministry and at
prayer; let us specially take heed how we demean our selves; lest the Angels,
that grace our assemblies with their presence, when they return to heaven,
complain of our unchristian inciuilitie in this holy place. As if they should
say to God: we were in such an assembly, professing thy name and worship, but
whiles thou wast speaking to them by thy word and Minister, some were talking,
some girding at the Preacher, some laughing and fleering, some making gaudes
and mouths, some flat along, not in prayer, but in a slouenly rudeness,
perhaps in their drousie drunkenness; and some were fast asleep.

Is this a good report? and should we not dread to be thus spoken of to God?
Further, let them consider this, who when they are private, care not what they
say or do; and what steames they send up of a corrupt and unsavory dunghill
within, in all their talk to their private acquaintance, without any grace to
the hearers. Such forget that the Angels are near, who want not ears, as they
be full of eyes; that is, are not slow to hear, as they be quick to see: and
how can they then be hidden? This is to grieve the Angels, and to make the God
of Angels to grieve them. So far for the persons that carried the soul of
Lazarus, the place follows, to which they carried it.

Into Abraham's bosom. The place of comfort to which the Angels brought the
soul of Lazarus, is here called Abraham's bosom by a trope or figure: because,
as the fathers bosom is the place of the childs rest: so heaven is that
bosom of eternal rest, into which Abraham, the father-beleeuer, with all the
children of promise which are believers, are received, in their souls, till
the day of the resurrection. And it is no other but the bay or haven of repose
from all storms mortal; whereinto Abraham has put long since, and all shall,
who walk in the steps of his faith.

Indeed, some of the fathers have spoken doubtfully of it; and the Papists
tell us that it is the Limbus or brimme of hell, where all our fathers were
till Christ descended to bring them out: But can that which is a place of
joyful and happy rest, be the brimme of hell? can that which is, and is called
a glorious kingdom be hell? Math. 8.11. Can it be a prison or place of
custody, that is called so often in the Scriptures, the glorious liberty of the
sons of God? Can that be so near unto, and border upon the place of torments
into hell; which by Abraham's speech of it in the 26. verse following, is so
far removed, that there is a great gulf, or gaping pit between? and can
Abraham's bosom, which is simply good, be taken for that, which (as a father
says) is never taken for good? Chrys^stome says, It is the poor man's
paradise: In hono^ de Diuite. Is paradise hell? and Austen in the place before,
denies it to be hell or any part of hell: and how then can it be the skirt of
hell? And Tertullian in his fourth book against Marcion, says; that hell is
one thing, and Abraham's bosom another. Then Abraham's bosom cannot be hell,
nor the canopie of hell. What shall I further say? this already spoken is
sufficient to clear this Scripture, from sending the soul of Lazarus to hell,
or to any part of hell: and therefore Abraham's bosom in this text is no other
then heaven, the seat of God, and of the blessed Saints in light; an harbor
of rest from the waves and Sea of this troublesome world: and unto it is the
soul of Lazarus brought presently after his death: from whence learn, that
after this life of pain and labor, there is nothing but joy and peace to the
righteous, so says Esaias: He, that is, the righteous person, of whom he spoke
in the former verse, shall enter into peace, that is, presently after his
death, enter, or make his entry upon it, Esa. 57.2. God reckened with those in
their death, who had received their Lords money. The account came not till they
died: and therefore says the text, When the Master of those servants
returned, (who is said to return, when dust returns to the earth as it was,
and the spirit to God that gave it, Eccles. 7,) he said to the good servant and
faithful; Enter into thy Masters joy, Math. 25.21.23. That is, into joys
unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 1.8, or, such as the Master has prepared
for all his faithful servants, after they have served their course and time
here. He says not, enter first into the fire of pain, and when that has well
purged thee, I will take thee to joy: But without any more ado, receive that
joy, whereof as the fountain had no beginning, so the rivers that come from
it, shall have no end. Receive thy Masters joy in that, and in these. So that
there is no pause or stay made by the Lord at the deaths of the godly, but
presently they pass from death to life; not painful, but truly joyous and
full of pleasures for ever. The voice from heaven said the same, and the Spirit
sealed to it; for so says the Spirit, that is speaks so, and no otherways
then the voice spoke: which is; Blessed are the dead in the Lord, that is, the
godly dead: and the reason is, they, to wit immediately after such a death,
rest from their labors; Apoc. 14.13: not in the purgatory of Papists where is
no rest, but in the paradise of God where is true joy, and the plentiful
redemption of the Saints. The Apostle Paul says, Those that sleep in Jesus,
God will bring with him, 1. These. 4.14. His meaning can be no other, but that
as soon as they sleep in Christ, or die in him; God has them presently in his
hand and keeping: who will keep them till the time come that he has appointed
to deliver them up, and to testify who^ he has received. Thus it is plain
that the godly enter upon happiness presently, and so soon as they go henceby
death.

The reasons. The voice from heaven says so, and so says the Spirit, Apoc.
14.13. Two witnesses without all exception: which being so does not the law
say, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be
established? Mat. 18.16. Ioh. 8.17. But these two from heaven are more, and
more sure then a thousand on earth: and therefore what they say is sure, and
must stand.

Secondly, how shall the day of death be better to the righteous, then the day
in which they are borne (as the Scripture speaks); if they who go hence,
come not out of pains but exchange them? nor end their misery, but continue
it? nor be in happiness, but be troubled still? Eccles. 7.3.

Thirdly, the speech of Abraham to the rich man must needs be true, which is,
that Lazarus (now dead) is comforted, Luke 16.25. But how comforted after
death, and wherein, if he were not then in pleasures, as the other was in
pain?

Therefore the preferment of the godly is great by their happy death, Psalm.
97.11. Here, They sowed in tears, there they shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5.
Here, upon tempestuous seas, there at anchor in their own road, and port of
peace; Here in their bondage, there in their Iubilee of redemption: Here in
travel, there delivered: Here taken from the society of men, there admitted
into the society of the Angels, and of the perfect spirits of just men: Here in
their strange Country, there in their own house. Here living by faith, there
by sight: and here absent from the Lord, but there in his presence. No eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart can conceive what God has prepared for
those that love him, says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 2.9. We have seen many strange
things, we have heard of more, and the heart that is so large, how can it but
conceive more then either Eye can see, or ear hear of; that is, not only
more strange, but most wonderful things? And yet one (speaking of this great
glory of the Saints in Heavenly places) says, If thou see any admirable
thing, say, it is not it: for then thou should not see it: And if thou
hear of any excellent thing, yet say it is not it; for then thou should
never have it. Or lastly: if thou can conceive, (as thou may) some strange
thing indeed, and passing wonderful: say also, it is not it, for then should
it not enter into thy heart. And then can any greater preferment befall the
dead in Christ, then to be raised to that, which no eye can see, nor ear
hear of, nor heart mortal conceive? We cannot conceive Adams excellent
estate in the earthly Paradise: and how then shall we be able to conceive the
vnconceyueable happy life of the righteous in the heavenly Paradise of God? or
if our eyes dazzle at the light of the Sun, how will they sink into their
holes to behold the light of the sons of God in glory?

When the Queen of the South beheld the glory and attendance that Solomon had,
the order of his Realm, the array of his servants, the variety of his waiters
and attendants, their diet, their places, their happy life to serve in the
presence of so wise a King; being ravished therewith, she brake forth, and
said: Happy are thy men, Happy are these thy servants which stand continually
before thee, and hear thy wisdom, 1. King. 10.8. But when the godly shall
see with open countenance, in whose presence they stand, and shall stand ever;
with what company? namely of Cherubims and Seraphims, Angels, Thrones,
Dominions, Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets, Apostles, Confessors, Martyrs, and
all blessed souls; in what place? to wit, the Court of Heaven, not Salomons
earthly Court; and how? not as strangers, like the Queen of the South; but as
the royal Queen of Solomon, married to Christ, the true Solomon, with the
crown of righteousness for ever; there to behold the blessed Trinity, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; there to be, and live continually in the
presence of God, and beautiful countenance of Jesus Christ. How can they
contain themselves? What Halle-luijahs will they sing to God Almighty of his
praise, and salvation? What joy will they not conceive to see the thousands
there that praise the Lord day and night? Will they not break out, and say:
Happy are we, and unspeakably happy that shall stand thus before God the
Father, and the true wisdom of God, (the true Solomon, Jesus Christ his
son) for ever, there to hear his wisdom, and to behold his glory? For the
particularities of this place, and for the sundry kinds and measures of glory
therein, I list not to be curious; and what I had to teach thereof by the
Scriptures, I have written already in a Sermon The third sermon of life and
death.
on Esaias, 57.2. only, as one very well says, God send us thither, and we
will be contented with the lowest room. Yet to say somewhat more, and not
much, of our great preferment in heaven, and as it were, to set it in our eye,
for the better raising of our minds thither; Let us go up with Moses into
mount Nebo, and see at a blush, Deuteronomy. 34.1 2.3 4. Apoc. 22.10
and far off the heavenly Canaan; or with John the Divine, into Gods
mountain, and with a like quick, but dark sight, behold (as in some short
Card or Map) the Jerusalem above, that we may withdraw our sight from the
Devils mountain of things below, Math. 4.8. The place is Heaven, called by the
Apostle, The third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.2. and elsewhere, the Bridegroomes
Chamber, Apoc. 19.5. Math. 25.10. A very large and princely room, Lightened
with the glory of the Lamb, Apoc. 21.23. The company good, as we heard, and
the time of our being there, world without end: though the company were good,
yet if the room were straight and unpleasant, it were nothing: and though the
room were large and pleasant, the company being naught, it would little
delight a good man. And though both were, as heart could desire, for
themselves, yet if our time in them were short, our departing from them would
be as uncomfortable* but here the room, company, and time, do all three
conspire to make our joy full. Psalm. 16.11. Apoc. 21.25.

Further, for the happiness of the soul after death, before the body come
unto it at the resurrection, the happiness of it must needs be great, seeing
it shall cease to sin, and shall be wholly joined to the Lord in truth, and
never displease him any more. The knowledge, the wisdom, the understanding of
it, darkened here in this mid-vale, shall in that clear firmament, receive a
glorious shining by the face of Christ, that Sun of righteousness. It shall
be no more knowledge and wisdom, and understanding in part: but this, in
part shall be done away; and we shall be absolutely wise, absolutely we
shall understand, know and love God: absolutely we shall serve him, and keep
an absolute Sabbath to him: Heb. 4.9. Esa 66.23. There shall be no more
ignorance of God, nor distrust in God, no more contempt of Teachers, nor need
of teaching, no more Magistrate and Subject, Pastor and people: for Christ
shall be our Temple, Apoc. 21.22. Our food, that is, our spiritual food
shall be The tree of life, Apoc. 22.1. Our Teacher and Governor shall be
God, and Christ themselves; for then, God shall be all in all unto us, 1 Cor.
15.28. not mediately, as here by the Word and Sacraments; but immediately
without these, and directly by himself, without Magistrate or Minister.

And for the body, when it is come to the soul at the Resurrection; what a
comfortable meeting will that be of two such friends and lovers, so long kept
asunder? How will the soul welcome her companion and yoke fellow in the
crosses and tempests of this life? How lovingly will they enter together into
their Masters joy? Where before it was full of sores, sickness and pain: now
it shall be a sound body for ever; in which shall be neither sickness nor
pain hereafter. It did hunger and thirst, it shall never hunger and thirst any
more. It was a mortal body, now it shall never dye again, 1. Cor. 15.44. It
was dull and lumpish, it shall be as the glorious body of Jesus Christ,
Philip. 3.21. Light and active, able as speedily, and with as natural a motion
to ascend upward, as it is to go downward. It was a sorrowful and weeping
body, now All tears shall be wiped away, Apocal. 21.4. It shall sorrow and
weep no more. Finally, both body, and soul in loving arms together, shall
reign with Christ for ever. They shall walk in the path of life, their glory
shall be greater in the pleasures of the Lord, then we can coceiue, or man's tongue
utter. And therefore as it was said at the crowning of Solomon, that the people
so rejoiced, that is, with such an exceeding great joy, that the earth rang
again: 1. King. 1.40: So, how can any pleasures be wanting, where the true
Solomon and his royal Spouse shall both be crowned together with glory in the
Kingdom of Heaven? Such honor have the Saints; and therefore great without
question is their preferment every way, and so much greater, because presently
at their death, they receive in their blessed souls but the moyty of that
happy estate, which they are sure to have whole and full at the resurrection.

This doctrine is wickedly crossed by the Papists in their Article of the
souls passing to the pains of Purgatory presently after death:

But how are the godly comforted (as Lazarus here) at their death, when after
their death they are thus tormented? and where they thus labor in Purgatory,
how can they be said to rest from their labors? Did the thief that went to
Paradise go to Purgatory? Luke 23.43. or did Saint Paul, who desired to be
with Christ, desire to be with him in Purgatory? Philip. 1.23.

Indeed to be with Christ (as the Apostle there speaks) is best of all. And
though it be not possible, as one says, either to find Christ in hell, or to
miss him in heaven; yet a Christian should be of the mind to desire rather to
be in hell with Christ, then in heaven without him? But shall we think that
the Apostle was ignorant where Christ was, when he so earnestly desired his
dissolution to be with him? And if he knew, as no doubt but he did, that he
was in heaven: then there is as little doubt, but his desire was, at his death,
to be in heaven with him.

If it be said, that the case of these two was extraordinary, as being the
case of two Martyrs, who therefore presently went to heaven: It may be
answered for the thief, that his death was not a Martyrs death, though his
salvation was extraordinary: for the Papists own doctrine is, that they who
suffer as Martyrs, must suffer as voluntaries for Christ, and with intent of
making satisfaction to God by such martyrdom: but the thieves punishment was
for himself only against his will, and without that satisfying mind that is
required in a Martyr, Luke 23.41.

And if any had need to go to Purgatory for the end that the Papists send
their dead thither: why not this converted thief, seeing he had so short a
time to purge in after his conversion? But for Saint Paul, though he were a
Martyr for Christ, yet where does it appear, when he spoke these words: I
desire to be loosed to be with Christ: that he knew he should so suffer for
him?

Indeed it was prophesied that he should be bound a^ Jerusalem for him, Act.
21.11. It was also said in general terms, That bands and afflictions did abide
him in every city, Act. 20.2^. But it cannot be showed that he then knew
certainly that by Death he should glorify God as a Martyr. True it is, that
he was ready not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of
the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13: Yet how does it appear that he was certain he
should die for it there, or otherwhere? But why should Martyrs be exempt more
then other Saints from Purgatory? It seems that this Apostle of the Gentiles,
(though a Martyr) did not exempt himself from the common estate of all the
blessed after death: for when he had spoken of such afflictions as the Elect
suffer here, and of the glory to come: he immediately speaking in the plural of
all Saints, adds, We know that when our earthly house is destroyed, we have
a building given us of God, 2. Cor. 5.1. As if he should have said, So soon
as we lay down the one, we receive the other; so soon as we remove from the
body, we dwell with the Lord, 2. Cor. 5.8. and so soon as we put off
corruption, we put on glory.

This is the common favor of the Elect, and not the particular privilege of
one more then of another. So Purgatory prayers are put out of office, and
Purgatory fire is proved injurious to the peaceable deaths of the godly
departed in the faith of Christ.

Thur far for the estate of Lazarus after his death, the contrary estate of
the Rich-man after his death follows

The Rich man also dyed, and was buried. We before noted, that death is the
common roadeway of rich and poor: for Lazarus dyed, and the rich man also
dyed. That, that follows after his death is the next thing to be considered.
And this concerns him in his body or soul. That which concerns him in his
body is That it was buried; I doubt not but solemnly, and in great pomp. The
old Translator says, He was buried in Hell, as it were in his own Parish:
but we read no such thing in the original Greek: It says only, He was
buried.

Lazarus (belike) was not; or not with such a train of followers, because he
was poor; therefore his Burial is not spoken of. Which therefore does not
condemn the burial of the dead, but their sinful partiality, who follow the
rich (though wicked) to their graves, and neglect the poor (though godly) to
honest their burial.

The duty of reverend burial is a necessary Christian duty, and it is not
reproved here; save that it was a good duty ill done, and to a person unworthy,
and vainly done.

From hence learn, that the body of a Christian, the soul being departed from
it, Doct.
is reverently to be put into the earth. It i^ fallen asleep: 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
And therefore Christians must lay it to bed by decent burial; It is the
Sanct^fi^d Temple of the Holy Ghost: ^. Cor. 6.19. The members of Christ
therefore must reverently bury it; It shall be partaker with the soul in
glory: and therefore as the companion of a glorified soul, it cannot be
neglected without sin. Could Iehu say of wicked Iezabel: Visit that cursed
woman and bury her, for she is a Kings daughter? 2. King. 9.34. And shall not
we visit our blessed brethren and sisters, and bury them? being all of them
(for any thing we know to the contrary) the children of the King of heaven?
Stephen was lamented, and buried, Act. 8 2. And the Church in her pitiful
Song complains; That the Heathen did not only kill the bodies of Gods
Saints, but left them above ground unburied, Psalm. 79.2. Abraham bought a
possession of the Hittites, for the doing of this duty to his dead, Genesis 23.4.
Jacob gave a charge for his burial, Genesis 47.29.30. And Joseph by faith, when
he dyed, gave commandment for his bones, Heb. 11.22. So certain it is that
the bodies of the dead must be honored with their graves.

The reasons. Hereby we build up the belief of the resurrection: for the
grave is our bed, in which we are laid to sleep till our awaking at the last
trumpet. Dan. 12.2.1, These. 4.16.17. And the burying of our bodies is like the
sowing of seed, which men commit to the earth with sure hope (after it is
corrupted) that it shall rise again.

Secondly, Christ was buried, Math. 27.60: And why (then) should any Christian
which is a member of Christ, want christian burial?

Thirdly, the Law that bids us to cover the naked, bids us in so doing, to
cover the dead. Amb in Lib. ^ob. cap. 1.
And if when our friends are taking their journey into some strange countries,
we, in our love do bring them some part of their way: shall not Christian
love move us, when they are taking their long journey into the far country
of the dead, never to return, to bring them going, by following them
christianly to their graves?

Lastly, the bodies of the righteous were the Organs or the instruments of the
holy Ghost to all good duties: and shall instruments so sanctified, be
neglected as profane?

A reproof of the Papists, who profess to keep the reliks of Saints; that
is, some parts of their bodies unburied; which (if they were Saints in deed)
they should bury with honor, and not punish with the reward of condemned men's
members, or of Traitors justly deprived of burial.

Thus most divinely, our Sovereign Lord King James, in his Praemonition. A
like reproof of some great ones among our selves, who deny, or do not
perform to their dead this duty, so seemly, needful, and charitable; either
out of some evil custom, or for no warrantable abstinence. Which, what is it
but to pierce (though not Christ himself, yet) the faithful in Christ with
the spear of a second death, after death? Ioh. 19.34. That is, after one
death, to put them to another. Our following of them to their graves is the
testimony of our love; by it we witness how we affected them alive: and love
(if it be sound love, and without guile) will go as far as it can. It is
also witness of the reverence we bore the^ for good things; as our mourning
does show our loss, by the loss of them to us in their deaths.

If then we truly loved our friends, how can we tarry at home, not accompanying
them (as far as may be) in their way to the earth, the house of all the
living? Why does not our love go with them as far as it can, if we loved
them? and if we reverenced their good parts; why do we not show as much, by
expressing at their graves our grief, for so many good things buried with
them? But some go too far, as these come too short, who drown the credit of
Christian funerals with immoderate howlings and taking on. Against such the
Apostle: Sorrow not as they who have no hope, 1. These. 4.13. Christ wept for
Lazarus, Ioh. 11.35: but not so. And they that mourn so immoderately, give
suspicious tokens that they weep for their own loss, rather then for the
loss of a friend: and that they more esteem their own good, then his gain
by death. Some for their bellies, or for a mourning gown follow the wicked
rich with praises to their grave, who yet will not honest a godly poor man's
burial with their presence, or with a good word. These are such as buried this
rich-man, and despised Lazarus. So far for that that concerned this rich-man
in his body, that follows which concerned him in his soul.

Verse. 23. And being in hell in torments.


For this rich man's estate in his soul, it was miserable and pitiful, though
his burial were glorious. Here was a change indeed, not more sudden then
fearful to sinners. A little before ruffling in wealth; now his soul is in
hell, and his body among the worms. So many at this day, flaunt it in great
bravery: and the next news we hear, is, their bodies are in grave, and their
souls God knows where. Yea many die, and because we hear no more of them but
that they be dead, we neither regard how they died, nor what is like to come of
them, dying without repentance. Therefore this terrible example is left as a
warning to us, in time to consider what follows after death: and that is, a
life after this life, either in joy unspeakable, or in torments endless. For
with the last breathe in our bodies, we go presently in our souls to heaven
or hell: good men to heaven, bad men to hell, Hebr. 9.27. Though men live as
beasts, yet they shall not die as beasts: that is, if they live wickedly and
die in sin, the beasts death shall be far better then theirs. For, they in
their death end their misery; those in death, do but begin theirs, that
shall have no end.

But to come to the words themselves, it is said, that the rich man's soul was
in hell in torments: and here is showed wither his soul went, to wit, to hell;
and what followed there. For the first: hell, or the place of hell is here
described by those pains of sense which are in it: and they are called hell
torments. For hell is not only a place of custody as prisons here; but of
custody and torment: therefore, is this rich man said to be in hell in
torments. He that dwelt in a stately palace while he lived, now dead, dwells
in an inglorious place of torments. He that had brave fellows for his
companions, has for companions now, the devil and his Angels: He that fed
delicately, is now fed with fire and brimstone. He that had his pleasure here,
is now tormented: and he is said to be tormented in hell; both in regard of the
extremity of torment, and eternity of term there. Which teaches that there
is no ease in hell, Doct. 1. The first branch of it.
nor end of hell, or no going out of hell, nor end of torments in hell. For
where hell is, there are torments: and in hell, there is no redemption; that is
coming out.

This is the doctrine; and this doctrine is a root of two branches: The first,
that there is an extremity of torments in hell; The second, that these
torments in hell are endless. For the extremity of the torments, it is
expressed in the Scriptures, by things most dreadful, and terrible out of
measure; as unquenchable fire; Math. 3.12: a lake of fire, burning with
brimstone: Apoc. 19.20: and a lake of fire and brimstone, Apoc. 20.10. Of all
torments none is so extreme as by fire: for fire, and all destruction by fire,
is terrible. But it is more, and most terrible ever to flote upon a river of
fire; nay, ever to be over head and ears in a burning lake of fire and
brimstone. Terrible needs must this be, i^ any thing in the world be terrible.
Therefore, Esaias cries out: Who can dwell with the devouring fire? who can
dwell with the everlasting burning? Esa. 33.14. As if he had said, no man can.
And yet the damned (whom God will throw into it) shall by the power of his
justice be strengthened for their greater increase of torments unspeakable, to
be in it, and to burn in it world without end.

Further, and for further terror, it is called utter darkness: Math. 22.13:
where is fire, yea a whole lake of it, and no light: or a dark land covered
with deadly obscurity, where the light that ^s, is darkness Job. 10.^1.22.
It were terrible to be in a dungeon of darkness for a short time: how terrible
then, to be in this hell of darkness for ever? They that love darkness more
then light, shall have enough of it here, and pass from affected darkness to
utter darkness, from one darkness to another. We read of torments invented by
men, and of cruel ones indeed, inflicted by heathen-men upon Christians: as
fornaces of fire, caldrons of boiling oil, brazen Bulls, and that Moloch in
the valley of Hinnom, where Idolators burnt their children to the dwell: 1.
King. 11.7. But hell is larger then so, and the thing exceedes all report. 1.
King. 10.7. Nebuchadnezars furnace was heated seven times: Dan. 3.19: this more
then seventy times seven. To be shut up in the belly of a brazen Bull over a
small fire; and there to be till the heat kill him, must needs be a lingering
and terrible death: but hell is much worse, and without end. Therefore does the
Prophet Esaias compare hell to Tophet: Esa 30.33: and Matthew, speaking of it,
calls it Gehenna, Math. 5.22, That is Tophet: because of the lamentable
screakings of children, sacrificed in that fire: but the screakings of young
and old in the Tophet of hell, the fire and burning there, is both intolerable
and eternal.

Thus hell torments must needs be great in respect of the extremity.

The reasons. The greater sufferings, the greater torment. The sufferings
spoken of are exceeding great, and yet far less then any of those that are
prepared for the damned in the Tophet of hell. For these earthly may be
expressed and conceived, those in hell cannot?

Secondly, the wrath of God shall then be executed to the full against sinners
and upon sin, which is executed more favorably here, and with some mixture
of clemency. Also, the devils are in place and put in office to further the
affliction in that lake of torments.

Thirdly, if those torments that afflict the body only, be so great and
intolerable, how great and intolerable must they be that shall afflict both
soul and body in hell? The torments of hell are universal in all the parts of
the body, and tender powers of the mind together: all at once shall be
tormented.

The pains of this life are (for the most part) particular, in some part of
the body, or in some faculty of the soul: and yet how extreme they sometimes
prove to be, and how insufferable, they that feel them can tell. The toothache
is but the grief of one part, perhaps but of one tooth; and yet some having it
in some extremity, have wished themselves out of the world: the like of the
stone, strangury, and the like. What then, when every part shall be racked, and
every faculty tormented? and when they shall cry out in hell with this rich
man, O, I am tormented in this flame? Luke 16.24. One, speaking at the cross
of those tortures to which that cursed parricide, M. Henry Greenwood at (...)
cross.
Rauilliack (the murderer of the last french Henry) was put unto, writes thus:

His arm that did that cursed act was taken from his shoulder: his nails
pulled from his hands and feet: his flesh piece by piece, fet from him with
hot burning pincers, and burnt before his face: and he rent asunder in the
end, with four horses. This is much; but the book written of his terrible and
deserved death, speaks of much more: and yet all this and more might, without
any pulles or the least touch of the soul, have bin endured, if the cause had
bin good for which he so died. But in this lake of brimstone and fire that is
never quenched; all parts, as head, arms legs, hands, feet, and what not, all
shall be tormented and ever tormented; not in an artificial furnace, as that of
France, but in the great wine press of the wrath of God, Apoc. 14.^9, and in
that horrible burning which the breath of the Lord, (like a river of brimstone)
does kindle continually, Esa. 30.33. Some pieces of flesh shall not only be
set from them, as from that french parricide with burning pincers; but if this
be a torment, (as who can deny it) all the flesh on their backs shall be so,
or rather much worse tormented by devils in hell His nails were pulled from
his fingers and feet once they shall be tormented ever, as if theirs were ever
so. One arm was taken from his shoulder; Books of the terrible and deserved
death of (...) R^uill^acke.
the book says, by consuming it in terribl manner, in fire and brimstone:
here, all the members of their body shall ever burn in fire and brimstone, and
never be consumed. He was rent by horses: and devils shall rack these in
every member. If his breasts were pinched and seared; the brawne of his arms
and thighs, the calfe of his legs, and other fleshy parts of his body: if
into the holes of his flesh that the burning pincers made, were powered scalding
oil, rosin, pitch, and brimstone, as the book says: which made the tormented
creature to yell out with horrible outcries, like some tormented soul in hell;
surely the damned in hell shall have enough of such things, hippe and thigh.

And yet I have said nothing of the soul, nor her torments that exceed all
this, besides, that it shall be so and much worse for ever.

Now, who will deny (these things well considered) the first branch of the
Doctrine to be true, that there is an extreamitie of torments in hell?

If then we avoid the breach of men's laws because of those chastisements and
pains of death, eats and drinks with sinners, or as sinners do shall be
cut off, (or all in pieces) to destruction, Math. 24.50.51, and be thrust into
hell, both arm, body, and soul; where they shall be tormented day and night
in the fire that never goes out: and should not this be enough to cut the cup
from our mouth, Joel, 1.5, I mean of excess and drunkenness? So much and
intollerably do they suffer who come into this place of torment, that Christ
bids us rather to cut off and ^ast away our right hand or foot, that is, the
dearest things ^e have, then with them, to be cast into this everlasting ^^re,
Math. 18.8. And if this fiery argument cannot move us, what will? If we should
hear a sudden cry of fire, fire, how would it trouble us? but Gods word, and
Gods Ministers, that preach his word, speak of an eternal fire that still
burns, and has ever burnt from the beginning of time, ordained before time
was; even fire and much wood, a lake of fire, and pit of burning fire: and
should not this trouble every bone in our body? Or, if fire come, will we be as
s^ubble for it?

I know that my speech of this is not pleasing: alas then, what pleasure can it
be to feel it? I speak not to please your ears; I speak to save your
souls. And whether I speak or hold my peace, the fire burns still.

As fathers threaten their young children with the fire, so we do you with hell
fire; not to cast you in but to make you to run further from it: and the
meditation cannot but be profitable, and even break the stone in your hearts.
When Baltazar saw the hand that wrote, it troubled him out of measure, Dan.
5.5.6. And if we would often common with our hearts by the word of these
things, it could no less trouble us to hear of them, then it troubled that
great Monarch to see the writing on the wall. Besides, the fear of these,
would make us fear to sin, according to that; tremble and sin not, Psalm.
4.4. And he that so fears hell, shall escape it; as he that neither fears
so, nor at all, shall be sure to fall into it. For (as one says truly) none is
so deep in these torments, as he who least thought of them.

But we put this evil day far from us; and that makes us to sit on our seats
of sin, as we do, Am. 6.3. We read not the word, or, what we read there,
we believe not; and therefore we run into excess, as if there were no hell.
All the account that some make of hell is, that they shall cast fire brands
there; but such are firebrarnds thereof: and to such it may be said, as men use
to say, when they have well supped in an Inn; that the worst dish is behind:
that is, the reckening, and that that must pay for all. Then will follow; Son
remember thou have had thy pleasures, Luke 16.25, or good things here. The
sum is, he that will follow his lusts, shall (without his repentance) follow
them to his cost. He that burns in adultery, shall burn in hell. He that
killes here, shall hang there: and he shall thirst there, Luc. 16.24, that is
drunken here. And what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and
lose his own soul? Math. 16.26.

This made Paul to keep a clear conscience: Act. 24.16. and the consideration
of this makes the godly fear to offend. Therefore Ierom: Whatsoever I do, me
thinks I hear this sound still in my ears: Arise ye dead, and come to
judgment. And thus in regard of the extreamitie of torments, hell is
intolerable: so is it also, in respect of the continuance and tea^me there.
For they that are in hell, are there in pains without ease, and time without
end.

And (now) where the damned shall be in hell, time without end: Doct. 2. The
second branch of it
we secondly, (which is the second branch of the doctrine) learn, that the
torments in hell are endless.

So Daniel speaking of the resurrection of sinners, describes the condition to
which they shall be raised in their bodies, by the names of shame and
contempt, and calls it, Perpetual shame and contempt, Dan. 12.^. And Apoc.
20.10. Hell is called the pit bottomless because in it, there is no
redemption, and from it no returning and the Apostle Jude, alluding to the fire
that they of Sodom, and the Cities about were destroyed with, says in effect,
that they passed from the vehemency of that fire, to the vengeance of eternal
fire, Jude 7. Where he likewise calls Hellfire, eternal fire.

The smoke of this furnace is always mounting, it ascends up for ever,
says Saint John, Apoc. 14.11. This tormenting worm of hell is immortal: The
worm dies not, says Saint Mark, Mark 9.46. Hitherto belongs that answer of
Abraham to this Rich-man, They that would go from hence to you cannot, neither
can they come from thence, that is, from hell to us, Luke 16.26. His meaning
is, Once in hell, ever in it.

One uses this comparison, As a man that is, to be pressed to death, calls
for more, and more weight, but cannot have it: so all the condemned to second
death, through an extremity of torments in that lake of death, call for death,
that there might be an end: but death flies from them, that is, end there is
none, nor any to be hoped for: For when so many thousands of years are past,
as have been moments of time since time began, the torments of the damned
cannot end that are endless.

The Reasons. Where there is no repentance of sin, there is no end of
torments for sin. After death, and in hell, there can be no repentance: for
Repentance is by the Ministry of the word, and the use of it is in this life
only. 2. Tim. 2.25. Apoc. 2.21.

Secondly, so long as the damned continue sinful, so long they shall be
tormented: but they must needs ever be sinful in hell: and therefore in hell,
ever be tormented: This oil can never be spent, the oil of sin: and
therefore the wrath of God which is as fire to the same, must ever burn: and
who shall quench it?

Thirdly, they that despise the counsel of God against themselves; and
therefore will not hear when God calls; must make account to call, to wit,
too late with this Rich man in hell, and not be heard, Prou. 1.24.28. And if
they be not heard, how can they be delivered? and if they be, how can the
Scripture be true?

A terror to those, who use so ill the short time of their repentance; seeing
when they be gone hence, Esau, they seek it with tears, Heb. 12.17. Besides,
what fools, and how unwise are they who will purchase eternal torments with
so short pleasures? May they not say, as a King once said; who being enforced
in an extreme thirst of water, to yield himself to the enemy: after he had
drunk of the water so dearly bought, brake out into these words: For how
short a pleasure, what a Kingdom hau^ I lost? So, what joys have I lost, and
of what continuance? and what miseries have I gained, and how endless, for
less then a dish of water? What madness to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, and after to lie in torments of fire for ever?

This Rich man would have given the world, if the world had been his to give:
to have been rid of his torments but one poor hour, or to have had any
little ease of them in hell: but if all the Angels and Saints of Heaven, would,
as we may not think they would, have begged of Christ for him, they could
have done him no good in that place of torments.

Therefore while there is hope, and while the Lord may be found, let us seek
him, to wit, in the way of obedience to the Gospel, Esaias 55.6. If ye will
not come into this place of torments where there is no coming out, hear Moses
and the Prophets in the old Testament, and Christ in the New, Luc. 16.28. Come
to Church: Hear reverently at Church, and practice carefully when ye are gone
from Church. Repent ye of your sins, and that to day; that is, while ye may
call and be heard, convert and be healed.

It can be no good husbandry in you or any, to put off your sowing till the
time of reaping come, and to pay for a few simple trifles, the loss of your
precious souls for ever. O think of these things now in these days of mercy,
and while the gate is open, strive to enter. The soul is more worth then all
the world, and all riches pleasures, and profits are but loss and dung in
comparison of it: Further, to be severed from God and Christ in the torments of
hell, is a plague above all plagues, mortal and earthly.

Now is the time to redeem thy poor soul: I say now, because thou know
not what may happen in an hour, and in a moment we are taken away. O
therefore now, and presently go about it, now, and presently abandon thy short
pleasures, that thou may reign with God for ever in the long life of his
salvation. And now and presently mortify sin in thy earthly members, that
thy soul may be saved in the day of the Lord, and thy body and soul may
joyfully meet at the resurrection of all bodies, in the kingdom prepared for
them, and there be for ever.

Here we read of a great man in Hell, or of a great rich man in torments in
hell, Doct. 3.
which teaches that no wicked ones (how great soever) are for that, or because
of such eminence, exempt from the place and condemnation of hell. Therefore
Tophet, to which hell is compared, and the burning Tophet, is said to be
prepared for the King, Esa. 30.33. I may say for Kings, and all in kingly
places that do wickedly. And Samuel said to all Israel, not only if ye do
wickedly, ye shall perish: but if your king do wickedly, ye and your King
shall perish, 1. Sam. 12.25. not subjects only, but King and Subjects. The
Lucifer of Babylon must to hell, as well as the meanest in Babylon, Esa.
14.9.12. that commits iniquity.

The Reasons. The soul that sins shall dye, Ezech. 18 4. It is spoken of
every soul and person, poor and rich.

Secondly, the sin that it committed is either punished in Christ, or shall
be in th^se that are committers of it, whosoever they be: for under other
terms, God never yet pardoned sin: and Christ who took upon him the sins
of his Elect, descended to the hels in the sufferings of his life and death, to
answer his Fathers justice, and for his peoples faults. But are al kings, are
all great ones in Christ? Has Christ suffered for all that are Noble? and for
all that are rich and mighty? does not the Scripture say, Not many wise, not
many mighty, nor many noble are called? 1. Cor. 1.26.

Now, if many be not, and but few are; they that are not called, must suffer
for that, and all that, which Christ never suffered for them: and where but in
Hell? and what torments but of Hell?

Thirdly, he that judges his people with equity, and the world with true
judgment, Psalm. 98.9. should go against his own rules of doing that which is
equal and just, if he should not reward every one according to his work, and
proceed to judgment without respect of persons, Act. 10.34. But it is
blasphemy in an high degree once to think, that howsoever wickedness among
men be in the place of judgment, Eccles. 3.16, the Judge of all the world will
not deal justly.

An admonition to great ones to serve the Lord in fear, Psalm. 2.11. and not to
bear themselves upon their great wealth above that which is meet: for how
soon and fearfully may they be brought down in a moment? and what will all
their glory and riches help them, when their pomp must descend with them to
the pit of corruption? And how can they redeem their poor souls, and what
ransom will they give to God for them, when a whole world will not be taken
for the redemption of one soul?

This Rich man in hell, and infinite thousands in hell as rich as he while they
lived, can say as much now. And what difference between the poor ungodly, and
the ungodly rich in hell (though great on earth,) seeing their chambers of fire
and burning pitch in the infernal Lake, are like, save that their torments may
be (and it is like) are greater? for look how much they gloryed in
themselves, and lived in delights, so much shall they have torments and sorrow,
Apoc. 18.7.

Now had it not been better for such (while they lived here) to have lived
under the nurture of the word, and to have come humbly and duly to it, and with
as great reverence and love as the poorest soul? But They hated him that
rebuked in the gate, Amos 5.10. and therefore wish too late, with this Rich man
in Hell, that they had not been such fools and mad men, to cross their own
salvation.

So much for the place whither the soul of this Rich man went: Now we come to
show what followed there.

He lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a far off, etc. We have heard whither
the soul of this rich man went, to wit to hell; here is further showed, what
followed there. And (first) what this rich man saw, and (secondly) what he
said. He saw Lazarus, and spoke to Abraham. He saw Lazarus; to wit, with the
eyes of his mind, the eyes of his body being fast closed up in the grave: and
he spoke to Abraham, but with an intellectual tongue. Which shows, that all
that follows, is a parable-part of Scripture. For souls in proper speech,
have neither eyes to see, nor tongues to speak with.

It is said he lift up his eyes; the more to increase his desire of that he
could not have, and sorrow for being denied it. And that his eyes being lift
up, he saw Abraham a far off: or, salvation far from the wicked: Psalm.
119.155: and (which more augmented his pain) Lazarus in his bosom.

As far as heaven and hell are asunder, so far off saw he Abraham; and with
the Mole-warp, he only opened his eyes at his death, and saw him, and Lazarus
with him in bliss. But as in his life time, he turned his eyes from Lazarus,
so now at his death, God turned his face from him: and so he saw, what he was
not better, but worse for seeing. And how could it be otherways, having such a
feeling of the torments he was in, and lively sense of the f^uours he lost; by
seeing Lazarus so happy, and himself so miserable? For might he not now say,
What has pride profited me? or what profit has the pomp of riches brought
me? Wisd 5.8.

Thus he saw too late, and with late repentance at his death, what before he
would not see. Which teaches that death, which is prevented of the righteous,
preuenteth sinners.

The rich man in the Gospel, who promised to himself a life of many years,
had not the poor life of one night to prepare for death, which took him away
in his covetousness, Luke 12.19.20. And Agag said merrily, the bitterness of
death is past; when (the same hour) bitter death which he thought to be past,
pierced him to the heart, being hewn in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal, 1.
Sam. 15.32.33. And what warning had Herod, when upon his royal throne, in the
sight of all his flatterers, he was suddenly stricken with death by an Angel?
Act. 12.23. When the old world thought least of a change, the flood of death
came, Luke 17.27. And Sodom with her Cities thought least of death, when her
end came suddenly by fire from heaven. v. 29.

As therefore the devils said to Christ, so are the wicked driven to say to
death: Art thou come to torment us before our time? Math. 8.29. At 50: at 60:
at more years, it is ever out of time: and they say with Iehoram, Is it peace?
2. King: 9.23. They know not if it be.

The reasons. They have no hope in death, and in this life only they have
their pleasure and heaven.

Secondly, they cannot cease to sin, and therefore cannot be in the mind to
look for death, that casts into hell for sin.

Thirdly, they are the inhabitants of the earth, upon whom death comes
suddenly, as the snare upon the bird, Luk 21.35.

An instruction to think of every present day as of the day of our death,
thief of his coming, Math. 24.43. And how soon are we gone? or how suddenly
may our death come? perhaps before we go out at these doors, perhaps at home,
perhaps in our way, as we are going home? some adulterers have been taken in
their filthy sin by death as Zimri and Cozbi were, Number. 25.7.8.14.15. Some
have withered in death, as Ieroboam^ hand, breathing cruelty, 1 King. 13.4.
Some drinking themselves drunken have so died. Math. 24.50. And some, dancing
on the Sabbath, have fallen down dead in the dance. Should not these examples
be warnings to us? should they not lead us to Christian watchfulness? or, are
we surer of our life, then these were?

But who considers, that profaning the Sabbath, swearing, whoring, drinking,
and being drunken, the same day or hour may take him that took them suddenly?
or do we think to go to heaven with a pair of dice in our hands, and a hel^
of oaths in our mouths? But, though this rich man saw Abraham, yet the text
says that,

He saw Abraham a far off: Not to his comfort, but further tormenting. As he
beheld Lazarus, so God now beholds him a far off.

And as far was the rich man from Abraham, as hell is far from heaven, and
as miseries without ease or end are from joy and pleasures endless. This
reaches, that as the wicked are far from Gods law, Psalm. 119.150, so Gods
salvation is far from the wicked, Psalm. 119.155. Sin and salvation are two
ends, that can never meet.

The Prophet says, as he loved not blessing, so shall it be far from him,
Psalm 109.17. And this made Paul to wish that King Agrippa, in his great pomp,
had bin such as he was, Act. 26.29, not to wish himself such as Agrippa was in
all his roialty. For he would not change coats with him, nor exchange estates,
though it were to have a Princes life for a prisoners.

The reasons. The wicked are not so near to salvation as hypocrites, who
(though they seem to live in the suburbs of it as he who was among the other
ghests, not having his wedding garment) yet shall never be saved: Math.
22.11.13. being not painted tombs, but sinkes; foul without, and foul within.

Secondly, they must need; be far from God, that is, from his salvation; to
whom he will say (as he does to all wicked sinners) depart, Math 7.23. and 25
41. Psalm. 6.8.

Thirdly, they are the haters of God: and such shall not come in his presence,
nor near him, Psalm. 1.5. and 68.1.

Fourthly, Moses might not stand upon holy ground till he had put off his
shoes: Exodus 3.5: how much less may the wicked stand upon heavens ground,
having not put off the foul shoes of their filthy sins?

An instruction to go far from wickedness,

And whither shall we go, if we go from him? He has the words, and with him
is the well of eternal life, Ioh. 6.68. In his presence is the fulness of joy,
Psalm. 16.11, and fullness of all miseries in our absence from him. With him is
light, without him we abide in darkness for ever. And now should not this
enforce us to love his presence in the assembly, and his familiar presence in
heaven? now to seek him in his word, that hereafter we may find him in his
Kingdom: now to have him, that we may have him ever? and now to live to his
glory, that after death he may draw us to himself, and show us his glory?
But far from him here, farther from him in hell. They that will not know him
here, shall not know him, nor be known of him there. And they that will not
see him near in Christ, shall (out of Christ) see (as this rich man saw) a
far off So much for that which this rich man saw; what he said, follows.

Verse. 24 And he cried and said, father Abraham.


What this rich man spoke and to whom, is next to be considered. Wherein we
have his speech, in this verse: and the replye unto it, in the two next.

In his speech I note the request he made, and the reason; For I am tormented,
etc. His request is in the manner, or matter thereof; The manner is said to be
with a crying speech, and with the calling Abraham, father Abraham. Because he
would not be warned in time, he cried, or was made to cry when time was past;
and he that would not be Abraham's son in obedience, desires to be with
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom.

He should have thus cried while he was in the way: and before the eternal
bars had closed him in.

Where we learn, that this life is a life for mercy, and that there is no
crying for mercy after it. Doct. 1.
So says Christ, The night comes, to wit, of death, when no man can work,
John 9.4. And Saint Paul exhorts the Galathians, and in them all Christians,
To do good while they have time, Gal 6.10. As if he had said: Ye shall not
always have it, nor after death. To this effect the Prophet Esaias, Seek the
Lord while he may be found, Esa. 55.6. That is, in this life, and not in
hell, where there is no finding of him. Abraham left sacrificing when the Sun
went down, Genesis 15.17. And when the Sun of life sets over us, there is no
more sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10.26. Therefore, says Solomon, All that thine
hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power, Eccles. 9, 10. That is,
presently and here.

The reason is, There is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. His meaning is, when thou art dead,
thou can neither do nor devise any thing for thy salvation or peace in the
pit of darkness, and of death.

The Reasons. After death there is no reward, Eccles. 9.5. And then is a time
of judgment, not of mercy. Secondly, mercy is from repentance, and repentance
from the Ministry of the Word, which only has power in this life, 2. Tim.
2.25. Apoc. 2.21.

Thirdly, when the tree is cut down, what hope of fruits? So after the axe of
death has been upon us, what hope to be fruitful? Lastly, there is no mercy
of God without says in God, but either here faithful, or never, 1. Cor.
13.10.13, and 2. Cor. 5 7.

An instruction, Heb. 3.13. 2. Cor. 6.2. not to cry for it with this Rich man
in Hell: nor with the foolish Virgins, when the gate is shut, Math. 24.10, 11.
the gate of all compassion and mercy. But we say to God as the unmerciful man
to his neighbor; Come again to morrow, Prou. 3.28. That is, we still put
off, though we know not what may be to morrow, or what the day may bring with
it. To morrow, says Pharaoh, Exodus 8.10. To morrow Pharaoh? And why not to
day? Walk whiles ye have light, says Christ, John 12.35. that is, whiles
you may be saved, strive to salvation by the light of the Gospel, lest when
it is removed, the darkness of despair come: and Whither will ye walk, not
knowing whither in the dark?

A terror to all that despise repentance when they be called to it in this
life. Abraham: yet God the Father of Abraham, Have mercy upon me. And what
hope of a tree when it is cut down, and burns in the fire? so what hope of
sinners, cut down by death for the fire of hell?

If this be terrible, better now preached, then felt in hell, where is no
redemption. Knowing therefore these terrors of putting off the day of
visitation, 2. Cor. 5.11. why should we not be resolved to seek and find
mercy with true and present repentance for all our sins? O therefore take no
more days to that, that must be done to day: so shall we find mercy, that
is, in due time, if we so seek it.

Further, for this damned Rich man, as he cried too late, so he begged (as
we say) at a wrong door: For, he said, Father Abraham, going to him for
mercy; where the righteous go directly, and only to God, and to none of the
Saints.

And here it may be noted by the way, that the doctrine of the Inuocating dead
Saints must needs want a good President, coming from a damned person in hell,
and a person that fared never a whit better by speaking to Abraham. The voice
from heaven is, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, Psalm. 50.15. Upon me,
says God, as if he had said, Upon me only: and it is so resolved by Christ
in the same argument of his fathers service, Mat. 4.10. They that say, and do
otherwise, let them show us where it is so written, and we will do after
them: but when God has charged us with an absolute service for himself, how
can we, and why should we, without a dispensation from him by his word, share
it between him and his creatures?

God (as we heard) has commanded us to call upon him by Jesus Christ, in our
wants, with promise to hear us: and how then can we call upon him with others
in our trouble, without offending him in his word, and distrusting him in his
promise? but this only by the way, and yet worthy the taking up. It is said
in the Text, that this Rich man called Abraham, Father; where he boasted of
that to which he had no right, nor good title; only some color of title he
had to it by the carnal birth, being a Jew. He would not follow Abraham, in
giving hospitality as did Abraham: and yet in Hell, who must be his father, but
father Abraham, whose son in obedience he would not be? but all this auayled
him nothing; since they only are Abraham's children, who do the works of
Abraham.

Where we learn, Doct. 2.
that it displeases God, and will not profit us to glory in the bare name of
a Christian, except we be Christians indeed. They that came to Ichus Baptism
said as much, but because they said and did not, Math. 23.3. he called them a
generation of vipers, Math. 3.7 He might have called them a generation of
toades more truly, then true Abrahamites. And what said Christ to those who
prophesied to others, but not to themselves, and did great works in his name,
but would do nothing for his name? Depart, says he, or, hence far from me,
ye that work iniquity, Math. 7.22.23. That is, ye that call your selves
Christians, and do not like Christians; to hell with ye. So he that would be
a Christian, and had not on the wedding garment of a true Christian, received
this sentence; Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness,
Math. 22.13. As if Christ had said: Deal with him, as with a prisoner, whose
hands must be bound that he may not resist, and feet shackled that he may
not run away. And because he loved darkness, the darkness of a subtle
heart; let him pass from that darkness of his, to the darkness of hell;
from one darkness to another.

The like we read of those, who pretending to be of the household of faith
with right believers, knocked at the door, to wit, by glorying vainly in that
which they had not; after the good man of the house had shut the door of hope
against all such vain and vain glorious talkers: but what was the answer? I
know not whence ye are? Luke 13.25. That is, ye are mere strangers to my
Fathers house and to me, or ye came to me for a night, but ye continued not
with me, as mine do: but they replied; We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, v. 26. their meaning is, we
have been at thy table, there we ^ate and dr^nke in the Sacrament with thy
household people; and we have heard in many Sermons of thee by thy teachers in
Church and Chapp^ll.

To this Christ reioines in the next verse; I tell you, I know you not whence
ye are. v. 27. As if he had said, I said it be ore, and I say it again that ye
are none of mine. Ye did indeed dip with me in the Sacrament: there ye did
eat and drink the blessed bread and wine; but doing so with no good
affection, nor simple heart, ye are and drank your greater condemnation. Ye
were baptized with the baptism of water, but not of the spirit: and ye wore
my linery, but in it, ye did service to my enemy. Also, ye heard, or seemed
to hear many Sermons; but ye always left them where ye found them: and
therefore the more ye heard, because ye so heard them, that is, formally, and
not in obedience, the more ye have to answer for. I tell you therefore, I
know ye not whence ye are. That is, ye are as strange to me as they that
never heard of me in the Gospel, nor saw my face in the Sacrament.

The reasons. They who be Christians in face, and not in heart and deed
Christians, are but hypocrites: and being hypocrites, they are hated of God,
his soul abhors such, Esa 1.14.15.

Secondly, they are but bastards in Israel: or, sons of the bondwoman that
may not be heirs with the son of the freewoman, Gal. 4.30. Some privileges
belong unto them, and for the true Churches sake, they receive man (...)
^utward good things here; but being bastards, they cannot inherit by law. And
what shall it profit a man, If he win the whole world, and destroy himself,
or ^ose himself: Luke 9.25.

Thirdly, they have to do with that God that will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7 And
then, what good will it do them to say, they are children, when they are not?
if they could deceive God that looks into the heart, as they can man that
sees not as God does, they might have some hope; but seeing God himself is
judge, how can they be hid?

A terror to those who putting trust in lying vanities, have nothing of the
Church or of true baptism in them, name in their mouths, Ier. 7.4. Such though
they say father Abraham, with this damned person; yet because they walk not by
holiness, in the steps of the faith of Abraham, Romans 4.12, they are the
children of their father, Ioh. 8.44. There is an Israel in the covenant, and an
Israel out; or an Israel in Christ, and an Israel that is none of Christ's: as
there is a circumcision in the spirit, and a circumcision in the letter; or a
circumcision of the heart, and circumcision of flesh, Romans 2.29. Now, they that
have no more in them then the Israel of an outward profession, or the baptism
of water, howsoever (judging as men) we cannot deny them the name and account
of Christians; yet when he comes to see his ghests (who is of pure eyes, and
judges otherways then man does) he will turn them out as intruders: command
them to be taken away, to wit, from all communion with him, his blessed Angels,
and glorified Saints: and send them to their own place, where is weeping with
gnashing of teeth, that is, sorrow and grief mingled with desperation, Math.
22.13. This is the portion of their cup.

This should stir us up to walk with more conscience in our professions. eye
is upon all his ghests, Math. 22.13. He that searches Jerusalem with lights:
Zeph. 1.12: but neither with torch-lights nor candle, and can see without them;
can find us out in our darkest hypocrisy, to whose eyes of knowledge and
providence, all things are naked, or as it were, vnquartered, Hebr. 4.13. His
eyes are a flame of fire, and with these lights he pierces, and looks
through every man's heart, conscience, and conversation: nothing is hid, or can
be from them.

And therefore though we be admitted by the Minister, and allowed by men to go
for Christians; yet, if we be not Christians in life, and in the testimony of
our own consciences so, their testimony will little? uaile us against Gods
examination, and the witness of our own hearts. If we condemn our selves,
and if God condemn us; what matter for the praise of men, or their good word,
whose eyes we have bleared with our seemings? Let us therefore approve our
selves to God and our own consciences, by true repentance, truly and indeed
to be Christians. If we have not repented thus, let us now begin: and if we
have, let us do it more. Let us break off our sins, even in the purpose of
our hearts; and not think to say, or think we have done enough, because we
can say; We have Abraham to our Father, Math. 3.9. For to receive the seals of
the covenant without the writing, and when we have no promise from God in our
sinful courses, what is it but to take that which is none of ours, and with
great sin, steal Gods seals and prints, which we must bring back again
with shame, when he that strictly observes all men's ways, shall say: Depart
from me, ye workers of intquitie; I know you not? Luke 13.27. So Much for this
rich man's request in the manner, the matter of it follows.

Have mercy on me, etc. The matter of this rich man's request is, generally for
mercy; and more specially, wherein he desires Abraham, to show him mercy. As
that he would be so good to him, as to send Lazarus, etc.

And the mercy which he craved, is here limited to the sending down of Lazarus
to him, with a very small quantity of water to cool his tongue, tormented in
a flame of fire that never goes out. But yet, by Abraham's answer, in the next
verse, it appears that he failed even of so small a drop of mercy; because
while he lived, he would show no mercy to Lazarus at his gate.

And so we see that they shall receive no mercy, who will show none. Doct.
So Solomon: He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, be himself
shall cry, and not be heard. Prou. 21.13. His meaning is plain: as much as if
he had said, he that turns himself away in his compassions from the needy
crying to him for some relief: shall cry, that is, fall into such miseries as
shall make him cry, and be never the better; and S. James says that merciless
men shall receive no mercy, James 2.13. His meaning is, that they who pity not
their brethren in their afflictions: turning away their ears that they may not
hear them, and (also) their eyes that they may not look upon them; shall
(themselves) come into troubles remediless, and not be pitied. We have the
example in that merciless servant; who, being born with in his debt of the ten
thousand talents, would not bear with his f^llow servant in the hundred pence,
Mat. 18 24.28.30. The master, without al mercy, cast him into prison, till he
should pay all that was due unto him, ver. 34. which he could never do. Thus
the brethren of Joseph, supposing they had been met with in their own
measure, confessed that the trouble which they feared, was just; Gen 42.21; and
that they were paid justly and truly in their own coin.

The Reasons. It is but right that they should be done by as they have done to
others, Judge. 1.7. and good reason that they who neither regarded the
commandment of God, nor the cry of his people, nor the members of his Son
nor their own flesh, should be as little regarded when they are in necessity,
as they regarded God and their needy brother in their good days. Secondly, it
is but after their own measure, and the mouth of truth has spoken it, that
with what measure we mete, it shall be measured to us again, Math. 7.2, and so
because their hearts were shut up to others, Gods ears are shut up to them.
Thirdly, such shall have judgment merciless, James, 2.13. and after
judgment, there is no hearing.

An Item therefore to merciless men, with admonition to al now and here to
show such mercy,

If men would consider this, I mean cruel men and hard hearted; or, if they
would believe what is written, and think what may come, they would be much
more, both tenderhearted, and open-handed, then now they be, laying up mercy
in the sure custody of a merciful heart. That wherein this Rich man craved
mercy, follows.

And send Lazarus that he may dip the tippe of his finger in water, etc. As
this rich man was greatly tormented at the sight of Lazarus, thus exalted in
glory: so he is made here to bow down low at the gate of a righteous person,
Pro. 14.19. by craving such a smal^hing in such humble manner of Lazarus whom he
had so much despised: for to beg of Lazarus, who begged of him, and to beg a
smaller matter then some crummes from his table, even one drop of water; and
yet to be denied by him who then drunk of the river of the water of life,
could not but be a great fall, and heart breaking. He that living on the
earth, had so many servants to ride or go at his command, had not, nor could
have one in hell, to fetch him in a dish, one poor drop of cold water to cool
the burning of his tongue, in that burning lake. This could not but add to his
torments, if any thing could be added.

Lazarus (contrarily) who had none to help him, while he lived, being (now)
dead in body, and in soul glorified, is not only honored with long life; but
has this honor added also, that the rich man who refused to help him,
seeks help of him by Abraham.

And so we learn that there is no wicked man or other here so great, Doct. 1.
but may have need of the poorest and meanest godly man whom he here despises.
This Rich man would have Abraham to do him so much pleasure as to send Lazarus
to him to hell, that is, from the bosom of bliss to the bottomless lake, to
ease him (though never so little) there.

It is a true proverb, that the evil shall bow before the good, Prou. 14.19,
that is, the godly shall have obeisance done unto them, and the wicked shall
do it: so proud Haman sought his life of her whose life he sought, Hest. 7.7.
and Jacobs sons were brought upon their knees, and greatly humbled before
Joseph whom they hated and sold, Genesis 42.9.10.11. etc. Saul was twice at the
courtesy and in the mercy of David, whom he persecuted to the day of his
death, 2. Sam. 24. and 16. Chapters. Also Shimes that rayled at him, 2. Sam.
16.5.6. was made to bow unto him, 2. Sam. 19.16.19. And what honor was Haman
enjoined to do to Mardochas a poor Jew, whom before he could not look upon
with any patience? Hest. 6.10.11. He must gloriously set him on horseback, and
lead his horse, and what greater a fall could he have, (save his last fro the
halter) then to see his enemy so horsed, and in such honor, and himself made
the man that must honor him?

Let no man therefore, though never so great, think but he may have need of
a meaner then himself before he dye. The Reasons. All Christians are fellow,
members in the Christian body. Now in the natural body, the head cannot say to
the foot, the highest to the lowest member, I have no need of thee, 1. Cor.
12.21. Besides, all members have not one office, and no member but has some
use; Romans 12.4. Secondly, the receipts of the best are with imperfection: and
therefore the best may need. Thirdly, all Christians are brethren, and what
brother may not sometimes need the help of his brother? Therefore the Apostles
question mixed with reproof, is; Why do thou despise thy brother? Romans
14.10.

An admonition to great ones, Math. 20.16. or their next course may be to be
inferiors; where now they are superiors: for, Whosoever exalts himself
shall be brought low, Luke 13.11. Then their own measure may be returned, and
as they despised others, so themselves may be despised: they may stand under
their sentence, fall under their hands, and lie down at their feet; which would
be considered of by those who look so high above persons better then
themselves, because God has made them rather richer and greater. And thou that
feast a poor man (though a good man) and despisest him, remember that God can
(and perhaps will) make thee as he is, in respect of poverty, and so thy
contempt of thy brother may come home to thy self. Adonibezck the tyrant could
say: As I have done, so it is done to me, Judge. 1.7. And Joseph's envious
brethren did say, As we thought to our brother, so it is come unto us, Genesis
42.21. And so it is a true word, Self do, self have.

But in the flames of hell, what would this Rich man chiefly have, to be
eased, as being greatly (though not only) tormented? He says his tongue:
belike because, having abused that member (as most do) either to blasphemy,
to a railing against Gods word, Ministers and children, or some other ways,
he was grievously tormented in it. True it is that souls have no tongues, but
he felt in his soul what his tongue had done.

And this teaches that men shall be punished, as in that measure, D^ct. 2. Eco
^1.22.23.24, 25.
so in that member and thing wherein they offend. Ieroboams hand was put forth
against the Prophet, 1. K^^. 13 4 and that hand which he put forth against him,
dried up. The lost sons curious taste of meats and drinks, was paid back unto
him in that courser taste of the husks which the Swine cate, Luke 15.16. So
our first Parents abused their eyes, Genesis 3.6. and God opened both their eyes,
v. 7. that is, punished them that way and in that wherein they finned; for they
sought his dishonor, and saw their own shame: and Zacharias the father of John
the Baptist, because he doubted with his tongue, Luke 1.18. was by the Angel
stricken dumb in his tongue, verse. 10. Further also, Nadab and Abihu, the
sons of Aaron offered strange fire, and God consumed them strangely with fire
from heaven, Lenit. 10.1.2. So David himself sinning in another man's wife, 2 Samuel 11.4.5. was requited by his son, in his own wives, Chap. 16.22. And the
Israelites lusting for flesh, had it, and their punishment in it: for it came
out at their nostrils, Number. 11.20. And thus it is plain that men have been
punished in that member and thing wherein they have offended.

The reasons. God would have us to take knowledge of his judgment: and how can
we better, then when he so directs them against our faults, and members
faulting, that we may see him pointing, as with the finger, to us, nay
standing over us in so particular a severity? For so he shows us the nature
and quality of the offense, by proceeding in such manner, and with such special
choice against it. Secondly, this course and manner of punishing the member
offending, is used by Princes often in their proceedings against malefactors in
their Kingdoms, where for the breeding of more terror in others, the member
first suffers that has first or chiefly offended. So Rauilliacke (he that
murdered the last Henry of France) lost first the hand wherewith he did it: and
when a Noble man plots any treason against his King, his King will have the
head that devised it So 2. Macab. 15.32* 33.
. Now if Kings to good purpose, and justly do thus; when God does so, we must
not doubt, but he that is King of Kings, does it both justly and necessarily
to admonish others.

An admonition to use well all those members and parts, Apoc. 16.10. I read of
a Seruingman in Lincolneshire, who had still in his mouth, Gods precious blood,
and at his his death, M. Perk. of the government of the tongue, pa. 72 out of
Phil. St^b^.
blood issued out most fearfully as in great streams from all parts of him,
from his mouth, nose, ears, wrists, knees, heels, toes, and all other parts,
not one free, and so dyed. Thus blood was paid with blood; the blood of Christ
profaned, with a fountain of blood from all his body. Some for abusing others
ears by words of slander, have lost their own; and many whose feet in youth
were nimble to dance the morris, at more years had never a foot nor leg to
carry them void of aches, issues and other slubbers: they that did spoil were
spoiled, and she that fed upon blood, fed the dogs: Drunkards seek red wine,
and have red eyes, Ezech. 39 10 1. King. 21.2^. Prou 23.29.30. And is not
drunkenness it self often punished with dropsies; and filthy whoredom also
with filthy diseases? Has not that member in some been pitifully taken, that
became the instrument of their wanton sin? What are these but warnings to us?
and happy are we, if other men's harms can make to beware: but if we will not
learn by others, we may be taught by our own feeling. Of this be sure,
without repentance, whatsoever member or thing thou abusest here, to be
punished with the loss, or in the anguish of that thing or member here or
hence. If thou abusest all, thou shall be punished in all. And for riches,
(that many regard more then they do the Kingdom of Heaven:) if thou dote
upon them, and make gods of them, make account to lose them, or to lose that
(which is far better) for them. The same may be said of all other commodities
and blessings earthly, whether children, or honor, or pleasures, or friends,
Ezech. 24.25. So much for this Rich man's request; the reason of it follows.

For I am tormented in this flame. Because this Rich man was tormented in the
flames of hell, he disired some refreshing: but what? even a drop of water: But
what good could a drop, or whole sea of water have done him, (being things
finite) for the easing of a pain infinite? And yet, as one who (for the
torment he endured) knew not what he did or spoke; he craves only a drop,
not a sea of water in that extremity.

Where we learn, Doct. 1.
that the torments of hell, do not only vex the minds of the tormented in
hell, but so vex them, that the tongue is supposed, and may be said to talk
idly and foolishly, it cannot tell what. Thus the damned of the earth, the
great men, and the rich men, being far from the salvation of God, and the life
of the Lamb, are brought in by John, saying to the mountains, Fall on us, and
to the rocks and hills, cover us from the presence of him that sits on the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Apoc. 6.15.16. which, what is it but
an idle speech and impossible desire? For, what mountain can hide from God, who
sees through the dark cloud? and what rock and hill can cover from him, who
can enter when the doors are shut? Ioh. 20.26. To him the night shines as the
day: the darkness and light (to him) are both alike, Psalm. 139.12. It was say
de of them, who in the transfiguration saw the glory of Christ, that they wist
not what they said, Luke 9.33. The meaning is, they were so beside themselves
with sudden joy upon that accident, that they spoke they knew not what
themselves, and yet they saw but a little of his great glory. How then shall
they know what they say, or what to say; who shall be far more carried out
of themselves with sudden ecstasies in hell, then they were ravished with
gladness here, who saw but a dark light, a little of their masters glory?

The Reasons. If a little sickness here, or some want of sleep make the head
idle, and the tongue foolish: What shall a sickness over all parts do, and
want of rest for ever? Secondly, the damned in hell feel that that must needs
overcome the senses, and take away reason. And what can they say or do that is
reasonable, and has sense; who neither have their senses about them, nor their
reason in any good order, or means to direct them?

An instruction to take heed what we say here; that we talk not idly and
foolishly (as this fool) in hell. Pet. 4.11, that is as Gods word teaches to
speak. Some have no care to deliver their words by this measure, who therefore
talk both idly and ill: but if we must give account for every idle word,
Math. 12.36, then for our evil words much more. And how great an account then
must be given for lying words and wanton talk? for words of slander, and
words of reproach to our neighbor? specially for words of blasphemy to God, and
of lewd defiance to God, and his truth?

A terror therefore to all vain and foolish tongues. Here men and women make
no conscience of their talk; Their tongues speak proud things, not the words
of the Lord that are pure words, Psalm. 12.3.6, and their days talk, all of it
is to no good or wise end, if not to their own praise, and their neighbors
slander, or to magnifie^^^^^selues, and cast down the Lord with Pharisaicall
lips. If they were in Hell, they could not talk more foolishly then some do,
or to less purpose: nothing in their mouths all the day, but what they might
be ashamed of at night, if it were written in a book, and read unto them. Is
this to redeem the time, and to walk wisely? Is our day-booke well filled,
that is made up with such vanities, as foolish talking, and foolish jesting,
and things that are not comely? Ephesians. 5.4. If such speak foolishly in hell,
they spoke foolishly here, and not to any use of godly edifying; and so neither
there nor here were their words good. And so we see that one effect of
hell torments is, to take away all sense and understanding from those that are
so tormented.

Now, where this Rich man calls the flame of hell, a tormenting flame, Doct. 2
he she weth (as has been noted already) that hell fire is a fire of
torment. But this was spoken of before upon the 23. verse; and so I pass to
Abraham's replye, in the verse that follows.

Verse. 25 But Abraham said, Son remember, etc.


Abraham now replyeth: The sum of which is, that that small comfort, which
was none indeed, or else as good as none, could not be granted him. And here
he puts him in remembrance (though in so active a conscience he could not
but remember) that he had his heanen here, and so could not have it upon the
earth, and in hell too: but Lazarus contrarily: and that therefore Lazarus has
now changed turns with him; Lazarus being in the bosom offelicitie, where he
shall ever be comforted, and he in the bottom of hell, where he shall never
see comfortable day, but be ever tormented. Also, that there is such a gulf of
distance set between the places of their opposite abidings; that there is no
passing from one to another, or possibility of going between.

This is the sum and meaning of Abraham's reply to the Rich man, in these
twoverses, the 25. and 26: where it may be considered in what manner, or by
what force of words he replied; and what was the matter of his reply: for the
manner, it is in these words, Son, remember; and it is in fit words, though
in words of no comfort to a tormented soul, and soul in hell. Son, says
Abraham, as if he had said, Thou Israel in the flesh, and not in Christ,
remember, which thou can not forget if thou would, thou have had thy
pleasures, and all thy good here, that is, here thou have had no other god, but
them, or it: In them was thy life buried, and soul hid, despising God, and
Gods poor members in all thy worldly prosperity: but Lazarus dyed in his
patience, and with pain at thy gate. He was a true Israelue, and in^ poor
life served no other but the true God: and therefore he now reapeth for this
seed of tears, the harvest of joy: and thou for thy life, and pleasures
abused, receiuest, and shall possess pains and woe endless.

In this sort replied Abraham in this verse; where first he calls him son:
which is not to justify, but more to condemn him: for, as he called him father
in no obedience, so now he calls him son with no comfort. He called him
father, and would not do as a son: and now he calls him son, and will
not be as a father to him. Besides, he bids him remember, for a further
scourge of his conscience in the late loss of all his delights past, which he
could not but remember with horrible torment and grief.

And here we learn, that the pleasures of sin leave a bitter and woeful
loss of remembrance in the conscience for hereafter: Doct.
therefore Zophar in Job speaking of the rejoicing of the wicked, how short it
is, and of all the joy of hypocrites which is but for a moment; says, that sin
which once was sweet in the mougth of the sinner, and which he hid under his
tongue, to wit, as sweet sugar shall turn in his bowels, as meat does in the
stomach; and he shall have a loathsome remembrance of it in the vomit of
those deadly morsels, which he shall bring up again: for God shall draw it
out of his belly, Job 20.12.13.14.15. And here that which Abner said to Ioab
concerning the sword which was drawn without mercy, may truly be applied to
sin: Shall it not be bitterness in the later end? 2. Sam. 2.26. That is,
though it please for a time, yet after a while, what pleasure can it promise or
give, when the best end of it is bitterness? The lovely looks of wine, when
the pleasant eye of it is in the cup, and when (as Solomon says) it moves
therein aright, that is leapeth or spirteth in it; has (in those that take it
immoderately) a very bitter after taste: the end of it biteth as a Serpent, and
stingeth as an Adder, Prou. 23.31.32: they feel pleasure at the first, but
they shall find sorrow and pain at the last, with Remember, drunken son,
thou have had thy pleasures here.

Salomons young man is bidden to rejoice, that is, to take his fill of the
delights of life, if no persuasion can tur^e him, but what is the reckoning,
and what will all that dainty cheer cost him? The wise King tells him, (as one
that knew something by his own dear bought experience) That for all this God
willbring him to judgment, Eccles. 11.9, that is, the reckoning will come, and
God williudge him to damnation for it. He also shall be remembered, and
therefore this, Remember Son; is an Item to him. Esaias speaking of such as
placed all their delight in that, which we at this day call good fellowship,
preparing for that troop, and furnishing the drink offerings for that number,
says, speaking in Gods person and name: I will number you to the sword; there
goes the reckning; that is, as ye prepared for sinners, so ye shall speed as
those sinners, and as you gave them drink, so ye shall drink of their cup,
Esa. 65.11.12, to destruction: for, says the Lord, My servants shall eat, and
ye shall be hungry; my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty; my
servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed; and my servants shall sing for
joy of heart, and ye shall criefor sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of
mind, verse. 13.14. The meaning is, Here my servants fare ill, and ye well:
hereafter all shall be contrary; when that sting of remembrance that has
daggers-prickes, beginning to prick, and you to feel it. Jeremy also may
come in as a witness, who in this very case sai^th, That the ways and
inventions of the wicked in Judah shall end in much bitterness, and as it
were, in the point of a weapon, that shall pierce to the heart, Ier. 4.18.
Therefore say the despisers of God, in the book of Wisdom, being pricked of
their own consciences: We fools thought his life, speaking of the godly man's
life, madness, and his end without honor; but now he is counted among the
children of God, and his portion is among the Saints. Wisd. 5.4.5. When they
heard this saying in the voice of their consciences, Remember sons, they
changed their note, and began to say, What has our pride profited us? and
what good has the pomp of riches brought us? All these things are past like a
shadow, and as a Post that passes by, verse 8.9. Thus the pleasures of sin
end in a very bitter remembrance.

The reasons. The pleasures of sin are a sweet poison, that much vexes those
that cate it: and for riches ill used, Christ compares them to thorns, Math.
13.22. Now, athorne in the foot causes great pain; but what prickings come
from such thorns in the conscience? Also the lusts of sin are but baits
that have hooks in them; and when the bait of sin is gone, the hook
abides still in the sinner. Secondly, it is a part of the sinners punishment
to feel continual gnawings and pullings after sin committed, by that worm
that dies not? And if so here, how much more in that lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, where sinners shall receive all their penny worths
together? Thirdly, the pleasures of the wicked go away in their death, if they
continue till they dye, as they often do not. But to have been happy, and to
be miserable; what can it bring but horrible vexation and death before the
time? and how can it but torment the sinner to remember that he, who once, was
full of pleasures, is now filled with pain? and he who had so much living,
now, dead, has nothing? that is, nothing but misery, sorrow, and his just
desert in the pains of hell, and second death.

And admonition, not to feed upon the sweet meat of sin, Prou. 23.32. When
the strange woman, that is, the harlot flattereth with her words, Prou. 2.16,
let us avoid her, as we would some deep ditch, Prou. 22.14. a whore is a
deep ditch, full of great danger; he that falls into it, shall hardly rise
again: not weak men only; but strong men have been deceived by her, as
Sampson; nor simple men only, but the wisest, as Solomon, Prou. 7.26.27.
Perhaps thou may be called out of the good way by such as say; Come, cast
in thy lot with us, we shall find precious riches, and fill our houses with
spoil, Prou. 1.13.14; that is, do as we do, and you shall be rich as we
are: but consent thou not: for there will be a bitter remembrance of all these
things one day. What got Balaam by the sweet wages of sin which he loved?
was he not cast away by them? Jude 11. Such wages of sin prevail much at
this day with too many: and with none more the^ those that should be most free
bestowers of the sacred inheritance of the Church: but for those Patrones of
Church lidings that should be faithful doorekeepers in Gods house, and yet
give no free entrance into the door of the sheep; but sell that way for money
to Simoniacall Hirelings, such as will open the door, soonest and best, with a
silver key: let them not forget that these greedy morsels will come up again in
an up braiding conscience, at the day of their death, if they repent not now in
their day; and strike them with a remembrance that will stick as close to
them, as this of Abraham to Dives, Remember Son, or Church-robber, Remember
that here thou soldest heaven, and thy part in heaven for money. I might thus
go through the land, but it shall not need, only this is needful, that
every private person remember that his sins whatsoever they prove to be, if
he repent not for them, and forsake them, will leave a bitter after-sent in
his mind, for the time to come. And let all, young and old, and all remember
this.

A terror to greedy sinners; Cain, how thou slewest thy brother, and remember
Judas how thou soldest thy master; and remember Saul, how thou persecutedst thy
friend. Dives, thou that would not give thy crummes to Lazarus, remember,
Sodom, thou that did so vex thy good neighbor, remember: Sinners of the
old world; ye, that did nothing but eat and drink, and marry and give in
marriage, till ye were all buried in that universal grave of waters,
remember: And ye that in this world, and now eat and drink, and take your
ease, neither caring for heaven, nor fearing hell or judgment; this that is
spoken to the rich man in hell, may one day be spoken to you there, Remember.

Sin is an hypocrite; honey in your mouth, and poison in your stomach: if
the honey which is in it deceive you; the poison that is in it, will kill you.
When the honey of sin has spent his pleasure, the poison that is in sin
will work by incurable vpbraidings; and then comes, Remember son. Then we
must answer for all, that cannot answer for one: all the sports of our youth,
and all the sins of our life, all the lies we have told, all the oaths we
have sworn, all the pleasures that we have been lovers of more then of God;
our drunken cups and companies, our whoredoms, our oppressions, our pride, our
thefts, our slanderings of the Gospel, and of our neighbor: all these, and
all such as these, will one day remember us, or be remembered to us, though we
would forget them; there is a Table of remembrance kept, and a book of Items,
which will be found in all consciences that are not purged before they go
hence; for, conscience follows sin as hell does death; and then they shall
hear of all, that here would not endure to be told of any: nothing shall then
be concealed, where here nothing must be known. O therefore, let us now
remember as we should, that hereafter we may not remember, or be remembered as
we would not too late: or as this Rich man in hell. So much for the manner; the
matter of Abraham's reply follows.

That thou in thy life time receyuedst thy pleasures, etc. The matter of
Abraham's reply by denial stands in two things, which made the Rich man's
request impossible to be granted. The first, in this verse; the second in the
next. The first is, because he had his heaven of pleasures here, which ended
with his end in death. The second, because God had inuiolably shut up the way,
as with an everlasting bar, between heaven and hell. The first is taken from
the justice of God, which requiteth those with pains, who for their pleasures
here, put his poor (as Dives this poor man) to pain. The second is taken
from his ordinance eternal; which is, that there shall never be any release
out of hell, or passage and pathway between heaven and bell; and this in the
next verse. The first thing in this first reason of denial, is taken from the
contraries of pleasures and pain here: where, by pleasures we are to
understand, not lawful pleasures, but the pleasures of sin: and by pain,
the pains of poverty and hunger in godly Lazarus not relieved, nor any way
pitied by merciless Dives. For simply, this Rich man could not be condemned,
because he had pleasures here, and Lazarus pain: but because he altogether
here followed his pleasures, and would not with his crummes ease this poor
man's pain: as if Abraham had said, Thou have lived to thy se^fe, and ^^^ther
to God nor thy neighbor: Thy belly was the (...) thy lusts and pleasures thy
gods. In these thou have (...), and no way in Gods obedience; therefore art
thou tormented now, and shall be ever.

This was Abraham's meaning, and therefore it condemned not the Rich man, that
he was wealthy, and had some pleasures here: but because he was rich and
cruel, and because drunken with the pleasures of life, because his mind was
altogether set upon worldly vanities* and in evil works; and never a whit
upon heavenly things, and no time upon goodness. We heard before that riches
considered in themselves and not abused by their owners, do not bolt the door
of heaven against any, as neither do the pleasures of life, used lawfully and
well: for then, no Rich-man could be saved, nor any that lives in any
pleasures here: but Augustine
poor Lazarus is in rich Abraham's bosom, and godliness has the promises of
this life, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. And as riches, and
pleasures do not in themselves bar any out of heaven; so neither do poverty
and pain for themselves, bring any thither: for Lazarus was not saved, because
he was poor, and in pain: but because in these, he trusted in God, and
waited for his salvation.

To wind up, and to come to the point: That which condemned this Rich man, was
the abuse, as has been said, of his wealth and pleasures here, and because
the soul of his delight was in them, not delighting in God, and hating his
poor.

From whence we learn, Doct. 1
that they who here are drowned in pleasures, and in the love of their belly,
must hereafter look to live in pain and misery, as this Rich man in the
torments of hell for ever. So it is threatened to the young man, who cheared
himself with the joy and delights of youth, following every pleasure, and
pleasant object, that his heart could imagine, or eye see, that for all these
things, he should be brought to iudgemen, to wit, to the judgment of
condemnation, Eccles. 11.9. Also when spiritual Babylon was fallea, the doom
she received for her life of pleasures was, So much as she lived in
pleasures, so much give ye to her of torment and sorrow, Apoc. 18.7, that is,
weight for weight: or as she could make no end of her pleasures, so let her
have no end of her sorrows, and put her deep in hell, as her soul was deep
sunk in hellish lusts. And therefore Paul speaking of the lusts of youth, bids
men to fly from them, 2. Tim. 2.22. not to go foot-pace from them, as it that
would serve; but to fly, as much as if he had said, they will speedily
overtake you to perdition, if you turn not speedily as under wing, from them
to the life of righteousness, with them that call on the Lord with a pure
heart. Job says as much in effect, where he confesses that God might justly
have rooted out his plants, if his heart had walked after his eye, Job 31.7.8.
I will not say how fitly, or unfitly rather, this was spoken unto, or of God by
him concerning the counsels of the Almighty, which are always just: yet sure
it is, that that holy man was persuaded that they justly deserve a cutting off,
who walk after their eyes here, that is, after them in vanities: and that
there is no hope for such but in their sound repentance. Look not then if thou
belong to Christ, for joy and prosperity continually on earth; or to have thy
heaven here, and in another world: For it is a foul error under the Sun,
and the dotage of those fools, who make this world their heaven, and make
heaven nothing. And if it be true (as it is most sure) that they who will
follow Christ, must swim after him in a sea of burning glass, Apoc. 15.2,
that is, be cast as into a sea, or follow him in a whole sea of miseries here:
then to enio^ and feel in this life (in soul and body) perpetual ease,
pleasure, and content, cannot but be an unfit thing for a true Christian, and
heir of a better life. The point therefore is plain, that there is no hope of
a better life, if we have our hope only in this.

The reasons. How can we come through adversity to happiness, if we suffer no
troubles here? How can our tears be wiped away, when we have shed none? how
can we be like our head, if we will be crowned with rose-buds, where he was
crowned with thorns? and if we do not suffer with him, how can we reign
with him? The Cattle that goes in the best pasture is for slaughter, where
that that feeds on the bare Common is for store: so they are for the Axe
rather then for any continuance, who live altogether at ease in the best
pastures of Sion; where they that are kept on the bares Commons of troubles for
well doing, are the Lords own store.

Secondly, a man drowned is past help: and what help for those that are
drowned in the pleasures as it were a whole sea of sin? Thirdly, here they
said to God, Depart from us, Job. 21.14: hereafter God will say to the^, Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity. Here they served their pleasures, and had no
pleasure to serve God: hereafter their pleasures shall leave them which they
served, and God whom they would not serve, shall condemn them. Here they would
not be saved, and hereafter they shall not: for Christ will say to such, as to
Jerusalem, I would, but ye would not, Math. 23.37. Fourthly, the tenor and
order of Gods justice is inviolable. Now it is a special part of the glory of
his justice, as to show forth his mercy on the righteous, so to execute his
fierce wrath upon unrighteous persons and sinners, Romans 2.6: therefore the
widow that lives in pleasures is say de to be dead while she lives, 1. Tim.
5.6. I conclude then, that the life of pleasures is a dead life, or life of
death: I mean, of second death.

And it is so that men cannot in the manner that this Rich man did live here in
pleasures, Romans 16.18. where is their hope? and what comfort have they, or can
they have, that ever they shall be saved in this course? or if God in the mean
while should call them away by death; what good end can they make out of so bad
beginnings? Let them consider this, who take no pleasure in the service of God,
and take so much pleasure in vanity; who upon the Sabbath leave the Communion
of the Saints at Gods house, to have communion with sinners at Tauernes or in
some Alehouse: and who day after day, fill themselves with wine and strong
drink, and seek not the Lord; as they have done, so they mean to do still;
to morrow, as to day, Esa. 56.12.

Let them also consider who are so tender, and keep themselves so tenderly,
that no wind may blow upon them; the web of their life runs all in an even
thread, and there is no knot in it concerning these outward things, or as it is
in the Psalm, They prosper always, and increase in riches, Psalm. 73.12. Their
seed it established in their sight, and their generation before their eyes,
Job 21.8: But will it be ever so? Job says, The candle of the wicked shall
be put out, their eyes shall see their destruction, and they shall drink of
the wrath of the Almighty, ver. 17.20, though there be no changes in their
life, nor bands in their death, Psalm 73.4, and though their branch be green,
yet shall they be cut off before their day, Job 15.32, that is, sooner then
they think, the flame shall dry up their branch, v. 30 and when their night
is once come, where are they? They have had their pleasures here; their good
days are all past and gone: that which is behind when they go down to their
grave, is sorrow and darkness, and the evil day that shall never leave them.
Job the righteous, and Jude the Apostle say, They are appointed to it, Job
21.30. Jude 4, or kept and reserved for it. So 2. Pet. 2.9. And what comfort
can there be in such pleasures, or short days of pleasure, whose end is with
such bitterness, and the recompense eternal death? What hope of such sottish
men, turned into beasts, and mastered with sensuality? what fools that for
pleasures so vain and dearly prized, will give heaven in exchange, (...)
their part in heaven? Honors, wealth and pleasures are casual, vn^table,
dear, and deceitful penny worthes; Let us therefore learn to use them
without trust, and to want them without grief: so may we have them here with
comfort, and not be worse for them, when we go hence: but take we heed of
all that fellowship, which for the ways it takes, may well be called the
damned fellowship, or damned crew of such as have their pleasures here. These
things are but chafe; and who would with such earnestness follow that chafe
of we^lt^ and pleasures here, that every wind scatters? Psalm. 1.4. Who but
fools would so much disquiet themselves about vain shadows, pursuing this
pleasure, that commodity, and those preferments earthly? and knowing how much
they may cost us, who would covet them that love their salvation, and would not
hear; Son, thou have had thy pleasures here?

A reproof of those who count them the only happy men that always (b) live
at rest, Use. 2.
and have their fill of pleasures in this world; for, had not Dives, Mal. 3.15
to whom Abraham (yet) says; therefore, or because of that, thou art
tormented? Now, are they happy that are tormented? or, is there any happiness in
that? and are they not rather as Oxen, fatted to the day of slaughter? And if
so, the state of the cross in this life, is much rather the plain and direct
way to true happiness. For, through many afflictions we enter into the kingdom
of GOD: Acts 14.22. this is the way wherein CHRIST led, and we must follow;
being conformeable to our head in sufferings. By these God brings his children
into a nearer acquaintance with him: who (but for them) would be strangers to
their own Father; and who by them, or by means of them, are made to seek him
diligently. Hos: 5.15. Worldly happiness (then) being such an hinderance to true
happiness, how can they be happy indeed, that are most happy that way? and how
can it be to them a blessed thing to have no affliction in their hearts or upon
their bodies and estates; when to be afflicted (some such way) is their best
way to glory everlasting?

Of Lazarus it is said that he received pain. Lazarus was dear to GOD, and
he greatly loved him: yet Lazarus, (whom God so loved) lived in no ease, the
Text says, in paize. Doct. 2.
From whence we may gather (as was noted before) that the godly are (usually)
most afflicted. This was spoken of before, upon these words of the 20* verse,
Which was laid at his gate, etc: And the Lord will have it to be so, for these
reasons. First, that the Flesh might have no cause to rejoice before him. 1.
Cor. 1.29. Secondly, that men might desire godliness for it self: who other
ways would be godly (or seem to be) that they might (for it) enjoy some ease
and prosperity here. Also this would make them to seek earthly things in
matters that are pure and heavenly. Thirdly, that they might seek him, and
depend upon him only: which they will do in their troubles, and hardly do when
they are at more liberty. And fourthly, that the members might be like their
head, who was a man of sorrows. No cause (therefore) to suspect the Gospel,
preached to the poor. Luc 4.18. and that the poor receive it, Luke 7.22. We
may be sure that if there be any more direct way to heaven then other, this is
it. And we know who they were that said, Do any of the Rulers believe in him?
John 7.48. If then thou be poor, and in distress, let not that condition of
thy profession, in so near a similitude to Christ, dismay thee; but rejoice
rather, that thou art so like to thy Savior in that, wherein was the least
worldly show, and the greatest heavenly glory: For now thou stand not upon
any weak prop of flesh, but upon the strong pillar of Israel, in whose name
thou trustest. So much for the first impossibility in Abraham's reply, the
second follows.

Verse. 26 And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf, etc.


Here we have the second part of Abraham's reply: wherein he further
shows, how impossible it is that this Rich man's estate should be bettered,
or be other then it is: for, he says, between us, and you, etc. as if he
had said, God, by an everlasting ord nance and law has barred the way from us
in heaven to you in hell; between, there is a gulf, or gaping pit, and no
bridge over. And there is no hope of ever coming nearer then we be. Further,
if any would come from us to you, which is not to be imagined they cannot; and
as they cannot, so they never will. This is Abraham's meaning.

Where we learn that the state of wicked men after this life is unchangeable,
and ever the same. Doct.
They that are in hell can never come out; as they that are in heaven, can
never come thence: and so we see the impossibility of getting out of hell,
being once in; for which it is called the deep, Luke 8.31; and of which Esaias
speaking says, He has made it deep, Esa. 30.33, and therefore deep, because
the damned there are so cast down, that they never rise, Psalm. 140.10. Christ
says of him, whom he sent to the hels, Bind him hand and foot, Math. 22.13,
as if he had said; by stripping him of all means of defense, and ways of
escaping, let him go and never return. For they who are cast with their hands
and feet bound into such a deep, how can they come out? This was spoken of
before upon the 23. verse, the words, And being in hell in torments, etc.
Doct. 2. there.

But is there no coming out of hell? Then take we heed how we come there?
that is, Psalm. 42.7. Here let us come ou^ of our sins by conversion to God,
that hereafter we come not with our sins, or in them to the place where is no
coming out. If now we humble our selves, we shall be exalted in due time,
1. Pet. 5.6: not cast down, as they who go to hell, are; but exalted; for to
be exalted is, to ascend up; not to be sent into the deep. One speaking of
the afflicted here for sin, says truly; The deeper in hell, the higher in
Heaven. His meaning is, the more men feel it here for sin, the further they
are from it, and from sin, that casts into Hell for ever.

A reproof of Origens error, Cain and Saul, and Judas, and al reprobates, as
they fell in their bodies, so they shall rise in them to judgment: no better
in person, nor in better manner.

A comfort to those whose hope is in death, and whose death is peace at the
last: Romans 1^.29.) that they shall not be removed for ever. And this has made
many to pass through the very flames of fire to God with a joyful calmnesse.
It made our godly fathers (as may be seen at large in the eleventh to the
Hebrews) quietly and gladly to suffer much and great adversity; for they saw
him that cha^geth not, and looked for their abiding City, Heb. 13.15. And
should not, may not this, in as good assurance, and with like hope encourage
us, as for a price, to set forth (as they did) to death? So to run that we
may obtain, 1. Cor. 9.24; So to fight, that we may overcome: 2. Tim. 4.8? And
so to seek Gods face of favor here, that we may continually see his face of
glory in heaven, and ever be with the Lord? Psalm. 17.15.

So much for Abraham's reply: This rich man is supposed to reioyne, as follows.

Ver. 27.28. Then he said, I pray thee, etc.


Here we have a further proceeding made in this Parable, and under the person
of a rich man in hell, by the figure Prosopopoea. And in this the Rich man is
brought in again, making another request, which is also denied. From which
supposed request the Papists would gather, that the blessed Saints in heaven
have care of their friends on earth; that is, in special and carnal manner of
those friends whom they knew familiarly, and loved dearly in the world. But
they gather that which the Text never scattered; and it would be remembered,
that these words are the words of a Parable, and not of a thing done; the drift
whereof is (as may appear by the answer made, or supposed to be made)
plainly to prove, that they who in this life refuse to give credit to the
Scriptures and word of God, may hope in vain to be called by men from the
dead. I will not deny but Christian charity abides in the Saints in glory, not
by special remembrance of one more then of another; for, such charity in them
extends it self indifferently and generally to all here, living, or yet
unborn, whom they love as themselves; yet it is ill proved from the example of
a damned spirit in hell: for what charity, where is nothing but all hellish
hate and bitterness? And to say that the godly in peace, should be troubled
particularly, or in special manner about their friends affairs below; what
were it, but much to derogate from their true rest in the place where they have
fullness of joy and pleasures for ever? Psalm. 16.11.

And now where request is made by a spirit damned in hell, that Lazarus who was
dead, might be sent to the brethren of his fathers house to teach them:

We learn that the doctrine of teaching men, Doct.
by men from the dead, is a doctrine from hell. Esaias calls it a going, or
doctrine of going from the living to the dead, Esa. 8.19. and Abazia is said to
have departed from God for his health, when he sent to the god of Ekron, or in
that Idol, to the Devil for it, 2. King. 1.3.16. The like of Saul, who also
was taught from hell, as Abazia was, 1. Sam. 28.8. Therefore God by Moses calls
it a turning after those that work with spirits, that is, with D^uils; or a
whoring after them, Leuit. 20.6: for how can it be a doctrine from any place,
but hell, that teaches men thus?

The reasons. First, the Text is plain for it: for this was the request of one
damned in hell. Secondly, such doctrine is not from Heaven; and that which came
from Heaven speaks otherways, and contrarily, Verse 29.31. Now that which is
not from heaven, or according to heavenly truth, is from hell: for there is no
third way, Math. 21.25. Thirdly also, such doctrine is a mean, by wandering
from God, to make men to believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12: and is there any
thing in this kind of teaching, but what is hellish and devilish?

Here we may see what to judge of those who forsake the word which is written,

So much for the Rich man's second request. Abraham's second supposed reply
follows.

Ver. 29. Abraham said unto him; They have etc.


In this second reply, Abraham tells the rich man plainly, that they get
nothing by all their lab^ur, who forsaking the Word, look for Revelations; and
who will be taught after their own fancies, not by Gods teaching, nor by the
ordinary way, and means appointed by him. Against such, God himself
complains by his Prophet, saying: Should not a people enquire at their God?
Esa. 8.19. and therefore the meaning of these words is, that the Word delivered
by Moses and the Prophets, and, accordingly since, by Christ and his Apostles,
is the only ordinary mean to convert sinners to God: and therefore they that
refuse grace by it, shall no way receive it from the Graves of the dead.

This I conceyne to be the meaning of Abraham's second answer to this rich man:
and to be the only reason why this second petition was made, and this
peremptory reply (secondly) made unto it: wherein for orders sake, we may
note his answer in substance: and the use that Abraham makes of it. The answer
in substance is, that God having ordained the Word written to be the only
ordinary mean for the calling of his five Brethren, and all Christians (yet
living) to repentance; it only is sufficient, and all means divided from it,
vain and ineffectual.

Which first teaches, that the only sealed rule of faith to salvation, Doct. 1.
is the Scripture and word of God written. This is that path, that leads to
the Way, the Truth, and Life, Christ Jesus: For, so says He, who is all these
unto us, Ioh. 14.6. and therefore he bids the Jews to search: that is,
exactly to search: or, as Hunters, who strike every bush, seeking the game they
hunt for: and to search the scriptures, that is, what is written, not un
written vanities. For, (says he) in them ye think to have eternal life, and
they testify of me. That is, in them ye may find Christ, and in him Eternal
life. Ich. 5.39. this is the most sure Word, 2. Pet. 1.19. or that which can
never fail us: all words of men may. This only pricketh the heart with
Repentance, which (without it) no miracles from Heaven, nor wonders on Earth
can do. Act: 2.37. So Heb. 4.12. it is a discerner of the thoughts and intents
of the heart. And therefore the heart being deeper then any Eye created can
look into, it must needs be wonderful to the saving of a sinner, above all
words of men or Angels.

A great Prop^ete had no other light of direction to his steps in true
godliness, then that which was placed in the lantern of the law. Psalm.
119.105. and this he followed in all his way to heaven. Herein the man of God
himself, the Minister, may have an absolute furniture of instruction for his
own ways, and the Peoples committed to him. 2. Tim. 3.17. And so it is plain,
that no line can be judged straight to the kingdom of God, but this of the
Word, and they that are drawn by it.

The Reasons. This word is called the word of Faith, Rom: 10.8. and none but
this. Now, what we may believe, or put faith in, is sure. Secondly, it is as a
second Tree of life. Prou 3.18. If Adam had eaten of the first, he could not
have dyed: no more can they perish, that feed upon the Word, the second tree
of Eternal life. Thirdly, it is the sanctifying truth. Job. 17.17. Ps. 1 19.9.
That is, that which (and which only) prepares, and begets us for the holy
City, into which nothing may come that is unclean. Apoc: 21.27. Heb. 12.14.
and (therefore) as fire it consumes the stubble of our corrupt affections,
Matthew. 3.11. as a sword it cutteth from us our putrified parts, and members of
sin. Heb. 4.12. and as Salt (that is sauory) it makes our words, and whole
conversation in the Gospel sweetly torellish, and well to savor, unto
edification, among all that hear, or live with us.

Use is against all itching after noueltyes, Use. 2.
not resting in that which is written. Saul, who would not hear Samuel alive,
went to his grave to hear him there. 1. Sam. 28.8. a very unmeet pulpit for a
Prophet to preach in.

Some would have Angels to teach them, and some look for miracles and signs
done, to confirm them; but Faith is begotten by the Word, and nursed with it,
being once borne in a true believer. It is not given by voices out of the air,
nor caused by Angel or Revelation. Ga. 1.8. The illusions of Satan, and his
lying wonders, come from the graves of the dead: and they that will have such
Teachers, put down the scepter of Gods prerogative in his Word written. When
God said: This is my beloved Son, hear him. Math. 17.5. should the Disciples
who heard the voice, have said: no, but we would hear an Angel from heaven:
for he will assure us rather: had not this been to cast away the word of the
Lord, and our selves with it, as did rebel^ious Saul? 1. Sam. 15.22.23. Did not
the working of Satan, and rising of Antichrist stand upon such a foundation?
and do they not go upon such legs to this day? 2 Thessalonians: 2.9.10. Therefore from
the living to the dead, is a foolish and sinful progress: Esa. 8.19. And
those Pharisees that called for signs, and neglected the doctrine and words of
Christ, were said by him to be an adulterous generation, Math. 12.38.39. that
is, children born in idolatry, and of idolaters: for, the meaning is not so
much of corporal, as of spiritual adultery, or whoring from God.

Further and again, as that only is to be believed to salvation, which is
written: first, in the old Testament, and (since) by the men of God in the new:
so, we (secondly.) learn, Doct. 2.
that all refusings of this ordinance for grace, is to make our conversion
impossible by any other means: the text is plain for it: and Jeremy says,
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Ier.
8.9. as if he had said: they will be wise, but not as God has commanded, and
therefore fools they are in their own course: or, they will none of that, that
makes a man wise to salvation; therefore (as unwise) they shall perish by their
own inventions. But because this doctrine comes fitly to be further
prosecuted in the last verse, and very last words of the parable, I refer it
thither.

So much for Abraham's answer in substance: the use he propounds of it,
follows.

Let them hear them. If Moses and the Prophets must speak from God unto us,
the^ we must hear him, speaking by them in his word, that is, by Moses, who
showed what we should do; and by the Prophets, who teach what we should
believe and do. Also mention is made of hearing them; because in them there is
work for the ear to hear, but none (save of reading) for the eye to see. In
them we hear a voice, but cannot see any shape or similitude, Deuteronomy. 4.12. But
this that is spoken of hearing Moses and the Prophets, because no more was then
written, is to be extended to the whole word of Scripture, as we have it now;
and so the whole word is to be heard, Apoc. 2.7.

The doctrine from hence is; Hearing is a necessary, Doct.
and the principal mean for salvation in all Christian assemblies or all
Christian Churches, and people must hear, if they will be saved: Therefore in
Prou. 4.10, and many like Scriptures, God offers his words, and requires our
cares: so Prou. 2.2. An harkening ear, and an understanding heart must go
together; for the ear is the furrow that receives the doctrine of the word,
and it works not but by hearing. Christ says, and the same says the Spirit in
diverse Texts of the Revelation: He that has ears to hear: he says not, he
that has eyes to see, and what must he do? not see a Stage furnished for a
Play in the Mass; but hear what the Spirit will say, to wit, by his Word
and Ministers to the Congregation, Math. 13.9. Apoc. 2.7.11.17.29. and
3.6.13.22. The Apostle S. Paul teaching the believing Jews and Romans, how
saving faith may be gotten, says, Faith is by hearing, not by seeing, and
Hearing by the Word, Romans 10.17, to wit, preached, as ver. 8.14. not by gaudes
and Images, called by the Papists, Laymens books. And he that turns away
his ear, (says Solomon) from the Law. He does not say, his eye from seeing,
but his ear from hearing it, refusing to be instructed by it, or from it, by
Gods ordinance; as the Mass, Priests of Rome, who do nothing in the service of
God to common understanding, but what may more properly be seen then heard: his
prayer, I may say his good prayers, which he so much trusts unto, will prove
abominable; that is, odious to God, and plagues to himself, Prou. 28.9.
Hearing therefore is the most necessary, and most important mean for salvation
in all the Churches of Christ.

The Reasons. As a man's mind is not known but by speaking; so neither can we
know Gods will but by his word; nor what is in his word, but by hearing:
Therefore God is say de to speak in his word, and speeches are to be taken
with the ear, and no other ways, Deuteronomy. 4.12. Secondly, the ear is the
conduit of knowledge to the soul; and so, of saving knowledge to it. Thirdly,
they that thirst, must come to Christ, as they that want common water come to
the well, John 7.37: but this well is deep, and our ears are the buckets to
draw with, John 4, 11. Therefore when we come to this well of living waters,
we must bring our ears (these buckets) with us. Fourthly, when a Master
speaks, he will look to be heard. God spoke by his Prophets in the Heb. 1.1.
old Testament, and by his Son in the new; did he not speak to be heard?
or shall we not cause our ears to hear? and can the Lord of his people take
it well, if we refuse to hear the Master of his own family? Fifthly, the word
of Scripture is called the Power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16; that is, his
arm revealed, Esa. 53.1, to save all that shall be saved in deed. But to
speak properly; we cannot see a word, and therefore we must hear i^, if we
will be saved by it. Sixthly, none can come to Christ but his sheep: and all
his sheep are thus marked by him; They hear his voice, John 10.27. If then it
be necessary for Christians to be Christ's sheep, it is as necessary that they
have his mark, and hear what he will say unto them.

The duty therefore of all Christian Churches and people is to hear the Word,
that is the written word of God: that not slackely, but with all readiuesse,
Iam. 1.19. Solomon opposes the duty of hearing, and the sacrifice of fools,
Eccles. 4.17* as if he should say, that they who refuse to hear, do service
as fools; and to hear is better then all sacrifice, says Samuel to Saul, a
good Prophet to a badde King, 1. Sam. 15.22. Also no duty that we do to God,
can please him without this; To pray is our duty, but they that refuse to
hear, may spare to pray: for, as we have already heard, such pray in sin,
or their prayer is sin, Prou. 28.9. To come to Christ's Table is a good duty,
but he that has not learned the mystery by hearing, comes to condemnation, 1.
Cor. 11.29. To eat and drink are necessary duties; but without the Word that
sanctifies the creature, what is our eating and drinking, but a profane
thing? Tim. 4.5.

Secondly, this makes against Popish Churches and people, in whose ears the
word sounds not, but in a strange tongue: and teaches that they who live in
Popery, live in a wretched bondage of ignorance and sin, to which the Devil
has captiued their ears and whole man. Neither can they do any thing so long
as they continue such, that will be pleasing to God. Further, this makes
against two sorts of Recusants in our land, the Popish, and those of the
Separation. And is it not a reproof of many of our own profession, who on our
Saboth days, neither show themselves diligent, nor well disposed hearers? For
though they do not turn their backs upon us, as the other do; yet they
look upon our Assemblies with little or no zeal, and some with Jeroboam set
up Idols of wantonness against them, and think it too far, or much to be
at them every Sabbath day, 1. King. 12.28.29. Or if they come to the Assemblies
in the morning of the Sabbath, yet in the afternoon of the same day, they go
to their Farms or pleasures from them, and from God in them, Luke 14.18.20.
And now how can they who come so seldom and unwillingly (when they come)
hearken? Ier. 6.10. Ezech. 33.31. How is it like that they will meditate in the
Law, who delight not in it? And what good hearing without meditation? They that
rejoice in unrighteousness, will never rejoice in the Word, that reproves
sinners, and for sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12: and can such prove good hearers?
Surely, when such hear the Word, (which they hear with so little good will,
it cannot but Heb. 2.1.
slip and run out, as liquor out of old tubbes, or water out of a Sieue. And
thus divide our hearers into four kinds of ground; the fourth ground, or part
of ground will hardly be found to receive the seed and doctrine of the Gospel
with good hearing, Math. 13.8. This Christ reproved in the hearers of his time:
and if our times be such, are they not times of ill hearing, worthy to be
rebuked in the gate, that is, openly, and with authority? Tit. 2.15. The
supposed reply of the Rich man follows.

Verse. 30 And he said, nay father Abraham, etc.


It pleased not this Rich man, that his rich brethren, drowned in wealth, and
in the delights of life, should hear the word at the mouth of any of Gods
ordinary Ministers, whom he knew they would despise: and therefore, or because
he would be contrary to Abraham and teach him, not learn of him; he
maintains still his first wicked position and principle, which was, that one
preaching to them from the dead, would do more good upon them for true
conversion, then all the Preachers living could. And therefore he says, Nay
father Abraham, etc. or not so, but as I say, and as I rather wish; who never
loved this teaching by the Word, whether dwelling on earth, or damned in hell.
Indeed the way which God by his ordinance has commanded for salvation to
men, is the hearing of his Word by Moses and the Prophets; but that way is not
sufficient, or I had not been here: and if he would give way for this (that I
speak of,) my five brethren should not come hither. Thus in effect he
reasons against God, in speaking to Abraham, rather then he will confess
the way he has followed, and would prescribe to others, to be (as indeed it
is) deceitful, and to destruction.

From hence learn, Doct. 1.
that the nature of the wicked is rather to charge God, then themselves for
sin. So do they whom Christ will set on the left hand of damnation, in his
last judgment: for, they say, When saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Math. 25.44: as if they had said, Thou chargest us that we saw thee hungry
and thirsty, and without clothes, and in sickness, and prison, and did not
help thee? but when did we ever see thee in such straites and want, and
withdrew our hand of help from thee? And therefore we have wrong to be so
charged, and the thing is not true.

Thus Adam blamed God for giving him no better a wife, not himself for
following in evil, when he should have led in goodness. The woman, says he,
which thou gave to be with me, to wit, as my wife and helper, Genesis 3.12.
Thus also most vile reprobates impute their damnation to Gods will that cannot
be resisted, Romans 9.19. And that reprobate that hid his talent, said, I knew
that thou wast an hard man, Math. 25.14, speaking against Gods severity, but
nothing of his own sin. So they said that Gods ways were not equal, who
themselves were equal no way, Ezech. 18.29: The like we read of Cain: for he
when God reproved him for the blood of his brother, speaks not of his great
murder, but of his over hard punishment, Genesis 4.13. He thought that God was
too sharp and spoke too severely to him for it. It is plain therefore, that it
is the nature of the wicked to blame God, and not blame worthy man.

The Reasons. Wicked men are proud by nature, and proud men will be in no
fault. Secondly, the Devils children (such as the wicked be) are contrary to
Gods children; and therefore where they justify the Lord, these justify
themselves. Thirdly, the wicked, being his children who abode not in the
truth, and whose name is slaunderer; must needs do his works, and say as he
will have them, John 8.44. Fourthly, such men are the vowed enemies of God: and
what care such what they say of him, and how they charge him.

Here then we see whose children, David, neither have they David's spirit in
them: for, he confessed his fault, that God might be justified in his sayings,
and pure when he judges, Psalm. 51.4. He blamed not God, when he had told him
by Nathan, That evil should be raised against him out of his own house, that
the sword of death should strike it, that his wives should be defiled, and that
the child should die, 2 Samuel 12.11; but confesses, as it was, that he had
deserved no less, and that God in so doing, was holy, righteous and just, v.
13. Nor did Eli charge God when he threatened the destruction of his house by
young Samuel, but subscribed, that he might justly do what Samuel had said, 1.
Sam. 3.18: for, says he, It is the Lord who can do nothing but well. And with
him subscribed Hezechiah in a like message sent him from God, 2 Kin. 20.19. But
what did Herod when John reproved him? He could not bear the rebuke of his
mouth, but sent him to Ward for being so bold with the King, Mar. 6.17. So
the Jews, when Steven justly charged them, in stead of justifying the Lord in
that just reproof, they rather justified themselves in their wickedness, and
in madness ran upon him, and with stones murdered him, Act. 7.51.57. And what
shall we say of our own times? when Gods hand lies upon us in some general or
private strokes for sin: do we confess our sins, and that God in visiting for
them is righteous? or do we not rather murmur, and take on in the affliction,
as if he dealt hardly, or too cruelly with us in smiting so for so small
matters? Do we say as Daniel, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and to
us open shame, or the confusion of our faces? Dan. 9.7: or do we not rather
break out by impatience and bitter cursing, at the least by fretting against
God, and his righteous judgments, as too galling and rigorous? The condemnation
that is of themselves, some have learned here of a damned soul in hell to
transfer, not justly upon themselves, but unjustly upon God, that they have
wrong to be damned: for, say they, how can we choose, when God will have it so?
Romans 9.19.

But this Rich man knew by himself, that the love of the word could find no
entrance where the love of worldly pleasures had filled the heart: so it had in
his five brethren; and therefore he was persuaded that all labor of teaching by
the word should be in vain and lost upon them.

And here we secondly learn, Doct. 2.
that worldly covetousness and voluptuous life quench in natural men all
desire of salvation by the Word: for such will not come to the Assemblies with
the bidden guests, who absented themselves by their Farms and yokes of oxen
from it, Luke 14.18.19: or if they come, they are sure to come without all
affection of hearing thither; and their mind goes after their covetousness,
Ezech. 33.31. Their wits are so exercised and taken up with thoughts about
worldly things, that they have neither leisure nor mind to attend to the word
delivered, or having spent all edge (this way) before they come: being come,
they fall asleep when they should hear; or if they be awake, and listen a
little, they have neither love nor liking to that which is taught.

The Reasons. Worldly riches and voluptuous life are thorns, Luke 8.14; as
therefore thorns make the sown fields unfruitful, so the thorns ofriches and
voluptuous life make the word where it is taught unprofitable Secondly, these
are enmity to God, Iam. 4 4, and what enemy will not in corruption, do all he
can to destroy his enemy? Thirdly, they that follow these lusts are called, if
they be men, adulterers, and if women, adulteresses, I am. 4.4: not corporal,
but spiritual, which is far worse; for corporal adultery is against the
second Table; but this is against God in the first; and a man may be a
corporal Adulterer, as David, and yet not hate God: but he that goes a
whoring from him by a worldly and covetous heart, cannot but stand up against
him, as the hater of him, and enemy of his covenant.

An instruction to empty our minds and hands of all thorns of earthly cares
and pleasures, barren, and without fruit in our hearing. They that plough and
sow their fields, will rid up by the roots, all Briars, thorns, and bushes.
So should they use no less dilgence to free their hearts from the thorns and
bushes of bad affections, that come to hear: and this foreskin of a covetous
and wanton heart, should likewise be circumcised by the spirit of God, in a new
creature, if they will hear with pleasure and commodity, Ier: 4.4. But they
who come stuff with worldly lusts, shall go away empty of heavenly fillings.
So says blessed Marie, in her thankful song: He has filled the hungry with
good things, but the rich he sends away empty: to wit, of things that are
truly good; Luc. 1.53. and so their hearing is made damnable, and with sin
unto them.

A like instruction to be contented with a mean Estate, world is a dangerous
morsel, 1. Tim. 6.9. Most men go a whering after it; and the best men cast
(but) too wanton an Eye upon it. Which makes the Lord in these outward things,
rather to keep his children short, for their good, then to surfeit them with
fulness. And (here) he deals with them, as wise Parents with their children,
whom they truly love. For, when they perceive them to abuse unto wanto^nes, a
full allowance, they will draw back their hand in a sparer portion. So God,
perceiving his children (because they be full-fed) wantonly to take pleasure in
the gauds and fashions of this world, does therefore many times keep them
low, and deny them that plenty of these worldly things that the wicked have.
He knows how weak our brains are to bear the strong Wine of prosperity;
and therefore He (sometimes) makes us to drink bitter adversities out of a
weaker cup. And who can deny that it is far better to creep with safety,
then to clime to destruction? and so better to keep on the low ground, then to
rise and fall. And now thirdly, this damned soul, though he could not be
ignorant, how little, nay, how nothing the necromancy that he spoke of, could
profit any to true conversion, seeing the word is sufficient: yet because he
loved to be contentious, and to take side against godly truth, he holds
himself fast to his former false ground, which was, that good might be
received by the preaching of men from the dead.

But this is (after) as truly denied by Abraham, as it was falsely avouched by
him, Doct. 3.
verse. 31. where we learn, that none from the dead did ever yet convert soul.
Therefore it was forbidden to the Israel of God, to ask counsel at the dead:
Deuteronomy. 18.11. And among other sins, wherewith the Lord professed himself to
have been angered by rebellious Israel, one was, that they remained among the
graves, Esa. 65.4. that is (as it is expounded, Esa. 8.19) were Necromancers:
and sought unto them that had familiar spirits, and that could divine. But
Lazarus the brother of Martha was raised by Christ: after he had bin four
days in his grave, Io. 11.39. Did the Jews for that, beleene? nay, but rather
they consulted to put him to death? Ioh. 12.10. Also, Christ raised himselse
from the dead. Why did not the Jews care to hear him? rather they bribed the
souldyers to belie his Resurrection. Math: 28, 12, 13, 14. Further, when Christ
rose, many dead Saints (his bed fellows) rose with him and were seen in the
holy city, Math: 27.52.53. were the Jews ever a whit the better for it, to
their conversion? nay, but they were more hardened rather in their vnbele^fe.
The reasons. That this cannot open the heart, in the point of Faith, must
needs shut it; And nothing can turn the heart to God, but that which has
power from him so to do: which power the Word only has, not the lying
Diumations of the dead.

Secondly, there is no conversion without Faith. But what faith is to be given
to devils in dead men's skins? Thirdly, that which is able to convert the
heart, has a promise from God, and blessing thereunto: But is any such promise
made to that which provoke him so much as Necromancie is said to do? and
does he bless that which himself has forbidden?

The use is against the kingdom of darkness in Popery, If the Gospel be hid,
it is to them that are lost, 2. Cor. 4.3: but this was spoken of in the use of
the first doctrine of the former verse.

Lastly, this contrarying mind in Dives, does as it were, hold us the light to
see what frowardnes naturally, is shut up in all stubborn Christians. And it
teaches, Doct 4.
that it is the property of a very froward person to reject the Word. They that
were very froward in Job, say de to the Almighty, Depart from us, to wit, in
the government of thy word: We desire not the knowledge of thy ways, that is,
we desire not thy acquaintance in the truth, as neither thy presence among us
by it in the mouths of thy servants, Job, 21.14; or what care we whether thou
be among us in thy comman dements, which we love not? rather we desire thy
room then thy company in such matters. So of Israel that would not hear, the
Lord himself says, Israel would none of me, Psalm. 81.11. the meaning is, They
who reject my Word, reject Me:and are they not persons very froward that so
do? They that would not have Christ to reign over them, with his word, are
called by himself enemies: Luc. 19.27. by Esaias, rebellious, or froward
enemies, Esa. 30.9. and, are they not wicked, and sinners indeed (such as will
help the d^^?) who rebel against God, in his own sovereignty, and the parts
of his Dominion? The reasons. The pattern of such frowardnes, we have here in
a very rebellious soul, damned in hell. Secondly, the Word is the Lords
scepter, and they that reject it, put down their Soueraigns scepter. This were
treason against an earthly Majesty: and can that other be less, or better
then rebellious frowardnes, or treason (in the highest point of treason)
against the Lord? Thirdly, such mean to live quietly in all sin: seeing they
reject the word that reproves sin, and the scornful sinner. And, are they
not most wickedly froward, who say of sin, This is my rest, here will dwell;
to wit, in the chair of sin, with the worst of sinners? Psalm. 1.1. Fourthly,
they that meditate in the law, and they that delight in it, are, and are said
to be very obedient children; therefore they are froward children and ungodly,
by the true rule of contraries, who cannot abide the Word, much less abide to
meditate in, or read it.

A reproof of Popish both Masters and Scholars,

An admonition therefore to all that would avoid the blot and note of very
froward persons, se. 2
or persons frowardly wicked and rebellious to God, not to cross his Word
either with their conversation, or tongues; and where the wicked as Antipodes
go against the footings of it; to walk with it in a right path, and to adorn
it with their obedience in a holy life: where froward persons and very wicked
speak against the Word, our reasoning must be for it; where they shut their
ears, we must open our ears unto it: where they hate admonition, we must
hear and increase in learning, Prou. 1.5. Increase (I say) as they that live
by their meat, and have a good digestion: for the righteous, the more they
eat spiritually, the more they may: Fools say to the Prophets, Prophecy not,
Amos 2.12, that is, speak as we would have you, or say nothing; and these are
fools indeed: but Christians (that are godly wise) say to the Prophets, that
is, to those that teach the^ in the word, Prophecy right things to us, Esa.
30.10, that is, tell us of our faults that we may amend them; and wherein we
fail, tell us, that we may do better hereafter, or, Let the righteous smite
us, to wit, with the severity of the Law; for that shall be a benefit, Psalm.
141.5; that is, that shall do us good indeed, and save us from the sweet, but
killing poison of flattring lips; and let not their tongues, nor let them (that
have such tongues destroy us. The last answer of Abraham, or his answer to this
rich man's reply, follows.

Ver. 31. Then he said, if they hear not Moses, etc.

Ahraham perceiving that words could not satisfy this importunate and
cuntentious rich-man, breaks off al further talk with him, and leaves him;
telling him (at parting) which he had told him before, that Moses and the
Prophets must be heard to salvation; and that not believing the Word, it is
impossible to believe without it, though men should come from the dead unto us.
And thus he concludes the Parable, and all speech with this rich man in it.
The conclusion is that which already was spoken of; and the repetition thereof
is safe for us, Phil. 3.1: for, besides that it stands upon a sure ground of
truth; it is avouched twice, the better to assure us, Genesis 41.32. And it
teaches that there is no persuading of him that will not be persuaded by the
Word written. Therefore said the counterfeit Samuel to reprobate Saul:
Wherefore do thou ask of me, seeing the Lord is gone from thee? 1. Sam.
28.16. as if he had said, How shall I persuade thee, when God by his word can
not? and what answer can I make when his Prophets will make moan? v. 15. So
Jeremy, They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?
Ier. 8.9, that is, the word cannot teach them, and what then shall teach them
wisdom? Therefore Moses speaking of the ordinances and laws which God had
commanded, tells the people, that to keep and do them is their wisdom,
Deuteronomy: 4.5.6. his meaning is, that if they will be truly wise, or made wise unto
salvation, it must be by the ordinances and laws written: or, if not by these,
by nothing. And Christ sends the Jews to the Scriptures, to search them: not
to dead men's graves, to rake in them. Ioh: 5, 39. As if he had said, either
there, or no where. For, to resolve the Jews, concerning Him, whom the Father
sent: what could do it sooner, or so well as the Word, that is mighty in
operation, lively for edification? Hebrews 4.12. The reasons. First, nothing
is written in Moses and the scriptures, that is not written in the heart of
nature, Romans 2.14.15. And what natural Man does not confess the effect of
the Law, as that which is so deeply engraven in him, that he cannot rubb it
out-by any pretenses or colors to the contrary? Secondly, the prophecyes that
went before, are daily fulfilled. And what will they believe who shall doubt of
that which they have heard, which they have seen with their eyes, and which
(even) their hands, in some sort have handled of the word of life? 1. Ioh. 1,
1. But all these are contained in the word written: and (therefore) they that
refuse to hear it, what will they hear? Thirdly, it is safe to hear Moses and
the other writings of holy men in scripture; but safe no way ( Satan
transforming himself (as he does) into an angel of light.) to lean unto
things not written: or rest upon un written vanities, taken up upon credit, of
satan the father, as of liars, so of lies, Ioh. 8.44. and wherefore has God
given us a most sure word of the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1, 19. but that we should
not leave a certainty, for an uncertainty: or go from that which will surely
lead us in our way, to that which will be sure to lead us out? Fourthly, the
word written contains the promises of a most excellent life, and that
Sternall in heaven: also the threatenings of a most intolerable death, and that
everlasting in the hells. If then, a short life of pleasures, short and vain,
so move us: how can we but be moved with the long life of those pleasures, that
are for ever? And if we be so much troubled to hear of death (which in some
ends all pains, and begins all joys that have no end) how can that but
shake all our bones, as with a most violent wind, that speaks of the death
that is endless; which all reprobates die, and are never dead? Therefore, not to
be moved with all this, what can move us? So it is sealed up for a sure truth,
that what the word of God ca^ not do, that no word of man or Angel can do.
They that will not be healed by it, are incurable; so says my text: neither
will they be persuaded, though one rose fro^the dead again.

A terror to those that cannot be persuaded by the word, whether Atheists in
life, or opinion. For, principles and lights both of grace and nature. And they
that so do, what can persuade them but the Magistrates staff? and what answer
must be made them, but silence? 2. Kings, 18, 36. How wretched then is the
condition of those popish poor people that cannot come at the word, to be
persuaded by it, and of their popish leaders, that think to persuade without
it? And, what do such, but bury Christ in stead of being buried with Christ?
also, by making ignorance the Mother of devotion (which is the stepmother of
religion) what do they but keep him still in his grave? But, let us of
christian England, to whom this day star of the gospel has so long appeared,
and in such glory and brightness, under the two Suns of Q. Elisabeth, of
infinite worthy memory, and of our dread Soueraign, K. James now living, and
the happiness of our land, and the glory of all Christendom: let us (I say) the
Christians of bappy England follovv, to wit, in obedience, this star of the
Word, to the house where Christ is borne: Math. 2.9. and avoid or turn from,
by our conformity with it, the house where the dead are, and whose guests are
in the depth of hell, Pro. 9.18. So shall we be partakers of those joys, which
Lazarus has in Abraham's bosom, and escape the torments, and place of
torments, wherein Abraham left this Rich-man, and we leave him. And pray we,
that we may imitate Lazarus, and be like him, and not be as this cruel
Rich-man, doing as he did, and ending where he left: lest being like him in
wickedness, our revvard be like his in hell.

From which woeful Pit of death Eternal, He that bought us with a price,
save us, and that by Faith in him only, who only is the Savior, Jesus Christ
the righteous; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be praise for ever,
in all the Churches. Amen.

FINIS.

