A Dolorous discourse, of a most terrible and bloody Battle, fought in
Barbary, the fowrth day of August, last past. 1578.

Wherein were slain, two Kings, (but as most then say) three, beside many
(...) ^mous personages: with (...) ^umber of Captains, and (...) Soldiers that
were ^^^ine on both sides.

Whereunto is also annexed, a note of the names of diverse that were taken
prisoners at the same time.

printer's device of John Charlwood, consisting of the arms of the city of
Geneva (divided vertically into two equal parts and showing the left half of
the imperial eagle and a key of St. Peter) first used by Rowland Hall in Geneva
in 1562-53 and passed to John Charlwood at an unknown date (McKerrow) POST
TENEBRAS LVX

(...) abonde.

To the Reader.
IT was not without great reason, (gentle Reader,) that the ancient Poets in
old time; fained Phaeton to fall from heaven, and to be drowned in the deapth of
the Sea: because not contented with his calling, he would of a proud
ambicious mind, presume to take upon him the government of his Father
Phoebus Chariot, being a thing far beyond his skill to compass. For surely
there is not in the whole world, a more pestilent evil, or a thing that
breeds so much mischife, as does the cankred and most accursed vice of
ambition, which not only works the ruin of the party therewith poscessed:
but often times causes the confusion of many mighty Monark^ and ^^e utter
overthrow of whole Countries and commonweals.

Wherewith the words of Cornelius ^rus do verry aptly agree, who says that
after the desire of principallytie had long continued in the minds of men
undiscovered: when Princes be^an to enlarge their Limittes, and to make their
dominions greater: when they began to conquer kingdoms, and envying the
felicity of commonweals, desired the confusion and utter overthrow one of
another. Then began this ambition first of all to break out, which as (Saint
Barnard says) pleases and delights every man, and yet is there nothing
that does more cruelly crucify or breed more unquietness, then it does.

For from whence springs bloody wars so much, as from this root of
Ambition.

What causes so many to endure the extremity of the could Winter nights,
by lying abroad in the open Feeldes without any harbor, and to abide the
heat of the whot Summer season being clogged with the carryage of their
vnweldye armoure: but only ambicion?

Is it ought else but this greedy ambition, that makes men to travel so many
intemperate countries, and desperately to run into so many doubtful daingers
as they do?

In conclusion, there is nothing that more breaks the bands of benevolence,
abateth the obedience of children toward their Parents: the love of
Parents, toward their Children: the duty of subjects, toward their
Princes, and the care of Countries commoditye, from al men, as does this
abominable vice of ambicion.

Whereof diverse historyes as well of ancient time, as examples daily showed
amongst us, is a most perfect testimony.

By the greedye ambition of Scilla Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Pompeius, and Caesar,
there were more slain amongst the Romans, then in conquering to them the
kingdom of the whole world.

Silla condemned and caused to be executed 80000. Romans, besides many ^ore
that were slain in the civil wars, between him and both the Marius.

Also Pompeius and Julius Caesar, the one suffering no peer, the other no
superior, by their insasiable ambition, caused innumerable people to be slain
between them, and subverted the best and most renowned public weal, in the
whole world: and finally, enjoying little time to rejoice them in their
unlawful desires, Pompeius shamefullye flyinge, had his head stricken off, by
the commandment of Ptolome King of Egypt: unto whom as to his friend he fled
for succor, and Caesar that was the vanquisher, was shortly after cruellye
murdered in the Senate, with daggers, by them whom he best trusted, and most
specially fauowred.

It would require much time, and a very large volume, to make mention of all
those that heretofore, by coveting to increase their credit and estimation in
the world, and to advance themselves to high dignities, have brought both
themselves and their countries to extreme danger.

But I will leave here to rehearse any more of such antiquitye, and show a
more lively and lamentable example, of three renowned Princes: who not long
since by their ambicious desires, did not only procure their own untimely
death: but also the destruction of many thousands of their people, in the
maintenance of their unjust quarrels, as by that which follows shall more
manifestly appear.

But before I proceed to the matter, I have here thought good, for the readers
better instruction, breflye to discribe the country of Barbary, and the
customs thereof.

()

A description of the orders and customs of Barbary.
BArbary, is a country situate in Africa, inhabited with a barbarous people
obseruinge the laws of Mahomet, given (for the most part) to idleness, and
sundry supersticions.

In this Country are many Jews enhabiting, in whose hands consists the
most part of the trafique of the Country, being the only Marchantes of
Sugers, Mallasses, and other ritche merchandise which the same yeldeth: for the
which, they pay great sums of money to the king. And now to the matter.

A Dolorous discourse of a most terrible blouddy Battle fought in Barbary
the. 4. of August. 1578.
Understand, that not long since, there raygned over the country of Barbary,
a King named Mully Hamet Shek* who had diverse Sons by sundry his Wives and
Concubines: for there they may have as many wives as they will.

The King passing on a time from Moroccus, the chief City of his country,
toward another Country of his, called Sus, was in the mydway, at a place
called Bibon, murdered by his own men.

After him reigned one of his Sons called Mulla Abdula: by whose means a Noble
man of yt country, called Alcatho Alley, caused the throtes of eleven of the
Kings Brethren, to be cut in one morning.

Two other of his brethren fled for fear into Turkey, and were there brought up
in the Turks wars.

One other of his Brethren named Mulla Hamet, remained still in Barbary,
without any violence offered unto him, and was well beloved of his wicked
brother: so that he grew very rytch, and was in great estimation throughout
the whole country.

And as cruel murder can never long rest unrewarded. This Alkatho Alley, the
only minister of the Kings mischievous devise, was in the end measured with
such a like measure, as he had before meat to the Kings brethren.

Now the cruel king Mulla Abdula: amongst many other, taking to his wife a
bond woman, that was a Black Negro, had by her a son, called Mulla Sheriffa:
who for that he was of his Mothers complexion, ^as commonly called the Black
King, to whom Mulla Abdula his Father committed the kingdom after his death,
as to his only heir.

Mulla Hamet, after the death of his brother Abdula, fearing the tyranny of his
Black Neuew that succeeded him, fled incontinently with all his substance and
treasure, to Argere, a Town belonging to y^ Turk, where he remained in good
safety.

Mulla Sheriffa, having for a while peaceably possessed the Crown, became in
the end so cruel a tyrant, as his people therefore hating him, murmured in
their minds at his great severity, and in the end burst out in plain
speches, saying: that the son of a bond woman should not reign over them.

Mulla Hamet, his Uncle, remaining all this while at Argere, and understanding
how the people were inclined, by the procurement of the most part of the
Nobility of the Realm: sent to his Brother Mulla Maluca, that remained with
the Turk, wylling him with all expedition, to procure such forces as he
could, and to return therewith into the country of Barbary, where he certifyed
him yt he should be sure to find such friends as he might easily attain to
ye Crown.

With this good hope, Mulla Maluca, having obtained of the Turk (in recompense
of his long service with him) a band of. 10000. Turks. He entered with them into
Barbary, where he was wyllingly received by his friends and favorers, and
greatly succored, as well by them, as with ye substance of his brother Mulla
Hamer, who spared nothing to pleasure him with all, or to further his present
enterprise.

Mulla Sheriffa, his Black Nephew, understanding of his coming: Levied a huge
Army, to make respsta^ce against him: but yet although his power far
surmounted the number of his enemies, yea: though he had ten to one, more the^
his Uncle Mu^la Maluca: Yet what through his own valliancie, and the good will
that he knew the common people bare to him.

Mulla Maluca, did in short time so prevail against the said Sheriffa, as
dryuing him to the Mountains of the country, he obtained possession of the
Crown, and ever since has continued king of Barbary: where he was well
beloved of his people, being a man very actyue, and of great agillitie,
skylfull in wars, wherein from his youth he had always ben trained up: and
as men report, ministered Justice with equity, much favoring Christians, and
specialie our Nation.

The Black king, when he fled into the Mountains, carried with him a great
part of the Treasure of the Country, and daily dysturbed the quiet possession
of his Uncle Maluca. Who slepte not in the mean space: but prepared by all
means to prevent whatsoever his Black Nephew might do to his prejudice. And
in the end, drove him to so great extremity, that he was forced to crave aid
of the king of Portingale: who has certain holds in that country.

The King of Portingale being a lusty young Gentleman, about. xxiij. years of
age, peradventure pricked forward by a vain hope and ambitious desire of
gain and glory, not respecting the perril yt depe^ded there upon: promised the
said Sheriffa to perform his desire therein. And thereupon levied an Army, to
the number of. 40000. in all: to wete 16000. Portingale footemenne, and 4000.
horsemen. 10000. footmen of Spaniards, high Almaines and Italians, and. 10000.
that were Pages, Servants, Purueiours, and such like continuallye accompaning
the Camp. With this power the king of Portingale in his own person^^
accompanied with a great number of his Nobillitie, departed out of his own
country on the.xiiii. day of July. 1578. and with his whole fleet first
arrived at a town in Spain called Calez: where he made his abode for ye space
of. viij. whole days together, the occasion whereof was, (as some suppose) to
furninsh his Army with all such things, as should be needful for the
prosecution of his pretensed purpose.

And on the. 22. day of the foresaid month of July, he gathered his men
together, and with all expedition passed from Calez, to another Town lying
within the bord^rs of Barbary, called Tanos: where he mett^ with the Black
Kings, who had with him, five hundredth Mores Horsemen. And after he had also
soiourned therefore a season, he departed from thence to Argele: Which is a
certain Houlde that the said king of Portingale has in Barbary, and after
his departure from thence.

The first day, which was the. 29 day of the said July: the said king of
Portingale with his whole power, marched forward one League farther, which is
three of our English miles, and pitched his Tents in a place called Sweet
River.

The second day, he went forward one League more, and in that place remained
for the space of two whole days. In which time there was discovered on the
top of a very high hill, a troop of Horsemen of the Mores, which wereby
estimation, not above the number of. 400. in the whole, and the cause of their
coming, as it might very well be imagined, was only to take a view of the
king of Portingales Camp, to know of what power he was: which indeed
stands greatly with reason, for that after their appearaunce, they departed
again so suddainlye without (...) or making any other^ (...)

The third day of y^ (...) proceeding, he marche^ (...) Leagues farther, and
(...) ^^^stance quietly pitched hi^ (...) unto a River called Qu(...), remained
all that night.

The. 4. day he also m^ (...) further, and arrived at a City of the ^o^es,
called Alcasar Kiber, b^t^^en ^^ich City and them, ran the great (...) ^sa: and
the bridge thereof was ^lye guarded by. 2000. Mores ^en: that the king of
Portingale per^^^^^^g it to be impossible without (...) to pass that way:
because he w^ ^re his men till more meet^ (...) ^^ght be offered for the
prosecution of his present enterprise: he c^ed the country to find out some
otherwaye mo^e f^t for his purpose. And at the lengt^ ^^me to a little Foorde
where he (...) o^^r his whole Army his Ordinance, and carriages, without any
d^n^^r o^ ^^ficulty ^t al, which (...) work, he was constrained to harbor
there all that night.

The next day the king of Portingale called all his most wise and best
experienced Captains to counsel, and asked their advise: whether it were
better for him with his whole power to martche toward Alcasany: which being a
dry Town, though there were in it about the number of. 7000. households, yet
was it but weak, unmeet to make any great encounter, and not able long to
stand in resystaunce.

Or else to proceed forewarde on his way toward the Town Alcasar Kiber,
before named.

This being long debated between them, every man alleging what he lysted:
After they had all particularly expressed their opinions therein, some one way,
and some another way: in the end it was concluded with a general consent that
he should keep his course toward ^lcasar Kiber, which he performed ^c^^^dingly.

He had not passed very far before he discovered Mulla Maluca, that was king
of Barbary, martching toword^s him with a great power of men, which were valued
to be in number. 70000. Horsemen, and. 40000. Footmen, whereof. 20000. were
Horsemen shot, and 10000. Footmen gunners, besides other followers of the
camp: whose number I have not heard, and therefore cannot make a true report
thereof.

But because the day was quite spent before the two Armies could com^ ^^y thing
near together, they both ^nca^ped them selves there that night, in sight the
one of the other.

The next day, being the fowrth of August. 1578. the King of Portingale
divided his battle into four squ^drons: whereof he appointed to Don Duer^e
Mennesses, General of the Army, the leading of the Vautg^rde. The second
Squadron, the king Portingale himself took charge off. Upon the right hand
was the Black king Sheriffa, with his Horsemen: And upon the left hand; the
Duke Dauerro, the eldest son of the Duke of Bargansy, with the. 4. Squa^^on.

King Maluca, did also use the like other in the division of his Army.

All things being thus prepared on both sides, the two Kings purposyng to put
themselves to the hazard of that which should happen, adressed themselves to
fight.

King Maluca, first gave the Onfette upon the Horsemen of the Portingales
Army, but they vallyauntly defended them selves, and in the end forced Ma^^^a
and his Mores, to retire with the loise of many of them.

But Maluca herewith nothing dyscouraged, bringing his men again in good order
of Battle: gave such a fresh charge upon the King of Portingales Horsemen, as
he constrained them to retire unto the main battle.

But the Portingales Horsemen, being ^ncontinently gathered again together ^n
good order, they gave the Mores such ^ sharp charge, that they flewe a great
number of them.

The Mores again returned freshly upon the forces of the Portingale horsemen,
forcing them to ioygne with their footmen.

Which done, the said Portyngales gave a new chardge upon the Mores: But
their best Soldiers being slain before, and having no new succourers, to
supplye their wantes: for that they were far from their friends, and in a
forrayne country, amongst their mortal enemies: whose power greatly
surpassed theyrs, they were not able to do any good at all.

But the Mores still remaining very strong, with the force of their Horsemen
shot, and footmen Gunners, so brake the arrayes of the Portingale Horsemen,
as they ouerthrewe, killed, and took Captyue, the whole Army, except. 80.
or. 100. persons at the most, that saved them selves by flight.

In this conflicte were slain. 3000. Almaines. 700. Italians, and. 2000.
Spa^^^rds. whereof Don Allonso Dageler ^night of Cordua was one.

In this last battle, it is supposed that (...) the three Kings were slain.

^he names of the Portingale Nobility, that were slain.
Don Sabastian, King of Portingale. Don Lewis, de Cordua. ^on Diego de
Mennesses. ^eorge de Silua Gouernoure and Justice of Portingale. Don Francisco
de Portingale. Don Francisco, son to the Countye of Sortelha. Don
Constantino. Don Ferdinando de Silua. Don Allonso de Almado. Don Christopher,
and Don Auero Peers of Trauora. Don Aluaro de Silua.
More.
Sheriffa the black King.



The names of such as were taken, and are known to re^aine (...) in Barbary.
THe Duke of Bargansas Son. Don Duart de Mennesses, great ^ster of the Camp,
and General of the Tangere. Don Farnando de Castra* Controwler of the
Fenances. Don Diego de Silua. Don Piedro de Menness^s.


Diverse other Lords and noble men there are missing, but whether they be
slain, or taken Captives, it is not yet certainelye known.

The dead body of the King of Portingale is reported to rem^^n in Alc^^^^r
Kiber, for ye delyuery whereof the Mo^es require in ransom the towns (...)
F^ues and Arsylla, with the Munition therein.

There is offered for the ransom of the Duke of Bargansa his son. 10000.
Duccats: but it is refused.

The King of Portingale lost by this Battle. 22. pieces of Ordinance. 700.
Chariottes, with Mules and Oxen: besides many other things of very great
vallue.

There were slain of the Barbarians about the number of. 40. or. 50. thousand
one with another, whereof the King is supposed to be one.

The Portingales have chosen for their King, a Cardinal, that was great Uncle
to their late King desceased.

FINIS.
The Conclusion.
Behold here, (gentle Read^^) (...) end that greedy ambicion ((...) breeds
so many bloody broyl^^ (...) brings them unto, that embrace (...)

Let the pittyfull spectacle here (...)down to thy view: of the woeful
ad^^^ture that happened to the Princes ^^fore spoken off, by the confusion of
t^ people, and loss of their own ly^ serve thee as an example, (of what de^
so ever thou be,) when thou feel ^^^selfe prycked forward to the like en^^
prise: by reason, to remove from thee, (...) deuyllish desire, which so greatly
b^deth the understanding of many re^^^nable creatures, alluring them thro^^^ a
conceived hope of yt which can n^ be compassed, to commit things contr^^^ to
all order and honesty: not regarding (...) reward yt ryghtfully belongs to
(...) aspyring minds, nor the m^serabl^ (...) of them that are so ambi^^^usly
(...)

If Mulla Sheryffa, the (...) King here spoken off (...) was in quiet
possession of his kingdom, could have governed his people with ^ety, and had
not of a proud ambicio^^ mind, (to make his power appear the greater) So
grievously oppressed the^ (...) tyrany as he did: their love toward him would
have been such, as his uncles ^^^^r should never have so prevailed ^^^^nst him,
as it did.

(...) the said Maluca could have conte^^^^ him with the good estate he was
(...) and had not left the service of the (...), (where he lived peaceably, in
^^eat honor and estimation,) to make himself king of Barbary, by
dispossessing his Nephew of his ryghtfull enherytance: ye king of Portingale
would never have been provoked to make wars upon him, and to work his
confusion, as he did.

Finally, if the king of Portingale, had not of an ambicious mind, been moved
to enlarge his Dominions, with another loss, and to increase his Fame by his
rashness: in waging wars with the said king Maluca, he should not have
brought himself, and so many (...) Gentlemen, to that miserable end yt he
did, in a barborous country, amongst a sort of brutishe Infydelles: but might
have lived in peace and great prosperity in his own country, and have still
continued that commendatio^ which by his virtues and vallure he had won and
well deserved: whose like for wisdom, courage, and good qualities (in such
young years) Portingale was never possessed withal before.

And therefore all Chrinstendome, but especially the poor widows, and
fatherles children, in Portingale, may well with most pitiful complayntes,
and lamentable cries, accompanied with floods of tears: be wayle, though all
to late, the unlucky lot of that unfortunate Prince, and the doleful day,
wherein unadvisedly, he first began this his unhappy enterprise.

O miserable man, borne to woe and callamitie: was it not sufficient that a
thousand thousand mischiefs, whereunto thou wast borne, should fall upon
thee, and ouerwhelme thee in this vale of mysery: but that thou must by thine
own unkindly inclination, add thereunto murder, discord, and division
between country and country, so carelessly: as thou do, contrary to the
custom of ^ll other earthly creatures of Gods creating.

What pleasure have thou in the spoil of thy people, O thou proud and
ambicions Prince? that to purchase to thy self such things as thou must leave
behind thee, when God calls thee away, out of this transitory world: wylt
put so many in peril of their life. When thou has^ attained to thy insatiable
desire, thy mind is never satisfied therewith, vn^yll thou thy self art also
become a pray to the woormes of the earth, or the ^es of the air.

And what shall then remain unto thee, of all the spoils and vyctories, that
with the bloodshed of many thousand men, thou have acquyred in thy whole life
time: surely nothing else but a syllye wynding sheet, and peradventure want
that too, (...) chance (...) not the better.

O Christian Princes, embrace peace, seek to have love and amytie one with
another, to the strengthening, establyshing, and enlarginge of Christendom:
least the Infydelles, for the sins of you and your people, be a scourge to
you all.

Has not God by his infynite, and incomprehensyble wisdom, wonderfullye
wrought in the placing of your Provinces: every one with such sundry
commodityes, as the one should always have need of the other, to the end
that you should lynke in Love, and live in contynuall concord, one with
another? Yes verelye: And wherefore do ye then alter the decree, and
determynation of the Almyghtye: Who has appointed all these things for the
benefyte of his people?

O ye Subjects, (...) your hartye prayers, for peace and quietness, and the
continuance thereof: that you with you^ wives, children, friend^, and (...) may
live quietly and peaceably together, mayntayning with your necessary trauayl,
your countries fertillitie, to the avoiding of penury, and the preventing of
such like mischeuous murders, and ^stly blouddy broils, as are before sp^^en
of.

O ye Prelates, Prophets, and Preachers, if you be the Messengers and Ministers
of our Savior Jesus Christ: Preach to your Princes, and as Christ did, so do ye
persuade youthful Princes from seeking such bloody battles: so shall ye be
known to be the Disciples of that heavenly Messiah.

But if any persuade Princes to the shedding of blood, murdring of Innocents,
and to make spoil of the people, whom God has only created to his glory.
They are not the servants of Jesus of Jesus Christ: but in deed the very
schoollers of Antichrist, and the messengers of mischief.

To conclude, I would council all men* of what calling so ever they be, as
well Princes, as private (...) ^tistie: them selves with that which ^t shall
please God to in^te unto the^: not seeking by unlawful means, to enhaunce them
selves higher then GOD has appointed, least for their great unthankfulness, he
do not only disapoynt them of their pretensed purpose: but also bereave them
of those benefits, which before he had bountifully be stowed upon them, which
is the just reward belonging to such ungrateful persons.

Surely if men would call to remembrance, the care, trouble, fear, and
continual danger, that always accompanies those that be advanced to high
dignities, and would ^aye with all, what assured safety, con^eth in the mean
estate: I am full^ ^swaded yt they would not the^ so pr^^^e for promotion as
they daily do, nor seek with such incessaunt pain and peril, to purchase a
thing so unprofitable: but rather to shun it as a most pestelent evil, being
ye only corrupter of good manners, and vanquisher of virtue, esteeming (...) to
live contented with a little: (...) seeking by dishonest means to ^^^^hase
great abundance, to put both (...) and body in danger, the one of (...)
^ation, the other of destruction.

(...) which enormities, the Lord for (...) mercies sake deliver us: and make
(...) ^ndfull of his manifold benefytes, (...) b^stowed upon us: far more
ly^* then we can either desire, or (...), Amen.

FINIS.
^^x super omnia prodest.
^^printed at London by ^ohn Charlewood, and Thomas Man.


