A funeral oratyon made the xiiii. day of January by John Hoper, the year of
our salvation, 1549. upon the text wrytyne in the Reuelatyone of Sayncte
Johne. Ca. 14.

..

1. Thessalo. 4. Murne not as other do which have no hope.

I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me. Writ, Blessed are the dead,
that dye in the Lord, straight way, so says the sprete: that they may rest
from there labors, but there works follow the^.
A Preface to the text.
THe death of a man's fredis paynefull for 2. co^syderatio^s. The one, because
he that lyuethe is forsaken and destytute of the famylyarytye and frendshipe of
him that is dead. The othere, that the living dowteth, where the soul of his
friend departed is bycome. Whether it be in heaven or in hell. Both this Isles,
may be redressed with one good, that is to wit: If he that lives be assured,
by the word of God that his friend departed, is by mortal death entered in
Christ in to eternal life. But now in this stands all the dowte. How the
living may know in what state the souls departed stond. This dowte can not
the Gentyle dissolve, the wise men of the world, nor the commone sort of
soche as bears the name of christianite.

Namely for this: that they ymagyn there friends souls, to be broiled and
roasted in the fire of Purgatory. Wherefore even as they fear they wotte not
what: so seek they there remedy they know not how. With Mass, Dirige and such
other. This pains (by the living) presupposed of the dead: who can iustlye
reprehende the misbelyuynge living for the state of the dead, that more the^
need is panyth the^ selves, and more then profyt is: redemeth the prayers of
other. But what may the truethe conclude. Is there any certayenty that puttyth
al out of dowte, our friends souls to depart from the earth, straight unto
eternal life. Truly after the judgment of the flesh, there is no such
knoweledge. For the flesh in this case, either will planelye despair for the
horror and gretnes of sin: or else dowte of the means how it may be
remedyd. Only therefore the certayntye is known by the scripture of God.
Give therefore head what in this case what the word of god certifieth us of
the dead.

I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me: Write. Blessed are the dead that
dye in the lord straight way.
IN a matter of dowt, here behold the dyuersyte betweyne the learning of God,
and the lerninge of man. The learning of man without judgment, knoweledge, and
grace: will compel and force them what live to believe there friends souls
departed to be broyled in Purgatory. Desire the^ to give you a reason why?
Answer have they none, but that ye must so believe, or else be accounted for
an Heretic. So that rather they will force men with dowte to abide in sorrow:
then with judgment of Gods word happylye to conforte them with joy. Blessed
therefore, be the God of mercy that has in this case, put unto us an
infallyble truethe and doctrine to warraunte the troubled mind of the living
for the state of the dead. And among other places of most certain truth,
here in this place he playnelye shows the^ to be blessed that die in the
lord: that is to say: Optaine the end that man was created unto eternal
felicite and joy everlasting. For a prove of the same against reasonne and
man's doctrine. Saint Jhon says: I hard a voice from heaven. As though he
had said. It is so true: it can be no way false, for it is from heaven. And
because it should instruct the afflycted of our time and assertaine us of
the state and condicionne of the dead, as well as it did saint Johne, and them
of his time, and for ever till the worldles end: the Angel bid Saint Johne
write the same, saying: Write. Blessed are the dead in the Lord. Although al
men indifferently wyshe and couete to be blessed aftre there death yet all
men come not to the thing they most wyshe for. Because they live contrary
unto the will of God that solie geuethe the bliss eternal, as Sayncte Paul
says Ephe. 5.1. Cor. 6. No fornicatoure, covetous man shall have any heretayge
in the kyngedome of Christ, and God. And as Paul excludes from heaven the
doars of the fruytes of infidelite, so does S. John exclude for infidelite it
self. Joan. 3. He that believes not the son of God, shall se no life, but
the Ire of God tarieth upon him. True it is then, that al men obtain not this
blyssinge of GOD after death. And even as the places before show who shall
miss of this Joyful felicite: so S. Johan, in this place shows who shall
come unto it, saying: Blessed are they yt dye in the Lord. They only therefore
be blessed yt dye in the Lord. And seeing a death in the Lord is the gate to
eternal life: We will more at large declare what it is to dye in the Lord. To
dye in the Lord is to dye in the says of Christ, whom he sent into ye
world for the redemption thereof. Joan. 3. which is done when four things is
observed.

First if the seykeman in his sekenes call unto his remembrance what he has
done all his life time against the first and second table of the Lords
commandments. The second if upon his examination he find his brothere and
neighbor hurt by him in goods, or fame, he study unfeignedly to satisfye
him as nere as he can again in both. The third, that the seyke man aknowlege
unto the Lord, as much as he has offended against the commandments of the
first table: with a detestation of them all. The fourth, that he ask of god
for the death of Christ remission of them all. But he that will assuredlye
trust to obtain this forgeuenes, had need to have redye and prompte, many
places of the scripture, that shows in Christ, the father of heaven to remit
the syke man's offenses. Gene. 3. Esa. 53. Matthew. 1.11. Joh. 1.3.4.5.
Romano. 3.4. 1. Johan. 1.2. The assurance of faith by grace optayned: it is the
sekemannes part, and as many as be with him, religiouslye to pray, for the
perseueraunce of the same says. And also to his pour, to help the needful
with his alms, that they also may pray to the Lord for him. Then thus
commended him self unto God, Let him commend all his likewise with some
exhortation that they diligently live in the fear of God as the scripture
teaches. Gene. 49. Deuter. 31. Josua. 23. 3. Re. 2. He that thus dies, dies
in the Lord, and therefore blessed as this text teaches. And as it is taught
in ye. 5. of S. John. Uerely, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word,
and believe in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
judgment, but pass from death to life. He can not dye a wicked death that is
blessed and sanctified in the blood of Christ. As he must needs be, that in
his seykenes seeks health by this medicine prescribed by S. John. That by four
words helps the greateste and damigerouse desperation, If credit and fayeth
be given unto them. The first word is: I hard a voice. The second: from
heaven. The third: Write, The fourth: Blessed be the dead that dies in ye
Lord. If ye learn it well, it shall not only make you blessed at ye hour of
death: But also moderate ye sorrows and murninges (which otherwise) ye shall
suffer while yelyue here, for your friends that dye. Likewise it shall assuyre
you of the state and condition of your friends departed that they have the
favor and presence of God. And better at ease in heaven with God, then ye be
in the earth with men. Learn to dye well therefore, by this lesson, ye
mortal men. And leave not the medycyne prescrybed and taught by God the
father, made and tempered with the blood of Christ, minystred in to the soul
of man by the holy ghost, brought from heaven by an Angel, written upon and
to the people of the earth by holy Sayncte John. For the medycynes appointed
by manne, as Mass, Dirige, Peregrinacions, Pardons, other men's merytes when
ye be gone, Tryntalles, Anniuersaries, Invocation, and prayers of and to
saints departede, Auriculare confession, and such other men's inuentiones
which cannot ease nor quiet the conscience of the poor sekemanne.

But the more of this trysles is promised unto the conscience of the afflicted
man, the more wretched creatoure he desires. As your conscience shall know
at the time and hour of your sekenes and danger. And then shall ye feel when
all othere things be to little, that the precyouse blood of Christ is enough
and where as without dowte your own conscyens shall bare you record (do you
and all othere men for you whatsoever may be done) ye are culpable and worthy
death everlasting.

So shall Christ's spyryte if he be in you by faith bayre record with your
spyryte, that year for Christ's sake only, the heirs of eternal life. This
is the only way to quyete every trouble and afflicted conscience in the day
of death. As Saint John says, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. But
seeing the deuell can not bare this doctrine, A man to be saved in Christ, for
the promise of Gods sake: He goes about to persuade this word of God to be
false that says: He that dies in the Lord is blessed. And so with the most
part of men he subuerteth this Godly consolation. Either he makes the syke to
dispare of his salvation for ye greatness of his sin: Either causes him to
seek vnsufficiente and unlawful means to remove his sins. And that you and
I be subject unto this temptacion: Read Mathewe..27. Luke. 23. And se what the
deuell adventured to persuade unto Christ himself. And would have borne him in
hand he was not the son of God: nether that God caryde for him saying he
suffered his enemies thus to preuale against him. And the same temptationne he
burdened the holy prophet David with all, Psalm. 3. If he could object and
bourdeyn the son of God with arguments that he could not be blessed that dyed
in the lord: How much more does he, ye or may he: not only swade and
attempt, but also persuade and overcome our miserable and weak condycyonne:
I Will preparyd God knows of a thowsande sorttes of temptationne to sustain of
them the least. Wherefore learn by time, or time deceive you, how to live
without time, of none ye may learn so well as by the life and death and also
the doctrine of the Patryarkis, Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles. Whose
example if ye follow not here: incase hereaftre ye never come where they be,
thank your selves. And that ye take upon you to use another remedys (yea and
as many men says bettre) to warraunte and stand at the time of death
against the tyranny of syne, hell, the deuel and the wordle. If after your
departure from hens it be worse with you then it is with them: blame none but
your selves. And the bettre blame worthy be ye, so many times admonyshede, yet
not a dele the bettre. Juge other me^ as they list, thus I believe. He that
dies as an Apostle, shall hereaftre live like an Apostel. And he that believes
as an Apostle, shall be saved like an Apostle. Understonde what I say. It is of
their doctrine and suffycient learning yt I speak of, which is fully and
suffycientlye able to lead a man in to all treuth. 2. Tymo. 3. Augu. lib.
confess. 6. Cap. 5. If any Counsale general, or prouyncyall: If any learning
of man could show you, how bettre to live, and more godly to dye, then the
wryttynges of the Prophets, and the Apostles in whose wrytynges ye have aplate
both of there life, and also of there death. I would comede it unto you. But
you know, there is none. Seeing ye be this persuaded of them, and allow so much
there holiness and name: dyseable not there doctrine lest peradventure those
that ye now acco^pte to be your friends: here after shall be testes and records
of your Just damnatyon, because ye comende there name and persecute there
blood in such as offeryth you there doctrine. The ignorancye of this true
doctrine to teach men to live and dye well, has brought in that false and
untrue opinione of feigned purgatory. The which inducyd four great Isles. The
first, it causes the death of a man's frynde to be more paynefull. The
second it abolysheth one of the chief artykles of our e belyefe. Which is, I
believe the remission of sin. The third is that it brought the works and
deservings of men into greater estymatione then the merits of Christ.

The fourth: it causes men to live in a greater securyte, and liberty of
life: Because there opynione is, that there freyndes doings for them after
death: shall help to there saluatione.

Beware therefore of this doctrine of purgatory as of a most pestilente I Will,
and seeing all our saluatione restethe in this that we dye in the Lord: whiles
we be in health, let us learn this doctrine well, and exercise the same. It is
not a Christians part to sleep in sin as an I Will souldyer till the trompe
blow. Nether yet to provide for weapone till his enymye be upon him. But to
have it ready that it serve as time and necessyte requires. And so we be
admonyshed to do by the horrible example of the five folyshe vyrgynes, in ye.
25. chap. of S. Matthew. that neglectyng there oune bound duty to know and
live well, and trusting to the help of others were shut out of ye Joye
eternal. For whiles they were a byinge other me^nes merits they lost there
own salvation.

The adversaries of ye truth does use to obiecte against this doctrine of
God, that such as dye in the Lord should strayghtway be blessed with him in
heaven, and say we deny not but they be blessed: but it is in hope to come and
not with present Joye and felicytie for they must suffer the pains of
purgatory and so enter the place appointed. To the which obiectione S. Johne,
in this place ansureth, and denies any deferring of time betywyxe the death
of a Christyane and his acceptatione into the fruycione of God, and says by
and by not to go first into purgatory and then aftre into heaven. And so
says Christ himself. John. 5. The same teaches us the parable of Lazarus
soul streyghwaye upon his death that was taken into Abraham's bossome. Luc. 16.
Where as ye may learn the state of the souls departed. And here S. John,
shows the cause why the souls that dye be not drawn through purgatory nor
passes through no such pains to come to heaven.

Because says he they may rest from there labors, that is to say from the
pains dew for sin, and from all other myseries of right annexed and laid
upon men for sin. If the Christyane souls go into purgatory they be not
quyt from there labors but put unto more labors. From a hot feuere into a
hot fire, from pains tolerable, to ye pains yt be (as there doctrine
says) as greuouse as the pains of hell. So the death of man were not the
end of his myseryes, but the beginning. Nether were not death as S. Paull
says. 1. Corin. 15. The last enemy of man, but purgatory were. Nether
were it true that he says: Ebre. 9. chapt. That manne receives his judgment
after his death: but after he is first dead, and then sufficyently purged in
Purgatory.

Whereof ye have no Example in the new Testamente nor in the old: ye have
neither any commandment to pray for the dead, nor yet promise that God
will hear your prayer, when ye pray. Who taught you to bring any religion
into the church of God without Gods commau^demente, and the decrees of the
universal church, which is the church of the Patriarchs, Prophets and the
Apostles, whose faith, life, death and doctrine is and ought to be, the
ground and foundacyon of Christian relygyon, as Saynct Paul writes Ephe.2.
Neither in the word of God is there any more mencyon then of two places, ye
right hand for the good in Christ: the left hand for the i will. Abraha^s bosom
for the one a place of joy, hell for the other a place of pain. Let the
adversaries of the truethe show by the scripture (which we esteem full
sufficient to make a perfect man in all things) a third place, and then we
will as we be bound give place unto the^, but sure we be, the scripture
Canonical which is suffycyent has no such thing: but of this shall be more
spoken here after. For in this text I mean to teach and not to dispute. Learn
therefore here of S. Jho^ to know yt al miseyries endythe with the christianes,
at there death, and seeing the word of god putyth the^ in joy, let not us put
them in pain. Nor those that ye scryptures saves, let not us condemn: if the
scripture say they be straight ways blessed yt dye in the lord; let us not
put the^ under the curse of the painful fire of purgatory. It is not the
part of a good scoler to find fault at his masters doctrine, until such time
as he be better learned then his master, neither before he has or can, learn
ye eleme^tes and principles of gods law: to ad unto his masters ruls Nor to
better ye thing yt is perfectly good of it self with any wit of his, which is
perfectly naught Nor to say his masters doctrine is not sufficient: when al ye
world knows the contrary. For the best learned men has come out of his
masters scole: and yet never added neither diminyshed one jot to yt there
masters taught the^. Behold ye ancient stole of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and the Apostelles which lyuyd virtuously, and dyed holyly: yet never added to
the souls any third place, or pains of fire, but were contented with the
two places that God had appointed, one for the good, the other for the I Will.
Wherefore it is my belyfe that the doctrine that sufficyd them, sufficyth us
and the faith that saved them in Christ sauethe us. Except God be changed, and
has made new ways to heaven sense their death. Either they arred, and knew
not what was suffycyente to lead to eternal life: or these dreamers of
Purgatory arre. For the one goes as contrary in this article, to the other, as
black is contrary unto white: and the catholycke church of Christ, to the
smerm and multitude of Antichriste, and asfer from the priuatyue church of the
Apostles, as gods word is, from the supersticion of man, and the doctrine
and life of S. Peter (that was but a record of Christ, and his doctrine. Actu.
1) from the life and doctrine of Boniface the eyghte, which is written post
sextum decretaliu^: better therefore it is to belyue with Saint Johne, and the
catholycke church, that the dead be at rest: then with the scole of the
gentles and multitude of men to judge them in pain. But let us hear what more
the holy ghost says unto S. John.

Their worckes follow the^.
By this text we learn two things. First, how these that dye in the Lord
be not, nor can not be hurt by the obloquye and slanderous report of i will
spekers. Seeing the world for the most part accounted the very christianes of
God to be heretics, and sedicious persons therefore says ye holy ghost, they
depart hence with their own works: which saying should cause us to bear
stronglye the perverse judgment of ye world for the judgment of God is just,
and judges not after the face, but according to the truth. Let al us therefore
lament and bewail our sins past, presently begin a better life, and here
after beware in Christ of the like fall, the^ let ye world say what it will.

The second doctrine here, of Saint Johne repugneth and ouerthrowethe the
opinion of many ignoraunte and supersticious persons that whiles they yet
live here them selves, passes little, what faith, religyon, or works
commaundyd by god they do, but in the time of death they think to redeem all
their sins by other men's works after death: with mass, pylgrymayge,
perdones and othere. Folyshe be they that sell this abhomynacyon, but more
fowls be the buyers seeing Christ ones cast such sellers out of the temple.
But those has the Pope and his received in again with both hands. And as
Christ beat them out with scurges: So the Pope and his adherences with
whyppe and fire betyth as many as call the people from this merchau^dise, and
no meruel, for he is Christ's aduersarye. Because therefore this error has
so much auayled in many men's conscyens, that it is very diffycyle to
remove it (partlye because they that selie, wax rich by the means, partlye
because the marchaundyse seems good to the bier, that trustethe to apese the
ire of God with monye) I will rehearse testymonies of the scripture to prove that
no man is the better for an other man's worckes, when he is dead. Christ
Matthei. 25. asks of the same he gave his talentes unto, account of the same
man again, for the use of his talentes and there unto constraynythe each of
his credeatours. In the same chapter sittynge in the last judgment as it
were, requyrythe account of souche works as were done by them that shall be
judged whiles they were yet alive. I was an hungered and ye gave me mete, a
thyrst and ye gave me drink: and so forth, read the place. In the old
testament and in the new is written many times that the just God will give
unto every man after his own works. So says S. Paul Gal. 6. and to the
Corinth. as he sows so shall he repe, and that says he also. 2. Corint. 5.
Every man shall receive as he has done in his body be it good, or I Will. And
be myndfull of the five folyshe virgynes that teach us how dangerous a thing
it is to trust unto boughten merits. When they were waked out of the sleep to
go mete the bridegroom, and had not oil sufficient in there lamps, they went
unto there merchants to bye. But in the mean time whiles they were agreynge
upon the price the gate was shut, and the miserable virgyns excludyd, and kept
out from the eternal Joys. After the same sort men being ignorant of the
truythe of Gods word uses in the time of there sickness with the unlearned
prystes. Whiles the miserable and afflictyd sick man is crucified and
tormentyd with the fire of hell in his agony and passion of death askyng
counsel of his curate, when his curate should persuade the sick man to the
restitution of his neighbors goods and fame, if any such wrongs were
commyttyd, and then persuade him of all mighty gods mercy in Christ, in who
is blood he foryeuethe all offenses Gene. 3. Esa. 53. Ephe. 2. and makyth the
sinner more whitter then the snow. Esa. 1. then the ungodly Curate settythe
forth his marchaundes to sale: Messes, Ryngyng, lights, peregrinations, with
other like. The wreachyd syke man though his conscience barith him record
these things satisfye not, nor remouyth the greatnys of his temptacio^ yet
saying he knowyth no better, and has lernyd no farther then the opinion of man
has taught: he begynnythe to entreat with the priste upon the price of his
marchaundes and many times before they be fully at apoynt ye byer and seller:
the poor sick byer dies, and the gate of salvation is shut in, and thus for
the lost of fayuyd purgatory that the scripture of God ferith noman with all,
he fyndyth vnfaynyd hell (eternal damnation) from whense nether the living,
nether the deed ca^ relese him. And thus I will yet add incase there were any
Purgatory, yet could not ye souls be delyueryd by these remedys that
supersticio^ has prescribyd saying there remedies for the most part be
blasphemye against God: as the Mass a profanation of the Lords supper, holy
water with other souche like: and other of there remedies be folyshe, and to be
mockyd at, as the Ryngynge of belles to ease ye pain of ye deed with other. I
beseech you all brether in the dear blud of Christ to leave byinge of Gods
grace, and the merits of men that cannot meritte enough for themselves. Your
own goods thus be stowyd, shall work your own damnation. Remember this sayng
of Saynct John. There works follow them. Live here after verteuslye that ye
may dye godly. He fyghtithe not manfullye, that is brought up all ways
delicatelye. In ye hour of death is like to be our hardyst assault and
greatest danger. The bocke of our conscience shall be opened. The devil will
agrauat and give all the strenghe he can to our sin and will (if god suffer
him) other extenuat and diminishe the mercy of God, or clean cause us to
despere: hell then will gape and open his mouth upon us. Make ready therefore
whyl ye have time for your selfs in ye blood of Christ and study amendment of
lief. Besides ye scripture here what S. August. says. Tract. 49. super Jo.
Vnusquisque cum causa sua dormit, and cum causa sua resurget. That is. Every
man slepeth with his own cause, and shall rise with his own cause. In our
sykenes let us therefore do these. 2. things, reconcile ourselfes to our
neighbors. The second, let us cry unto the Lord in Christ saying: I believe
remissyon of sin.

The conclusyon.
If we will not lamente the death of our friends, let us hear and read the
scripture diligently that says: they be blessed yt dye in the Lord. And we,
if we purpose to dye well: whyl we be in health let us learn to know, to fear,
and to put all our trust in the Lord solye and only thorough Christ, and
then in the trance and dangerous agonye of death we shall overcome manfullye,
and say rather for our friends that dye, blessed and thanked the Lord who
has vouch saved to take unto him his servant in the blood of Christ from
the miseris of this world and the Isles thereof: rather then to say (as the
most part of me^ does) God have mercy upon his soul, which word includes a
very doubt of the state of the dead, and more spoken of custom, then of
knowelege. Let us therefore with the holy ghost say, blessed be the dead, that
dies in the Lord. So be it.



FINIS.
Imprented at London by Edward Whitechurch at the sign of the Son in fleet street 1549.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


