THE PATTERN OF PERFECTION: Exhibited in Gods Image on ADAM: And Gods Covenant
made with him.

Whereunto is added an Exhortation, to redeem the time for recovering our
losses in the premises.

And also some Miscellanies, viz. I. The Prayer of Faith. II. A Preparative to
the Lords Supper. III. The Character of a sound Christian in 17. marks.


By T. H.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent,

Rev. 2.5. London, Printed for R.Y. and F. Clifton, and are sold at his Shop on
new Fish-street hill. 1640.

The Contents.
GOds image is man's Excellency. Sect. 1. page 6. Gods image is imprinted in
the whole Soul. Sect. 2. p. 31. Of Gods image in the Understanding. Sect. 3.
p. 42. Of Gods image in the Will: specially holiness. Sect. 4. p. 61.
Righteousness a part of Gods image. Sect. 5. p. 84. Of free will in Adam.
Sect. 6. p. 115. Of Gods image in the Affections. Sect. 7. p. 149. Of Gods
image in the body. Sect. 8 p. 179. Of Gods image in respect of the creatures.
Sect. 9. p. 192. Of the Covenant made with Adam. Sect. 10. p. 208. Of life
promised to Adam, if obedient. Sect. 11. p. 231. Of the Sacraments of life to
Adam. Sect. 12. p. 245. An exhortation to redeem the time. Sect. 13. p. 257.
Where, What opportunities of grace and salvation we have. p. 260. What we must
part withal to obtain them. p. 263. Rules for buying at Gods market. p. 269.
Rules for following our callings. p. 294. The excellency of the commodities to
be bought. p. 297. The shortness of our time to purchase them. p. 305.

Miscellanies.
I. The Prayer of Faith. p. 313. II. A preparative to the Lords Supper. p. 344.
III. The Character of a sound Christian, in 17 marks. p. 376.
THE PATTERN of perfection.
GENESIS 1.26. And God said, Let us make man after our own image, etc.


REligion, being the Doctrine according to godliness, is referred to two
heads: The knowledge of God, and of our selves.

The knowledge of God consists in his sufficiency, what he is. One God, and
three persons: in his efficiency, what he is to man.

God has in himself fullness of happiness. He needed not man; but as he is
good, so all his good is communicative: he is willing to work what is good for
the Creature, in giving our being, in providing according to our being; which
consists in supporting the frame of heaven and earth, and in guiding it
according to his good pleasure.

The knowledge of our selves must be considered in a threefold estate.

1. What we are in regard of innocence. 2. What we are in regard of our fall.
3. The estate to which we are renewed.
These three take up the estates of man: In the last of of them observe three
particulars.

1. What we have received from Christ. 2. What we are to do for him. 3. The
means of our renewing.
1. What we have received appears in his purchasing our redemption, and in
applying it: Christ does not only provide a salve, but lays it on, applies it
effectually, in calling, justifying, sanctifying.

2. What we must do for God; and here comes in the nature of the Law, That
being redeemed, we might walk before him in holiness and righteousness (as
S. Luke speaks) all our days. This we must do, not to purchase any thing,
but to glorify God for what we have received.

3. The means; which are the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments.

Thus when a man sees himself created, lost, recovered, then a man is a
Christian man.

My purpose is not to begin with the knowledge of God, but with the knowledge
of our selves, because it is most available to make us see our misery, and the
need of a Savior.

First then we will begin with the first condition of man, as he came out of
the hand of God.

1. And God said, Let us make man in our image.
IN the Words there are two things:

1. The consultation, [And God said.] 2. The execution of it effected.
The consultation gives us to consider, partly the difficulty of the work,
partly the excellency, when in all other things it was but a [Let it be] but
now there is an high Court of Parliament; the three Persons enter into a
consultation to set upon this masterpiece; better then all other creatures,
except Angels, and in some case better then them. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
say, Let us make man; every one addresses himself to it with mavelous care.
Come we then to the Work. If you ask what is the pinnacle of perfection, from
which Adam fell (for fall implies some prerogative he had) I answer, it was
this, That he was made in Gods image, and from this he fell

Gods image is man's excellency.
Doct. The excellency of Adams condition consists in this, that he was made in
the image and likeness of God. Therefore, Col. 3.10. the Apostle disputing
concerning renovation, enjoynes them to put on the new man, which is renewed
according to the image of him; that created it. In the Text are two things:

1. The work of sanctification is that we had in Adam by creation; and
therefore he calls it the new man. Adam having blemished it, Christ renewes it
again.

2. Observe, that both the work of sanctification, and creation, are according
to the image of God, Ecclesiastes 7.9. God made Adam upright, yea a straight
man.

This is a comparison taken from a straight line; there can be no crooking in
it. So the heart of Adam lay level, and exactly agreeable to the rule of
righteousness. Ephesians. 4.24. Put ye on the new man, which is created after God in
righteousness and true holiness. Look what is spoken of renovation, the
self same Adam had in creation. Now we read that the new man is after God, as
the print of the wax is after the seal; and a man does his work after a
pattern, that is agreeable to it: So the stamp of Gods image was upon Adam,
that he was agreeable to his will.

For the opening of it, observe three questions:

Q. 1. What is this Image?

Gods image, what in general.
Ans. In the general, it is that spiritual ability put into Adam, whereby he
was able to work as God wrought, after the manner and measure of a creature.
We do all things according to our scantling: God has a power infinite, Adam
had it proportionably. Adam was not to equal, but to imitate God. Luke 6.34.
Be merciful as your father is merciful. Adam was holy as God, and ordered his
conversation as God would. We say, That the child has the image of his
father, not in bigness, but in likeness, either in carriage, countenance, or
behavior: Or, as it is with an apprentice, that has learned the skill of his
Master, we say, He is his Master right; not because he is a man, but because
he is a workman, and imitates him exactly, and carries the print of his skill
upon him. So the image of God in Adam is not so much in regard of the being of
Adam, as in this, that he was able to work as God, he was partaker of the
spiritual virtue of God; he was able to know what was needful, and to will
what ever he knew agreeable to Gods will. Had God taken flesh upon him (as
indeed Christ took flesh upon him) he would have so behaved himself, and so
approved of good courses, (being made after Gods Image) as did Christ (taking
our flesh upon him) in whom there was no guile.

Q. 2. Whether may any creature be said to be created in the image of God,
beside man?

Only men and angels made after Gods image.
An. No Creatures beside Men, and Angels. It is true, that in all the frame of
the creatures, there is a stamp of the holiness and power of God left
passively; there are footsteps of Gods goodness left in the creature* but no
creature is able actively to imitate God, to have an holy will, and to walk
answerably. There is a great difference between a man's footsteps in the sand,
and his picture. If his footsteps be in the sand, we say, A man has been
there; but what his stature and proportion is, no man can tell: Draw a picture
of the same man, such parts, and such lims, this discovers what proportion he
is of; The other concludes the man was there, but does not discover his
stature. If a man should see that man's son* just of his stature, he would
then say, There is the lively picture of his father: So it is here in the
creation of the World; God leaves a foot-step of his attributes, that every man
may say, Wisdom, Goodness, and power has been here. Psalm. 19.1. The
Heavens declare the glory of God. They, as it were, speak it, and offer it to
our consideration. Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God, is in them:
that is, the footsteps of God may be observed in the creatures. But the image
of God in Adam was like a picture; not a livelesse, but a lively picture. As
the child that does like his father, does discover him somewhat: So did Adam,
God; he was able to express the virtues of God, that had created him. 1 Cor.
15.49. As we have borne the image of the Earthly: So we shall bear the image
of the Heavenly. All the sons of Adam had the image of Adam: he was stubborn,
so were they. Now as we have this image from Adam, so the saints have the image
of Christ; holy, as he his holy. Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we have received,
grace for grace. What ever grace is in Christ, he puts upon the hearts of his
children. There is never a letter on the seal, but is on the wax: So every
grace that is in Christ is imprinted upon his Saints proportionably.

The creatures have three things in them:

1. They are the effects of goodness.

2. They show them forth to the consideration of others.

3. A wise man may see the footsteps of Gods goodness in them. The creature
cannot be merciful, as God is merciful; the creature does its nature: the
fire burns, the water moistens, but no creature can express Gods goodness,
but Adam and the Angels.

Qu. What is the difference between the image, and likeness of God?

Ans. The difference is this: The one discovers the frame of the heart
inwardly. The spiritual power Adam had to work, we term the Image: The
discovery of this, or the acting accordingly, the Likeness. There is the power
of Adam, and the execution of this power; the latter is Likeness, the former,
Image: Let us make man after our etc. As who should say, Let us put a frame
into Adams heart, and then he shall walk answerably to it in all his courses.
Acts 13.22. it is said, I have found a man after mine own heart, which shall
do all my will. This is the description of a man after Gods own heart; he
does all his will. God has such an heart as David's, and if he were on earth,
would do as he did, except his infirmities. 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy as your
heavenly Father is holy, in all manner of conversation. He requires not only
an inward frame, but an outward expressure thereof. God made Adam thus; who as
he had a power in his heart, so he expressed it in his life, and wrought as
God wrought, which no creature else could.

Qu. But why did God make Adam thus?

Ans. There is no reason on man's part, but it was only Gods will. The Lord is
an understanding agent, therefore he works all things for a good end. And the
reasons why God imprinted this Image in Adam, are two:

Reasons why God made man after his image.
1. That he might fit him for spiritual and heavenly worship. God would have
one creature near to him, one of his Privy Council, that might perform
spiritual worship to him. Now unless God had created Adam in his image, he
could not have performed spiritual worship to him, as it was requisite God
should make some creature so to do. John 4.24. God is a spirit, and must be
worshipped in spirit, and in truth. None can approach to God, but in a
spiritual manner. The trees grow, and the beasts serve man; they do their
nature, and grovell on the ground, but reach not to God, because they are not
spiritual, nor have they reasonable souls. Look as it is with great Princes,
though they employ ordinary persons in ordinary affairs, as their under
officers, Cooks, and Grooms, etc. yet no man must be Secretary of State,
unless he have eminent and excellent abilities without which he cannot close
with his Prince, nor is fitted for him: So, it is true, that the God of heaven
has all things at command, and he will work sometimes wonders by them: The
heavens hear the earth, the earth hears the corn, and the corn hears
Israel: but none of these can worship God in prayer or the like, but only
Adam, who has the image of God upon him. Adam is Gods counselor; He reveals
his secrets to the righteous. An holy man can close with an holy God; they have
union one with another. No other creature can come to God, but only man. All
creatures serve man, that he may serve God. The heavens hear the earth, and
the earth hears the corn, and the corn hears man, that man may serve the
Lord. The text says, God seeing that in the frame of heaven and earth, there
was not a fit companion for man, did therefore make woman, such another as
himself, to be with man: So neither had God one for his turn, when Sun, and
Moon, and Stars, and all things else were made, therefore Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost consult to make one that might be acquainted with the businesses of
Heaven.

Again, God purposes to communicate himself and his image to one creature,
that he, serving God, might be blessed of him. God would communicate happiness
to a creature, and none could receive it unless he had the image of God. Hence
(I say) they consult together about it: I will create, says the Father, and do
you create, Son, and do you create, Spirit. The work of the Father is
discovered in creation, the work of the Son in redemption, the work of the
Spirit in sanctification; all concur to make him partaker of happiness. This
is the cause why no other creature is capable of happiness but Men and Angels,
because they only have the image of God.

Reas. 2. Because God would have one creature above the rest, that should take
notice of his attributes discovered in his works. God would have the glory of
his attributes, that are manifested in his works. He creates a world; in that
world he expresses the works of wisdom, power, and holiness. When first the
heavens were bespangled with stars, the earth replenished with fruits, the sea
with fishes, no creature could see Gods worke-manship, and honor him for it;
therefore God makes man in his own image, makes him able by wisdom to
conceive his works, and gives him wisdom to return him honor from all. It
is requisite, there should be some spectators. The goodness of God is in the
heavens, they, at it were, speak the providence of God: now we see these
things, and cannot but admire them. Psalm. 103. ult. The Psalmist speaking
there concerning the wonders of God in the heavens, mark what he adds, Bless
the Lord all ye all his works. As who should say, All ye sons of men come
hither, see, and wonder at the power and goodness of God in these things, and
bless his name for them. Prove. 3.6. Acknowledge the Lord in all thy ways. The
creature cannot acknowledge God, because it wants the image of God; but man,
that has a spiritual ability to know God, cannot but acknowledge him in all
his ways. Men that have any curious workmanship which they would have seen,
build up a stage for the better view of it. Why should they set it forth, if
there were no man to come, and observe it? Just so God does; he makes the whole
frame of the world, and in that expresses his power and goodness. To what
purpose should all these be made, if there were no man to see them, and wonder
at them? Exodus 14.4. When God would raise his honor out of Pharaoh, he sets
him upon a stage. He might have been slain amongst the first borne, but he
brings him into the midst of the Sea, and there slew him. This passed not
without observation, insomuch that the Heathens could say, These are the Gods
that slew Pharaoh, etc. What should books do, if there were no scholars? The
world is the book of Gods goodness; wherefore should this be, if there were
no man to study it?

Use 1. The first use is of instruction, Duty to God in this respect.
to teach us what our duty should be to God, since his kindness is such to us.
Adam was a common root, therefore what Adam had, thou have in him. Hence then
take notice of the extraordinary duty we owe unto God. Has God done more for
us then for other creatures? then let us do more for him. All the world joined
together have not received so much as man. As the excellency of man is above
all, so his care should be to return more to God, bestow the best affections,
the utmost labor for the promoting of the praise of God. What a shame is it
for a Prince to turn a Peasant? for Adam, the best, to become the worst? If
the dog return to the vomit, and the sow to the wallowing in the mire, if the
horse and mule have no understanding, it is their nature: but Adam has not the
image of an irrational creature but the image of God; yea, of that God, that
takes it in great indignation, that all should serve us, and we will not serve
him. The Lord lights his candle for man to labor by, he draws his curtain
for man to rest by, the creatures lift us up to God, and say, Serve him more
then all. Isaiah 1.2. The Lord makes his moan to the creatures, Shall all
creatures obey God, better then man, when man was made better by creation then
them? When thou find thy heart sluggish, quicken thy self thus; Ask the
fowls of the air, and they will tell thee, thou receivedst all from God;
return all unto him again. When thou see the heavens turn in their
compass, condemn thy soul, that thou art so dead hearted in duty. The Sun
rejoices like a Giant to run his course, because God commands it; the sea
ebbes, and flows, because God will have it so. Nay, the creatures will do
against their nature for God. 1. King. 13.5. Oh Altar, hear the word of the
Lord, and the Altar breaks in pieces; the poor stones rend in sunder at the
commandment of God, and yet after so many threatenings we stoup not: let us see
it, and be ashamed.

Ob. But we cannot obey God.

Ans. Yet see thy bond, though thou can not pay it: see thy debt, and be
humbled, though thou it not able to satisfy for it.

Use. 2. The second use is, It is not for one made after Gods image to dote on
the creatures.
Learn from hence not to be servants to those that God has made servants to
you. We should not be doting daily upon these empty shadows, because they are
unworthy the nature of man. Shall the Lord make us better then the best of all
creatures, and shall we abase our selves below the meanest condition of the
lowest creature? Think of this, that we may consider whence we are fallen, as
God speaks to that Church in Rev. 2. The drunkard is a slave to his cups, the
covetous man is a drudge to the dirt of this world, the ambitious man's being,
is the favor of men: Nay more, man is become not only a slave to the
creatures, but a vassal to his own lusts: Let us be ashamed of this. The
Apostle 1 Cor. 3.21. when diverse had disputed of the excellency of Paul and
Apollo, says, He all is yours, therefore glory not in your servants: The
argument falls more strongly here, Bestow not your selves on these empty things;
they are your servants, be not vassals to them. Men bear themselves according
to their birth; the King scorns to stoup to a Peasant, and a man of Nobility
scorns to stoup to a dunghill churl. Oh that we were thus wise for our
souls; bear up your selves according to your birth, and think thus with your
selves, When profits and pleasures crave your services, a man should conceive,
in an holy ambition, that his heart were too good to trust to lying vanities:
Man is of a better birth; and should answer them as Christ did the Pharisees
coming to tempt him, Matthew. 22.21. who, when they asked if it were lawful to
give tribute to Caesar, requires a penny, and asks them, Whose image, and
superscription has it? They answering, Caesar's; says, Give unto Caesar, that
which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods: so ask this question, Whose
superscription does this nature bear? Gods; then give to God the things that
are Gods. Let vanity be bestowed upon the world, but thy soul has Gods image;
give it him. If a creature be strayed, or stolen, though it be disfigured, yet
when it is found, we return it again to the owner: so thy Mind, Will and
Affections are straying from God, Satan has stolen them from the family of
the Almighty. Though thy soul be disfigured, yet it is Gods; return it home to
him. 1 Pet. 2.25. we are as sheep going astray, and fall now and then into a
ditch: but now let us return unto the Archbishop of our souls.

. 2.
NOw we come to the particular unfolding of this image: and the point is this;

Doct. The image of God was imprinted in the whole man. God says not, Gods
image in the whole soul.
Let us make a body, or a soul, but man in our image. It was not with Adam as
with children, in regard of their natural parents; If the child be but eyed
like his father, we say, He has a brow like his father, and nothing else. It
was not thus with Adam; but as it is with the picture of a man, if it be
drawn to the full proportion, there is a resemblance in every part, so it was
with him; there was never a part of his body or soul, but there was in them a
proportion of those virtues, which are in God infinitely, Genesis 2. ult. They saw
themselves naked, and were not ashamed; the meaning is, The eye of their
consciences saw nothing within to ashame them, the eye of their bodies saw
nothing without that was shameful: but when they had sinned, not only the eye
of their consciences was open to accuse them for sin, but the eye of their
bodies ashamed to behold that stained which before was void of blemish.

Qu. What reasons may be alleged to prove this?

Answ. The reasons are three:

1. Look where sin takes place after the nature of man defiled, there was the
image of God before; now sin reigns in the whole man. Sin and the image of
God are both of a breadth. The privation of a thing can be no where, but where
the thing was; blindness is no where, but where sight was, or might have
been; death is no where, but where life was, or might have been: so sin could
be no where, but where the image of God was, or might have been. Sin is like
leaven, that leaveneth the whole lump: there is no whole part in man from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, therefore the image of God was in
the whole man. Matthew. 15.1^. Out of the heart come evil thoughts: There is the
throne of sin: but Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies.
Thus is the kingdom of sin described: for that a man is as it is, full of all
unrighteousness, Romans 1. The heart is full of malice, and the hand is full of
blood; the heart is adulterous, and the eye wanton; the members, the members of
an Harlot (as the Apostle speaks:) for if profaneness be once in the heart,
the hand is full of mischief. If then the whole man be deprived of Gods image
by sin, then the whole man had the image of God before sin.

Reas. 2. The image of God was restored to the whole man by Christ. What Christ
restores, that Adam had. Christ renewes what was before made: now Christ
restores the whole man by sanctification; which is clear by Scripture. For it
is called to this purpose the new man; not a new eye, or a new hand, but the
new man. Those are two pregnant places, 1 These. 5.23. The God of peace
sanctify you throughout, and I pray that your whole spirit and soul and body
may be blameless unto the coming of Christ. and 2 Cor. 5.17. He that is in
Christ is a new creature. He is not a monster, but a creature. This new
creature has all the parts of a creature: New thoughts, new endeavors; the eye
sees chastely* the tongue talks holily; all things are new both in body and
soul. If then the whole man had the image of God repaired, then the whole man
had the image of God created.

Reas. 3. Because the whole nature of man was bound to the Law to obey it,
therefore it must be fitted by the image of God to obey it. That all parts are
under the law, it is clear: the Scripture provides a precept for every part:
The eye must not lust, The hand must labor, Let him that stole steal no more,
but work with his hands, Ephesians. 4.28. The Law has a charge likewise for the
tongue, Let your words be gracious, Col. 3. Thus the Law reaches to the
outside; and for the inside* it is clear, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy soul, with all thy strength, etc. Unless the whole man had had
the image of God, it could not have obeyed the Law: Otherwise, the damned in
hell, or the wicked could obey Gods Law; the soul is the same in substance, so
that if the soul as it is a soul, could obey the Law, the damned in hell
might. It was not Adams soul, but the image of God, that enabled him to
obedience, therefore he must have this image, before either his body, or soul
could obey. A man speaks Latin, not because he is a man, but because he is a
scholar: a man builds an house cunningly, not because he is a man (for then
every man might do it) but by man might do it, but by virtue of the cunning
of a Carpenter: it is not the soul in regard of the essence of it, it is not
the body in regard of the being thereof, that inables a man to keep the Law.
The Devils in hell have an Understanding, and Will, but they cannot love God:
The essence of the soul will not do it, but the frame that God puts into it.

Use. The use in General is this:

A trial of true sanctification.
Thou may hereby perceive whether thou were ever sanctified: for if so, thou
have the image of God in thee, and if it be in thee, it is imprinted upon thy
whole man; so Adam had it, so Christ renewes it. 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy in all
manner of conversation. It is not enough to have an outside, this is no
argument of true grace; but if ever thou be sanctified, all is made new. He
that is in Christ is a new creature. It is a monstrous thing to have the eye of
a Saint, and the heart of a Devil; to have the hands of Esau, and the voice of
Jacob; to howl and cry for sin, and yet to retain our old corruptions. This
is not to be renewed, but to be patched up, a piece holy, and a piece unholy.
Away with these appearances; if ever you be sanctified, the whole man must be
changed. When ever a man comes to meddle with a gracious man, he shall find him
of another mould. It befalls wicked men as it did NebuchadneZZars image; the
head was gold, but the feet dirt: so men have an outward profession, an head of
gold, but follow them home, and there you shall find their feet dirt. Cozening,
and cheating prevails over them. It is with carnal men often, as with
NebuchadneZZar, Dan. 5. who had the shape of a man, but the heart of a beast,
that is, beastly affections: so men have the visage of Christians, but yet such
unclean and proud hearts, that scarce Beelzebub himself has worse. God does
perfect bis work: a good man has the heart of a Saint, and tongue of a Saint.

. 3.
NOw for the further explication of the point, we must press into
Particulars, that so we may see the image of God instamped on every part of
man. To this purpose these questions are to be scanned.

Quest. Where is the image of God in the Soul?

Ans. For answer, observe, by way of preface:

What a soul is.

God imprinted his image in the soul of Adam, in his Understanding, Will, and
Affections. Now concerning what the soul is, The soul is an immortal
creature, and we discover it by its acts; as in man, by conceiving, choosing
and refusing a thing.

Of gods image in the Understanding.
For the Understanding; God imprinted in it Knowledge and Wisdom suitable to
the place in which he had set it.

Quest. What is this wisdom?

Ans. The spiritual light, whereby the Understanding of Adam was able to
pierce into the nature of things, and perceive them with that perfection as did
fit him for the attaining of his end, and performing service to God.

There are three things in this description:

1. It is a spiritual light. It is with the Understanding as with the air; it
is capable of darkness in the night, as well as light in the day: So the
faculty of Adams understanding was capable of blindness and ignorance that
might delude him, as well as of spiritual light that might guide him. A man's
eye may have blindness in it as well as sight: so the understanding is capable
of ignorance, and spiritual wisdom too that might reveal that to us that
should be done by us. Col 3.10. Put ye on the new man, that is renewed in
knowledge. And Ephesians. 1.18. He prays that the eyes of their understanding might
be enlightened. The eye cannot see unless there be a faculty of seeing put
into it; which Adam had in his innocence,

2. Whereby the understanding of Adam was able to pierce into the natures of
things; which piercing discovers it self two ways.

1 The Understanding of Adam was able to close with every truth that was to be
apprehended, if he would diligently bestow his mind, and thoughts thereupon. If
a man will turn away his eye he cannot see: so if Adam would turn away
himself, and not bestow his thoughts upon an object, he might be deceived, as
he was by the Serpent; Not attending was the cause of his cozening. He had
such a spiritual light that whatsoever was offered unto him, he, improving his
wisdom, was able to discern the nature of the truth, and the reason thereof:
for both these are distinct. When Rebeccah was with child, she says, Why am I
thus? She knew that she was with child, but knew not the reason of it: but Adam
could apprehend upon every occasion he met withal, both the truth; and the
ground of it. Genesis 2.19. God gave the creatures to Adam to name, and as he
named them, so their names were. He apprehended every creatures disposition,
and accordingly gave them names.

2. The Understanding of Adam by this spiritual wisdom, was of that large
strength, that he was able to understand all occasions to help him in his
work: His reason did carry him clearly and speedily to do his work. This we
call practical wisdom. It was not enough for himself to see the truth, and
the reason of it, but he could carry himself answerably to it. I say, this
practical wisdom made him easily do his work. As in carpentry, a man may
stand by, and say, This must be done: but to be nimble in doing the work, must
be the skill of the Carpenter. Adam he could both see how to order his
business, and to do his work according to that order. He was able to look
into the creature, and imitate it. Col. 1.9. the Apostle prays, that they may
be filled with all knowledge and wisdom. The words are better translated,
prudence and wisdom. To see truths, and the reasons of them, that is
wisdom; to be cunning in practice, that is prudence. Ephesians. 1.8. God has
abounded to us in Wisdom and Prudence. The opposite to wisdom is folly, the
opposite to prudence is blockishness in a man's whole course. Now Adam, who had
both these, Wisdom and Prudence, was able to take up any trade in the World.

Qu. In what manner had Adam this?

Ans. It was in Adam in perfection. This you must consider two ways:

1 Either such as concerned the attaining of his end: or

2 Such as concerned the performing of his service that he owed unto God. Adam
had both these very perfect. True* Adam had not the actual knowledge of all
things. Our Savior himself had a knowledge by experience; for the Text says,
He learned by his sufferings: so Adam had not the knowledge of all things, but
he had an habitual perfection, that he could conceive any thing, that might
fit him to obedience. A man's eye does not actually see all colors, but it is
able to see all colors, if they were offered: so though Adam did not actually
comprehend all things, yet whatsoever occasion he met withal, he was able
clearly to pass judgment thereon. He was able to conceive of any thing, that
might further him in pleasing God.

Qu. Wherein does this perfection of Adams understanding consist?

Answ. In three particulars.

1 In the universality of it. Adams perfection of understanding, wherein.
He was able to understand all things, that were presented to his
understanding, and liable to the power of reason, what ever might either be
necessary to direct himself, or order the creature. We must not think he was
able to conceive the secret mysteries of Gods counsel, or to dive into the
secret thoughts of any other man, or else to foretell things to come; this
only belongs to God. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong to God, 1 King. 8.39.
For thou alone know the mind of all the sons of men. Isai. 44.7. When God
did contest with the Idolaters, he says, Let them foretell things to come; to
which we must not extend Adams knowledge. What ever might help in ruling
himself, and governing the creature, he had; yet we must not extend the
knowledge of Adam to Gods secrets. Adam was like the governor in a Camp, who
has not only skill to govern himself, but to order all occasions, and
removings of the Camp: Adam was the General of Gods Camp, the birds of the
heaven, and the beasts of the field, were all under his dominion, he had
knowledge to order them all to the ends to which they were appointed for. We
that have lost this image, understand almost nothing: How often are we at a
stand in common things? Esa. 59.10. We grope at noone day, as if we had no
eyes. Among the Saints, which have received some of this knowledge, that which
they know is the least part of that they know not; so that the accusation of
Job is against us, Job 26.14. What a little part do we know of God? But Adam
met with no difficulty, but he was able to search into the depth of it: there
was no means useful for him, but he was able to order and dispose them for
his good.

2. The perfection of Adams knowledge consists in the certainty of it: He knew
things according to truth, not erring, or mis-judging; he did not only
perceive the truth of things, but he judged according to righteous judgment.
How often are we cozened with the affairs of this world, and the devices of
Satan? The eyes of our understandings are like the man's in the Gospel, who saw
men like trees; but it was not so with Adam, there was no web in his eye, no
filme upon his understanding, but he was furnished with the perfection of
knowledge.

Ob. But if Adam was able to discover deceits, how came he to be deluded by the
Serpent?

Ans. The cause of his error was not because he could not discern, but
because he did not bestow his mind upon it, and improve his wisdom: he had
wisdom to discover Satan's sleights, had he kept his mind and thoughts to a
consideration thereof. Let a man's eye be never so clear, yet if he consider
not of the object, it may be hard by him, and he perceive it not: a friend
stands by, and we know him not, because we look not settledly upon him: so
though Adam was able to discern the deceits of Satan, yet his not attending
made the devil put a cheat upon him.

3. The perfection of Adams understanding consisted in this, that he could
understand all things clearly, without doubting. This is a weakness that we
find. Many things we do not know; many things that we know, we mistake; and
those things we mistake not, we see at peradventures. Look, what is the
difference between the light of the sun and starre-light: (In starre-light,
if a thing be subtle, or small, we doubt of it, but when the sun comes, we
can perceive every thing undeniably:) such was the knowledge of Adam, whereby,
as by the light of the sun, he could discern without staggering the things
that were offered to his view. but a natural man walks in darkness, or at
most but by the starre-light of reason. The best Saint has but twilight: we
know in part, and understand in part.

Use. The use is double:

1. Of instruction. Ignorantia non excusat a toto, sed a tanto.
From hence we learn that ignorance will acquit no man's person. God made Adam
perfect in knowledge, therefore the scales of ignorance will not acquit thee.
We that have received so much from God, it is requisite we should repay
something to God again. Must men think they must be pardoned, because of their
ignorance? Alas! say some, Scholars should know, but as for us, who have had
no education, I hope God will not require wisdom at our hands. No? Why? will
not God look for his own at every man's hands? Nay, unless thou will have God
wrong his justice, God does expect, that thou that have received a weighty
talent from him, should return it to him again improved. Be it known to you
therefore, that God will knock at every man's door, and say, Where is that
knowledge that I gave thee? Therefore our ignorance cannot excuse us, it will
condemn us rather. That it is thus, consider

1. Ignorance makes men strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. How comes it
to be so? Through ignorance. An ignorant heart is a stranger to life and
happiness: when all the mercies of God, and his holiness, are propounded, it
never prevails with an ignorant heart.

2. Consider, what undoubted plagues it brings with it, Hos. 4.14. The people
that understand not, shall not only stumble, but fall, that is, perish
totally: Jer. 10.25. Lord correct me not in thine anger: Whom shall I correct
then, says God? Oh pour down thy wrath upon the people that know thee not:
those are people prepared for ruin. All you ignorant creatures, think of this
which the Prophet speaks: God gave us knowledge, ignorance therefore cannot
excuse us, but accuse us rather.

Use 2. The second use is of exhortation: Labor to recover thy lost wisdom.
we ought to be moved to recover our losses. The former truth should provoke
us to get to that high pitch of understanding, which is so excellent. This the
wise man presses effectually, Pro 2.2. Incline thine ear to wisdom: if she
will not come, then cry mightily after her: if she will not hear thee, then
seek for her as for hid treasure. The excellency of wisdom should be argument
enough to force every man to an earnest eager pursuit after her. How does the
covetous man toil to get his wealth about him, because it is excellent;
because wisdom is much more excellent, let us labor more to get it. Let
never a covetous man outbid us, let never a merchant outgoe us in seeking of
the riches of India, when wisdom is better then the gold of Ophir. Pro. 4.
Above all thy gettings get understanding; as if he should say, You will be
getting, but when you find your selves quickened in the pursuit of these
things, remember this of the wise man; Above all pains, let me labor to get
wisdom. Every man labors to imitate that in another, which most excels: If it
be but a fashion, if the best have it, every one labors to imitate it; here
is the excellentest piece of all, by wisdom we come to be like God. What
would thou excel in? such a man (may be) would be something more then
ordinary: Would thou excel in wealth? the golden mines have more then thou
can have: would thou have strength? the oaks of Basan have more than thou
can attain to: would thou have pleasure? the beasts have more then thou
can enjoy: but would thou excel in all other things? get spiritual
knowledge, and thou shall be above all, and like to him that is excellency it
self. Dan. 5. when Belshazzar had had experience of Daniels wisdom, mark
what a price he sets upon him; The wisdom of the Gods is in thee: as if he
should say, Thou art a God-like man. What greater argument can be alleged to
get wisdom, then this, It makes us like God? And as it is most honorable, so
it is mavelous useful. Eccles. 2.14. The wise man's eyes are in his head. The
excellency of wisdom is, that it makes a man's course easy: The poor blind
man observes no inconveniences that might overwhelme him; but he that has his
eyes in his head, can foresee them: so wisdom is able to descry
inconveniences, and help us against them. Let therefore our own profit be a
means to provoke our hearts to get understanding.

. 4.
Quest. WHat was the image of God in the will?

Ans. How ever we see not our soul, Of Gods image in the will.
yet there is a spiritual substance in every man, which is immortal, and has
two faculties* Understanding and Will. Now the faculty of the Will, is like the
hand, that puts away, or takes any thing. The will is like an unruly horse,
that casts his rider; I will do what I will, though reason cross it. This
will, whereof we now speak, was graciously regulated, when it came out of the
hands of God. Now for the Answer. Holiness and righteousness were imprinted
in the will of Adam, Ephesians. 4.24. The Apostle to the Colossians made knowledge a
part of the spiritual image of Adam, and now he adds holiness and
righteousness, which were seated in the will, Luke 1.75. Christ has redeemed
us, that we might walk before him in holiness and righteousness all our
days.

In the answer are 2. things: 1. That holiness, and 2. That righteousness were
there.


Of these in order.

Quest. What is holiness?

An. A spiritual power, Holiness, what.
or frame put into the nature of Adam, inabling him to do Gods will, and
fitting him to love God above all.

Three things are in this description.

1. It is a spiritual power. It is not the very nature of the faculty of the
will, but a frame put into the will, that sets it on, and carries it out to
God: for the will of it self is not able to close with God, but only so far
as it is carried out to him. As it is in the body, the tongue is the instrument
of tasting; of it self it cannot taste, but there is a moisture there that
makes it taste; hence if it be evilly affected, it tastes evil; sweet things
seem sour, and sour things seem sweet: or as it is with the hand; it cannot
work about any thing barely as it is an hand, unless it receive strength and
motion from the vital faculty: for a dead hand, or a benumbed hand, can
exercise it self about nothing: so it is with the will; that power of it self
cannot relish the things of life and happiness, but it must be an holy will
that can close with an holy God: it is not barely the will, but there must be
an wholesome constitution put into it, and then it can close with an heavenly
God, having this heavenly frame. Hence it is death to the wicked to be under
the ordinances of God. The devils have a natural faculty of will, but
corruption possesses it, and therefore they abhor the holiness of God,
because they themselves are unholy: but Adams will had a spiritual frame of
holiness put into it, whereby it was able perfectly to please God.

2. There was a readiness and promptness put into his will, whereby he was
able easily to bestow himself upon, and comfortably to be carried unto the
doing of the will of God. When the wheels of a clock are rightly ordered, they
go on speedily; Adam was the clock of God, and the maine wheel was the will:
when the rust of sturdinesse hangs on the will, the motion to Godwards is
hindered; but had our wills this oil of holiness, they would run on
chearily in the service of God. Men slight the means of grace, and cannot close
with the ordinances of God, because their wills are unholy. As it is with sin,
Romans 7.23. it leads a man captive to the commission of evil, it puts a
promptness into the heart to incline it to evil: so holiness puts a
quickness into the will, which carries it on joyfully to perform the will of
God, 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man will purge himself, he shall be a vessel of honor
fit for the Masters use, and prepared for every good work. While a man's heart
is like an unclean vessel, he is not prepared for any good work, but when his
heart is purged, he is fit for every good work, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Thou servedst not
the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse and gladness of heart. God will be served,
but with what heart? with a joyful and a merry heart: This gladness comes
from the holiness that was in Adam.

3. He was by this able to love God above all; and this was the performance of
the first Table: and this above all implies three things. To love God above
all, has three things.


1. He did prize God more then what ever God could do for him; nay, more then
salvation it self, Psalm. 73.26. When he was dazeled with the prosperity of the
wicked, mark what he says, The Lord is my strength and my portion for ever; as
if he should say, I esteem of God above all. A man makes an high account of
his patrimony, so does David esteem of God. Psa. 73.26
If a man love father, or mother more then me, Mat. 10.37.
he is not worthy of me: nay, a man must love God-better then his life, Psalm.
63.3. Thy loving kindness is better then life, then the life of my wife, then
the life of my child, nay it it is better then mine own life.

2. He made choice of God above all. As a man prizeth a thing, so he will make
choice of it: When we come into a shop, look what commodity we prize, we will
take; so was Adams choice of God. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee?
The renewed soul counts all things dung and dross, in comparison of Christ.
Adam had by virtue of this frame, that power, that if all the world were
offered him, yet he would choose God above all.

3. He was able to have his heart carried with great intention of soul, to
bestow his mind upon the Lord. When Adam did choose God above all, then he had
power to have his heart carried with greatest extent of strength to him; for
thus it is commanded, by our Savior to the Lawyer in the Gospel, Matthew. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy might, and with all thy
strength: so was Adam carried with the utmost of his strength to close with
God. If God should have threatened, Adam would have trembled; if he should have
revealed his goodness, Adam would have been enlarged in love thereof; if he
should have revealed his name, Adam would have honored it. This frame of his
will made him carry himself proportionably to Gods will to the utmost of his
strength. A man must love his neighbor with his whole heart, not with some of
it, yet not with his whole strength: A man may love his neighbor too much; but
when he comes to the love of God, he must love him as much as he can. Adam
ought to have loved his neighbor with his whole heart, yet it was not required
of Adam to love his neighbor as his wife; but for his God, he was to bestow
his whole strength upon him.

Quest. Why did God imprint this upon Adam?

An. First, Holiness why imprinted on Adam.
because Adam without this measure of holiness could not return that tribute
of holiness he owed as a reasonable creature, and which God expected as a
Creator. There is a payment which God expects at the hands of a creature,
namely, praise: for as Landlords let out their lands for rents which they
expect at their tenants hands; so does God require thanksgiving from Adam,
which, unless he had holiness, he could not have given. Deuteronomy. 10.12. When he
had discovered the largeness of Gods love, mark what he gathers, And now, oh
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require, but to love him with thy whole
heart? as if he should say, This I look for, that for all my kindness, thou
fear me, and love me with thy whole heart; which to do is a Christians
Masterpiece. Had God made Adam so, that he could not have loved him, he could
not have received honor from him, and so had been accessory to the dishonor
of his own name.

2. Adam by this means attained his own good. Heavy things never leave
moving, till they come to the earth; so Adam was restless, before he came to
enjoy union with God* This was Adams, and is our happiness, to enjoy God;
which is the only good of a man's soul. Isa. 26.8 The desire of our soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. The up-shot of the desires of Gods
servants is toward his name: when the body is in the grave, and the soul in
heaven, the soul would feign be united to the body, that both may be united to
God, and be possessed of him, and then all desires cease.

3. Because if Adam had not had this holiness, God had required more of him,
then he had ability to perform; which had been a want of equity, which is
utterly unbeseeming the sweet nature of God. To require a thing absolutely
impossible, is against equity: had not Adam had power to love God, God
requiring love from him, had required that of him, which he had not been able
to perform. It stood with equity, and Gods righteous will, to give Adam power
to love him above all; yea it was a debt God owed to him, seeing he would
require obedience from him. When Adam had not offended, it was requisite God
should give him ability to discharge his service.

Use. The use hence is,

No shame to be holy.
1. For instruction, to teach us, that it is no shame to be holy; holiness is
no man's dishonor. It is the greatest praise that can befall a man, to be holy:
to be like God is no dishonor, and by holiness we come to be most like unto
him. It is one of Gods names, The holy One of Israel, Isa 43.14. Nay the
Angels, Isa. 6.3. do not say, Powerful, powerful, but Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of hosts: the Lord is said there to be the God of hosts, but he is three
times holy, for his one time powerful; not that holiness is more in God, then
power, but to show how God rejoiceth in this name Holy. Who art thou then that
art loath to have the name of holiness? Yes, you are one of the holy crew,
will they say. Art thou an enemy to holiness? then thou art an ungodly man.
The venom of such men's spirits as hate holiness, is incomparable: there is no
greater argument of a graceless disposition.

Use 2. It is a word of terror. It is clear, that the sin of those men, who
oppose holiness, or keep others from it, is marvelous heinous. We will pursue
both.

A great sin to oppose holiness.
1. It falls heavy upon those, who make holiness the mark of their malice.
There is no person so vile, no practice so abominable, but they will approve
of: they will hug drunkards in their bosoms, and harbor adulterers in their
houses, but if holiness appear in any man's practice, they are transported
with fury against it. Their blood rises in their faces, rancour in their
hearts, and venom in their tongues, that they say as was said of S. Paul, Away
with such a fellow from the earth; We cannot live in quiet for these holy men.
Oh thou that do thus, hate the very image of God, and flyest in the face
of the Almighty, and would if thou could as well rend God from his
throne, as these holy men from the face of the earth; there is no surer
evidence then this, that God intends no good to thy soul. Salvation comes by
holy means: God the Father is an holy God, that loves his people; Christ is
holy, that redeemes his people; the Spirit is called the holy Ghost; heaven is
an holy place, it is called the heavenly Jerusalem; the way to heaven likewise
is holy, Isa. 35.8. nay, all those that do walk in that way are holy, Isa.
63.18. the people of holiness possess it. The scripture says, the Saints of
God are Priests, and the Priest ware upon his breast plate, Holiness to the
Lord. Do thou that hate holiness think to go to heaven? then there must
be another heaven, for this is holy. Hear, and fear thou whose conscience
does convince thee, that thou have been carried with indignation against holy
men: see the heinousness of thy sin; the place is holy, the Spirit holy,
etc. If thou go to heaven, God will come out of heaven, for he will not
dwell with unholinesse, Jude 4. God has ordained from all eternity, that
unholy and ungodly men shall never come to heaven, but shall be in an unholy
place, among unholy Devils. Know thy sin to be heinous, and thy judgment
heavy.

2. It reproves those, A great sin to keep others from holiness.
that would keep others from holiness. Men count it a great wisdom in
directing their families, if they can keep them from looking after this
holiness. This is the counsel they give them, Do what you please, only be
not a precise fellow; be any thing but a Saint. It is all their cunning, to
daunt the hearts of others from seeking after holiness; hence we hear so
many fears suggested to men that labor to walk as they ought. Nay, says the
Master, if you must needs to the godly crew, I will break the crew of you,
etc. But do but consider what you do.

1. You cross the command of God, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy, as I am holy: what
heart have thou then that command the contrary?

2. As you cross Gods command, so you damn the souls of those that God has
committed unto your charge: thou that keep their souls from holiness,
keep them from happiness. Oh it will one day be a wound to thy conscience,
to think with thy self, My child would have followed holiness, but I would
not suffer him: therefore is he gone into the bottomless pit, and I was the
cause of it.

Try whether thou be holy or no.
Use 3. Does holiness fit a man to love God above all? and would thou know
whether thou have an holy heart? Try it from the former truth, Where ever
holiness is, it fits the heart to love God above all. Can thou do this,
which holiness enables a man to do? then if there be holiness in heaven, it
is also in thine heart. I do not mean, that any man should have the
exactness that Adam had in creation; but what he had in perfection, we must
have in desire. Thou must have an heart enlarged to love God above all, though
thou have many weaknesses with it. Many for want of this are cast out, as not
being partakers of this saving work: Namely

Those that never had any readiness to this saving work of God, further then
shame or disgrace provokes them; for most that live upon the face of the earth,
must have some constraining power to force them to the performance of Gods
service; they say as those in Malachi, What a weariness is it? Mal. 1.13. The
word of God, and his ordinances are a burden; the sabbaths are tedious; men
come to Gods worship as a Bear to a stake, or a captive to prison: how willing
are they to be freed from these duties; whereas holiness ever brings
willingness with it!

Ob. But do not the Saints find a great deal of awkwardnesse?

Ans I confess it is true: but there is a great deal of difference between
these and the other: The Saints willingly oppose their corruptions that clog
them; but a carnal heart joins sides with the flesh; he desires means and
occasions to withdraw him from the love of God; he is glad to find a pretense
to travel on the Lords day, or to neglect prayer in his private family: But
the Saints are weary of their untowardnesse and awkwardnesse to holy duties.
Matthew. 26.41. the Disciples were overcharged with weariness, and fell asleep;
Christ adds the reason, The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Romans 7.
The law is holy and the commandment holy, but sin took occasion by the
commandment, etc. It is not I, but sin that dwells in me: as if he should
say, It is good to please God, and I will labor after it; but I confess I
have a wilful wretched heart within me, which opposes this: yet there is a
spark of holiness in this heart, and with that I love thee, though my flesh
oppose thee.

. 5.
Quest. WHat is righteousness?

Righteousness, what it is.
Answ. The second part of the spiritual image put into Adam, whereby he could
love himself as he ought, and his neighbor as himself.

In the description there are three things.

1. It is the second part of Gods image in the will. Holiness fitted Adam to
go to God, yet, of it self, it could not fit him to love his brother,
therefore he must have another frame, that is, of righteousness.

Again, it is beyond the power of the soul to perform spiritual love to his
brother; therefore it must have this part of Gods image in it: 1 John 4.7. Love
is of God: to love another holily, is beyond the power and faculty of nature.
Indeed, a man may love another carnally, as adulterers; and naturally, as
creatures; but to love another spiritually, he must have power from God. There
is a double cunning of the hand (as David uses the word) a cunning to play on
an instrument, Psa. 137.
and a cunning to write; now the cunning of the one will not make a man
skillful in the other: so there is a double cunning put into the heart of Adam;
the first Of holiness, whereby he could love God above all: the second, Of
righteousness, whereby he could love himself as he ought, and his neighbor
as himself.

2. The second part of the description was, By this he was fitted to love
himself as he ought. The ground of all lawful love comes from self-love, if
it be pure. There is a self-love required; nay, if it be right, it is the
standard of all love to another: He that loves himself as he should, will be
disposed to love another. Love looks first at that which is most good to me;
as to my honor (which is a greater good to me) before the honor of another
man. It is true, what was said of David, 2 Samuel 21.
Thou art better then ten thousand of us, that was in regard of his place and
office: but take a man as a particular person, and my good is better to me then
another man's.

Quest. How should a man love himself?

Ans. This love is bounded by three things: Self-love how to be bounded.
by a right Order, Measure, Manner.


1. A man must love himself in a right order, and that you must understand in
three rules.

Rule 1. He must love himself in the second place, God in the first, Pro. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with the first fruits of thy increase. Mat. 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of heaven, all else must be served after God. In the
old law it was required, that God should have the first fruits of a man's
vintage. We must bestow the chiefest of our love and delight on God: we must
love Gods honor in the first place, our own in the second, Mat. 22.38. This
is the first and greatest commandment, To love God with all our heart: The
second is like unto this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

2. He must love himself with a subordinate degree of love: but in the love of
God he must put forth the utmost of his strength. In the old law, he that
brought a sacrifice, was to bring a male, Mal. 1. ult. Cursed be the man that
has a male in his flock, and offers a female to the Lord, The male is the
stronger, the female the weaker. All our prayers and services unto God, must
be male; but female love and desire will serve our selves. God required in the
old law, that the sacrifices should not be shorn: our sacrifices are our duties
to God, (they are the males we must offer) we may not sheare our joy and
delight, but let them go with their fleeces on, that is, in their full strength
to God; but when we come to our selves, we may sheare our love.

3. A man is to love himself in God, and for God. Adam was to love Gods image
in himself, as a step to conveigh him more speedily to the love of God. What
would thou love in thy self? thine honor? Get thee to a wise and glorious
God, and love his glory more. Do thou love thy life? Oh love the life of God,
who is a living God, Romans 9.3. I could wish to be Anathema for my brethren,
etc. Seeing that the Jews would fall to the dishonor of God, he did so prize
the honor of God, that he could wish himself to be accursed, that they might
stand. This was the cause he loved the glory of God above all.

Adam had power to love himself in a right measure. This I refer to all
those things, which concern Adam in comparison with his fellow brethren.

In this right measure two rules are to be attended.

1. Adam was to love all things belonging to himself, with a love
proportionable to them: He was to proportion his love suitable to the nature of
the things. As one exceeded another in goodness, so he was to exceed in love
toward them. Those things that were of the choicest nature, on them he was to
bestow the choicest affections; as for example, Adam was to love his life,
honor, and good name, according to their nature: A man must love his life
above his wealth, and the good of his soul above his life. As in a pair of
scales the heavier the weight is in the one, the more weight we put into the
other, if we would have them even: so, answerable to the love that was in any
thing, Adam was to weigh out an agreeable proportion of love. The happiness of
the soul is everlasting, therefore he was to bestow unchangeable love upon it:
but wealth and riches are mutable, therefore mutable affections will serve them;
we must so love them, as to be content to leave them. Thy wife is dearer then
thy kinsman, weigh out the affections of matrimony to thy wife, of friendship
to thy kinsman. The credit of the world is good, but it is but a small good;
weigh out but a little measure of love to it. The woman sick of a bloody issue
spent all she had to save her life; and shall not a man spend his life to save
his soul.

Rule 2. We ought to love our own personal good, more then the good of
another. All true love begins at home: I must love mine own honor, more then
the honor of another.

For the right understanding of this Rule, take notice of two cautions.

Caut. 1. I must always compare my good with the good of another in the same
kind: I must compare my life and his life, my soul and his soul: My own
soul is dearer to me then another. But if you take them not in the like
quality, the rule binds not. I must love the soul of my brother more then
mine own life. If a man might undoubtedly set forward the salvation of his
brother by laying down his life, he must be content to dye: so likewise I must
love the life of my brother better then mine own riches. But compare them in
the same kind, and the rule holds.

Caut. 2. There must be no overpowring circumstance to oversway me, if the
public good may be promoted, or God may be honored more by him then by me,
in regard of his parts and place: 1 John 3.16. We ought to lay down our lives
for our brethren. When God may receive more honor from another man then from
me, I must lay down my life to save his. It was requisite a private Christian,
should die rather then Paul the Apostle, because he was chief; if therefore a
private man should rescue Paul, he must lay down his life for him. 1 Samuel
18.3. The life of king David is better, then the life of a thousand subjects;
Gods honor may be more promoted by it. The arm will loose it self, to save
the head.

Rule 3. We must love our selves in a right manner; The manner of loving our
selves.
namely, in that manner that is comely and beseeming. This makes known it
self in these three particulars: It must be Really, Fervently, Purely.


1. Really, not in complement, but with love unfeigned and hearty, 1. Joh. 3.18.
Let us not love in tongue, or in word, but in deed and in truth: so it was with
Adam, he was able to do good to himself, whereas we that are corrupt, are
most enemies to our selves, when we seem most to love our selves, Pro. 8.
ult. He that despises wisdom, (...)
lays violent hands upon himself (so the word in the original is.) Out of
self-love and pride you must not have your base courses condemned, but you
hate your souls in despising the means. God is Jehovah, a Being God, therefore
requires that man's love should be real.

2. Adam loved himself fervently, 1 Pet. 1.22.
as Saint Peter calls it. There was, namely, a pressenesse in Adams spirit,
whereby the whole man was carried to improve any means for the good of
himself. Adam was free from weakness within, from impediment without. As in
Heb. 6.10. it is called, The labor of love, so was Adam painful to use all
means for his good. Ephesians. 5.29. No man ever hated his own flesh; but
nourishes and cherishes it, that is, he imployes all means to help
himself: whereas we that are corrupt, cannot enlarge our hearts in duties of
love. We are so distracted, that we cannot go on freely in our occasions, both
in things that concern God, and in things that concern our selves, Romans 7.
The good we would do, we do not.

3. Adam loved himself purely, not with carnal nor sensual love. He loved
only that which was good in himself: he loved his excellency, that so he
might get more of it, and be fitted by it in the performance of his service.
There are six good things belonging to a man; Honor, Life, Chastity, Goods,
Good name, Prosperity: now Adam loved these, that he might get more of them,
and be fitted the better for Gods service. These two things Adam got by
obedience: 1. more ability: 2. more dexterity in the performance of Gods
command. Adam loved his honor, that he might receive more honor from others,
and be more enabled to perform his duty to them; whereas we love good things
for naughty ends. The covetous churl loves his scraping humor, and grows
more covetous: we love sin, which we ought to abhor, and we do good
oftentimes for bad ends; but Adam loved that which was good in himself, for
that good end, to get more of it. Gods people are followers after
righteousness: Isa. 51.11.
More of that (Lord) more chastity and meekness. As the beast that hunts his
prey, pursues it still with more and more eagerness, so does the gracious man
follow after righteousness. Adam was patient, etc. but yet he desired more:
we love good things well, but many times use them ill when we have them. A man
perhaps craves honor with moderation, but he lifts up his heart, when he has
gotten it.

Part 3. The third thing in the description, is, He loved his brother as
himself; for quality, not for quantity. The love of himself was a pattern to
imitate, not to equal or exceed.

Quest. How may we know how Adam was to love his brother as himself?

Ans. The rules are two.

How to love our brother as our selves
1. He was to weigh out love, respecting as well his brothers good as his own.
In 2 Kin. 1.13. the poor man was afraid that Elias would have slain him,
therefore he prays him, that his life might he precious in his eyes: as Adam
was able to set an high price on the honor and life of his brother, so should
it be with thee: as thou desire that that which is good for thee should be
continued, so should thou desire, that all good should be given to thy
brother. Were thou in disgrace, thou would desire reputation: have the like
desire for the credit of thy brother. Act. 26.29. I would (says S. Paul) that
all that hear me this day, were altogether as I am: altogether holy, altogether
assured of Gods love. Here is an heart, such an one as Adam had in perfection:
it was as if he should have said, I would to God that all that hear me this
day, had the like evidence of Gods goodness. We ought to desire that what good
befalls us, might happen to our brethren also, Number. 11.29. I would to God that
all the people of the Lord were Prophets. So, have thou honor? say, I would to
God all Gods servants had honor too. Is thy soul comforted? say, Oh that all
Gods servants were so! we think our candles burn the worse, because others
burn bright. This was not in Adam, and ought not to be in us; we should
rejoice in the good of others, Luke 15.8. They rejoiced with her: we must
rejoice in the prosperity of others. Adam had the heart, to rejoice in the good
of his brother, and we ought to do the like.

2. We must be painful to promote the good of our fellow-brethren, as our
own. Love is solicitous and full of care to provide for what is beloved. Look
what care thou would bestow to promote thine own honor, or welfare, the
same diligence must thou use, in due time and place, though not in the same
measure, to procure the honor or welfare of thy brother. 1 Cor. 13.5. Love
seeks not her own. Gal. 5.13. Serve one another in love: Thou should in
this case be a servant to thy brother; it should be one part of thy task, to
promote his good. We all ought to take special care of our brothers credit,
for we are termed our brothers keepers: Genesis 4.9.
yea we should take the honor, life, safety of our brother as our charge; we
must keep evil from him, and not suffer it to lie upon him, Lev. 19.17.
the evil of sin especially, so far as God puts occasion into our hands.
God enjoynes not man this duty toward Scorners; Ephraim is joined to his
idols, Hos, 4.17.
let him alone: we must not cast pearls before swine, Lev. 19.17. yet thou
shall not suffer thy brother to lie in sin. This is love in truth, to rebuke
another plainly, and not to suffer sin to lie upon him. Ezekiel. 13.
To sow pillowes under men's elbowes, this love came from hell, it never came
from righteousness.

Quest. Why was Adam thus furnished with righteousness?

Ans. Because he was made a sociable creature, for the maintaining of society,
and propagating the Church. Love is the sinews of society. In a building, all
the parts must be pinned together, otherwise one part will not uphold another:
so it is in society, there must be inlets of love to uphold it: we must be
souldred together with loving affections, else there is no continuing of
society. The desolation of kingdoms, the ruin of nations, whence comes it, but
from want of love? Saint Paul makes love a matter of excellency, 1 Cor. 12.31.
I show to you a more excellent way. Adam therefore being made for society, must
be furnished with this love, which was a special means to help him therein.

The use is threefold.

1. It falls heavy upon many wicked and ungodly men, Malicious men have not
Gods image on them.
the vileness of whose hearts is such, that in stead of having in them
righteousness and love, they have hearts full of rancour within, and tongues
full of railing without. The sting of the serpent is in their hearts, and the
poison of asps is under their lips; they regard not what they say against those
that fear Gods name. If righteousness be the image of God, then envy and
malice is an argument of a man whose heart God never wrought upon; it is a
black brand of a child of the Devil. In this the children of God are
manifest from the children of the Devil. 1 John 3.10. The children of God are
the children of love, the children of Satan are the children of hatred. He
that hates his brother, is a child of the Devil, it is manifest, thou may
conclude it undoubtedly. 1 John 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God: as if
he should say, Thou that have no love, have no interest in God. Hatred is that
wherein the kingdom of Satan consists, Joh. 8.41. as for all other sins, they
are practiced among men, but this is the trade of the Devils in hell. The
Pharisees bragged that they were Abraham's children, You seek to kill me, says
Christ, which Abraham did not: if you were of your father Abraham, you would
do the works of Abraham: but mark the 44. verse: You are of your father the
Devil: for he was a murderer from the beginning. You have never heard, that
Satan stabbed a man, but his murder was, He maligned Adam in his innocence:
this therefore is a devilish sin. Satan does not steal, neither is he
drunk, but he is envious as hell. If this be expressed in your conversation,
know, what ever your stock may be, yet you are of your father the Devil.
Those that set themselves against the life and honor of their fellow brethren
(for we may set our selves against the sins of others) those, I say, whose
hearts sink at the good of their brethren, and rejoice if their goods and
estates be overthrown, do by that show whence they draw their pedigree. This
is the very brand of a wretch. Gal. 4.19. Ishmael was a cast away, as the text
plainly speaks: what was his guise? He persecuted the son of Promise, he
persecuted him with a railing tongue; for this the Scripture often calls
persecution: and this is the note of a man born after the flesh, who shall
never see Gods face; for the Text says, Cast him out. Envy and malice is the
sin of the Devil, and it is the note of a reprobate: the Lord therefore
look upon us, that we seeing our own misery, may strive for power against
it, and get love from God, that we may be possessed of happiness with him.

Use 2. The second use is of Instruction. Expect no friendship from the wicked.
From the former truth we may learn what to expect at the hands of the ungodly.
There is no friendship to be expected from a wicked man. Love is another
matter then men make of it; it is a grace above nature, which no man can
express, unless God put this image into the soul. Love comes from
righteousness; We had as good look for honey in an hornets nest, or in a
serpents den, or sweet fruit from a crab-stocke, as love from an unrighteous
man: unless the root of righteousness be within, love cannot be without, 1
Pet. 1.22. You that have purified your hearts, etc. love one another with a
pure heart. First we must have an heart purified by the spirit, and then we
must love one another: if purity be not within, love cannot be without;
therefore delude not your selves. If thou see a man's life profane, let him
pretend what kindness he will, let him promise golden mountains, he will never
love thee. David behaved himself wisely, so that Saul confessed him to be
righteous; yet unrighteousness was in Saul's heart, and he (against reason)
persecuted him as a partridge on the mountains. Judas, that lived in the
bosom of our Savior, and never received evil from him, (which a man would
have thought should have wrought upon him) yet loving money more then Christ,
he sold him for thirty pieces of silver. Never trust a wicked man, for he
will sell thee for six pence. Do not think with thy self, I will walk so
carefully, that I will bind him to my love: Oh poor creature, thou can not
have what he cannot do: unless thou can give him a righteous heart, thou
can never receive love from him. If a man have an horse that is surfetted
within, or is lame of his legs, feed him with the best provender, he will
halt still, unless his lamenesse be cured. It is an idle delusion, when you
think to win him by friendlinesse; alas, he that has a naughty heart will
oppose thee, notwithstanding all thy kindness. Pro. 12.10.
The tender mercies of the wicked are cruelty: That man can never be a friend
to you, that is a foe to himself. He loves not his own soul, therefore he
cannot affect thee heartily.

Use 3. We must hence see what course to take, To love a right begin in this
righteousness.
that we may be enlarged in duties of love to our selves and others; which is
the masterpiece of a Christian. All the whole Law consists in this one word,
Love: Love is the end of our being, Romans 13.10.
and there is no better evidence of grace under heaven then this. Labor to get
righteousness within, and love will be expressed without. Look what course God
took in the creation of Adam in paradise, the same he takes in our renovation:
for first, he made Adam righteous, and then Adam performed all duties of love
to his brethren. The deeper the root of righteousness is, the more will be the
fruit of love. We take the wrong way, to labor to squeeze out a little kind
behavior: the old nature will return to the old course, but labor to get thy
heart rooted in righteousness, and love will grow abundantly in thy whole
course. The Musician will first string his instrument before he play with it:
the waggoner will have his wheels prepared, otherwise they draw heavily: so if
thou would have thy heart make music before God, tune it with
righteousness, and then thy practice will go on cheerfully. If a man had a
righteous heart, he would do good even to an enemy: but it must be the spirit
of God, that must work this in thee, Romans 8.2. He that will have heat must
come to the fire that is hot, other things are but heated: so thou must come to
God, and desire him to work it in thee. The Apostle says, 1 John 4.7. God is
love: would thou therefore get love? then get more near God, that he may
work this righteousness in thee: for it is he that enableth us to do every
good work.

. 6.
NOw we come to another passage: Of freewill in Adam.
from wisdom in the understanding, and holiness and righteousness in the
will, there flows a third thing, and it is that which we call freewill: he had
power to do good, which flows from the two former parts. Freewill to do
good is the garland of all graces, and is made up of them. We may easily
perceive it by the want of it; for we hang back, and cannot be brought to the
performance of service due to God. Adam had a freedom of will, which was the
excellency and beauty of wisdom, holiness, and righteousness.

Quest. What is freewill?

What it is.
A. It is a special privilege proceeding from the image of God in Adam,
whereby he was able to choose any good without any impediment, yet after a
mutable manner.

In this description are four things.

1. It is a special privilege proceeding from the image of God, viZ.
holiness, righteousness, and wisdom. The stateliness of a building comes
from all the parts conjoined; beat down the parts, and it will be an heap of
stones: so freewill is the structure that God put on Adam, whose beauty flows
from the joining together of wisdom, holiness, and righteousness. This was
a special privilege to Adam: no creature, besides him and Angels, had free
liberty to do good. God put this stock into his hand. When I say Adam had
this special privilege, I do not say therefore he was free from subjection to
God; for God gave Adam a law, and concurred with him in his work; but the
dispensation of the work God left to Adams liberty: if he did well he should
be rewarded; if he did ill, he should be punished. God would not constrain Adam
to his service, nor compel him to evil. The other creatures could not meddle
with him, for they were under him; therefore he was free. Hence the Philosopher
observes, that praise and dispraise belongs only to man. We praise not the
fire for burning, because it is tied to it by a bond of necessity; but Adam
might do, or not do; if he did well, he was to be praised, because he might
have done evil: if he did evil, he was to be dispraised, because he might
have done well. Still God concurres with Adam, as he does with the nature of
the creatures: he works with the fire when it burns, with the sparrow when it
flies: for so it is in 2 Cor. 3.17. where the spirit is, there is liberty:
there is a sovereignty in the will of a regenerate man, by which all creatures
are under his dispose, which God will not, the creature cannot hinder:
Therefore Christ says unto the believing Jews, Joh. 8.32. If you hear my
words you are free.

2. He was enabled to choose any thing that was good. Freedom is not seated in
the understanding; therefore the description says. He chooses good; which is
an act of the will. The will can embrace nothing, but what the understanding
presents unto it, it is true; but it is as true, that the liberty of freedom
lies mainely in the will: For example, when a man has disputed what a duty is,
and has concluded it, he presents this unto the will, which either allows or
rejects it; so that still the choice lies in the will. It is easy to convince
a man's understanding, all the difficulty is in the will: The will says
obstinately, I will not hear upon that ear. If the Judge be unjust, he will
have the Jury bring in a verdict according to his mind. When the understanding
has observed what is true, and tells the heart, You must not do thus or thus;
the will says, I must have another verdict: so that the root of liberty is
mainely in the will. Deuteronomy. 30.19. I have set life and death before you, choose
life, etc. That is, the blessings are many if you obey; the curses are many, if
you disobey: therefore choose the good way. Act. 5.4. Was it not in thy power,
etc? as if he should say, It was in thy choice to have given, or not to have
given. I add, that the will of Adam could choose any good, whether natural,
moral, or heavenly; the two former remains in us, but Adam was further
enabled to choose holy things. There was no command, but he was able to obey,
nor no truth but he was able to choose. Good is the food of the will, Adam was
able to digest any good with full content: and herein mainely consists
liberty, for a man to choose that which is good: It is no liberty for a man to
be carried on headily to evil. Men esteem none so free, as they that choose
what they list. I will choose bad as well as good, says one; I will profane an
holy day as well as sanctify it; but this is not free will, to be hurried on
to evil. In 2. Pet. 2.19. the false Apostles would give a man free liberty to
do any thing, and yet go to heaven, as the Text says, 2 Pet. 2.19
promising liberty when t^^y themselves are the servants of sin. There is no
such slavery under heaven, as to be slave to sin: but for a man to have a
sovereign uncontrolled power, to be carried to that which is good truly and
spiritually, this is liberty. The Angels of heaven are most free in the
performance of their duty: they are so confirmed, that they cannot love evil;
nay, God himself wills good most freely. There are no bounds to his will, and
yet he cannot but will good: therefore when we are able to will good most
freely, we are most free. He is a free man, that is able to follow good,
beyond persecutions and temptations. The other description of liberty is a very
false one.

3. Without any impediment. Of impediments in choosing good.
This is a great blessing, to be able to embrace good without any hinderance.
Nothing could cross Adam in his course. A man may bind another hands, but he
cannot command the will. There was this special privilege in Adams will, that
nothing could thwart him. Now this appears in four things:

1. There was no weakness in him to disable him: there was no good to be done,
beyond the depth of his understanding, and reach of his will. Psalm. 73.16.
David had that feebleness of understanding, that it was too difficult for him,
to observe the difference of Gods providence: but this was not in Adam.

2. There was no stir of corruption, that could oppose him: corruption is
like a backe-byas, that hinders our course. The Saints of God find always
some stirrings of corruption still opposing them in duty; but it was not so in
Adam. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit. This every Saint of God
finds: for when he would be humble, then pride stirs, etc. it was otherwise
with Adam.

3. There was no strength of corruption that might foil him; but our
corruptions prevail over us. Romans 7.23. I see another law leading me captive
unto the law of sin. Man's proud heart makes him vent wrathful words, and
foyles him; but Adam had no power of corruption to foil him. As it is with a
ship well trimmed, if wind and tide serve, it goes on amain: so Adams heart
was full of holiness, which carried him forward to good amain: he had
sea-roome to enlarge himself in the choice of good.

4. There was nothing without to stop Adam in what he would. The Devil might
offer a temptation to Adam, but he could offer no compulsion: he might see, if
he could persuade him, but he could not force him. When the serpent spoke with
Eve, if she had resisted him, he would have gone from her. For Adam had the
sovereign dominion over the creatures, the Devil only usurpt it. Adam had
nothing within, nothing without to hinder him.

The fourth thing in the description is, that it was after a mutable manner.
The meaning is, Adam was able, as to choose any good which God had revealed, and
perform it, so to entertain any evil, and commit it. It was with Adams
liberty as with a pair of scales that are equal; if you put more into the one
then the other, you will easily make the one sink and the other rise: so Adam
was in an even poize, he might be carried to good, if he would exercise that
power he had; and he might turn himself toward evil, if he would abuse
that liberty he had.

For the opening of this, two questions may be scanned.

Quest. 1. What was the ground of the manner of this choice of good and evil
in Adam?

Ans. It lay in the nature of Adam, and flowed from that mutability which was
in the nature of Adam, who was a reasonable creature. Though nothing could
force Adam to turn from a good course, yet there was a mutability joined with
his liberty, that he might turn himself from God. Solomon having discoursed
of the deceit of a woman, supposing it demanded whence it came? He answers,
Eccl. 7. ult
I know, that God made man upright, but he sought out inventions: inventions
were of his own devising, not of Gods ordering. Nothing in the world could
compel man to do it; but he sought out crooked ways. This was intended in
the two Sacraments, that Adam had, Genesis 2.9. the Lord set two trees in the
garden: first, the tree of life, to intimate, that as verily as he saw that
tree, so verily, if he loved God, he should live for ever; and secondly, the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, to wit, if he did eat of that fruit, he
should know what it was to have the image of God, and what to be deprived of
it. These two Sacraments intimated, that God had set life and death before
Adam; he might choose the one, and refuse the other. Our Sacraments signify
not so. Baptism signifies our implanting into Christ, the Lords Supper
signifies our growth in Christ: but in the Sacraments of Adam, the one showed a
possibility he had to live, the other the possibility he had to dye. This
mutability was no part of the liberty of Adam; for it destroyed his liberty:
but it was a quality, that did accompany the condition of Adam. Genesis 1.1.
Darkness was upon the face of the deep. The text does not say, God created
darkness, but it did accompany the creature naturally: so did this mutability
accompany Adam. Immutability belongs to God only, and therefore Job says, he
found no steadfastness in his Angels: mutability therefore belongs to the
creature, as a creature.

Quest. But how did this stand with the perfection of Adams nature?

An. Mavelous well, without any disparagement to the image of God; nay, he
could be no other. It was no sin in Adam to be mutable, but that he abused
all, when he might have used it to Gods glory. It was so far from being a
blemish to Adams nature, that it agreed very conveniently with it. Herein
appears the difference between Adams estate, the estate of the Saints
glorified, and the wicked now damned. Adam was to trade for an immutable
condition, therefore could not have it put into his hand at first. The Saints
that have fought the fight of faith, are established, and never shall do
evil, because they have performed obedience unto God through Christ: The
damned, because they have sinned against God, and have withdrawn themselves
from his authority, are immutably evil; for God has separated himself, all
his holiness, and the means of grace from them, and delivered them up to the
power of sin; as who should say, Take them, all ye crew of cursed
abominations, and carry them headlong to will evil eternally, and perish
everlastingly. Adam was to trade for this immutable condition before he could
have it; first he was to fight before he could conquer: And as he was not
immutably good, so he could not be immutably evil. As it is with a man that
has an estate left him; if he will trade with it, he may live; if he spend
it, he may lie in prison: so it was with Adam. Again, had God established and
confirmed* Adam, he should have prevented all opportunities of the
manifestation of his justice in condemning, and of his mercy in pardoning. Had
he been immutably good, none could have been punished, because none had
offended, none could have been pardoned, because none had sinned.

Quest. But why was this freedom to do good imprinted on Adam?

Answ. Because without it, Adams obedience could not have been acceptable: The
Lord loves, as a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.
so a cheerful performer of service. It is the Apostles rule, The Lord accepts
a willing mind. If a man grudge to give to a poor man, God flings his gift
into his face: a willing mind makes the service acceptable. All Gods servants
must be Volunteers, not pressed. As Deborah, Jud. 5.4. My soul is with those
that offer themselves willingly. We abhor it in our servants when they come
to their work as a Bear to the stake, and will God accept it at our hands?
All the offerings of God must be freewill offerings. Thus our Savior did, that
knew how to please God, Psalm. 40.8. I am delighted to do thy will, O my God,
and thy law is within my heart. He comes not off with murmuring, Joh. 4.34.
but says It is my meat and drink to do thy will. When you are at a feast,
you can sit at it hour after hour; so if our duties be as our meat and our
drink, they will not be tedious to us. Ephesians. 6.7. We must serve God with a
goodwill: It is an unseemely thing, to cause God to distraine for his service.
God will have his praise out of a proud heart: but then God honors himself,
we honor him not. The Devil himself will do duties after this fashion. In Job
1.6. it is said, the Devil came also. He would have been ranging and raging
about the world, but God made him come also. Mar. 5. We know that thou art the
Son of God: God wrested a confession out of him. It is not acceptable, when we
are haled to duty; the Devil does so: the service that God accepts is done
willingly. Thou shall serve the Lord with a glad heart, and be carried on full
sail in the ways of godliness.

2. Had not Adam had a freedom to good, he could not have been punished for
sin: for he that constraines another to do an evil action, is to be
condemned. If a man should compel another to strike a man, he that forced him
ought to be blamed: a man cannot be blamed for what he cannot avoid. Now that
Adams sin might be punished, and his service accepted, it was necessary he
should have ability to choose good, and refuse evil; wherefore the fault was
Adams in falling, and not Gods.

Justify God concerning Adams fall.
Use 1. Hence. we learn to justify the Lord, and let the fault of Adam lie
upon himself and his posterity (...) own fault. The Lord (...) Adam ability
to do wh^^ he should; if therefore he did not what he might, he is to be
condemned, the Lord to be justified. It is in vain for thee to plead, that
thou can not do thy duty: The Lord knows I carry a body of death about me:
I confess it is so, but whose fault is it? Esa. 3.11. Say unto the wicked, it
shall go evil with him, for he shall receive the reward of his own hands.
Your own hands framed your own ruin. Prove. 1.28. They shall call, but I will
not hear: they might reply, This is a hard chapter: But what says the Text,
they would none of my counsel, therefore they shall eat the fruit of their own
ways. This must cut off all pleas; remember Adam had liberty, and thou in him.
Thou shall be satisfied with the fruit of thine own planting, and God will
fill thee with the fruit of thine own devices. The malicious man shall have
malice enough in hell, and shall for ever hate God, and for ever be tormented.

Again, it should still our repinings against God; vain it is to snarle
against the Lord. The Lord did not assist Adam: yet there was no fault in God:
for Adam had freedom of will without any opposition, and thou in him;
therefore thy blood be upon thine own head, God is to be justified. You sought
out inventions; if therefore you have what you seek, the fault is your own.
Psalm. 51.4. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Thou O Lord art clear, it is my iniquity that deserved it. Matthew. 13.21.
Whence came those Tares? The enemy has done this. So say thou, I confess my
mind is blind, mine heart is corrupt, whence came these Tares? the Lord sowed
good seed; if therefore I am unclean, the envious man has done it, therefore
acquit the Lord for ever.

Hence we may see, Use 2. To know whether Gods image be restored.
whether we ever had this image reprinted and restored. Where ever the Image of
God is, there is freedom. If ever sound grace be in thee, thou shall find
thine heart unshackled, and set at liberty to close with the Lord. 2. Corin.
3.17. Where the Spirit is, there is freedom, and an heart carried willingly to
do the service God requires. It was that that our Savior proclaimed. Isaiah
61.2. an acceptable year, it was that was typified in the old Law by the year
of Jubilee, when the servant was free from his Master, the Debtor from his
Creditour: so Christ came to preach the year of Jubilee, that all poor drudges
that have been slaves to Satan, and indebted to Gods justice, should be freed
from the guilt of sin in justification, from the slavery of sin in
sanctification. In Act. 8. when Peter was in the town streets, he perceived
he was not in a dream, but it was a thing real: so it is with thy soul:
Can thou find that God has knocked off thy fetters? then thou may know,
this is a realitie, not a dream of grace. If Peter had dreamed he had been out
of prison, and had been fettered in the morning, he would have known he had
been in a dream: so thou have dreamed that God has renewed thee; Are thy
fetters of sin on thee? then it was but a dream, indeed, and when thou awakest
by death, thou shall see thy self bound up in chains of darkness. Psalm.
45.17. All the sons of God are Princes; all Gods servants are freemen, 1
Cor. 7.22. If thou art Christ's, thou art a free man, to be carried
uncontrollably to good: though sin and Satan conspire against thee, they
shall never overcome thee, but thou shall still be victorious.

Qu. But what shall we say of many that seem holy, whose sins clogge thim
heavily? Where was Saint Paul's freedom, when he was led captive, as he
speaks of himself?

Of the captivity of sin in the godly.
An. A man may be led captive, and yet be free too. This freedom in captivity
appears in three things.

1. Though many times by the violence of Occasions, the Saints are surprised,
yet they have hearts to approve of the good, they cannot do. This is that Saint
James speaks of, Chap. 1. ult. If a man, says he, has Religion, and swears,
and rayleth against Gods truth, he deceives himself; but this is pure
religion to keep a man's self unspotted. Look as it is with a City besieged,
when it is taken, the enemies make those that are in the city swear to their
King; if now a man resolves to take his death, rather then the oath, he keeps
himself unspotted from treason. So Satan by long siege transports the heart
unto the commission of evil; yet the soul keeps it self untainted, when it
chooses the good it cannot do. Deuteronomy. 22.25. if an adulterer offer a rape to a
Virgin, the sin is his that forced her, it lies not on the party forced: so
Satan in a sort forces the soul to the commission of evil: if therefore
thine heart bear it as a burden, the fault is Satan's and not thine.

2. Yet the soul takes part with the word against both the temptations, that
would inveigle it, and the corruptions, that would foil it. As it approves
all good, so it joins sides with the word against all evil. Romans 7.15. I do
the thing that I hate. The spirit lusts against the flesh; the heart is
resolved to die in the quarrel: though it cannot prevail as it would, yet it
will fight as it can. 2 Cor. 13.8. I can do nothing against the truth.

3 The soul gets the upper hand of evil. David was never adulterous more,
Peter never denied his master more; the soul not only reformes infirmities
outwardly, but subdues the distempers inwardly. 1 Ioh. 5*18. He keeps
himself, that the evil one touch him not. Romans 8.2. The law of the Spirit
sets a man free from the law of sin and of death. Satan says, Thou may be
full of malice and spleen: the law of meekness says, I will not be full of
spleen: so also the law of humility takes off the law of pride. Pro. 28.13.
He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy: the same
phrase is used, Genesis 2. The wife shall forsake father and mother. The woman
forsakes, First, the place and company. Secondly, the authority of father and
mother. Thirdly, she is not to perform what service they will require, but
what her husband requires: so the soul must forsake the house of sin. If thou
were married to Christ, thou would loathe the place, and abhor the society
of those that go down into hell themselves, and lead others with them. I say,
if a man were married to Christ, he would not be under the authority of
corruption, but being delivered from the bondage of sin, will utterly forsake
it.

To get liberty, labor for holiness.
Use 3. The third Use is of exhortation. The former truth should force every
soul to employ the best of his endeavors to gain this holiness. Will any
man be a free man? let him be an holy man. Be sure of the one, and thou can
not miss of the other; and where the one is not, the other cannot be. Liberty
should be like a lodestone, to draw us to it. Nature hates slavery; then if
we would be freed from it, let us get holiness. Experience teaches, that the
poor bird will beat her self to death, rather then be kept in a Cage. What
poor shifts men in captivity take to be freed from those that are hard
taskemasters over them, our often Briefes show. We are all captives, taken by
the policy of Satan; Let us make a gathering out of the stock of the prayers of
Gods servants; and let thine own prayer be, Oh guide and direct me how to
get power against my corruptions. How careful are men to purchase the liberty
of a Corporation, and how highly do they account of it when they have it! In
Acts 22.23. Saint Paul says, he purchased to be a free man of Rome with a
great sum. What slavish hearts have we then, when we may be incorporated
into the body of Christ, and will stick for a little? Go and sell that you
have, what ever it cost you, that you may be free men in Christianity. Christ
says, Joh. 8.32. If you continue in my words, you shall be free; To continue
in Gods word, is to submit to the authority of the truth; for if we do thus,
we are free. Rev. 6.2. And I saw, and behold a white horse, etc. The white
horse there, is the truth. It is called a white horse, because of the purity of
it, and it prevails wheresoever it comes. Would you be free? then let the Word
prevail in you. Is it not every man's desire, that when the strength of
corruption, and the violence of persecution press in upon him, then to be
conqueror of all? Labor then to get this image of God, and you shall be above
all things, but God, and be carried on incontrollably in a good course.

. 7.
NOw we proceed to the image of God in the affections of Adam, as love, joy,
Of Gods image in the affections.
delight, sorrow, fear, which are seated in the sensitive soul; for all
sensitive creatures have them. The poor creature fears the whip; and the
creature again, sports and delights it self. Now these Adam had, and in these
was the image of God.

Qu. What was the image of God in the affections of Adam?

Ans. It appeared in that serviceable subjection, What it is
sweet agreement, and submission which they did yield unto holy will, and right
reason. The Understanding directed what should be done, the Will embraced
that, and the Affections yielded serviceably to the command of Reason and
Holiness. Herein appeared the difference between these affections in Adam, and
in other creatures. The creature is carried by the rule of appetite; the horse
rusheth into the battle, the wild ass snuffeth up the wind. The Psalmist
says, Psalm. 32.
Be not like the horse and mule, which have no understanding, Psalm. 32. Here
was the excellency of Adam; that wisdom that God had imprinted in his
understanding, that holiness that he had implanted in his will, commanded his
affections, and they did sweetly yield thereto. Adams soul was like a
well-tuned instrument, all the strings (the affections) being rightly tuned,
make a sweet harmony. In a well governed commonwealth, the Council directs,
the King enacts laws, and the subjects obey: so there was wisdom in Adams
understanding, and that counseled; there was holiness in the will, and that
commanded; and all the affections were like loyal subjects, embracing what
reason and holy will commanded. In this commonwealth there were no traitors;
no, in Adams heart there were no tumultuous disorders, as now we find; but
what the reason said, and the will chused, that the affections embraced.

Quest. Wherein does this subjection discover it self? How shall we see Adams
affections submitting to reason?

Ans. In four particulars.

Wherein the affections submitted to reason.
1. The affections of Adam were willing to entertain every command which
wisdom and holiness gave. The affections are but so many servants that
attend on the understanding. 1 Pet. 5.9. Be sober and watch: There is a
sobriety required in the soul; namely, a man should not lavish out his
affections on other things, and so unfit himself to be under the subjection of
the Truth. This sobriety was abundant in Adam; he had a sweet easiness and
softness of affection, like wax, to take the print of Gods Seal: whereas it
is with our affections as with drunken servants, who, when their Masters call
them, are not themselves: for there is a drunkenness in man's heart, when it is
inordinately carried with too eager a pursuit after vain things; and though
reason commands, yet it obeys not. Adams affections were in a sweet frame:
for if God revealed any command, love embraced it. Ephesians. 6.15. Having your
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. The feet are the
affections; the shooing of the feet, is the preparing of the affections to
entertain all the conditions of the Gospel of peace. A man that is shod, is
fit to go a journey: so when the affections are thus shod, they are fit to
walk in any way that God requires. Since Adam lost this sobriety of
affections, what awkardnesse do we find to duty! when a man should love an
enemy, how hardly is he brought to it! when a man ought to reform a sin,
what a difficulty is there in it!

2. They were speedy in the performance of what was enjoined them. A wise
understanding could no sooner reveal a duty to be done, but they ecchoed
answerably, This all of us would have Psalm. 40. mark how speedy Christ was in
performing of duty: Behold I come, thy law is within mine heart. And Psalm.
27.8. The Lord says, seek ye my face: and his affections answered, Thy face
(Lord) will I seek. Also in Psalm. 119.4, 5. Gods voice says, I charge you
diligently, keep my Commandments: and they echo again, Oh that our ways
were made so direct, that we might keep thy Statutes! 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the
loins of your mind. And in Luke 12.35. it is said, Let your loins be girded
about, and your lights burning. The loins of our minds are our affections.
They are compared to loose garments, such as they wore in the East Countries,
which they girded up, when they went on a journey. Our affections hang like
loose garments about us, we must gird them up, that we may with more speed go
in the paths of Gods Statutes. Thus David prays: Set mine heart at liberty,
that I may run the ways of thy commandments. But we find the contrary: for
though many times the mind so yields, that the course is holy, yet what a base
weariness hangs on the heart! what slow hearts have we! how do we draw our
loins after us! We feel this; and the ground of it is the want of Gods image.

3. They continued in the speed they made. Adams affections were to hold
themselves in an holy bent, without warping. We find the contrary. In Gal. 6.
the Apostle says, Be not weary in well doing. Sometimes a man is hot at
first, and then his affections cool; this is the bane of Religion. He was
holy; so they may say of a man-devill, 2 Cor. 11.14.
an Angel of light. But Adam was able to hold himself in a right pitch. This
David prayed for, Psalm. 51.12. when he had wounded his affections, Oh stablish
me with thy free spirit! as if he should say: Time was, when I did love thy
Word, mine heart did fear evil, and I did hate uncleanness; but now, how
unstedfast are my affections! therefore stablish me with thy free spirit. If
you find your hearts giving way to any base lusts, you shall find them easily
giving back from holy duties. Rev. 2.31. Thou have forsaken thy first love: O
woe to that declining condition; that those who heretofore expressed
forwardness in a good course, and could cry for mercy as for life, are now
key-cold: But Adams affections were able to keep themselves in full strength:
and so did the Saints of God. Number. 14.24. Caleb followed God fully. Psalm.
63.9. My soul follows hard after thee. He pursued God with eagerness, as
the creature the prey. David stands not still, nor delays, but pursues; and
as the phrase is, ( Esa. 51.1.) follows after righteousness. Thou that have a
stubborn heart by nature, if thou be once righteous, thou will then follow
after meekness.

4. His affections were in an orderly tractablenesse to the rule of reason and
holiness. Reason and holiness gave not only direction to the affections, but
moderation in all things, and upon all occasions The affections would not be
carried out of order nor measure upon any thing, nor stay longer then they
should upon any object. An Ambassador goes no farther then his Commission,
stays no longer then his Commission gives leave: so reason and holiness were
the commanders of Adams affections; they received a command therefrom, and went
no further then reason and holiness allowed them. It is lawful for a man to
love the world; but no more then reason and holiness allows: if God should
say, I will take away these things from thee, love and joy should willingly
part with them. The soldier, if he be loyal, when the Commander bids
battle, he goes; when he sounds a retrait, he returns home again: so the
reason and will sanctified, were the commanders of Adams course. When reason
and holiness says it, a man may delight in the things of this life; but when
they say, grieve no more for the loss of them, the affections should yield to
the command of reason. It is quite contrary in us; a man's affections, though
they are set upon a lawful object, yet they go so amain like unruly colts,
that they cast the rider: delight and desire out-bid reason, and sometimes
transgress the bounds of honesty, most commonly of holiness. It is mavelous
hard to have our affections at command. Lot goes into Sodom, and God could not
get him out again, but that the Angel was feign to carry him out by force: so
when a man gets into Sodom, lets loose his affections on shop, or children,
or the like, oh what an hard matter is it to say, No more of that! But Adams
affections were so ordered, that if reason should say, Love that now, and then
leave it; he would love it now, and leave it then. Philip. 4.12. I know how to
abound, and how to be poor; his meaning is, if God would bestow these things,
he had an heart to love them; if he would take them away, he was content to
leave them. Job 1.21. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord; whereas we sit Rachel-like, disquieted,
because our comforts are not.

Use 1. The first Use is of examination. By order in thy affections, esteem
what grace thou have.
A man may here plainly perceive what measure of grace he has, and whether
he has any or no: See what tractablenesse there is in thy affections, to
submit unto the authority of holiness. So much boysterousnesse as thou find
against the evidence of reason, and frame of holiness; so much corruption
there is in thy heart. I speak this the rather, to take off the conceit of
many, who use to commend a man in this manner; He is an holy man, but that he
has one fault, he is as dogged as may be: it is but a poor commendation. So
much boiling as is in thine heart, so much want of grace is there. He is a good
Christian (they will say) but wonderful outrageous: surely then there is but
little good in him. The servant is stubborn against his Master, the master
again is quarrelsome for every word: if there be grace in these, it is well;
yet there is a great deal of the want of Gods image upon such a soul: 1 Cor.
3.3. When there are strifes and envyings amongst you, are ye not carnal? When
the heart is boisterous and full of envy, is it not carnal? There is a great
deal of rubbish in thy heart, which grace, if it were there, would remove. The
Philosopher observes, that all storms are here below in these baser bodies,
there is none of them in the highest heavens: so, had thou an heavenly heart,
all thunderings and lightenings, all cross, dogged, and malicious distempers
would be gone, there would be no news of them. The fruits of the Spirit are
love, Gal. 5.22.
meekness, etc. But when men run abreast, the Master his way, and the
Servant his way, where are the fruits of the Spirit? Are ye not carnal?

Ob. But may not a man by education or misery be tempered, and cooled from
these things?

Answ. Yes, he may have the ruggedness of his affections smoothed, and the
edge of furiousness blunted. But though a man may have these somewhat abated,
and want grace, yet if a man have these, it is somewhat suspicious, whether he
have grace. There may be a root, and yet no blossoms, and yet it is certain,
where there are blossoms there is a root. If a man express envy in his life,
there is sure a treasure of it in his heart. If there be so much filth in the
streams, there is more in the fountain: if there be good in thee, there is but
a little.

Here we may also see, whether we have any truth of grace: judge of it by the
works. No fire but will burn: fire will heat the whole house; so grace will
frame the whole soul. Art thou able to tame those jarring affections, and to
stifle them? Art thou able, when they would transport thee, to allay them, and
bring thy soul to a calm frame? Then it is a sign thou have grace. God is
the God of order, not only in the Church, but in the house, and every where. If
thou can master those boisterous affections, that they may be subject unto
wisdom and holiness, then it is certain, there is some grace in thee.

Quest. But are not the best men troubled with passions and distempers?

Differences of distempers in the godly and others.
Answ. There are such in the best, upon whom the Lord has been pleased to
look graciously: but they are in a far different manner in them, then in the
wicked. Their spots are different: Deuteronomy. 32.5. Their spot is not like the spot
of my children: as who should say, the Saints have their spots, and the wicked
have their spots; but they are not the same. The spots of the purples are
dangerous, but the spots of the plague are deadly. The wicked have the spots of
the plague; the Lord have mercy on them, they are but dead men. Though a
Commonwealth be subject to conspiracies, yet a wise Kng can discover them;
but when there is no King, (as in Israel) every man does what he list: so in
the heart of an ungodly man, corruptions do what they list, they make him as
proud, and as covetous as they list. The Saints have many mutinies in their
hearts, yet they have a wise King, a gracious will that quels these, and
submits to God, and the power of his grace.

The difference between the distempers of the Saints and the wicked, appears
in three particulars.

1. The Saints make those distempers and unruly affections which lie upon them,
their greatest burden; it is their heart-smart, though other sins are greater:
and the reason is, because they break the union between God and the soul, and
they breed a distance between Gods good Spirit and it. 2 Cor. 12.7. God
suffered Satan to buffet St. Paul, which was some distemper, and provocation
to sin; now this made him groan and sigh to the Lord, yea, it brought him on
his knees thrice. As it is with an enemy, if his use be to come suddenly upon
a Town, a wise Captain will gather his forces together to hinder his
designs: So must the Saints, because their corruptions surprise them suddenly.
These make them cry out, This will be my bane; the least sin will damn me as
well as the greatest; I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul, etc. 1 Sa^.
27.1.
whereas a carnal man makes nothing of these, but bears all with a Pish, it
is not such a great matter as some make it: I confess I am passionate and
choleric; but I would I had no worse to answer for, and the like. Oh, how does
this argue a graceless heart, that can thus digest graceless courses. A toad
will feed upon poison; but if a man take two or three drops, it will kill him:
it is a sign thou have a toadish nature, that can digest these lusts. Genesis
15. ult. Esau went away carelessly, when he saw that he lost his birthright. I
confess, it is possible for a carnal heart to grieve for these distempers,
but it is either when a man has monstrously befooled himself, or when
conscience flies in his face; What, you go to heaven? Therefore a man on these
terms may crouch, not because of sin, but of disgrace, or the sting of
conscience, that lies in his bosom.

2. The Saints, when they are thus, it is but a pang, they come to their cold
temper again, and they then will welcomly entertain the word, and desire that
it would discover their sin. A gracious heart cares not what the man be that
discovers his sin, whether he be friend or enemy, whether a good man or a
bad man. He looks not at the man, but at the goodness of the command. 1 Samuel
1.17. Eli, when he had been indulgent, and the Lord threatened him for it, he
says to Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.
Hide nothing from me. Jonah being in a sullen fit, forsakes Gods command; but
this is but in a push; in cold blood he is otherwise. David, that had the
heart of a Lion, he would not leave a man alive in Nabals house; yet Abigail, a
woman, makes him say* Blessed be thou, Chap. 25.
and thy counsel* here was a gracious heart, that could submit to the counsel
of so mean a person. But a wicked man cannot abide to have his corruption
crossed: they are so incorporated into it, that they cannot live without it:
This was it that made the young man go away sorrowful. They murmr against
their instructers, as the Hebrew said to Moses, Exodus 2.14. What, will thou
slay me, as thou did the Egyptian yesterday? Let every cup stand upon his
own bottom; what have you to do with me? etc. A wicked man may bite the lip
for the present, and say, I thank you for your counsel; yet he will go away,
and fit you an evil turn. But the godly come, and acknowledge plainly, These
passages and grace cannot stand together, and therefore they will submit to the
truth with all their heart. A wicked man will use all means to undermine the
truth, and misconstrue it; and if any man will join side with him, he will fly
out desperately: but if he cannot avoid it, he will (like the dog) bite the
stone; if he cannot have his will of the man, he will owe him a grudge. The
Saints will say, The Word of the Lord is good, strike here at this sin, Esa.
39.8
smite home.

3. The Saints are not only careful to have their sins outwardly mortified,
but their lives reformed; they do not complain of this and that, and yet
maintain it: no, he that is burdened with sin, will part with it. Luke
2.8. When Christ came, crooked things were made straight: not only mountains
were brought low, but rough things were made smooth: So in the Saints of God,
there is not only a new tongue, to talk of religion; but a new heart, and new
affections. It is possible for a godly man by the power of tentation to be led
aside, yet you shall always find him on the mending hand, and so in
conclusion forsakes sin. I do not say, he will be now and then drunk, and the
like; (for we do not read of those, that after they accustom themselves to
gross sins, do ordinarily rise again;) but I speak of some boisterous
distemper which breaks out, yet I say, he will be of the mending hand. As a
man in an Ague, when nature grows strong, his Ague will leave him: so if a man
be overtaken with these, if grace grow strong, he will leave them, else he
erres from the nature of true repentance. You know what God calls for, when he
requires repentance, Isa. 1.24. Cease to do evil, learn to do well. Jer.
26.3. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the imaginations of his
heart. This is repentance; this the Saints have done, as holy Job speaks, chap.
34.32. If I have done iniquity, I will do so no more. Psalm. 18.23. I have
kept my self from mine iniquity. Gal. 5.24. They that are in Christ, have
crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof: the flesh is sin, the lusts thereof
are the violent distempers thereof; he that hates sin, kills these. Can any
man kill the root, and the blossom flourish? so, can the root of sin be
killed, and the fruit thrive? It cannot be. Again, morality can make a man
somewhat qualified, and cannot grace much more? shall a Heathen bridle
himself, and not a gracious man? That cannot be. But a wicked man gives way
to, and continues in his course without any amendment, and that is the reason
why they fall to day, and fall to morrow, and continue in it. Jer. 8.6. He
takes fast hold of iniquity, and rusheth into it, as the horse rusheth into the
battle: for a man customarily, usually to be transported with these
boisterous distempers, this is the spot of the wicked; no righteous man can
always be thus: for he has not that depth of wickedness in him; yet upon
some occasion he may and does fall into sin. You see how the godly are, and
how the wicked behave themselves. The wife railes, and the husband, out of a
kind of sottish Nabalnesse, if any thing fall cross, makes the wife and child
pay for it. This is ordinary, these are the plague-sores of our towns; also
the servant, if he be admonished, then he flies out, and warning must be
given presently to be gone. These are the spots of profession now-adaies.

Use. 2. It is a word of instruction, Grace, ordering the affections, brings
the most quiet life.
That a gracious heart brings most quiet to a man's life: that takes away the
greatest troubles: that is most peaceable. Nothing can trouble a gracious
heart, unless he trouble himself. It is not the blowing of the wind that
shakes the earth; but the wind is got into some hollow of the earth, and the
shaking comes from within: so, when there is envy and malice within, these
breed hatred without, and these shake our holds: whereas, were these removed,
were a man quiet at home, he should never be troubled from without. It is not
a man's condition, but his corruption that breeds discontent; therefore St. Paul
says, I can abound, and be poor; he had quiet within him. Look, as it was
with our Savior, Math. 8. when the winds arose, he commands them to cease; so
it is in the Lords power to rule these distempers: nothing under heaven can
quiet a man thus enraged, but grace. Go to God to take away thy unrulinesse.
Grace makes a man on Gods side, and therefore there can be no dissension: if
God takes away any thing, the good soul is content; if he will have any
thing, the soul yields it, and so here is no trouble.

. 8.
Quest. WHat was the image of God in the body? Of Gods image in the body.


Ans. I answer two ways:

1. Negatively, Wherein it stood not.
The image of God did not consist in the body of man, so as to be in the flesh
and blood, bones and sinews; and the reason is double.

1. Because if the image of God consisted in these, then other creatures should
have the image of God: but other creatures, though thus qualified, have not the
image of God, but only Adam.

2. God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. and consequently, Body implies rather an
opposition. There is no proportion betwixt a Spirit and a Body; Luke 24.38. A
Spirit has not flesh and bones. This is against the plea of the Papists, that
make the image of God the Father like an old man; the reason they give, is,
because man had the image of God, and therefore we may resemble God by him. I
answer, If flesh and blood be not the image of God, then there is no ground to
resemble God thereby. Isa. 40.14. To whom will ye liken me! To frame an image
of God, is to commit a great sin.

Quest. Where was then the image of God in the body?

Answ. In that framablenesse, In what it was.
whereby it was moved by the reason, will, and affections, and so did express
the virtues of them. A merciful heart does express it self in a bountiful
hand. So David, Psalm. 45.1. Psalm. 45.1.
My tongue is the Pen of a ready writer; his heart indicted it, and then his
tongue did speak it.

Quest. Wherein does this framablenesse appear?

Ans. In two things.

1. The framablenesse of the body to act the service that wisdom and
holiness required. The parts were not stiff, not stubborn, nor weary, but in
a readiness to act what wisdom required. But we find it otherwise in us:
St. Paul himself complained that he was clogged with it. When a man is
distempered, either sick, or weak, there is a weariness in holy duties. The
body is then like a dark shop, in which a good workman may cut his fingers.
When the body is full of noisome humors, it is but an ill shop for the soul
to work in: but this was not in Adam.

2. There was a fitness in each part for its task. The eye was fit to see,
the tongue to talk, etc. So that it is observed by Galen, though he were an
heathen, yet considering the frame of the body, he fell in admiration of it; so
that he professed, that it was not possible for a natural cause to bring
forth such an effect. Romans 16.8. Yield not your members instruments to
unrighteousness. He calls the members instruments. The Devil oftentimes tunes
the tongue, and he sees out of an adulterous eye* yea, his malice vents it
self in an unruly tongue. Look again in the 19. verse, and there it is said,
a man's members should be servants to holiness, tools or instruments that
should be under the power of God. In a tool, there is both the metal, and the
making, as in a saw or axe; so there is in the parts of the body, which are
tools serviceable to wisdom, and the power of holiness, that they may work
their works thereby. An hand is a tool, whereby the merciful heart may deal
mercifully. We say, in such a case, Here is a gracious tongue, a chaste eye,
etc. so the hand is the Almoner of a merciful heart: so that this image of God
in the body, is wide from that of the Papists.

Q. What Is the reason of this?

A. This: Because it was not only requisite, that God should instampe his image
inwardly, but that is should be expressed outwardly, that others might see it,
and glorify God in heaven Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine among men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your heavenly Father. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Show forth the virtue of him that has called you out of darkness. Hereby is
Gods honor promoted. Ephesians. 2.9. We are the workmanship of God, created unto
good works. When men see another excellent workmanship, they say, This man was
a skillful workman: So Gods workmanship is seen in you, when another reviles,
and you are patient to bear. When he is impatient and utters words of
reproach, the wicked stand by, and say, I marvel how you can suffer it: This
is rare workmanship to them. When the wicked challenge godly men, and say, What
do they more then other men? The answer is, They fear an oath, their soul
abhorres the least sin; go thou, and do so: they are willing to hear a
reproof, do thou likewise. But when a wretched man comes to lie on his
deathbed, ready to go out of the world, ask him then what he thinks of the
Saints; oh, says he, that I might dye their death. Thus we see, it is
requisite the image of God should be in their bodies.

Murder an heinous sin.
Use. 1. This Use is for instruction. Hence we observe the heinousness of the
sin of murder, as being that which defaces the image of God after a vile
manner. What greater evil can there be? He that clips the Kings coin is a
traitor; but if a man maimes the body of a Prince, every man thinks no
punishment is enough for him. That creature, for the creation of which, there
was a consultation; that creature, upon whom the image of God was imprinted, on
whom all the works of the Trinity were expressed, of the Father in Creation, of
the Son in Redemption, of the Spirit in Sanctification, which was the
masterpiece of Gods workmanship, to blemish that image, and overthrow the
workmanship of God therein, what sin more heinous! It is therefore called a
crying sin, as it was said to Cain, Genesis 4.10. The blood of thy brother cries
up to heaven: Murder calls for vengeance, and will have no nay, Genesis 9.6. He
that sheds blood, by man shall his blood be shed: because God made him after
his image, therefore God pursues the malefactor with unconceiveable horror of
heart. The reason is not only because of the unnaturalnes of it, (though that
be great, for, Lions and Lions, Tigers and Tigers will lie together;) but
herein also appears the vileness, in that all the attributes of God are up in
arms against a murderer, because they have all been wronged. Drunkenness
wrongs sobriety, adultery wrongs chastity; these sins wrong particular graces
only, and a drunkard may honor God by sobriety, as he has dishonored him by
drunkenness; but murder defaces the image of God, never to be recovered.
There was a gracious tongue, but when it is murdered, it will never speak
more; a wise head, Grace in the heart appears in the body.
but now will never plot business more.

Use. 2. Hence we see the spreading nature of grace. Wheresoever holiness and
righteousness is, it will discover it self. If it be in the soul, it will
appear also in the body. It is with grace, as David speaks of the Sun, Ps.
19. wheresoever it comes, it casts in its beams: so it is with the sun of
grace, it goes into every crevice of the heart, and every practice of the life:
there shall be no work of the hand, no walk of the foot, but grace will frame
it. Men think grace is confined to a corner; swear they do grossly, but they
have a good heart to Godward: no, if thy heart be good, thy life will be good;
if holiness be there, the instruments will be in tune. Others conceive, grace
meddles not with men's practice. No? Grace will meddle with every occasion. In
Isaiah 3.16. the Prophet speaks of proud women, who walk with stretched forth
necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go; even such things grace
will reform. Psalm. 131.1. My heart is not haughty, my looks are not lofty.
Romans 16.16. Salute one another with an holy kiss: even our very salutations
must be holy; hence grace is compared to leaven, Mat. 13.33. When the oil was
poured upon Aarons head, Psalm. 134.
it ran down to the skirts of his garment: so it is with grace, it descends
to a man's apparrelling, and speaking. Grace frames and fashions every thing.
Hos. 4.6. His smell shall be as the smell of Lebanon. Lebanon cast forth an
odoriferous smell, like a box of balm; so that as a wretched man leaves a
stench behind him, so an holy man leaves a sweet smell of grace and holiness.

Use. 3. We see hence how to get a conversation well ordered. To order thy
conversation well, get Gods image into thy heart.
Get the image of God inwardly, and it will express it self outwardly. As the
springs of a watch are, so the wheels go: so if there be a principle of
holiness within, thy whole course will strike proportionably. The husband
complains the wife is contentious; will thou have this reformed? it is not
chiding will do it; bring thy wife under the means, and get holiness into her
heart, and then the outside will be amended: So, it is not enough for a man to
fall out with himself, because he has abused God, and dishonored his
profession; this is not the way, get an holy heart, and all boisterous
distempers will depart away. Let the fountain be pure, and the streams will
not be polluted; let the root be good, and there will be green branches.

. 9.
Of Gods image in respect of the creatures.
FRom all this follows another thing, and that Divines call the outward image;
and that was the dominion Adam had over the creatures.

Quest. What was this rule and dominion?

What the dominion over them is.
Answ. It was a sovereign dispose of the creature, to further his service to
God, as he saw fit.

Two things are in the description.

1. A sovereign dispose over the creature, I mean, the beasts of the field,
the birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea. These were Adams journey-men.
He could have called for the horse to wait on him, etc. so the text says,
Chap. 2* 20. For Adam was not to have dominion over the Sun, or the Heavens,
or the Waters, but over the sensible creatures.

2. I call this a supreme, or sovereign dispose, because it was allowed him by
God, for next him, he was above all creatures. When Pharaoh had preferred
Joseph, he says, I only will be above thee. So God only would be above Adam,
but all creatures should be at his dispose.

Quest. Wherein does this dominion discover it self?

Ans. In three particulars.

And in what.
1. Adam had a supreme right and title unto the creature: he might in way of
equity challenge service from it. Usurped authority is tyranny, but when a man
has a right title, this is true sovereignty. Though God gave this to Adam, yet
it was equal he should resign it, if he required it of him. Adam was like a
Steward in a noblemans family, unless the Master gives him authority, he can
have none; so it was with Adam: but since the fall, we can challenge nothing.
Dan. 9.7. To thee belongs mercy, but to us shame. All that we can challenge,
is our own sins, and our own sorrow. If therefore God would arm creatures
against us, he may. What God will do for his mercy, is one thing; what we can
challenge, is another.

2. Adam had skill and cunning to order the creature, and so could dispose it
that way, whereby God might receive most honor. He had a sufficiency in him to
rule; for when God sets a man of government in a place, he furnishes him
ability. 1 Samuel 10.9. When God called Saul to be King, he changed his heart;
and when he took his Kingdom away, his spirit went from him. A General must
not only dispose himself, but the Army: so Adam had cunning given him to
dispose the creatures.

3. He had authority and power to awe the creatures, and uncontrollably to
command them in what he would. Genesis 9.2. The dread of you shall fall upon all
creatures: But we are rebels against God, therefore the creatures go against
us: the wild beast destroys one, the horse kills another: The creatures durst
not do so to Adam, but if Adam commanded any thing, the creature would
perform it. Genesis 2.13. Adams naming the creatures, employed his ruling over
them; They knew their names, and would come at his call. Those creatures that
God named, Adam had no dominion over. Adam could not command the Sun to stand
still; but the living creatures would neither oppose his command, nor stand
still and not do it, when he commanded.

The second thing in the description, is, that this was to further the service
of God, not to abuse it. The creature was to serve man, as far as he served
God. As it is with a Viceroy, the King makes him as himself; but he must do
no more then his Commission: so Adam was to rule over the creatures; but God
gave him a Commission, he might do no more then whereby he might honor him.

Quest. Whence comes it, that Adam must have this dominion?

Answ. Why granted to Adam.
Because all these creatures tend to those ends for which God made them: Now
the creature being made for Adam to use, he must have dominion over it. The
creature could not come to his end, unless Adam brought it on. All creatures
have a desire to come as near God as they can; hence all creatures are
uncessant in motion; as the sea runs continually, etc. The creatures therefore
would willingly be guided by that man that is ruled by the Almighty. Hos.
2.21. When God had brought home the Jews, and received them into covenant, all
the creatures come to serve them. The creatures are suppliants to God to serve
a faithful man. The heavens send their influence to the earth, and the earth
to the corn, and the corn strengthens man, and man must give all to God.

2. Because otherwise Adam might have had some excuse for himself, or plea for
his sin, if he had broken Gods command: had the creatures opposed him, or
been wanting to that supply he needed, Adam might have pleaded with God, I
confess, I knew what thou requiredest, but these creatures hindered me: I
commanded them to be helpful, but they would not, and that is the cause why thy
laws were transgressed. As it is with the Steward that has received command
from his Master, if any duty be wanting, the fault is laid upon him; it is in
vain for him to say, others would not do it; for he had power to compel
them: so Adam was left without excuse, he wanted nothing that might be required.

A shame to have lost power over the creatures.
Use 1. From the consideration of the great command we had, we should be
ashamed of what we want. It should amaze us, for that abasement we have put
our hearts into by our sins. We had a command, and supreme right to all the
creatures; but we have forfeited this right, and are put out of office; we were
Stewards, but now are become drudges. All creatures contest against a sinful
man, and become masters and tyrants over him; the fierce adder stings one, the
mad dog bites another, nay, a fly, an hair many times is made a means to
destroy him, that had dominion over all creatures. As it is with a traitor,
though he were of never so high a place, yet if he commit treason, he loses
his life, and his goods are confiscated: so we, having been traitors, have
lost, not only our lives, but our dominion over the creatures.

Quest. Wherein does this loss of right appear?

Ans. In three particulars.

1. No man since the fall can challenge, as his due, the use of the least
creature; so that if a man receive punishment from Gods hand, he has no more
then he deserves. God may take away a man's life, then much more every thing
that shores it up. Lament. 3.22. The lamenting Church naming of their sins,
quarrel not because they have not this, nor that; but mark how they speak, It
is of Gods mercy that we are not consumed. God commanded Abraham to slay
Isaac; if God should make every Father the executioner of his own child, he
required but what he might. Whatever thou have besides hell, is mercy; if we
had dropped out of our mothers womb into hell, and there been roaring, while
now we are seeking to God, it had been just; for unto us belongs nothing but
shame and confusion.

2. A man now defiled with sin, has not skill and ability to improve the
benefit of the creature to the right end of it; and this is a great loss. The
divine right of Adam was seated mainely in this, He could improve the creature
to the best advantage. God does not bestow any good upon a man, that he may
abuse it in the service of Satan; he vouchsafes not any blessing to this
purpose: yet if God give us wealth, we are ready to say to the wedge of gold,
Thou art my God. Tit. 1.15. To the impure all things are defiled. Each man,
though the blessing be never so great, yet if he be sinful, he abuses it.
Haggai 2.13. If he which is unclean touch any thing, it is unclean. Such is
the vileness of our wicked hearts, that whatsoever blessing we enjoy, it is
unclean unto us. A filthy stomach will turn the best meats into noisome
humors: so a sinful heart turns the best blessings of God into the dishonor
of his name. What is better then the goodness of God? yet a carnal heart will
despise that.

3. It goes against the creature, nay, it is a grief to the creature to serve a
wicked man. It is a grief, as I may so say, to the bed to lodge an adulterer;
it is a grief to the drink to feed the drunkard, that feeds his lusts. This
service to them is not a duty the creature owes, but a vanity it undergoeth,
Romans 8.20.
The creature is subject unto vanity. That is said to be vain that attaines
not his end; a man's labor is vain, when he attaines not what he labored
for: so the creature was made for good; but when it is perverted, this is the
vanity thereof: therefore the text says, it does this unwillingly. Romans 8.
Hence in Lev. 18.28. the Land is said to spue out her inhabitants, as a
naughty stomach does meat: therefore also the stars fought against Sisera,
Judge. 5.20. The Lord is the Lord of hosts: if the General be offended, the
soldiers must join side with him: so when we went from God, all the creatures
took up arms against us. Job 5. Thou shall be at peace with the stones of
the field. It is Gods mercy to curb the creatures, else they would be all up
in arms; Christ makes all the creatures on a good man's side; but he that is
rejected of God, all the creatures are at deadly fewd with him: I say, were it
so, that man had that divine right which Adam had to the creatures, they would
not disobey his command. We see therefore our great slavery, for all creatures
would arm themselves against us, would God permit it.

Blame thy self, not the creatures, failing of their service.
Use 2. Hence we learn how to carry our selves in the dangers we fear from
the creatures, to wit, do not look at the creature, but at our own sins, and
there lay the blame. This is a mavelous usual sin, that in the failing of
the creature, we fall out with it. If the beast fail in traveling, men fall
to cursing; Do not so, lay thine hand upon thy bosom, and say, I am the
cause: had not I deceived the trust God committed into mine hand, the creature
had not deceived me. Sometimes, God arms the creatures against a man, and the
creature so takes head that the bit cannot curb it: the horse slayes one, the
ox another; I say, when you find this that your subjects rebel, do not rail
at them, but blame thine own sin, and reason thus; I confess, the creature
may do so; for how many commands have I had from God, and none would rule me,
wherefore it is a wonder the creature takes not away my life? Numb. 22.23.
Balaam smote the ass, and God opened her mouth, and she said, Was I wont to do
so? as if she should say, It was not my fault, thou saw not Gods wrath. When
you find hurt from the creature, imagine you heard it say, The time was I
stooped, but thy sins have made God to set me as a soldier against thee.

. 10.
Romans 10.5. Of the covenant made with Adam.
He that does these things shall live.


The excellency of Adams condition appears in two things.

1. In the Image of God upon Adam; we have spoken of that already.

2. Concerning the Covenant made with him. In which we will discover two things.

1. The nature of it. 2. The seals and sacraments of it.
The nature and substance of it is discovered in the words of the text, quoted
out of Lev. 18.15. The self same words being repeated, Gal. 3.12.

A covenant of works.
There is a double covenant.

1. The covenant of works; and the substance of that is this, Do this, and
live. Obey (says God) and keep my commandments, as thou may, and thou
shall have what thou will.

2. And of faith.
There is also another covenant: Adam falsified this, and did not perform holy
obedience; God therefore provided another means, that as it is Romans 8. that
which was impossible by the law, might be made possible by the Gospel:
therefore in 2 Timothy 1.10. God brought life and immortality to light through the
Gospel. This second covenant is, Believe, and live: because thou have not
performed my commands, believe in another, and go to Christ, that he may do
it for thee. Believing and living, belonged not to Adam; but the first
covenant, Do this and live; touching which, we will propose three things.

1. To tell you what it is. 2. The reason of it. 3. The use and application of
it.
Qu. 1. What is it?

The covenant of works described.
An. It is a compact between God and Adam; in which, upon condition of yielding
obedience to God for him and his, God promised life to him and his.

In the description are two things, which are the parties of the covenant.

1. The parties that make it; a covenant implies a covenanting, not with a man's
self, but with another.

2. The terms of agreement: both are here expressed.

1. The parties; God and Adam: the Creator and the creature enter into an
engagement one with another; the one to obey, the other to bless and assist.
This the Scripture shows us in the renewall of the covenant, Exodus 19.5. If
you obey my voice (says God) you shall be my peculiar people: and in the 8.
verse the people answer, Whatever the Lord has said, we will do. This
discovers unto us the covenant of Adam, though it were made many years before.
This Law opposes the covenant of the Gospel, Gal. 2.16. But Deuteronomy. 29.2. they
took another oath, that what righteous laws God appointed, they would
perform, and God enters into the same condition with them.

2. For the articles of agreement, they are two.

1. That Adam should perform obedience for himself and his posterity.

2. God promises life to him and his posterity upon these terms.

He was to obey; for God delights in obedience. 1 Samuel 15.23. To obey is better
then sacrifice. God gives not Adam a charge to be rich, but to keep his
commandments, Joh. 4.23. God looks not for men of great place, but those that
yield sincere obedience. As the master commends such an office to the servant,
and says, This is your charge; so the charge that God gave Adam, was not to
gain prosperity, but to obey. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou shall keep all his
commandments.

Quest. After what manner was Adam to perform obedience?

Answ* The manner of his obedience appeared in four things. The manner of
Adams obeying God.


1. He had a power and principle in himself, to keep Gods commandments. Adam
had an uncontrollable liberty of will, whereby he could begin his own work.
He needed only an ordinary concourse of Providence, which God gives to other
creatures. God put this stock into Adams hand, that he might manage the great
affairs of life. But it is otherwise in the second covenant; we must see our
selves lost in regard of our own ability to service, and therefore we are
bound by faith to go out to another; which Adam needed not. We that are weak
of our selves, must fetch power from Christ. It may truly be said, that Adam
had something of his own. It was a debt to Adam, that if God required
obedience, he should bestow ability on him; God could require no more of Adam
in equity, then he gave him ability to discharge: but it is mercy, that we
have any thing: So that the substance is this; Adam needed not to deny
himself, we must deny our selves. We are dead in sins and trespasses, and
therefore it is not I, says St. Paul, but Christ in me. Joh. 1.16. We
receive grace for grace from Christ; nay, we must wait on God, and stay his
time; for he may as well withdraw help as bestow it; but he could not do so
with Adam: He engaged himself never to be wanting to him; but God owes us
nothing in point of grace. Hence the covenant of doing and believing are put in
opposition. Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith: the meaning is, believing in
Christ is not the performance of the moral Law. He that believes, says, I
can do nothing; Adam might say, I can do all things. I say, Believing in
Christ is not a performance of a work of the Law, but of a work of the
Gospel. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By grace ye are saved through faith, not of your
selves. If any one had been saved by his own works, as Adam might have been,
he had been saved by himself; but now it is through Christ, and it is through
grace that Christ assists us: this is the cause that many perish who think to
be saved by the merit of their works; but this is cross to believing, this is
not going out, but continuing within themselves. Those that are under the Law;
that is, those that seek for life by doing, these are under the rigor and
condemning power of the Law: Those that are of Faith, that is, those that are
content to be ruled by the power of the Gospel, they are saved by Christ. This
is the meaning of that parable, Gal. 4.24. For Agar, spoken of there, is a type
of the Law, Sarah of the Gospel; the Law has children, and the Gospel
children: the children of the Law are the children of bondage; but those that
are begotten by grace, are free men, free from the guilt and power of sin. If a
man will come to salvation by the Gospel, he must not come by himself.

2. Adam had sufficiency in himself fully to keep the Law in the rigor of
it; Adams heart, and the Law were of an equal breadth and latitude. The Law
took up his whole heart, and he was able to perform the whole Law. The Law was
written in his heart, as in a book full written, never a white line left.
David, Psalm. 119.2, 6. sometimes says, he will keep the whole Law; sometimes
he will keep it with his whole heart. It is not so with us: as of our selves
we are not able to think a good thought. Our faith is like a grain of
mustard seed, mingled with imperfection, 1 Cor. 13. We know in part, and we
believe in part; our graces are mingled with many frailties. Romans 7.21. When I
would do good, evil is present with me. Heb. 12.1. Sin easily besets the
soul. When we perform duties, corruption stands by, and crosses it. In the
best duties exceptions may justly be taken; they answer not fully the Law of
God.

3. Adam might have challenged a recompense of reward by way of justice, for
his doing. He needed to crave no pardon, had he obeyed the Law, as he was
able; because there would be no fault in his performance. Romans 4.4. If a man
can perform the Law, recompense is due to him as a debt; which Adam was able
to do. He might glory in the performance of his duty, giving also glory to
God. Romans 3.27. Boasting is not excluded by the law of works, but by the law of
faith. As if he should say, Could a man do what the Law requires, he might
boast; but the law of faith excludes boasting: if I can do nothing but what
God helps me in, and perfect nothing but what God perfects in me, why should
I boast? A man cannot be saved by works and grace too. Romans 11.6. If by
works, it is not mercy; if by grace, it is not his own sufficiency: when we
have done what we can, we can challenge nothing, but beg pardon. Psalm.
130.3. If thou, Lord, should mark our iniquites, O Lord, who could stand!
Adam could have endured it; for he (I say) had no flaw in his obedience, but we
(poor creatures) cannot do this. Do thou think to be saved by thy services
and merits? Romans 4.7, 8.
No, Happy is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered: those works cannot save a man, Adam stood or fell for us as well as
for himself, and why
in which there is enough to condemn him.

4. Adam did it for himself and his posterity; if he had kept the Law, we
had lived in him; therefore if Adam broke the Law, and died, thou must also
die; this is so by all rights.

1. By the right of Nations: The Kings sends over an Ambassador, he craveth
terms of agreement; what ever the Ambassador does, all the Nation does,
because the Ambassador goes in the name of the King, who is the Ruler of the
Nation.

2. Look into all Courts, what the party does, the surety does; if the party
falls, the surety falls: also, what the Parliament does we do, because we
choose men and send them thither.

3. Look into the law of Nature; if the Father has a child borne long after
the bond was made, yet he must pay the debt; also if his father purchase land
for his heir before he was borne, he must have the benefit of it. Adam was our
Father, he made a compact for all his posterity. Romans 5.12. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin. The tenor of the compact was for
his heirs and executors; if he kept the Law, he and they should be happy: if
he broke it, he and they should be miserable. He did for his posterity, but
here every man must believe for himself; it is not the faith of thy father
that will do thee good. Thy faith has made thee whole, not another man's:
another man's digesting of meat cannot help thee; so another man's faith cannot
save thy soul.

Use 1. A sinful disagreement which is for holiness.
The first Use discovers what the great God of heaven requires of his, namely,
obedience; and then it falls mavelous heavy upon, and condemns the practice
of wicked men. The ground of agreement between God and Adam, was obedience; but
obedience to God is now the cause of all jarres with men: if a man discharge
his duty in obedience to God, it breeds divisions: Men are, as is spoken of
Simeon and Levi, brethren in iniquity; if they vent themselves in sinful
practices, then they rejoice in them. All contention comes from holiness. It
is surely an argument of a malicious wretch, whom God will make an example, as
he did Cain, 1 John 3.12. Who slew his brother, because his deeds were evil,
and his brothers good: he loathes him, because his sacrifices were accepted;
on this root grows all the derision that befalls the righteous. So says
David, Ps. 38.20. They hate me because I do the thing that is right. If a man
begin to reform his life, they bend themselves all against him. You who are
maliciously bent against the Saints, mark this; Does God show salvation to
them, and will thou show contempt? either the Lord is to be blamed, or thou
condemned. Exodus 19. If you will obey my voice, you shall be my peculiar
people. Have thou then a child whose soul is awakened? that child should be
thy peculiar treasure, before all other ruffian-like children. That husband or
wife that obeys the voice of the Lord, should be a treasure to thee; but if
when the child sets his face toward goodness, thou art set against him, thine
heart is graceless. Ps. 69.27. Blot out their names out of the book of life.
Why? they persecute him whom thou have smitten. When God has smote a poor
sinner, you add taunts to his trouble; take heed you bring not that judgment
upon your selves you shall never be able to bear.

Use 2. Holy persons, in league with God, may in all evils be comfortable.
It is a word of comfort to cheer up the hearts of all poor Christians
against contempt; though their wants are many, their oppositions great, that
they are accounted the offscouring of the world: Let this be a cordial unto
you, God will accept you, not according to what you have, but according to what
you desire. Have thou riches and honor? God likes thee never the better for
them; neither does he like thee ever the worse if thou want them. Psalm.
147.10. God looks not at the feature of man, it is not his bravery and
ornaments, it is not his silk coat that covers him, that God takes delight in,
but in them that fear him, and hope in his mercy. Though thou have not outward
pomp, have thou an heart to fear God? then God rejoices over thee, when all
the mighty of the world shall be discarded. Acts 10.24. God is no respecter of
persons, but in every Nation, he that works righteousness, Jam. 2.2, 3
is accepted of him. It is the guise of men, that when one comes in a gold
ring, he is respected; but if a poor Saint comes, they disdain him. This
entertainment you shall find of the world; but know it of a truth, God loves
those that love him, and such shall be respected when the wicked shall be cast
out of Gods presence. Micah 6.18. He has showed thee, oh man, what he
requires, That thou should walk before him. Reason therefore thus, It is
true, I have not riches, or wealth; no matter, for God does not require this:
what he requires is obedience, and that I have.

Use 3. The third Use is of instruction, and it is double.

1. Hence we may learn what care to use in walking in obedience; Take care to
walk obediently.
this is that which gives God contentment. Do as thou can, and God will
accept of what thou do, if it be sincere. We must not think to perform
exactly what Adam did, but to endeavor what we can. Romans 12.1. Give up your
selves a living sacrifice to God. Would you please God? your reasonable service
shall find acceptance. Heb. 13.16. To do good forget not, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased. Mat. 6.20. This is called the heavenly
treasure: look, as it is with wicked men ( Romans 2.5.) They treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath; the more sin they commit, the more punishment will
lie upon their souls: so does a good man lay up a treasure of holiness.
Should a man bring all the treasure of Dives, all the honor of Ahashuerus,
they would do him no good. Will thou appear, and say, Lord, I have cozened so
many poor, and by this means I have gotten so much wealth! No, the only
commodity that will go off, is holy services. Rev. 14.13
Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, their works follow them; nothing in the
world but works can follow a man. The services that come from a sincere heart,
will go with thee to thy grave; therefore as Factours purchase things that will
be saleable when they come home, so let us now lay up that provision that will
stand us in stead hereafter.

2. Hence we see how to carry our selves toward others. Love those best who
are best.
As good children, let us imitate our father. God loves men that obey. Let the
same mind be in us, Psalm 119.63. I am a companion of those that love thee.
He says not, I am a companion to those that haunt evil places, but to such
as love God. Psalm. 103.6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in the land. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while you are with him. The Lord keeps
company with them that keep company with him in holy duties. Let us be of the
same affection toward our brethren, and let nothing breed division, but only
the sins of others. Zach. 8.23. Ten men shall take hold on the skirt of a
Jew, saying, We will go with you: for the Lord is with you. I say, let
nothing breed jarres between us and others, but only their sins.

. 11.
NOw we proceed to the second part of the Covenant; Of life promised to Adam
if obedient.
What God promises to Adam: He that does these things shall live.

For the opening of this, we must treat of three particulars.

1. What life is. 2. Wherein lies the sweetness of the promise. 3. The
universality of it.
1. What is meant by life? Life natural.
Life is double; natural and spiritual: eternal life is nothing but
spiritual life made perfect. Natural life is the motion of the creature,
issuing from the joining of the body and soul together, according to the kind
thereof. The life of a tree is to grow; of a reasonable creature to discourse.
This is not meant here; for Adam did thus live before and after he brake the
Comandements of God.

And spiritual.
2. There is a spiritual life, which belongs to the soul in holy duties: it is
called life by a similitude, and it is those spiritual works which proceed
from the whole man, the soul being united to God. As the union of the body and
soul causes life; so the union between the soul and God causes spiritual
life. Genesis 2.7. God breathed into his nosthrils the breath of life; so the Lord
breathes assistance: and this is spiritual life here meant; which may be
discovered in three particulars.

1. Adam, Spiritual life discovered in 3. things.
out of his special liberty he had, was able to put himself under the stream
of Providence, and so to be carried on to holy duties. God would have assisted
Adam, but he must first put himself under the stream of Providence: as the
boat upon the stream, so would the Providence of God have conveyed Adam. All
things were made for man, and man is next neighbor to God. Had Adam looked
toward Gods wisdom, he should have been quickened in wisdom: and so he
might have received strength from any Attribute, if he would submit his heart
to the stream of it. Joh. 1.16. From Christ we receive grace for grace. What
letters are in the seal, the same are in the wax; so when by faith we look
upon Christ, there is grace in him, and it is conveyed to us. Psalm. 86.11.
Unite my soul to thee: first the soul must be united, and then it acts from
that union. John 6.68. Thou only have the words of eternal life: as if he
should say, By thy virtue only we must be strengthened. By this time God and
Adam are met.

2. The soul of Adam being met with God, hence followed spiritual actions,
namely, Adam was able to work like God, according to his manner: the boat, and
rower, and stream go all one way. In 1 Pet. 4.6. a good man is said to live
according to God; This is spiritual life, when a man's will and desire is
answerable to God; but wicked men, Ephesians. 4.18. are strangers to the life of
God. Col. 4.12. The Apostle prays that they might stand perfect in the will
of God. Psalm. 119.144. Give me understanding that I may live. A man does not
live thus, because he sees as the beasts do, or grows as the trees do, or
reasons, which the devils can do; but because he has an understanding to live
the life of God. When Adam is at God, he is where he would be. Romans 14.18. The
kingdom of heaven consists not in meats and drinks, that is, in outward
actions; they are in themselves neither good nor bad: but when a man is led by
God to perform holy duties, he then pleases God in them.

3. He had power to hold out this blessed will of God to others, that they
might love it. Phil. 1.20. St. Paul prays that in life and death God might be
magnified. Adam did hold out the glory of God, that all the world might see how
glorious he was.

Quest. Wherein lies the pith of this promise, and what should Adam reap from
this?

The sweetness of the promise of life, wherein.
Answ. It lies in this; That God would so continue good to Adam, that if he
would obey God, he would so support him with his grace, that he should have
pleased him for ever: as if God had said, If thou will do what I command, I
will unchangeably supply life to thee. I will express it by the contrary: Thus
it befell Adam; he broke the law, and therefore was under the power of sin,
to be led by the force of it to sin eternally, and perish everlastingly. The
Lord said, Thou shall not eat; Adam did eat; so going against the command,
the Lord puts him under the authority of corruption; and this is spiritual
death. So then, it is not the law of God that rules thee, but the vanity of thy
mind, that domineers over thy soul, and members of thy body. Contrariwise, had
Adam pleased God, he should have been under the power of holiness, and never
have sinned. For God thus said to Adam, If thou will keep my Laws, I will
support thee, and thou shall never be subject to any evil. As it is with the
damned, they can do nothing but sin, and depart from God daily: so
contrariwise, had Adam performed Gods laws, God, with a full stream of
immutable assistance, had carried him on daily in his service. This is the
happiness of a Saint in heaven, not only to be freed from misery and anguish,
or to have joy and delight (a man was not made only for these) but to please
God. If it were possible for a sinful creature to carry a proud heart to
heaven, he were miserable; but if a man have holiness, all sweet content is
his. This is but the second part of happiness.

Qu. Why did God make this covenant with Adam?

Answ. This covenant observed, had added immutability to Adams happiness.
Because it was the only way to conveigh an immutable condition to Adam. God
had furnished him with all things; nothing was wanting but immutability and
constancy. Immutability is an essential property belonging to God, Mal. 3.6.
Jam. 1.17. therefore it was impossible that any immutable quality should be
put into Adam. If Adam had made use of Gods continual assistance sustaining
him, though he were in himself mutable, yet he could never have changed. A
glass, though it be brittle, yet hold it in a man's hand continually, it will
never break; so, though Adam were brittle, yet if he would have kept him in
the hands of Gods assistance, he could not change. Adams obedience was an help
hereto: had Adam done Gods will, he had pleased God; Gods pleasure is
himself, himself is immutable, therefore he must have an immutable
assistance. The damned in hell did offend God, and provoke his displeasure, his
displeasure was unchangeable; therefore he delivers them up to the authority
of sin, to be unchangeably sinful, and perish everlastingly: so it was here
with Adam; Gods pleasure was immutable, therefore he pleasing him, God must
reward him answerably.

Use 1. The first Use is of Instruction: Impossible to be saved by the Law.
it is impossible for any man to be saved by the works of the law: Why? He
that will be saved by the covenant of works, must perform the conditions of
the covenant: but no man can do this; for the law requires personal obedience;
that is, that which comes from his own power, and constant obedience in all
things, at all times, without any failings: therefore, no man being able to do
this, no man can have life by his works. Romans 3.20. By the law a man has
knowledge of sin: now if the law discovers a man's sin, and pronounce him
guilty of death, it cannot save him. Gal. 3.10. They that will be saved by the
works of the law are cursed: for cursed is every man that continues not in all
these things to do them. If a man break the law but once, though he never
break it more, he could not be saved by it. It is impossible for a man to
keep the law since the fall, and therefore it is impossible for the law to save
him. Gal. 4.21. Cast out the bondwoman and her son. The law begets children to
bondage; it shows a man his bondage in sin, and condemns him for it.

Adams sin is rightly charged upon us.
Use 2. We learn hence not to repine at the Providence of God, not to charge
God foolishly, because the sin of Adam is imputed to us. We have in our hearts
the old Proverb of Judah, Our Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and our teeth
are set on edge. See (says some man) Adam has sinned, and shall I be
punished? Thus the soul snarles at God like a chained dog: Labor to quiet all
such distempers. If Adam had performed the law, thou would have been content
to have been happy: why then, is it not equal, that since he broke the law,
thou should be plagued? It was the argument Job used to his Wife, Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not evil? So, when the heart
begins to rise against God, saying, Adam sinned, and shall I be plagued? Thou
speak foolishly: shall we receive good if he had kept the law? and shall we
not receive evil, since he has broke it? Are you content to partake of the
mercy of Christ, and not to partake of Adams sin, who stood in your stead?

Use 3. The third Use is of direction, To live holily, get the Spirit of promise
how to get power to carry us on in a Christian course. If thou will stand
fast, have recourse to that which may support thee, have recourse to the Spirit
in the promise. Our grace is feeble, but the Word of the Lord endures for
ever, and it will make thee to endure, Rev. 14.

The reason why the grace of the Saints of God is feeble, is* because they have
not recourse to the Spirit. We look to our own pits, no wonder then if the
streams of grace be dry: have recourse to the fountain, which is Christ. 1 Samuel 2.9, 10. No man shall prevail by his own strength. Say, as David, Psalm.
51.14. Stablish me with thy free Spirit; my spirit is feeble and unconstant,
but do thou stablish me. Isa. 40.29. The strong men shall fail, if they
trust in themselves: but he that puts his trust in the Lord, shall renew
his strength like the Eagle. Hence many a weak Christian lives and dies
comfortably, when as the stronger stagger all their days; because the one
trusts to Christ, the other to his own abilities. This David makes the foot
of a Psalm, Psalm. 136.
The mercy of the Lord endures for ever: be sure therefore to repose thy
self on that most constant bottom.

. 12.
Genesis 2.9. And God set two trees in the garden.


NOw we come to the seals of this Covenant, Of the Sacraments of life to Adam.
and those were two trees, the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good
and evil. Trees, types by Gods appointment.
They were not bare trees; but set apart by Gods appointment: As water in
Baptism is set apart to be significant to typifie spiritual Baptism; so did
the Lord appoint these for a significant end. They were natural trees, but had
a kind of institution by God touching the terms of agreement between him and
Adam.

Concerning these trees we must enquire four things.

1. The reason why God appointed them. 2. The nature of them. 3. The reason of
their diversity. Why appointed of God.
4. The use of the whole.
For the first of these; Why they were appointed. I answer: God did appoint
them for a double end.

1. To persuade Adam of his faithfulness; that he would put it out of
question, that he purposed seriously to do what he promised. Not that God
needed this for any weakness on his part, but to condescend to the infirmity
of Adam. When a man has sealed to a covenant, he cannot fly off: therefore
the Lord did it to make all sure, and to fence them against the policy of
Satan, who told the woman, she should not dye, Genesis 3.5. As if he should say,
God grudges at your happiness, he knows, if you eat, you shall live.
Therefore the Lord sets his seal to certify Adam, he seriously meant what
he had promised.

2. They were as monitors to stir up Adam to watchfulness over his courses;
and therefore these trees were in the midst of the garden, Genesis 3.9. and any
thing that is in the midst, we easiliest discern. A man that looks upon the
seal, is thereby put in mind of the covenant: so did these daily put Adam in
mind of the covenant.

2. Qu. What was the nature of this seal?

Ans. The tree of life employed two things.

Tree of life, why.
1. It put him in mind of the covenant of life; and this is done by way of
signification.

2. The eating of this ( Adam having first obeyed) would have been a mean^ to
conveigh to him immutable assistance to eternal life. There be diverse
opinions of Divines touching this; but surely it did mainely seal the
covenant; and the reason is, because life, which was in the covenant, was
communicated by this tree: but life spiritual only was intended in the
covenant; therefore the seals seal life spiritual only. It is a weak
opinion of some, that think the tree would make Adam immortal, though it were
after his fall. They prove it out of Genesis 3.22. else why should God thrust him
out of Paradise lest he should eat of the tree of life? I answer: This word
(lest) implies, not what followed, but what they conceived would follow.

Tree of knowledge of good and evil.
Touching the tree of knowledge of good and evil, we are to know three things.

1. What is meant by knowledge. 2. What by good and evil. 3. Why it is called
so.
For the first: Knowledge in Scripture has a double sense. Sometimes it
signifies, to be able to pierce into the nature of things; as it is Ephesians.
1.17. This spiritual knowledge was not here meant, for it was not here
ratified, but taken away.

2. It signifies sense and experience. We use to say, I never knew what
poverty meant. Such a man may talk of it, but never had experience of the
pinching of it: so we say also, I now know what a prison means. Perhaps he
knew what it was before, but that was but a bare notion; now he has tasted of
it by experience, and can read the nature of it by proof. So, 2 Cor. 6. ult.
it is said, Our Savior knew no sin: he had knowledge humane, and
spiritual, and therefore knew the loathsomeness of it: the meaning of it is,
he knew not what it was by his own experience. Exodus 4.4. The Lord says,
Pharaoh shall know, that I am God; that is, he shall know by experience, that
I am a just God, and feel it to his cost. So, Isa. 26.10. The wicked will not
learn righteousness; and in this sense it is here taken, to wit, for
experimental knowledge.

2. Qu. What is meant by good and evil?

Answ. Good implies two things. 1. A performance of duty to God, and pleasing
him. Micah 6.8. He has showed thee what is good. So David says, I love the
thing that is good in thine eyes. 2. It implies the happiness and blessing
that flows from closing with God. As a man by chewing meat receives
nourishment, so does a man by doing good. Psalm. 125.4. Do good to those that
are good.

Evil is a disobedience, and vengeance comes therefrom by a just recompense
of reward.

3. Qu. Why is it called the tree of knowledge of good and evil?

Ans. Not because in it self it had any virtue to cause the knowledge of good
and evil; for in its own nature it was as other trees: Genesis 1. ult. God saw
that all things were good, and this among the rest: But because God did hedge
in this tree, and forbid Adam to eat of it, it was therefore unlawful,
because God forbad it.

It was called thus in two regards.

1. It did signify to Adam, that if he did eat he should die; and so have
experience of good and evil.

2. If Adam did eat, then through his own sin it was made a means to make
Adam know, by experimental proof, what it was to please God, and what to
displease him; as you may see, Genesis 3.7. They saw by the eye of their
conscience their lusts ovespreading them, and shame following them, and that
they were deprived of happiness.

Q. But why did God give these two contrary seals?

Ans. 1. That Adam might see and know his changeable estate, that he might go
in the right way, and be blessed; that he might not go in the wrong way and
be cursed. Our Sacraments are to one thing; by Baptism God entertaines us
into his family, by the Lords Supper he nourishes us in his family.

2. That he might make full provision for Adam, that so he should not say, If
I had had this, I might have stood. For, like as it is said, Exodus 33. I have
set life and death before you, God set the tree of life to encourage Adam, and
the tree of knowledge to affright him. Thus the Lord would be wanting to him
in nothing.

Use. Hear curses to affright from sin, as well as mercies.
The Use that will follow from the diversity of the seals, is this: Hence we
learn as well to hear curses to terrify us from sins, as mercies to
encourage us. If Adam had need of this in his innocence, that had no sin,
how much more need have we, when the flood gates of sin are within,
abundance of bad examples without! If a man in a good and healthful
constitution need opening diet, then much more, a body that is corrupt, has
need of strong physic. If Adam, that was in an wholesome condition, had need
of a threatening, how much more need have we, that have hearts overcharged with
strong distempers, and clogged with venom and malice. This cheks the conceit
of carnal persons, that think Ministers ought not to speak such terrible
things; either they must be wiser then God, or we must be better then Adam.
Therefore we should deal with our hearts as men do with the creature; though
it be somewhat tame, it must have an ordinary fence; and if it be unruly, we
shackle it: So Adam had a well tempered disposition, yet he had a prohibition:
but alas, our natures are like an untamed heifer, as they, Jer. 2. that snuff
up the wind like the wild ass, and are carried on violently into corruptions.
What shall we say of these wild ass colts, as Job speaks? Chapter 11.15. for if
Adam had need of a chek, a thousand threatenings are too little for such
wretches as we are.

. 13.
Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.


THis verse shows unto us the proof of a wise man, and one that does truly
take notice of all the occasions of time, whereby he will redeem the time. Wise
men will do so.

In the verse are two things to be considered.

1. A Duty; and 2. the Reason of it.

1. The Duty: Redeem the time.

2. The Reason: Because the days are evil, full of misery and all
abomination, and harder times will come in the last days: so that all wise men
should store up against an evil day.

To redeem is to purchase, or to buy. The time, that is, a season, not a
distance of many hours, but a season; and that is the convenience or meeting
of many helps together. As wind and tide makes a season to sail in: so when
there is a fair day, and the sun shines, tha'ts a season of traveling. When
there is no wind nor tide, there are indeed so many hours, but it is not a
season: so in the night, there are so many hours, but not a season; no
sunshine or light, and therefore not a fit time or season for traveling: But
that is a season, when there are helps afforded of doing good.

2. What is it to redeem the time? It is no where read, but it signifies thus
much, To buy in the market, as tradesmen do. So should the children of God,
while time, and means, and health, and life, and liberty is afforded unto
them, store themselves with faith and ability against evil days.

The Doctrine hence is this.

Doct. Improve gracious occasions for good.
It is a point of spiritual wisdom to purchase the opportunities of grace
and salvation at any rate.

Where helps are, there are opportunities of doing good.

For the further explication of this Doctrine, there are 3. questions to be
propounded.

1. What are the seasons of grace and salvation. 2. What we must part withal
for them. 3. What course we must take for to purchase them.
Quest. 1. What are the opportunities of grace?

Opportunities of grace, what.
Answ. They are either general, or special. General are such as men take in
the time of their life; here is the time of working, here is the time of doing
and getting: for, In the grave there is no wisdom, nor counsel, Eccles.
9.10. and there is no hope neither; for as death leaves us, so shall judgment
find us.

Eccles. 3.
2. There are special opportunities for every business: a time to plow, and
sow, and reap: so there is a day of salvation, a day of grace.

These seasons may be divided into three heads.

1. When we have matter to work upon. Then is a season, when God calls us to
do good. Sometimes the Lord casts us among the poor, that we should relieve
them; the ignorant, that we should instruct them; the wicked, that we should
reprove them. Sometimes the Lord lets us be wronged, that is a time to use
patience; and suffers us to be disgraced, that is a time to use humility, and
to trample all reproaches under feet.

2. Sometimes there are special means of doing our selves good; as upon the
Lords day, which is the market day for our souls, wherein God sets out his
wares to sell, if men have hearts to come and buy; and such are the Sacraments,
and communion one with another. See how men do in worldly matters, so do you in
spiritual: one man sels cloth, another man corn: so should Christians: Thou
should give thy brother a word of humiliation, he should give thee a word of
comfort, as thou stand in need of the same.

3. When the Lord enlarges the hearts of his children, as he does many times,
that is another opportunity; take hold of it: when the Lord strikes, strike
thou; when the Lord moves, move thou. As when thou hear the Word, and art
convicted by it, and thy heart begins to move; oh then, that is a season. Make
hay while the sun shines: follow the blow, and break thy heart, and humble thy
soul; for that is a special and a spiritual opportunity for good to thine own
soul. Or sometimes, when thou art in thine own private chamber, and the door
shut, and the candle out, and the curtains drawn about thee, then call thou
to mind thy sins, and the many abominations thou have committed; oh then
humble thy soul, and break thine heart, and bless the Lord for that
opportunity.

Quest. 2. What must we give for these opportunities of grace and salvation?

Answ. With what we must part for them.
What will you bestow? This is Gods market day; if you will bid like a chapman,
you are like to have them. I will tell you what you must give, and I will set
down the price in three particulars.

1. A man must part with all his sins and corruptions; and a man may do that
upon as reasonable terms as may be: for a man's sins will never do him good
but hurt, and therefore he ought to forsake them.

2. (If it please God to set his commodities at so high a rate, then) we must
forsake all the comforts of this life, rather then lose salvation. Not only
pleasures, and profits, and delights; but meat, drink, and apparel, if God
will have his wares so dear. We must part with all kindred, friends, and all,
yea, life it self, if occasion should serve. But sometimes the Lord is so
merciful, and the market goes at so low a rate, that a man may have both the
comforts of this life, and the means of grace and salvation too: but if the
Lord require these, then we must let all go. Phil. 3.7, 8. I count all things
dross and dung, yea, (...).
dogs-meat, in comparison of Christ. We must part with all for Christ, and be
willing to suffer for him, if God require. I count all dogs-meat, says S.
Paul, I count all these things nothing: A Pharisee of the Pharisees, a Jew,
circumcised the eighth day, yet I account all these but dung. Mat. 19.27. There
when Christ called his Disciples unto him, Peter said, Master, we have left
all, and have followed thee: What therefore shall be to us? He answered, Ye
that have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit
upon the Throne of his glory, even ye shall sit upon the twelve thrones, etc.

So that you that are content to part with all, house and land, silver and
gold, friends and acquaintance, and follow Christ, in the regeneration, all
things shall be restored unto you. Christ says unto the young man, Follow me:
I pray (says he) suffer me to bury my Father: No, no (says Christ) Let the
dead bury their dead; but follow thou me. So, when our hearts hang after
commodity and profit, and we are loath to part with them, which indeed are but
dead commodities and dead profits: they say, they will hear and attend
afterward: oh (I say) Let the dead bury their dead, attend thou here.

3. We should bestow the best of our labor, and our continual endeavor
about these things. We must not think that the Lord brings us up for nothing
but to live as we list, and to spend our time about what we please; no, he will
make us seek for mercy, and down on our knees, and beg for it, and make us be
glad that we can have it too, and be wonderfully thankful for it. Phil.
3.13. One thing I do, but leave all the rest, forgetting that which is behind,
and pressing forward to that which is before, to the reward of the high calling
in Jesus Christ, if by any means I might attain unto it.

Ob. Is this the price? Yes: But then some may object, and ask, May a man of
himself purchase salvation?

Ans. No, no, nothing so: Man cannot deserve it at the hands of God. No
merchant can get a commodity, unless he lays down something for it: so it
is here; unless we part with sin, and pleasure, and the like, we cannot have
these. And these are the rates that God has set on his wares; and that is the
reason why they are called purchasing. As a man cannot have commodities unless
he purchase them, (...).
unless he pays for them: just so it is here; we cannot have these, unless
we buy them at these rates that God has set down; and that is called
purchasing.

Now when we come into the market, Rules for buying at Gods market.
that we may buy those things we want at the best hand, observe these four
rules (we are all careful to buy at the best hand, most care ought to be
taken for the purchasing of grace and salvation).

1. We must run betimes to the market, we must take the day before us, we
must seek after the means of grace and salvation, and seek it in the first
place. We must know that there is no buying, but in the market, and all men
that need, repair thither, and we must rise betimes in the morning, and be at
the opening of the market. In the little country villages, you know, there are
no markets, nor no commodities that we need; if a man stands in need of a
commodity, it is to be had no where but in the market, thither he must
repair: just so it is here; In every town there is not fasting, and praying,
and preaching, then you must go where it is: so that if we have not means at
home, we must seek for them abroad. When Joseph's brethren wanted corn in the
time of famine, they went to Joseph their brother, for he had laid up some for
them: There is corn in Egypt, there is praying and preaching in such a town,
there you may buy corn. Ye should use all means, and take all pains to hear
the Word; and though men scoff at you, yet tell them that market-men must do
so. Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. 2 Chronicles. 11.16. It is said there, that the people forsook all, and went up to
Jerusalem to sacrifice to God. Many times a man goes four, or five, or six
miles to a market: I confess, a man might make a shift for a while without a
market, by borrowing of his neighbors; but a man cannot live without a market
long, no, not the best gentleman in the country: so a gracious heart cannot
live without the Word. Mat. 24. The text says, Wheresoever the dead carcass
is, thither the Eagles will resort: so it is with the Saints of God; if there
be any Eagle-minded, they will resort thither where Christ is taught, and
there seek for Christ, as the Eagles for the carcass. If he be a dunghill
sparrow, then he will be content to live among the flies: such men can live
whether there be any market or no; whether there be fasting or praying, or
no, they care not. Isa. 2.3. The people there say, Come, let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, that he may teach us
of his ways. Each man calls his neighbor; Come, let us go to the market, or
to the fair: so should the Saints of God; Come, let us go unto the house of
the Lord, unto mount Zion, etc. There are a generation that are content to have
commodities cried at their doors, and will not come out for them to buy them:
oh, surely such men never knew the want of grace.

As they must come to the market, so they must come with the first. Pro. 8.34.
We must wait at the gate of Wisdom: we should be with the foremost in the
town, not stay, as many do, till half Gods service is past. Psalm. 103.4. My
soul (says David) does even wait until the morning watch: so we should
wait all opportunities to be first in the Church, and tarry till the last. When
Peter was to come to Cornelius his house, Act. 10.24. before he came, they
were all there. A good husband, or a wise merchant will go betimes to the
market, go, and stand at the towns end, and see what good cattle comes in,
and what good penny-worths may be bought; so that by this means he has all the
best before him, and seeing all the good penny-worths, will let none go out of
his hand. Oh that ye were as wise for your souls, as you are for your bodies,
to come betimes! He that comes betimes, has the chief, all the holy
petitions, sweet promises of the Gospel, and uses of instruction, admonition,
reproof and comfort: But for a man to come late, when the prayers are
finished, and the Minister has took out his Text, and has delivered such
points, and such Doctrines, he loses all the benefit of them; and why? he came
after they were delivered: as when the days of Fasting were, we came at the
last duty, when as many sweet prayers and heavenly petitions had been put up to
the Lord; and what is the reason you got no benefit by them? oh, you lost your
market: you must seek to the means with the first.

2. When you are come to the market, you must attend upon it. You must bestow
your selves upon the means that God has bestowed upon you: you must come for
some good end. A wise man, as he comes to the market betimes, so when he
comes there, he attends it: he will not stand hanging about stalls, or slip
into an alehouse, (yea rather, an hell-house;) but he will attend his
business, and see how the market goes, and observe the penny-worths; he will
see the choice things in the market, and will not let a good pennyworth pass
his hands: so should a good Christian be attentive, and listen, and not suffer
any choice thing to slip from him. You must attend the market; for your go upon
life and death, upon salvation or damnation; therefore do not lose your market.
Rev. 3.2. Be watchful: let not a good pennyworth go out of your hand, but
hold it fast. A wise merchant sees a commodity, and lays hold on it, and will
not let it go; he will cheapen it, and will not let it go out of his hands
for fear he should lose it: so, when the Word meets with you, hold it fast;
oh, that is my sin (say,) and that belongs to me. Pro. 4.13 The text says, Lay
hold on instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she is thy life. Deal
with it as men do many times with a commodity; if they set on it, they will
have it whatever it cost them. Oh that men were thus set upon Christ! that they
would resolve, he should be theirs, whatsoever he cost them! oh that our
hearts were thus set upon the means! When the Lord has showed thee the
necessity of them, and God has revealed himself, oh, I say, hold fast there,
let not that opportunity go: it will be a mavelous folly if thou do, and
it will deprive thine heart of much benefit; nay, thou may lose thy soul by
such dallying; when you have time and opportunity, and yet lose it, sure it is
for want of attendance. Likewise, the children of God must pray privately,
besides this, for they have private sins as well as other sins. Attend not,
look not after temptations, but attend upon the means. Many men, when they
come to market, will fall about their homely occasions; that which they should
do at home, they do in the market: just so it is here; when the Minister is
preaching, then they are reading, or praying, or conferring; oh this is a
sinful thing; you must do your own business at home, and not neglect the
opportunity before you.

3. We must lay aside, yea, lay by those that are the best commodities, and
most necessary. We see Tradesmen need many things; but those things that are
most profitable and necessary, they will be sure to have; and if their purse
will reach and hold out, they will buy other things afterward. He will buy
bread now on the one side, and cloth on the other side: bread he must have for
his family to feed them, and cloth he must have to cloth them; and if his
money will hold out, then happily he will buy some lace, or a rattle for his
child: So I say, you have the choice of all favors, and of all mercies; now
provide that which is most necessary; First seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33. This is the maine thing: it is of necessity
that the soul should be saved. What is here meant by the Kingdom of God? Some
say, It is the kingdom of glory; others, the kingdom of grace: but how can a
man seek the kingdom of glory, but first he must have the kingdom of grace
before that of glory? And how shall a man attain to this? The Lord has
vouchsafed it to none, but to those that do seek it in his ordinances; it is to
be had by the preaching of the Gospel of grace. Was there ever any man
ordinarily converted, but by the Word of God? Romans 10.17.
for Faith comes by hearing, etc. This Word is the word of the Kingdom; first
seek that by which faith is bred, by which Christ's righteousness is made
ours; make this sure to thy soul: for this is that you cannot be without; this
is that which David desired, Ps. 27.4. This is that I will require, Lord,
(says he) that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, and see thy face in the
beauty of holiness. You make little of the preaching of the Gospel, and never
regard it; but David was glad of it: O Lord (says he) One thing I have
desired, whether I have health or no, life or no, I care not, but one thing
(Lord) I crave, that I may see thy face in the beauty, etc. For this did Christ
commend Mary; Martha, Lu. 10.42.
Martha, thou art cumbred about many things, and much business, but Mary has
chosen the better part; that shall never be taken from her. Whether is the
soul better then the body? A child of God will say, The soul is best. Whether
is prayer better then profit, heaven better then earth? if prayer and heaven
be the better, then let the earth stay, let commodity stay, let profit stay,
let heaven and salvation be served first. This dashes the dreams of many men,
that will not stir out of their shops. though they may well be spared; will
rather lose the Word of God, then lose the profit of six pence. Oh see now,
come, and lay these things together, and see the difference between them.

Ob. But some will say, they will have them; but lay them by yet, and afterward
they will bargain.

Answ. But defer not the time: Now, what will you give for them? Me thinks I
hear men's souls say, O mercy, mercy is worth a thousand worlds. Oh, what
availes it to be rich and miserable? honorable and accursed? You little ones,
what say you? Do not you wish for mercy? O mercy, mercy; without mercy we are
for ever wretched; oh, it is mercy that we live, and are not sent quick to
hell. But now, will you buy it? you shall have it cheap enough. What will you
give? (Now we come to the maine) You must give as the market goes, and on Gods
terms, for you must not think that God will save you with wishing: Oh, no,
no, he will not. But now, Will you buy them? Then bid fair: you must part with
all your sins; away with the proud heart, and away with the world and the
pleasures thereof. Now see how the world replies. First young ones reply, We
have no wit, nor understanding; well, you must believe, else you must perish.
The old man says, I am weak and feeble; well, you must get faith, or else you
must perish too. Now you know the price of it, you must provide to pay it. Mat.
13.44. There it is said, The wise merchant, when he found the pearl, went and
sold all that he had to buy it: That was a great price. Thou must sell all to
buy this: if thy lust be as dear to thee as thine eye, thou must part with
it; if thou have a proud heart, thou must down with it; if a man have a fair
estate, and so many hundreds, and such lands, and such and such wares in his
shop, if God require it, he must part with it all. The drunkard must part with
his cups, and the whoremonger with his queans: unless ye do part with these,
ye cannot have Christ; this is the price of it. Return to me an answer whether
you will have it, or no, that I may return an answer to the Lord, that he may
preserve it for you. See that of Judas, Acts 12.24. He would rather have the 30
pence; yea, he would betray his Lord for it, and he had it: but he came again
with horror of conscience, and threw it away, and threw away himself too; for
he went and hanged himself, and now hangs in hell for ever. It is an easy
matter for a man to tell over his money, but not so easy to make the heart
willing to part with it: but if you will not part with it now, there will come
a time at the day of death, and then the covetous man will say, Here, take my
money that I have got by oppression; and the drunkard will say, Here, take my
cups. Then (I say) now part with them; be wise merchants, part with them now,
and the match is made: Then now resolve. Is it mercy (says the soul)? then it
is enough, Lord take all, though I never see a good day more: if it be mercy,
then Lord take all; my God I will have, my God I must have: so that now the
decree is set down, what ever it cost I will have it, Act. 11.23. and now I
see the commodity is fair, and the offer is kind. As a merchant, if he have a
great stock, some in corn, some in household stuff, and land, and cattle, if
he sees a bargain, he will sell all that he has; yea, leave himself neither
shop nor house, and all to buy this purchase: so I beseech you, play the wise
men; here 's a deal of time spent in eating and drinking, and sleeping, and
recreating, and apparrelling, and company-keeping, and bowling, and vain
things: Play now the wise men, now God must have time, prayer must have time,
and now a stubborn heart will ask a great deal of time to batter down; many
a sigh, and many a tear, and many a prayer; now no more apparel then will
serve the turn, etc. What a deal of tricking and trimming there is for the
body! It might fare well with the soul, if it were but served as our sinkes
are many times: what washing and scouring have they? Away with this tricking
and trimming* if you do not leave it, it will cost the setting on, if God
require more then this. Be wise for your souls; if you have not time enough,
then put off your pleasure, nay, and put off the world too, nay, put off
friends, put off all, sell all. No marvel indeed, though many men say, I
marvel how such a man lives, and runs up and down so much: oh, let them know,
there is a purchase in hand that will well requite both his pains and cost.
Do not then stand higling with God, and break off for a little odd money. For
many say, I would serve God, but my friends will forsake me; and I would come
to Gods house on the week day, but the boys in the street would laugh at me.
I say, why will you dodge with God in this manner? Will your friends save you?
When you lie on your deathbeds, and your consciences accuse you, and you cry
out, Now friends save me: they cannot; for they may perish, and you too. Oh,
away with this dallying with God. What if your Landlord frown on you? what if
your father forsake you? Resolve thus. What though I have the frown of men? I
have the favor of God. What though the world be gone? yet heaven is my
comfort; happiness, that is not gone: Then say, I Will dodge no longer with God.
Saint Augustine stuck fast to his corruptions, yet To morrow Lord, and to
morrow he would leave them, and yet he prayed against them, and at last he
read the place in the Romans, Lay aside chambering and wantonness, etc. and
then he said, Why not to day Lord? and so struck through the bargain. You see
the commodity, if you will have it, speak: if you have it not, you may go
away, and repent you of it as long as you live. Now I pray you answer me; Will
you have grace? will you have salvation? and will you buy this, and give as the
market goes? tell me, do not delay while to morrow. Why not to day? O let
your souls answer and say, Yea, Lord, to day. Take all, only save my soul.
Come what will come, I Will have it. Then now the business is ended, the bargain
is made; go and take the condition; it is yours.

4. Buy not only for time present, but for future times. If thou hear the
Word of God now, then store for thy soul. Let this day be a day of
reconciliation; and then you may say, at such a day the Lord afforded you
grace, and you bargained, and that the Lord knows it: Keep that by you, that
when Satan tempts you, and says unto you, Have you any grace? you may
recall this, and say, I provided such a day against such a question, and I
remember the time, place, and stone I stood on, and the Minister that spoke,
and the Lord is my witness. Oh store up: it is the part of a wise man so to
do. Isa. 42.23. Who attends, that he may hear for afterward? Joh. 16.4.
These things (says Christ) I speak unto you, that in the time to come ye may
remember them. So ye see the opportunities of grace, the market day for it;
then go home cheared, and, having gotten grace, keep it by you. He that was
content to sell all, he had the pearl. This will cheer you, to sell all to
get Christ, and keep him by you.

In the last place: When the match is made; then in all other things you do,
you must change the property of them: you must now trade for grace, use the
world as if you used it not, and you must not live to your selves, but to God;
you must trade for God, and walk with God. You see how you must bestow your
labor and pains, else heaven will not be had. If you ask the manner how you
must seek these things; it must be in the first place: Come to the market
betimes, and see the choice, and buy the best upon any terms, and store up for
the time to come; and then buy other things. You must seeek grace in the first
place: when you are at the means, you must bestow your heart on the means; and
when you have seen the bargains, lay aside those that are more necessary, and
then part with all to have them; and thus store up for the future.

And Lastly, Use all outward means no otherwise then to help you forward to
speed.

To proceed; Now we must retain in our callings three things.

1. We must use them so, that they must give way to spiritual things. I would
not have tradesmen so set to their callings, as that they will give no liberty
for prayer, and for hearing of the Word of God. Let commodity, let profit go to
the wall, rather then to let prayer and the Word to fall, and to be neglected.
First seek the Kingdom of God: As any man will do, if there come two men to
him, if the one be better then the other, he will bid the other stand by till
his betters be served: so it is here, God is better then commodity, then
profit; then let God be served first, let duty be performed first.

2. We must so use our callings, as that we may be the better fitted to
perform more duty to God. It is very fit we should have some taste of God in
our daily employments, that we may thereby be the better fitted for his
service. As a man takes a cup of sack before supper, not that he makes a meal
of it, but to make way for his meal: just so, we should have our hearts more
enlarged by it to perform our duties, every way to take notice of Gods favor
and kindness toward us.

3. We must keep heavenly minds in earthly or worldly occasions; and that is a
marvelous hard thing, and this is the reason that the Saints of God being
snatched away by so many worldly occasions, and so many businesses, that their
hearts many times come to be deaded and dulled. But a man should use them no
further, but that his heart may be enlarged to God. Look what good we find
in our trade, let us be led by that to see what goodness is in God, who is
the fountain of all good. When we see that great good, and the commodity that
comes in to us, then let us see the riches of God: and seeing this is so good,
what should we think of the goodness of God? Let us see his goodness in it;
for unless the Lord smile on us, what avails it for us to be rich? what, to
be rich and to be damned? this is very pitiful.

But what is the reason men are so backward in buying these things? how shall
we do to bring men to bid like chapmen? The reason to persuade them may be
taken from two grounds.

1. The excellency of the commodity. 2. The time we have to purchase it.
I. To make the first plain, The excellency of the commodity to be bought.
these three arguments are to be taken from the commodity.

1. Because the means of grace and salvation is a thing of as great
excellency and price as can be; therefore in reason we should lay down a
price for them. For the better the commodity is, all wise men will lay down
answerably. The price of salvation is a great price; because there is nothing
better that is or can be desired. Pro. 4.7. Wisdom is a precious thing, but
above all things get understanding. The world, honors, pleasures may be got;
but Wisdom is best of all, therefore get that first. For all the things here
below are vain things, because they are lying vanities; but the Word of the
Lord endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1.25. and that will make us endure for ever too,
if we are humbled by it. The Word of the Lord will stand by us, for it is an
immortal Word, and it will make us immortal also: it will stand so by us, as
it will make us live for ever, and it will cheer our souls when nothing in
the world will. Phil. 2.13. We must work out our salvation with fear and
trembling: Now the manner how we shall do this, is not by making our selves
rich in this world, and getting the things thereof, but by getting grace, that
it may go well with us: this is the maine thing that we may get the love of
God, to get our souls to be humbled and cast down. Now, if this be the best,
(as it is) then in all reason, it requires the greatest price. Is it so, that
the Word of God will endure for ever, will stand by you and save you? then if
you give a price for any thing, give most for that.

2. As the means of grace is best, and of greatest worth; so it is most
necessary for us. What is the reason that men buy commodities? Because they
have need of them; as if a man should say, This I must have, and I have need of
it. Gold is better then silver, and pearls then both; but bread is best of all,
for all these must be left for it: a poor man will part with silver and gold,
and all for bread, for that he must have. Now, there is nothing so necessary as
for the soul to be saved; for if a man want any thing else, he may make a
shift; if he be poor, happily his friends be rich, and they will relieve him
well; but if the soul have sinned, and is become miserable by reason of sin,
oh what hope, what help but only from God! Therefore that is most needful:
without it the soul is starved and famished: And what though you have money?
yet your soul may perish, and go down to hell. What Is that to the soul for a
man to be rich, or what is that to the soul to have the person applauded, and
have abundance of all things, and the poor soul is starved and famished, and
wants all things? Me thinks I hear your souls cry out, The body, that is
clothed, the house filled, and the shop, that is stored; oh, says the soul, I
shall be damned; all is provided for, only I shall smart for it, I shall pay
for all, I shall go to hell for it. I beseech you think of it. The time will
come when you will prize mercy, and cry out for it. When thou lie on thy
death bed, when thou art breathing out thy last breath, then one dram of mercy
Lord, and then one dram of faith Lord; then it will be worth a world to thee.
Mat. 23. It is said there, the foolish Virgins cry out, We have no oil, oh,
lend us some; oh then, Lord, open unto us. One day the poor soul will have
need of mercy. You see that it is most necessary, then buy it, lest you be
forced to borrow and cannot have it. So then there is but one needful thing,
Luke 11. ult. It is not of necessity to be rich, it is not of necessity to be
honorable; but oh, this is of necessity, that thy sins should be pardoned,
thy person accepted, and thy soul saved.

3. Here is a point of great christian policy, for in getting of grace and
salvation, you shall get all other commodity with it, and all other good
things. It is the best husbandry to buy that which will bring in most good. For
all outward comforts and contentments that this life can afford, they come all
in this. As, a man that sees such a tree, and such an acre of ground, if it
likes him, he will not go to buy that, but he will buy the Lordship, and then
all the trees are his, and all the ground is his. So, this is our misery, we
stand puddling our selves here for a little honor, and for a little riches: go
(I say) and buy the Lordship, and then all will be made sure unto thee. Pro
3.14, 15, 16. Get wisdom, for life and honor are on her right hand, and
riches and pleasure are on her left hand, etc. First seek the kingdom of
heaven, and all other things shall be cast in upon you. So that a good man
compares all this outward commodity to pack thread and paper, which if a man
goes into a shop, and buys wares, he shall have into the bargain for nothing.
So here, get once grace, and then all things else you shall have into the
bargain: for Godliness is great gain: it has the promise of this life, and
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. You may sit and sing Care away; for all is
yours, heaven is yours, the earth is yours. It is a mavelous folly in men,
who take a wrong course to thrive. If you would be rich, then Consider your
own ways, and your hearts, and turn unto the Lord; Hag. 1.16.
for that is the way. It is not all the policy, and the carping and caring in
the world that will make a man rich; for the Lord has a vein of vengeance to
waste this man's estate, and a secret plague to plague another man's wealth: So
now consider your ways. Consider, how that when you were careless of God,
then the Lord crushed all you did. Where are men's hearts, thus to wait upon,
and to follow God? I say, where are men's hearts? if grace be the best good,
then labor herein.

II. Secondly, Time to purchase it, is but short.
See the opportunity that God gives us to get grace. From whence we may draw
two reasons. One from the shortness of our life: and the other from the
shortness of the means of grace and salvation, by reason of our
unprofitablenesse. It is our wisdom to strike while the iron is hot; the
means of grace and salvation is short, and he that dies without grace shall
never be saved. Consider of it, this may be the last time that I ever shall
speak, or you shall hear: for the Lord may take away our lives, or the means
from us. Therefore while you have time, employ your time; for there is a great
deal past, and that is gone, and cannot be recalled again; so that is none of
ours: then for the time to come, that is none of ours, for we cannot tell whether
we shall live or no; therefore only the time present is ours. Hear therefore
while you have time and means: the offer of grace is tendered: Oh turn ye, turn
ye, why will ye die! But see what became of it; the Lord offers commodity, but
it is not worth the buying amongst some What says the Text, Mat. 23.37. Oh
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you as an hen does her
chickens, but (says the Text) ye would not! O let us not stand out with God,
lest he leave such an heavy doom upon us, as he did on Jerusalem. Now your
house is left unto you desolate. How often would I have received you, and you
would not! O then I say, take heed that the Lord does not say to us, O England,
how often would I, but you would not! Ye care not now for teaching, ye will
have no instruction: Well, you shall not, (says God to Jerusalem), you shall
never see my face more till you can prize it; yea, till you say, Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. So the Lord may
say unto us, Oh ye have refused mercy; but ye will cry and houle, and never
shall have mercy more. How do thou know this, oh man, whether ever thou shall
have the offer of mercy again? You may never have any more offer. Luke 19 41.
Christ stood over Jerusalem and wept, Oh (says he) that thou had known in
this thy day the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hidden from
thine eyes; now they are taken away because ye would not. They may have the
Word, but shall find no good in it. Oh that is the doom of all dooms, when the
Lord curses his blessings, when the Lord gives a man up to the hardness of his
own heart, and to the blindness of his own eyes! Who knows but the Lord may
speak to some of us now, and that he will never offer nor work again? Pro.
1.27. They shall call and cry, but I will not answer them, says the Lord. Who
knows, but that this may be thy lot? This may be thy share. Is there any one
whose soul stirs within him, and says, Oh the precious means of salvation
that I have had! how kindly did the Lord come, and I had almost yielded, and
yet withstood the Lord! Is there any that has been thus? I charge thee take
heed lest the Lord set it down upon thy forehead, Well, grace has been offered,
and it has been refused, it shall never be offered more; My Sabbaths they have
had, but they profaned them; well, they shall never see Sabbath more: of all
plagues, there is none like to this. O fearful, that the Word should never
work more; and They shall cry, but I will not answer! Pro. 1.24. A man were
better to be torn in pieces with wild horses, then to hear that voice: Wisdom
says there, I will laugh at your destruction. When a man is in perplexity, and
the Lord should see him, and laugh at him in his misery, and should say, This
is he that heard the Word and opposed it, this is the man; come and behold him,
O Angels, come and rejoice at his destruction; this is he, let him be accursed;
this is he that despised all means, therefore send him down quick into utter
darkness: then ye will know what it is to oppose grace. Time may come, that
thou would pray, and thou may have no heart; or if thou do, the time
may come when God will not hear thee. Oh, I withstood all means, and therefore
with what heart can I do any thing! Oh that ye would but think on this; thou
may seek, and seek, and seek often, and that with tears, and yet may have
the repulse. Deuteronomy. 1.41. The people of Israel began to murmr against the
Lord, Would to God we had dyed in Egypt. The Lord heard them, and made a
solemn vow, that they should never enter into the land of Canaan. Deuteronomy. 1.45.
Then they returned and wept, and prayed, but the Lord heard them not. Therefore
take heed how ye oppose grace and salvation: I beseech you, for the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake think of it. How many offers of grace have we had, and then
have said, we would labor that our hearts might be enlarged toward God, and
we would be more holy? we have had many Sabbaths, how little have we
profited by them? If God shut the Israelites out of Canaan for the refusing of
one offer; fear God, I say, fear and stand aghast. Seeing it is so, it is the
part of wise men to take the offer of grace and salvation whilst it is offered
to them.

MISCELLANIES.
I. The Prayer of Faith.
JAMES 1.6. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that doubts
is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. Let not that man
think he shall receive any thing from the Lord.


THE holy Apostle has pressed the distressed and scattered Jews to the
practice of a mavelous heavenly and holy duty, but a mavelous hard one, and
that indeed which might seem most unseasonable, considering the extreme
pursuers that then pursued them beyond strength almost. The duty was this (as
it is expressed in the words of the text) Ver. 2. Brethren, count it all joy
when you fall into many temptations. Each word carries a weight, and a kind of
impossibility to a distressed spirit, and a perplexed heart. He says not,
they should find this by proof, and that it would appear in issue, that
temptations would bring them forth pleasant fruits of righteousness through
the blessing of the Lord; but he bids them account it so before hand, when
they felt nothing but vexation. Now this was not to be done alone when they
were assaulted by troubles, but when they were oppressed with them too; not
when they met with miseries, but when they fell into them: now, when he falls
into a pit that he is over head and ears in it; he falls into the snare, so
that he is entangled in it; and yet then he must count it joy: and further,
not when they fall into some temptations, out of which there were some hope to
get out with some speed: but when they fall into many, and yet more, to make
the matter wonderful, he wills them not alone to count it some joy, but all
joy. When their miseries were so great that more could not be endured, yet
there their joy must be so great, that more could not be expressed. A duty
wonderful hard, and wonderful heavenly! and therefore in verse 4. he adds
mavelous sweet and pithie reasons to persuade to so heavenly a task; and
they be taken from the incomparable profit that would come thereby: a man
should be a gainer by all his losses, and a getter by all his extremities: The
trial of their faith would bring forth patience, and let patience have her
perfect work, and then they shall be perfect, and entire, and want nothing.
For they that have no want may have all joy, if any in the world may.

But because the feeble heart might here happily reply, How shall a poor sinner,
who wants both wisdom and strength, be skillful to know how to carry
himself in such extremities, or yet be able to undergo such pressures
passing strength? To this the Apostle answers in the 5. verse, If any man want
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives abundantly, and upbraids no man, and
it shall be given him. By wisdom is meant, not the grace of spiritual
understanding in the general; but that special point of wisdom which might
suit with the present occasion, and make a man cunning to carry the cross. And
the Apostle so propounds the direction, that it might answer and point to all
the carnal pleas that a corrupt and distressed heart might cast in the way;
and therefore you shall observe each circumstance is worth observancie. If any
of you be banished and persecuted, not only such as are able Christians, of
great graces, and large abilities, of glorious parts and performances, and
therefore might hope to speed best; no, if any the weakest, the feeblest, and
the meanest. Oh, but I want a world of wisdom, so much that it is not like to
find a sufficient supply; a little will not serve the turn: Why, behold the
Lord gives abundantly, richly; if thou be a beggar in knowledge, he has
riches of knowledge, and he can supply thee. Oh, but I have abused his mercy
and help in this kind, which he has given me, and therefore I fear he will
give me no more: He will not upbraid the sinner for what he did abuse; (the
text adds, he upbraids no man) but will give him what he needs and asks. Oh,
but what is that to me, that God has enough to bestow on whom he will, if he
will give none to me? Behold this also is answered; for the words say, If any
man ask, it shall be given him. Now this may seem strange, and to be too good
to be true to a distressed spirit, and a distrustful soul; Why, is it
possible that God should give wisdom to me, who am so ignorant? succor and
supply to me, who am so weak and unbeleeving? I cannot imagine it, I cannot
think it, much less can I expect it at the hands of God: therefore the Apostle
in the words rehearsed, gives us a caution to his former direction; Let him
ask in faith: What a man asks, it shall be given him; but take this with you,
always provided, he ask in faith: otherwise, if a man doubt, he shall be
disappointed of his hopes. So that the scope of the words are to teach us how
to pray, that we may be sure to obtain what we pray for.

In the words two things are to be considered.

1. The duty required, Pray in faith.

2. The hinderance to be avoided, which may let the duty; Nothing wavering: and
this wavering is further amplified by a double argument against it.

1. A distressed, distrustful, staggering heart needs nothing to vex and
trouble it; because it will be racked and tormented in it self in restless
disquiet: for such a man is like unto the sea waves, whirling now this way,
tossing again that way. Fears and hopes are the hangmen of the heart; Hope
says, It may be, and Fear says, I suspect it will not be; thus a man
becomes like a wave.

2. This doubting does debar a man of that he should have. Let not that man
think to have any thing at the hands of God. Thus the Apostle cuts off the
soul from any expectation of good. Let not that man; as though he had said,
Let none such plead any privilege; for neither shall be accepted that
unbeleever, nor that party, nor any that staggers and wavers, doubting of the
performance of Gods promise. Again, he says not thus, He shall not receive
any great favor, but he shall receive nothing from the Lord. To put it past
peradventure, he adds peremptorily, Let not such a man cozen himself with
vain hopes and groundless expectations, that yet the Lord will pity and
supply him. He affirms expressly: Let him not think it; I would not have him
so much as imagine such a matter, for it will never be.

We purpose only to trade in the maine duty, which will be our task at this
present: so that the Doctrine will be,

Doct. He that purposes to prevail in prayer, must be sure to ask in faith.

For the sense of the Doctrine, it is here to be conceived, that it is presumed
in the text, that a man has faith, and he that is to pray is supposed to be
a believer: for how can he pray in faith that has no faith? But that is not
all, nor sufficient to express the sense of the point, That he that prays
should be a believer; but that he should put forth the power and virtue of
his faith in prayer; Nay further, it is not alone here required, that he
should put forth the work of faith in general touching the Covenant; as, that
God is reconciled to him: but, that he should exercise the work of his faith
touching that particular which he is to beg, and which he now begs at the
hands of God; and this especially is to be attended. For these two works are
far differing one from another, and may be one without another. Each
faithful man does believe the covenant of grace touching the pardon of his
sin, and the attainment of eternal life through Christ; and yet may stagger
on the promise touching some particular which God has promised, and he stands
in need of. Thus Abraham was ruled by God, Genesis 12. and cast himself upon the
call, command, and promise of the Lord, departing from his kindred and fathers
house, depending upon Gods direction and blessing in the land unto which he
would bring him, and where he had engaged himself to bless him; and yet he
was not persuaded of that special branch of the Covenant, that he would give
him a child out of his loins, which should be an heir to him, (as the text
plainly testifies, Genesis 15.3.) Now both these acts of faith are here
required, and the last is principally intended: so that the full sense of the
Doctrine seems to be this; He that will speed in prayer, must put forth the
virtue of faith, to believe in particular the obtaining of that he prays for.
Jam. 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick. He says not, The prayer of
a faithful man; but the prayer of faith: as though the Apostle had spoken
thus, It Is not the man so much that must pray, as faith in the man, that must
frame and follow those petitions which we put up, if ever we speed. Mar.
11.33. Whatsoever ye ask praying, believe you shall receive it; that is, the
very particular which you beg for, shall be given you. For the clearing of the
Point, we will enquire,

1. What it is to pray in faith. 2. The Reasons why he that does beg in
faith shall receive.
To pray in faith, according to the sense of the Doctrine, implies 3. things.

1. Faith sees, and settles upon the fullness of the sufficiency, and the
freeness of the riches of grace in Christ, which is able every way to supply
it, and to satisfy abundantly all the necessities which can befall the soul:
and this gives ground and encouragement unto faith, to go to God, because there
is enough to be-had, and therefore it is likely it shall speed of that it would
have. Thus Abraham, Romans 4.20. He believed that God who had promised, was able
to give a child, though his body were not able to beget one, being now dead:
Sarahs womb was not able to conceive one, being now barren: therefore he
counted it bootlesse to consider of them; but being fully assured that God was
able, was encouraged to go to him, to rely upon him by faith: This al
sufficiency gives footing or foote-hold to our faith.

2. As the riches of goodness encourages faith for to pray, so in the second
place, it closes with the spirit in the promises, sets that on work, and
fetches virtue from thence whereby it may be enabled for to pray: for it is
not faith that of it self puts forth prayer by its own power immediately; but
that that closes with, and sets the spirit of Christ in the promise on work;
by the lively efficacy whereof, the heart comes to be quickened on, and
carried forth comfortably to this duty. Hence the Apostle, We know not what to
ask as we ought, but the Spirit helps our infirmities, and it makes request.
A man must not fetch his prayer from his parts, as will, memory, understanding
or ability, but from the Spirit, who is the prayer-maker, Jude 18. praying in
the holy Ghost.

3. Faith, by the riches of Gods grace being encouraged, and by the spirit
enabled and set on work to prayer, carries the heart unto God, and holds it
with God until it has mercy: Genesis 32.26.
I will not let thee go until thou bless me. For,

1. Faith puts wings to a man's desires; or if you will, Faith closing with the
Spirit, that puts fire to our petitions, lifts up our prayers, and causes them
to come in unto the Lord, and lay hold upon him* hope expects, and desire
longs, and the will rests, and makes choice of God, and then holds there, and
so all lie at God daily: that is the first.

2. It will not leave God until it see his power and wisdom, faithfulness
and mercy go forth, to the accomplishment of that that has been desired;
faith follows the blow home, and rests not until it see the wisdom of God
contriving, and his faithfulness and power effecting the thing craved; jogs
the everlasting arm of Gods power, and providence, and mercy to work forth
good of such whose necessities are pitied; jogs the everlasting displeasure,
and just indignation of the Lord, and follows it home to the heads and hearts
of the enemies of Christ, whose ruin is desired. Faith goes not to means
first, but goes to God, that he may work with means, without means, above
means, against means. Faith will not neglect means, but faith goes to God to
provide means, and to go out with them, and to give a blessing to them. It
befalls a faithful man in this case, as it does sometimes a poor tenant
oppressed by the injury and cruelty of the steward; he repaires to the Nobleman
himself, entreats so much favor from him, that he would injoyne his steward
to deal equaly and justly with him: the honorable personage easily grants so
equal a request, and therefore bids him tell his steward, It is his mind,
that he should deal favorably with him: the poor man replies, Alas Sir, he
will not pass for my speech, nor respect my words; I beseech you let me have
but two words in writing, or a token from you, and then I am persuaded he will
not dare but do your command; and when that is obtained, he knows his desire
will be effected: so faith gets a Letter under Gods hand; the Lord sends a
token of his displeasure and indignation, a token of vengeance, and terror, by
the prayer of faith (as by a Post or Pursuivant) unto the hearts of the wicked,
to chide Laban over night, to calm the heart of cruel and fierce Esau; and
then it is certain all shall go well.

Thus Jacob strove with God, and would not away from the promise before he had
it under Gods own hand, Thou have said thou will deal well with thy servant,
and I will not leave thee till thou sendest this message to the heart of Esau,
that he may know it is thy mind: at last the Lord granted, and then all the
mischief was stopped. Thou have prevailed with God, and thou shall prevail
with man.

Reason 1. Unbelief binds Gods hands, as it were, that he cannot give, and
stops the current of Gods kindness, that he cannot conveigh that mercy we beg
and need: for as God has decreed to give a blessing for any thing; so he has
appointed and decreed faith to be the means to conveigh it.

If therefore we will not believe, we cannot expect what we desire. God cannot
give it because he cannot deny himself, nor cross his decree, nor alter the
word, the oath that is gone out of his mouth; for mark, He could do no great
thing because of their unbelief.

Reason 2. Unbelief intercepts the blessing upon the means, that those means
which God has appointed for our good, God neither goes out with them, nor
works by them; but the stream of providence is turned another way. Asa
trusted to the Physician, therefore the physic could not help him.

Conceive a stream able to carry and conveigh a Barge speedily to the haven,
if this stream be stopped, or turned another way, it will not be able to
carry a Boat; because the strength of it runs into another channel: so it is
with the stream of providence dammed up, and turned another way by distrust.
Mat. 14.31. when Peter was to walk upon the water, all the while he sank not,
his faith was sure; but when a great wave came, then he began to fail; the
Lord cries to him, Oh thou of little faith! (not why do thou sink? but) why
do thou doubt? The word in the original is, (...).
why art thou divided? part of his heart looked to God by faith, and so was
supported; part looked to the waves, and feared the greatness of them, and so
was carried down the stream, as plucking himself from under the power and
providence by which he should have been supported.

Reason 3. Unbelief indisposeth and unfitteth a man, and makes him incapable
of that mercy he begs, and God is willing to bestow. Look, as it is with a
vessel, turn the backside of it to the spout, and it will scatter all the
water; but hold now the hollow side, and then it receives it: so it is with the
soul, unbelief is the back part of the heart, that spils all the mercy and
goodness that God offers in the promise, and will not suffer the least
refreshing thereof to come to the heart. Jer. 17.5.6. Cursed be the man that
trusts to the arm of flesh, and departs from the living God, (...)
he shall be like a naked shrub, (for so the original goes) and shall never
see when good comes.

Use 1. The first Use is of terror, to dash the comforts, and to daunt the
hearts of all unbeleeving sinners under the cope of heaven. They have no faith,
they shall never, they can never have any thing at the hands of God for their
good. His pains is to no purpose, his labor is lost, his prayers spilt like
water on the ground, without any profit, whoever remains in the estate of
unbelief: let him pray, God will never answer him; let him seek, God will
never be found of him; let him want, and beg till his eyes sink in his head,
and his tongue faulter in his mouth, and his heart fail in him, let him not
think he shall ever get any good that he begs at the hands of God: nay, the
Lord cannot give it, unless he should deny his own word, alter his decree,
make a new covenant, new Scriptures, make a new way to bring a company of
unbeleeving wretches to heaven: which God will never do.

Use 2. Gods people may, by way of instruction, here see, what price they
should set on faith, and what use they may have of it. Faith is not only
necessary for the attainment of eternal life and salvation, but is necessary
also in the whole course of our lives. If you pray, faith must help you; if
you seek God, faith must guide you; if you fast, and purpose to speed, carry
faith with you. You have not more need and use of your breathing, then of your
believing, in a Christian course.

Use 3. Hence the poor servants of the Lord may take comfort to themselves,
and cheer up their hearts in the midst of all wants that might discourage, in
the midst of all miseries that do any way annoy them. Let them but pray in
faith, and they are sure to obtain what they pray for: for all those wants of
theirs are sure to be supplied; all their miseries are sure to be removed.
Go your way, and be comforted, you blessed spirits; You complain, your minds
are blind, your abilities poor, your corruptions great, your hearts straight,
your desires weak; be it so, yet if your desires be of faith, God will grant
them; if your prayers be of faith, God will hear them, and accept them.

Ob. Oh, but my wants are many, my necessities great, and need a great deal of
mercy to pardon such sins whereof I am guilty. I lack a world of wisdom to
direct me in such straights into which I am cast, and yet, wretch that I am, I
am unworthy of what I ask, and have abused all that I have received.

Ans. Be it granted: yet what ever you be, what ever you lack, it skils not;
be your person never so unworthy, or your wants never so many, ask but in
faith, God cannot but give it. Such a man cannot but obtain what he seeks, and
therefore may therein be comforted, because he is sure to be satisfied
abundantly, and never be upbrayded in what he shall receive.

Use 4. Lastly, We have here a ground of encouragement for to call in faith,
and to be confident to speed, and to gain audience whenever we call; and
indeed, who would not beg, when he shall be certain to speed? Have but
faith in prayer, and have whatever ye will at the hands of God; in nothing
doubt, and in nothing miscarry.

Quest. But how may we fence our hearts, and help our selves against this
wavering, which (we see) has been the bane of our hearts, and the overthrow of
our prayers?

Ans. We must be wary and watchful; for which, observe two Rules.

1. We must be mavelous fearful that we enter not into terms of contention
with the truth, and set up falsehoods by cavellings, and disputings against the
promise; as when we grow willing to deceive our selves, and to invent subtle
pleas, how we may object against the promise, and defeat it of the proper
powerful work it would have upon our hearts, and deprive our selves of the
comfort we might have thereby. It Is said, Acts 11.2. They of the circumcision
(...).
contended with him; it is the same word that is used for (...)
wavering in the text, when we (by armies of carnal reasonings and cursed
cavellings against the truth of the promise, set up a company of surmises and
jealousies in our souls, to keep off, and to stop the entrance of the promise
into our hearts,) are apt to say, as Nicodemus did unto our Savior, Joh. 3.9.
How can these things be? and with Sarah, who laughed and said, Genesis 18.13.
Can Sarah have children in her old age?

2. A man is said to waver when he questions the promise, though he do not
dispute against it. This we must be as wary of as of the other. Act. 10.39.
when the Lord had directed Peter in the vision, that he should not count the
Gentiles unclean, he professes he came without gainesaying; for when the Lord
has promised, and the Word has spoken, we ought not once to question it, but
conclude undeniably, that it will be. Ps. 23. Doubtless, mercy and truth shall
follow me all the days of my life. Isa. 39. He has said he will do it, and
not one jot, nor one tittle of his Word shall fail; which may be a good
ground to keep our faith from failing, and our prayers from wavering.

II. A preparative to the Lords Supper.
COncerning the preparation to the Sacrament, three things are considerable.

1. How we may know whether we have a title to the Sacrament, yea, or no. 2.
How to be prepared for it. 3. Thirdly how to reap and receive the benefit of
it, being so prepared.
For the first, Whether we have a title to the Sacrament, or no, we will
discover it two ways.

1. We will show what does interest the soul thereto.

2. What does not hinder; and consequently, what also does hinder the soul
from coming.

Inverting the order: First then, What does not hinder? I answer briefly and
punctually, thus.

Rule 1. First, the want of the sense and feeling, either of Gods favor
toward us, or of the present apprehension, to our own sense, of Gods grace in
us, does not hinder. I say, that the want of the sense and feeling, either of
Gods favor to the soul, or of the work of grace in the soul, does not
hinder a man.

The ground of it is this; If he that has great interest in Gods love, may
yet notwithstanding not be assured of it in his own sense; if he that has a
great work of grace, may yet not be able to apprehend that work that God
gives; nay, if a man that walks exactly before God, cannot see the power of
grace, that helps him so to do; it is certain, this cannot hinder him from the
right of coming to the Sacrament; But the former may be, ergo, etc. The Rule
is undeniable.

Rule 2. This is no hinderance from coming to the Sacrament, that a man finds
a deadish heart within him in the performance of service; that a man finds a
body of death oppressing of him, and lying upon him when he comes to this
duty: And the reason is this; because the soul, (sometimes) when it is most
pestered, and the heart most deaded and clogged, is then truly in the estate of
grace, and also walks most humbly before God, and labors to depend upon, and
seek much more for his mercy, and to strive most sincerely against its
corruptions: all which argue, that a man is deeply interessed in Gods love,
and has an interest, in a great measure, to the Lord Christ and his Covenant,
and so consequently to the Sacrament. I dare say this, That the worst services
of a Christian man to his own sense and apprehension, find most acceptance
with God. The poorest duties, for the performance outwardly, are sometimes most
perfect; Why? Because then the heart is most abased in it self, and then it
sees most need of Christ, and then also does it crave succor and relief from
Christ therein. In a word, as inlargements of heart, and great freedom, and
forwardness, and sufficiency many times unto duty, is accompanied often with
most falsenesse, at least wise with most pride and haughtiness of heart; so
deadness, weariness, untowardnesse, inability, is many times accompanied with
most humility, with most brokennesse, with most baseness, with most going out
of himself unto Christ, and with most sincerity in approving the heart unto
Christ.

Rule 3. The third Rule is this: Former unpreparednesse unto Gods service, and
happily sometimes (to a man's own sense) unprofitablenesse under the Sacrament,
in the receiving thereof, is not, should not be any sufficient hinderance to
any faithful soul to come yet freely hereunto: for it skils not what a man
has been formerly, nor what his failings have been in former times at the
duty, if now those be amended, and he be humbled for them, and strive against
them, yea, and for the present does address himself unto this duty. There
cannot but be many failings in each man's performances; what then? if this sin
might hinder, then other sins might hinder also: but no sin may hinder a man
from coming to Christ; for it is a great sin not to believe in the Lord, yet a
man's former unbelief, as it must not keep him from coming to Christ; no more
may it hinder him from coming to the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. Besides, shall unprofitablenesse and unpreparednesse before, hinder,
because it is a sin? that should rather make us take heed that we do not
commit a sin in not coming to the Sacrament when we should; for if
unpreparednesse and unprofitableness hinders because it is a sin, then not
coming when we should come, hinders because it argues a sinner.

Quest. How shall I know whether I have the work of grace; and so consequently
title to, or interest in the Sacrament?

Answ. The first evidence is taken out of 1 John 5.18. He that is borne of God
keeps himself that the wicked one touches him not. We may discover the truth
of grace by the work of grace: this is one, That a gracious heart keeps
himself so, that the wicked one does not touch him. So that where there is
true grace, there is power against all corruption: and the soul that is truly
wrought upon by Christ, is enabled by the spirit of the Lord Jesus to master
any distemper.

Quest. Why, but (a man might here say) would you have a man so perfect, or
shall his grace be so pure and holy, that corruption should not be in him, nor
lodge in his soul?

Ans. I answer, The text does not say so: the text says this; The evil one
touches him not: that is, closes not with him, fasteneth not upon him, does
not domineere over him: this is to keep a man untouched.

Quest. But how shall a man know that he is only oppressed and foiled by
corruption, and that yet he is not touched with it?

Ans. That may be perceived on this manner.

1. When the soul cannot master corruption as it would, and overcome the
unruly distempers thereof, yet it will stand in the defense of Jesus Christ,
and will not plead for a base corruption: he will not say, Oh, it is my
infirmity, it is my nature, alas, I cannot amend it, etc. but a gracious heart
will come to this; he sees his sin, and observes his distemper and
corruption; and the heart says, The Law is holy and good, the reproof is
good, the admonition is good, the duty good; yea, the soul will freely say, I
have the vilest heart under heaven; but the Law is a blessed Law.

2. When the soul observes, and hates, and loathes, and discovers, and pursues
all manner of traitorous devices and rebellious dispositions in others against
the Lord Jesus Christ. It is certain he did never hate sin in himself,
that joins or sides with sin in another man's heart and life.

3. Observe what authority, or what value, or what excellency the Word has in
the account of the soul: namely, Is thy soul under the supreme government, and
sovereign royalty and authority of the truth? if it be, then it is a gracious
soul. It is one thing for a man to have sufficiency to the discharge of a
duty with strength and promptness, and another thing to be under the
authority of the truth, and to submit himself to the government of that good
Word. There is a passage that sometimes has been much in my thoughts, in Psalm.
119.29. Take from me the way of lying, and grant me thy Law. Sin is a way of
lying; not only a step of lying, but a way of lying; the whole guise and
carriage of it is deceitful: now when he says, take away the way of lying, his
meaning is, I cannot master it my self, but good Lord take it away: And the
text adds, grant me thy Law: as who should say, It is the greatest blessing
the soul desires to enjoy in this life. For when the soul is content that God
should pluck away every corruption from him, even the dearest, it is a sign of
grace.

Qu. But the question here grows further, namely, how a man shall understand
whether he be content that God should take from him the way of lying, and to
part with every beloved corruption?

Answ. You shall observe this in two or three passages.

1 Do thus; observe either what special sin you have in your soul, and what
the darling, and the secret distemper of the heart is.

2. Or if not that, then observe what a man is in his calling: there be some
particular corruptions that sally out upon a man when he comes to his
particular place; for sometimes when the sin of a man's nature and constitution
has failed, yet the sin of his calling has overthrown him, and also
discovered him to be false.

3. And thirdly, observe what it is in the world, or in any outward
contentment, a man puts the highest price and the greatest esteem upon: as
thus, One man he esteems wealth, and is not able to endure poverty; and
another man esteems his credit, and he cannot abide to suffer shame; another
man the glory of his parts, that he would have a sufficiency above another,
etc. Now (I say) if ye will try whether the soul be content that God should
take away the sinfulness of the heart, try it thus,

1. By finding out if the soul be in good earnest content that the Lord
should discover all these courses, and whatever sin is in them, and should
shame him for them.

2. If the Lord should take away all these, and the Word take place, and pull
away all these distempers, and then the soul finds a restlesnesse until the
Lord pluck them away from him.

3. Whether the soul is willing, and strives much, and contends sadly that it
may be content that the Lord should take all that outward excellency from him,
that is so much prized by him: If he prize wealth, to be content that God
should make him a beggar; if he prize his credit, content that God should cover
him with shame; if he prize his parts and gifts, content that God should make
him lie in the dust. Whatever the soul is not content to part withal (if it be
a temporal thing) that is a way of lying, and he loves it imoderately. Oh
where is that man that can bear contempt, that can bear poverty, and is
willing to be left under the table, and to be made base in the eyes of the
world! He that would hold any thing that he is not content the Word should
take away, it is certain, that that is the king, and the master, and the
commander of the heart.

Now the text adds, And grant me thy Law. Whether the heart have this frame,
is discovered in these three particulars.

1. The heart puts the highest price upon the Word, and the graces of God
therein working, and conveyed thereby: as namely thus, The soul that is
addicted to covetousness, cries, Grant me liberality, Lord; the soul that is
addicted to pride, prays, Grant me humility: he puts a higher price upon that
which is contrary to his sin, then ever his sin was sweet to him.

2. He looks for, and is willing also to entertain the authority of the Word
to order him, and to carry him out to this way and work.

Thirdly and lastly he finds a full sufficiency and contentedness herein.
Grant me thy Law; I desire no more: Now by this time a man is fully under the
authority of the Word: though I cannot do what I would, my corruptions being
strong, my temptations boisterous, yet take from me the way of lying: Whether
it be my beloved sin, or sin of my calling, or the outward comforts of
those things I prize, I am content it should be taken away. And when it says,
Grant me thy Law, 1. It most prizeth it. 2. It most yields unto it. 3. It is
satisfied therein. By this time (I say) it appears, a man has a title unto
the Lord Christ.

Touching the fitting of our selves for the Sacrament, two things are a little
to be attended. 1. The necessity of our coming: The second is the manner how
to prepare our hearts when we do come, that we may come fitted, and (as we
are necessarily enjoined) prepared to this Table of the Lord.

For the first, several questions are to be propounded and answered, and then
the point will be cleared.

Quest. 1. Is it left unto a man's liberty to come, or not to come unto the
Sacrament?

Answ. It is not a point of indifferency, it is a point of necessity, which the
Lord lays upon us as a duty, which God expects from us, if God affords
occasion with convenience; it is a sin in us to do the contrary: I say, If
God afford occasion with convenience, nothing should detain us from coming;
yet some straight may happily lie upon a man, that it were neither requisite nor
reasonable for him then to press in to that duty. As,

1. Were it so that a man could not receive the Sacrament unless he should
cross some comfortable assurance of Gods favor toward him in the committing
of some sin; as to receive it by halfs, as the Papists do; then he were not
bound, nay, he ought not to receive it; it is not a point of convenience; for
no man must do evil that good may come thereof: it is their fault who pollute
the holy ordinance in aberring from Christ's institution, it is not my fault not
to receive.

2. The second case of inconveniencie is, when a man shall occasionally press
into a place, and not be acquainted with the Congregation; or give offense
unto it, because he belongs not unto that Congregation: in this case the Lord
affords him liberty to depart; the reason is, because it is a wrong done,
seeing he cannot come unto Gods ordinance without being troublesome unto the
people where he is, which God (who is the God of order) allows not, nor
requires.

3. If the Sacrament be so ordered, and so given and celebrated, as the
occasion of the times carry, that happily it is done three or four times in the
week, by reason of the multitude of the Congregation, (as now on Easter day,
Easter monday, and Easter tuesday, and the like) I take it, a man is not bound
here at all times to come particularly to the Sacrament: and the reason is
this; because God requires that I should come always to a Congregation, when,
according to the order of the Church, it is appointed or celebrated for all;
but here it is celebrated at several times for several persons, by reason of
the greatness of the Congregation: And now these cautions premised, it is a
sin for a man not to take all the occasions, in the place where he lives, to
partake of Gods ordinance that he has appointed for his good.

Now the grounds of the Point are these.

1. Our own necessity might justly require this: our sins many; we want
strength and power against them: our abilities small; weakness of grace
great, and therefore we had need of all the helps that may encourage us, of all
the means that might strengthen us, of all Gods ordinances that might carry us
on with more cheerfulness, and comfort, and sufficiency in a Christian course.

2. Look we here to the mercy of God, and the richness of Gods goodness, and
the bounty and the large provision that God makes for us: he also requires our
care and christian attendance unto the enjoyment of the means for our good;
the Lord is the Master of the Feast, it is his mercy to provide these means,
and his free grace to give us liberty to enjoy them: then, to turn our back
unto these ordinances, is to cast his kindness into the kennell; it is an
high dishonor to God, and an high contempt unto his ordinances.

Quest. 2. But what if a man be not prepared for the Sacrament? is he then
bound to come?

Answ. No, he ought not to come unto the Supper of the Lord; but this he must
know, His sin is desperate, his offense is heinous and high, that he is thus
unworthy, and sinful, and unprepared for to come; and therefore he must not
rest here in this estate, but take it as a mavelous heinous and miserable
condition, wherein he must never give himself rest until he get out thereof.
There is such a peevishnes of distemper in a man's spirit, and such an idleness
in his nature, that, because he cannot have and do what he would; therefore he
will neither have nor do what he should; and because his heart is not humbled,
and the like, therefore he will be content to continue in his corruptions, and
keep his sin; and cast Gods kindness behind him; for, in effect, he says,
he will not do what he should, unless the Lord will do for him what he
list. A gain, there is also an idle distemper in the heart, when a man thinks
thus, If I should come to the Sacrament, I must walk thus strictly and
exactly, and I must part with my corruption; and that is the reason we will not
receive the Sacrament.

Quest. 3. But you will say, What great sin is there in this, that a man
should abstain from coming to the Sacrament? wherein appears it?

Answ. It appears in this; in that the soul loves his sin, and harbors
his corruption more tenderly, and imbraceth it more nearly, and prizeth it more
highly then he does the blood of Christ, or the mercy and favor of God in
Christ: this every man (that will not prepare for the Sacrament, nor come to
the Sacrament) shows by his practice, and proclaims in the course of his life.

The second thing to be handled was, After what manner, or how he should be
prepared.

There be two things here considerable.

1. How a man should be prepared for the Sacrament.

2. How he may partake of the benefit and fruit of the Sacrament.

For the former, that a man may be prepared for the Sacrament, two things are
required.

1. He must have these graces, Faith, Repentance, Knowledge and Love; for
without these no man can receive good from the Sacrament.

Ob. But here may some object and say, If a man cannot find or feel that he
has grace, must he therefore abstain?

Ans. A man's sense and feeling, and the judgment that he passes upon himself
out of his weakness, is no rule to go by in this case. The reason is, because
many times the best Saints are most suspicious, and he that has most grace in
temptation, has least sense and feeling of his grace.

Qu. Why, how then? what course must he take, and by what rule must he be
judged?

An. He must openly, nakedly, plainly, and to the full lay open his estate unto
some faithful, judicious, and holy-hearted Minister; and if upon sincere
relation of his estate, the Minister, out of the Word, shall answer all the
objections that he can make against himself, and is able to give, out of his
own relation, arguments to convince him, then is he bound to submit unto the
Word, and to address himself unto the partaking of the Sacrament.

2. For preparation to the Sacrament, it is not enough for a man to have these
graces, but he must renew them, and put fresh colors upon all those spiritual
abilities that God has bestowed upon him: he must not only have faith,
repentance, knowledge and love, but he must renew all these. For the renewing
of repentance, observe this: Look what sin thy soul has over-loved, look what
stains and blots thy heart has taken since thou have received the Sacrament,
and get thy heart more loosened from every sin then ever it was before the
committing of it, and never leave it until it be come to a right set and
frame, and as ready to entertain the grace that is in Christ, and to submit
thereto, as formerly thou have been, nay, more then ever thou wast before.
Also, renew thy faith thus: Look what doubtings and staggerings thou have had
since the last Sacrament, how thy faith has been weakened and clouded, and
renew this grace afresh: and to this purpose remember this rule; See a greater
insufficiency in thy self then ever thou did formerly, and come with
greater boldness, and confidently expect more mercy and favor from the Lord
by his ordinances then ever thou did before. And so likewise for renewing of
thy love, observe this rule: See a greater need of the Sacrament then formerly
thou have done; and then see a greater strength and assistance to be received
from the Sacrament every day more and more.

Now for the second thing, which is the way to partake of the good of the
Sacrament: that is done these ways.

1. You must rightly inform your selves of what you must expect from, and what
you may have in the Sacrament; what you come for, and what is there to be
gotten: All spiritual good that your hearts can desire is to be had here: The
soul can want nothing, can desire nothing; God has promised nothing, can
bestow nothing, but it is here to be received. The ground is this, because
Christ is there, and all his merits; and he that has the Son has life, and
in him, all things: In a word, all that the sinner can desire, as, the pardon
of what is amiss in him, power for the subduing of all corruptions for him,
and the quickening of his heart to the well-pleasing of God, are all conveyed
and communicated to the soul by the Sacrament, and to be received therein.

2. You must understand how this is communicated to the soul in the Sacrament.

Quest. How is pardon and power conveyed unto me by the Sacrament?

Ans. I answer; This comes from a right discerning of the body and blood of
Christ: when I can see beyond the outward elements, and see the spirit of
Christ undoubtedly communicating the spiritual good, as I see the outward
elements communicating the temporal good; when I can see something beyond
bread, and something beyond wine, and something beyond breaking, something
beyond pouring out, something beyond taking, and see as certainly the Spirit of
God communicating the spiritual comfort unto my soul, as the outward elements
would do to my body: in this case the Spirit of God does as certainly
communicate assurance of Gods favor, and power against corruption, and to
walk with God, as the bread does food to my stomach, and the wine sweetness
to my taste and refreshment to my nature: I say, the Spirit of the Lord does as
undoubtedly give Christ and his merits, the fruit and benefit of them in the
forgiveness of sin, and strength against corruption, as dryness goes with the
bread, and moisture with the wine.

III. The Character of a sound Christian, in seventeen marks.
Mark I.
IF thou can mourn daily for thy own corruptions and failings committed, yet
so as to be thankful for the grace received. Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Ver. 25. I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc. So then with the mind I my self serve the
law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

Mar. II.
If thou art grieved for the sins of the times, and places where thou live.
Ezekiel. 9.4. And the Lord said unto him, go through the midst of the City,
through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men
that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst
thereof.

Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water run down mine eyes because men keep not thy
Law.

2 Pet. 2.8. For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds.

Mar. III.
If when thou mournest for the sins of the times, thou take heed that thou
art not infected with them, Phil. 2.15. That ye may be blameless and
harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.

Act. 20.40. And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying,
Save your selves from this untoward generation. Jam. 1.27. Pure religion, and
undefiled before God, and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and
widow in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. 1
Pet. 4.4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you.

Mar. IV.
If thou endeavourest to get victory over thy corruptions, and art daily more
circumspect over thy ways, and more fearful to fall in time to come; 1 Cor. 9
27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any
means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. Psalm.
39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I
will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked are before me. Job 40.5. Once
have I spoken, but I will not answer thee, yea twice, but I will proceed no
further. Phil. 2.12. Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as
in my presence only, but now much more in mine absence, work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling. Pro. 28.14. Happy is the man that fears
always.

Mar. V.
If thou can chide thy own heart for the coldness and dullness of it to good
duties, and use all holy means for quickening it up afterward. Ps. 43.5. Why art
thou cast down, O my soul! and why art thou disquieted within me! hope in God,
for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
Ps. 57.8. Awake my glory, awake psaltery and harp, I my self will awake early.
Isa. 64.7. And there is none that calls on thy name that stirs up
themselves to take hold of thee. Judge. 5.12. Awake, awake Deborah, awake,
awake, utter a song: arise Barak, and lead thy captivity captive thou son of
Abinoam.

Mar. VI.
If thou can be patient under afflictions, and better for afflictions. Heb.
12.5. And ye have forgotten the exhortation, which speaks unto you as unto
children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him. Heb. 12.11. Now no chastening for the present seems
to be joyous but grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable
fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby. Ps. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy words. Jer. 5.3.
O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth! thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction, they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to
return.

Mar. VII.
If thy conversation be in heaven, that is, if thy thoughts, and the course of
thy life be heaven-wards. Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in heaven, from
whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Col. 3.2. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. Heb. 11.15. And truly,
if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they
might have had opportunity to have returned.

Mar. VIII.
If thou delight to speak with God in thy prayers, and that God should speak to
thee in his Word. Romans 8. 26. Likewise also the Spirit helps our infirmities:
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self
makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Joh. 8.47.
He that is of God hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God.

Mar. IX.
If thou art as well content to submit thy heart and life to Gods Word in all
things, even when it crosses thee in thy profits and pleasures, as thou art
content to come and hear it. Isa 2.3. And many people shall go and say, Come
ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Ezekiel.
33.32. And lo, thou art to them as a very lovely song of one that has a
pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument, for they hear thy words,
but they do them not.

Mar. X.
If thou can rely constantly by faith on the promises of God in Christ, when
thou art in any straight or temptation, as well for thy present provision and
preservation in this life, as for thy salvation in the life to come, abstaining
from the use of any unlawful or unwarrantable practices. Genesis 22.8. And
Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a Lamb for a burnt offering;
so they went both of them together. Exodus 14.13. And Moses said unto the
people, Fear ye not, stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, what he
will show to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall
see them again no more for ever.

Mar. XI.
If thou can find in thy heart, that thou do love God sincerely; although
thou could never love him, but that he loved thee first. Joh. 21.17. And he
said unto him the third time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was
grieved because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And he said
unto him, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. 1 John
4.19. We love him because he first loved us. Romans 5.5. And hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, which is given unto us.

Mar. XII.
If thou can heartily love good Christians, and others that have helped thee
on to heaven; and on the contrary do hate and avoid wicked and dissolute
men, but most of all such as withdraw others from the faith, or by scandalous
lives have caused the faith to be blasphemed and evil spoken of. 1 John 3.14.
We know we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.
Mat. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive
a Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man, in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. Romans 16.4. Who for my
life laid down their own necks, unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all
the Churches of the Gentiles. Gal. 4.14. And my temptation, which was in my
flesh, you despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even
as Christ Jesus. Ps. 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he
honors them that fear the Lord. 1 Timothy 3.3. Without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good.

Mar. XIII.
The fight between the flesh and the spirit. Romans 7.23. But I see another law
in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members. Gal. 5.17. For the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that you cannot do the things you would.

Mar. XIV.
If we long for the appearing of Christ. Revel. 22.20. He which testifies
these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only,
but unto them also that love his appearing.

Mar. XV.
If thou make conscience of secret sins which none eye sees; as, a hard
heart, a secure and proud heart: if thou look not so much to the matter of
good duties, as to the manner, if they be done in truth and sincerity; also if
thou do apply both the promises and the threatenings to thee in the Word of
God, and love and admirest grace more in others then in thy self, and hate
sin in all, but most in thy self.

Thou may take comfort from these, if thou can do them in a holy manner;
namely,

1. With uprightness of heart. 2. With continuance. 3. With daily growth in
the practice of them.
And to this end two things must be practiced.

1. Use often to examine, and try, and search thy heart, and all thy actions.

2. Take an often account of thy life, concerning thy progress in the course
of godliness: for want of this examination, many live and die hypocrites, and
know it not, but suppose their case is good. 1 Chro. 29.17. I know also my God,
that thou tryest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness: as for me, in
the uprightness of mine heart I have offered all these things. 1 John 3.18. My
little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in
truth. Rev. 2.19. I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and
thy patience, and thy works, and the last be more then the first. 2 Timothy 3.7.
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Psalm.
119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. 1 Timothy
4.15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all. Gal. 1.14. And profited in the Jews religion
above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the
traditions of my Fathers. Heb. 5.12. For when for the time ye ought to be
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first
principles of the oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk,
and not of strong meat.

Mar. XVI.
If thou do desire to keep no corruption; or if thy endeavors be constant
in the use of all means against every corruption.

Mar. XVII.
If thou desire Christ for his holinesse-sake; which if thou do, then thou will take all that comes with holiness, whether it be shame, or disgrace, or
persecution. etc.

FINIS.

