ODES OF HORACE The best of Lyrick Poets, Containing much morallity, and
sweetness.

Selected, and Translated by Sr: T: H: 1625

Imprinted at London by A: M: for Will: Lee and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleet: street: at the sign of the Goolden Bucke



To the Reader.
FRiendly, and generous Reader) I present not Horace to thee, in his native
luster, nor Language. Take these rather (if so thou please) for a reflection,
from that brighter body of his living Odes. Behold in them Morality touched,
and Virtue heightened, with clearenesse of Spirit, and accuratenesse of
Judgment. These have I selected amongst many, not with desire to prescribe the
same choice to others, as a rule; nor yet with any diffidence in my own
election. Abundat quisque suo sensu. When in a Garden we gather a Coronet of
Flowers, we intend not the total beauty of that fair piece of prospectiue,
but particular ornament, and entermingled delight. These supply both. But many
(no doubt) will say, Horace is by me forsaken, his Lyrick softness, and
emphaticall Muse maimed: That in all there is a general defection from his
genuine Harmony. Those I must tell, I have in this Translation, rather sought
his Spirit, then Numbers; yet the Music of Verse not neglected neither, since
the English ear better hears the Distick, and finds that sweetness, and
air in these proportions, which the Latin affects, and (questionless)
attaineth in Saphick or Iambick measures. Some will urge again, why were not
these Wreathes of moral, and serious Odes, for the more variety, and general
entertainment of most, mixed with his wanton and looser strains of Poesy?
These I answer, and with it conclude. The Translatour of these, had rather
teach Virtue to the modest, then discover Vice to the dissolute. The streams
of Helicon, are clear, and Chrystalline. Drink thou goodness from these
purer Fountains, whilst such take unhappy draughts, from the troubled and
muddy waters of Sensuality.

Jn Fidelissimum HORATII interpretem T. H. Equitem Auratum.
ANglia nunc Musis dominatur; Horatius Anglus
Laetatur; Lyrico victaque Roma suo est;
Talia, linguarum Dominam mirabere posse
Dicere; non magis est, haec potuisse, rudem?
Flaccus mutatur, remanet sed candor in Illo;
Plumeus, in doctas, concidit imber, aquas;
Sic tibi gent is honos, nostrae tibi debita linguae
Gloria; and Angliacae Laurea vitta Comae.
F. L.

To the Translatour.
What shall I first commend? your happy choice
Of this most useful Poet? or your skill,
To make the Echo equal with the voice,
And trace the Lines drawn by the Authors quill?
The Latin Writers by unlearned hands,
In foreign Robes unwillingly are dressed,
But thus invited into other Lands,
Are glad to change their tongue at such request.
The good, which in our minds their labors breed,
Lays open to their Fame a larger way.
These strangers England with rich plenty feed,
Which with our Countries freedom we repay:
When sitting in pure Language like a Throne,
They prove as great with us, as with their own.
John Beaumont.

To his worthy Friend, Sr. T. H. Knight, upon his Translation.
While to thy Time the Lyrick Poet sings,
And takes new graces from thy tuned strings;
Behold, whole Quires of Muses, reddy stand,
To beg like favor at thy curious hand.
Who would not join with them, and move the same,
That sees this One so happy in thy Name?
We whom the Romans held for dull and weak,
Now teach their best of Poets how to speak.
They need not lay to thee, the want of skill,
Of Music, or of Muses, he that will,
May hear them both expressed by thee, in veins
Equal, if not beyond the Roman strains.
George Fortescue.

To my Noble Friend, Sir T. H. Knight.
An O de in pure l^^bick feet.
I Knew before thy dainty tuch,
Upon the Lordly Violl:
But of thy Lyre who knew so much
Before this happy trial?
So tuned is thy sacred Harp,
To make her echo sweetly sharp.
I wot not how to praise enough
Thy Music and thy Muses:
Thy Gloss so smooth, the Text so tough,
Be Judge, who both peruses.
Thy choice of Odes is also chaste,
No want it has, it has no waste.
A grace it is for any Knight,
A stately Steed to stable:
But unto Pegasus the light
Is any comparable?
No Courser of so comely Course,
Was ever as the winged Horse.
That Astrophill, of Arts the life, S. Phi. Sidney.

A Knight was, and a Poet:
So was the Man, who took to wife S. Geof. Chancer.

The Daughter of La-Roet.
So Thou that have reserved a part,
To rouse my Johnson, and his Art.
Receive the while my lowly Verse
to wait upon thy Muses:
Who cannot half thy worth rehearse,
My brain that height refuses.
Beueath thy Meede is all my praise;
That, asks a Crown of holy Baies.
Hugh Holland.

In laudem Authoris. Oda, In qua Versiones nonnullae ab eodem factae
praenotantur.
QValis Sonoro voluitur alueo
Veruis Hydaspes imbribus intumens,
Ripaeque debellator vndas
Per teneras rapit amnis herbas.
Horatiano talis ab aequore
Linguae decorus flumine patriae
Manas, and inspiras amorem
Cordibus, imperio Camoe^ae.
Scu cantu auit is Regibus editum Moecenas Ataui^ etc. Iam satis terris, etc.

H^roa promis: seu violentius
Vndas retorquentem minacis
Tibridos in dominam Orbis vrbem
Cantas Etrusci littoris aggerem:
Vitae ipse purus seu canis integ^um; Integer vit^, etc. Quis desiderio, etc.
Dianam tenerae, etc. O Diua gratum, etc.

Raptumque non deduci ab Orco
Quinctilium lacrymis perurges.
Per te Dianam dicere Virgins
Nouere. Diuam, quae regit Antium,
Eheu! quid vrges in Britannos
Caesareis comitem ire turmis?
Nunc quaeris auro quis color abdito. Nullus argento, etc. Aequam memento, etc.
Non semper imbres, etc. Beatus ilbe, qul, etc. Exegi monumentum, etc.

Nunc mentis ornas aequanimae fidem.
Nunc Mystis extincti calores
Picrijs moderaris vndis.
Tandem beato ruris in otio
Laudas agentes. His tibi sacula
Post mill duraturum, and vltra
Carminibus monum^ntum adornas.
G. D.

V. Cl. T. H. Equiti Aurato, Suo.
ANglica Romani iam prodit Musa leporis
Aemula, nec caeptis excidit illa suis.
Quam sibi Narcisso similis Narcissus in vndis,
Tam similis nostras Flacce Poeta tibi.
Quam similis linguae rediuiuis vocibus Echo
Permeat aethereas, Nympha canora, plagas,
Tam similis Lyricae respondet nostra Camoenae,
Romanumque melos Anglica plectra mouent.
Romanas tenuit Romanus Horatius aures,
Nunc Anglas Anglus non tenet ille minus.
Nam quod dulce sonat Romany Appula Musa.
Hoc resonas Anglis Cantia Musa tuis.
I. CHAPPERLINVS.

ODES OF HORACE.
The First Book.
Ode. I. To MAECENAS.
All things please not all men. HORACE most especially affects the name of a
Lyrick Poet.

Maecenas atavis.
MAecenas sprung from Grandsire Kings descent,
O, my defense, and sweetest ornament.
There are, who in their Chariots speedy flight,
To raise Olimpique dust, do take delight:
And having with chass'd wheels, the goal declined,
For Conquest's meed, have style of gods assigned.
This man, if wavering Citizens contend,
His worth, with threefold hohours to commend:
That other, if he in his Garnier stores,
What ever has been swept from Lybian flores,
From painful Tillage, and the Countries love,
The wealth of Attalus can never move,
That he a Mariner in fear of loss,
With Cyprian Bark Myrto^an Seas should cross.
When Southwest winds, Icarian waves do raise,
The Mercha^t rest, and Country graunge does praise;
Straight his torn Vessel, he repayres again,
The force of want unable to sustain.
Some others use, old Massique Wines to ply,
Nor from the day, some part to take deny;
Now, seeking under Arbutt's shade to cling,
Now near the soft head of some gentle Spring.
In Tents, and Trumpets Echo some delight,
Mixed with the Flute, and Wars that Mothers fright
In Fields the Hunter on the coldest day,
Forgetful of his tender Wife, does stay:
Whither his faithful dogs, have viewed the Hind,
Or, Marsyan Bore his round netts have vntwin'd.
Me, Iuy the reward, for Learned brows.
A place, among supernall gods allows
Light qui^es of Wood Nymphs, that with Satyrs bide,
And shady groves from Vulgar me divide:
So that my Pipe Eu^erpe not restrain,
Nor Polyhimne to tune my Lute refrain.
But if you me, amongst Lyricks will account,
My raised Creast above the Stars shall mount.
Ode II. To AUGUSTUS CAESAR.
Many storms are powered upon the People of Rome in revenge of Julius Caesar
slain. The only hope of the Empire is placed in the safety of Augustus.

Iam satis terris.
Jove, now on Earth, sufficient,
Of Snow, and direful Hayle has sent;
Who shaking Towers, with fiery hand,
Affrighted made the City stand:
He Nations scarr'd, left Pirrah's Reign
New Monsters should produce again;
As erst when Pro^eus drove his Flock,
To feed on Cliffe of steepy Rock,
Then to the Elme's Tope Fishes claue,
Which Turtles used for seat to have
And Does, whom sudden frights disease,
Swam boldly over swelling Seas.
Our eyes have yealow Tybers Flood
Beheld, by Tyrrhen Shores withstood
With violence; run down to beat,
The Tombs of Kings, and Vesta's seat.
While Ilia much to him complains,
He vows revenge: Though Jove disdaines,
His wandering, and vxorious wave,
Upon the City bancke, should rave.
Succeeding Youth, through Parents crimes,
Impayr'd, shall hear that passed times,
Have sharp'ned swords; shall hear of bralls,
Wherewith the Persian better falls.
To which god, shall we Vows assign,
Now, that our State affairs decline?
What prayer shall holy Virgin Saints,
To Vesta yield, made dease to plaints?
To whom shall Jove, the power dispense,
Of expiating Sins offense?
(Divining Phoebus) come we pray,
Whose shoulders white the Clouds array.
Or, if thou please (smoth Venus) hy
About whom Sport and Pleasures fly.
Or founder Mars, if Stock, or Kin,
Thou Love, which have neglected been.
O, thou that cloyed art with fight,
Whom clamor, and smoth Helmes delight:
And Mauritanian's visage bold,
When his stern Fo, he does behold.
Or, may thou (gentle Maia's Son)
With winged speed be hither won.
Augustus figure, chaung'd in thee,
Caesar's reuengefull friend to be.
Oh, may thou (late) to heaven retire;
Be present long, to Rome's desire:
Nor may the speedy blast of Time,
Take thee offended with our Crime.
Here Triumphs seek, and lasting fame,
Instil'd with Prince, and Fathers name;
Nor suffer Caesar (thou our Guide)
The Medians unrevenged to ride.
Ode XXII. To ARISTIVS.
Integrity of life is every where safe, which he proves, by his own example.

Integer Vitae.
Fvscus) the man whose life's entire,
And free from sin, needs not desire;
The Bow, nor Dart from Moore to borow,
Nor from full Quiver poys'ned Arow:
Whither over Libya's partched Sands,
Or Caucasus, that houselesse stands,
He takes his journey; or those places,
By which the famed Hydaspes traces.
For I, while, in the Sabine Grove,
My Lalage do chaunting roue,
From me not marking limits dew,
A Wolf (though I unarmed) slew.
A Monster such, as all exceeds,
Which in large woods fierce Daunia feeds:
Or those, which Iuba's Kingdom has,
The Desert nourse of Lions wroth.
Place me in coldest Champaines, where,
No Summer warmth, the Trees does cheer:
Let me in that dull Climat rest,
Which Clouds, and sullen Jove infest:
Yea place me underneath the Carre
Of too-neere Phoebus: seated far
From dwellings. Lalage, I Will love,
Whose smiles, whose words so sweetly move.
Ode XXIV. To VIRGILL.
Who immoderatly bemoned the death of Quintilius.

Quis desiderio sit.
MElpomene) on whom great Jupiter
Did shrillest voice to tunefull Harp confer:
Declare in mournful Notes; what shame, or let
Should on the love of such a friend beset.
Shall then Quintilius sleep eternally?
An equal unto whom, pure Modesty
And Justice Sister, Faith sincere and plain,
And naked Verity, shall never gain?
Of many worthy men bemoaned he fell:
But (Virgill) no man's grief can thine excel.
Thou (loving) do (alas) the gods in vain
Quintil us, not so lent thee, ask again.
What if more sweet, then Thracian Orphens wyre,
You Trees persuade, to hearken to your Lyre;
Yet can you not, return of Life command,
To shadow vain; which once with dreadful wand,
God Mercury, unwilling Fate t'vnlocke,
Has forced to dwell among the Stygian flock.
It Is hard I grant. "But Patience makes that light,
Which to correct, or change, exceeds our might.
Ode XXVIII.
Architas, a Philosopher and Geometrician is presented, answering to a certain
Mariner, that all men must dye, and entreating him, that he would not suffer
his body to lie on the shore unburied.

Te Maris, and Terrae.
THee, who the Sea, Earth, Sands, that none can tell
To bound with measure, knew'st (Architas) well.
The poor gift of a little dust confiries,
And near unto the Matine shore enshrines:
Nor could it any help, or profit be,
Death being ready still to call for thee;
Those ay'rie mansions to enquire from hence,
And search in mind the Heavens circumference.
The Sire of Pelops, who with Gods did feast,
And aged Tython, shrunk at Deaths arrest:
And Minos, to Jove's Counsels called, was slain,
And Panthois dyed, let out of Hell again,
Though he with Shield affixed, proving well
That his first Birth in Trojan ages fell,
Affirmed, that death naught killed, but nerves, and skin:
(No man in Natures power was better seen:)
But we into one self same night do fall,
And must the paths of Death tread once for all.
The Furies, some to games of Mars apply
The greedy Sayler, drencht in Seas does lie.
In death both young and old by heaps do join;
Nor any head escapes sad Proserpine.
Yea, the South Wind, crooked Orions mate,
Over whelmed me in Illyrian waves of late:
But be thou pleased (gentle Mariner,)
MY bones, and head, in loose sand to interre.
Which done (so thou be safe) may the Eastern wind,
That moves Hesperian billows be assigned,
To bluster lowdly in Venusium woods:
And may on every side, thy traffick'd goods,
In plenty flow to thee, from Ioue's just hand,
And Neptune, who Tarentum does command:
But if to frustrate me thou be not nice,
Which may thy guiltless issue prejudice;
I wish due punishment, and proud neglect,
May on thy Funeral Obscquies reflect:
Nor may my Prayers be powered forth in vain,
Nor vows have strength to set thee free again.
Yet if thou have, no longer stay I crave,
Then, thrice the dust be thrown upon my grave.
Ode XXXI. To APOLLO.
He desires not riches of Apollo, but that he may have a sound mind in a
healthy body.

Quid dedicatum poscit.
WHat does thy Poet ask Phoebus divine?)
What craves he, when he powers thee bowls of wine?
Not the rich corn of fat Sardinia,
Nor grateful flocks of burnt Calabria,
Nor Gold, nor Indian Iuory; nor the grounds,
Which silent Lyris, with soft stream arrounds:
Let those whom Fortune so much store assigns,
Dress with Calenian hook, their fertile Vines:
Let the rich Merchant to the Gods so dear,
(For so I term him right, who every year
Three, or four times, visits the Atlantique Seas,
From shipwreck free:) Let him his palate please,
And drink in gilt bowls, wines of highest price,
Bought with the sale of Syrian Merchandise.
Loose Mallows, Succory, and Olive plant
Serve me for food. O (great Apollo) grant,
To me in health, and free from life's annoy,
Things native, and soon gotten to enjoy;
And with a mind composed old age attain,
Not loathsome, nor deprived of Lyrick strain.
Ode XXXIV. To HIMSELF.
Who repents, that having followed the Epicurean Sect, he thereby has
negligently honored the gods.

Parcus Deorum cultor.
I, Of the gods a tardie worshipper,
Whilst (skilled) in frantike wisdom I do err,
Now backward forced am my sails to raise,
And to seek out again forsaken ways.
For Jupiter, who light to day inspires,
Dividing sable clouds, with shining fires,
Has through the clear sky often ordained his drift,
With thunder breathing horse and chariot swift,
Wherewith d^ll earth, and wandering rivers quake,
The Stygian Fenne, and horrid Seat does shake
Of hateful Taenarus, and Atlas bounds.
"God, in exchange, the high with low confounds:
"He abject baseness on the highest flings,
"And casts luster on obscured things.
Hence restless Fortune, height from one man takes,
With shrillest noise, and great another makes.
Ode XXXV. To FORTUNE.
He beseeches her, that she would preserve Caesar going into Brittany.

O diua gratum.
O Goddess, which beloved Antium swayes,
Still ready with thy powerful arm to raise,
Men from the low degree of wretched thralls,
Or turn proud triumphs into funerals.
The poor, and rustic Clown, with humble plea
Sollicites thee: Thee Lady of the Sea,
He lowdly inuocates; who e're does sweep
In Asian vessel the Carpathian deep.
The Dacian rough, the wandering Scythian,
Cities, and Kingdoms; The fierce Latian;
Thee Mothers of Barbarian Kings do fear,
And Tyrants, which bright purple garments wear.
Let not a standing pillar be or'ethrowne
With thy offended foot; nor be it known,
That people apt for arms, yet now at rest,
Take arms again, and Empires peace infest.
Thee sharp Necessity, does still fore-goe,
Holding in brazen hand, as pledge of woe,
Tormenting beams, and racks: and more to dant,
Sharp hooks, and molten lead do never want.
Thee Hope, and simple Faith in white attire,
Does honor, and thy company desire,
How e're another habit thou do take,
And made a foe, great houses thou forsake.
But the false multitude, and perjured whore
Does back retire; yea friends when vessels store,
Is to the dregs drunk up; Away they fly,
Shunning the yoke of mutual poverty.
Preserve thou Caesar safe, we thee implore,
Bound to the world's remotest Brittan shore,
And the late raised troops of youth most able,
To Eastern parts, and red Sea formidable.
We at our scarres do blush, Sin, Brothers fall.
(Vile Age) what mischefes do we shun at all?
What youth, his hand, for fear of gods contains?
Or who himself from Altars spoil restraines?
Ah would thou now our blunted swords new frame
The Arabians, and the Massagetes to tame.
The end of the first Book.
ODES OF HORACE.
The Second Book.
Ode. II. To C. SALVSTIVS CRISPVS.
He prayseth Proculeius for liberality toward his brothers. Only contempt
of money makes a man happy.

Nullus Argento color.
NO color is in Golden vain,
(Oh Salust, enemy of gain)
Hidden within a greedy Mine,
Unless with temperate use it shine.
Never shall Proculeius die,
Amongst Brothers marked for piety:
Suruiuing Fame with daring flight,
Shall yield his Name eternal right.
In larger circuit thou do reign,
If greedy humor thou restrain.
Then if thou Gades to Lybia join,
Or both the Carthages were thine.
The selfe-indulgent Dropsy grows,
Nor does the palate's thirst unloose,
Till man from veins, the sickness cause,
And pallid watery faintness draws.
Virtue, that vulgar does oppose,
Not in the rank of happy, chose
Phraat with Cyrus throne indu'de.
And does forbid the multitude
False acclamations to make;
And rule, and Scepter safe partake,
And Bays to him alone apply,
Who viewes huge heaps with careless eye.
Ode III. To DELIVS.
Prosperous, and adverse Fortune are to be moderately borne, since one, and the
self same condition of death, hangs over every man.

Aequam memento.
IN adverse chance, an equal mind retain,
As in best fortunes temp'red, free from vain
Of mirth profuse: For (Delius) thou must die,
Whither in sadness, thou do ever ly;
Or, on Feast days retired to grassie shade,
Thou with close Falerne wine art happy made:
Where the white Poplar, and the lofty Pine,
Their friendly shade in mutual branches twine:
And Rivers swiftly gliding strive, apace
'Bout crooked banks, their trembling streams to chase.
Bring hither Wine, and odorous Unguents. Bring
The dainty Rose, a fair, but fading thing.
While Fortune, age, and wealth yield seasons fit.
And the three Sisters sable loomes permit:
Thou from thy house must part, and purchased woods,
And village lau'd, with yellow Tybers floods.
And thy high hoarded heaps of wealths excess,
An Heir (perhaps) ungrateful shall possess.
No matter it is, whither thou rich art borne,
Of Argine Kings; or low, exposed to scorn,
Sprung from poor Parents, live in open fields;
Thou art Death's sacrifice, (who never yields.)
We all are thither brought, it is he that turns,
And winds our mortal life's uncertain Vrnes.
Sooner or later each man has his lot,
And exiled hence, embarques in Charon's Boat.
Ode IX. To VALGIVS.
That now at length he would desist, to deplore his deceased Myste.

Non semper imbres.
THe swelling cloud, not always powers,
On rugged fields impetuous showers.
Nor Caspian Sea (Valgius beloved)
With tossing storms, is ever moved.
Nor on Armenia's bord'ring shore,
The sluggish ice stands always hoar:
Or Ga^gan groves, with North-winds riu'd,
Or Ash trees are of leaves deprived.
You still in mournful sort complain
That death, has dearest Myste slain.
Your love not fails, if Vesper rise,
Nor when bright Hesper, Phoebus flies.
But thrice-ag'd Nestor, mourned not still,
That death An^ilochus did kill:
Nor Parents, nor sad Sisters, ever
To wail young Troilus persevere.
Cease then at length, thy soft complaint;
And in our Songs, now, let us paint,
Great Caesar's Trophies, and command,
And how conioyn'd to conquered land,
The Median stream, and Nyphate strong,
Do in less Channells, run along;
And Gelon's to less limits ty'de,
In far more aightned fields do ride.
Ode X. To LICINIVS.
Mediocritie to be used in either Fortunes.

Rectius viues Licini.
YOur safer course (Licinius) count,
Not always on the Maine to mount:
Not whilst you (wisely) storms abhor,
Too much to trust the shelfie shore.
He that affects the golden mean,
Lives safe from Cottages unclean,
And (sober) does as much despise,
In Envy breeding Courts to rise.
The blustering winds more often far,
Against lofty Pines, do threaten war:
Brave Towers with greater ruin fall,
And Thunders highest hills enthrall,
Each Fortune, minds prepared does glad,
They fear in good, and hope in bad.
Jove brings in horrid Winters rage,
And suddenly does it assuage.
If with thee now, it be but ill,
Think that it cannot be so still.
Sometimes Apollo's silent Muse,
Speaks in his Harp; nor does he use,
Always to bend his angry Bow;
In crosses strength, and courage show.
And let your sails with prosperous wind
Too much advanced, be declined.
Ode XI. To QVINTVS HIRPINVS.
Cares laid aside, let us live merrily.

Quid bellicosus Cantaber.
What the Cantabrian stout, or Scythian think,
Divided with opposed Adria's brinke,
(Quintus Hirpinus) do not thou enquire,
Nor for life's use, which little does desire,
Be thou too careful. Smooth-faced youth, apace
Does backward fly, and with it beautie's grace.
Dry aged hoarinesse with furrows deep,
Dispelling amorous fires, and gentle sleep.
The Summer flowers keep not their native grace,
Nor shines the bright Moon, with a constant face.
Why do thou tire thy mind, subordinate
Unto the Counsels of Eternal Fate?
Why under this high Plane, or Pine tree's shade
In discomposed manner, careless laid,
Our hoary hair perfumed with fragrant Rose,
And odours, which Assyria does disclose.
Do we (anointed) not to drink prepare?
Free Bacchus dissipates consuming care.
But (oh) what Boy, Falernian wines hot rage,
Will soon for me, with gliding streams assuage?
(Ah) who retired Lyde will require,
Hither to come. Boy with her Iuory Lyre,
Bid her make haste, and hair to tie not shame,
In careless knot, like a Laconian Dame.
Ode XIV. To POSTHVMVS.
Life is short, and Death is necessary.

Eheu fugaces Posthume.
AH Posthumus, swift years do pass,
Nor can religious zeal (alas)
To wrinckles, or decrepit days,
Or Death untamed bring delays:
Not, if thou to harsh Plutoe's shrine
Each day three hundred Bulls assign:
Who Geryon, and Tytius bound,
With sable River, does surround.
A stream on which each man must sail,
From royal Scepter to the flayle.
We bloody Mars decline in vain,
Or broken waves of Adrian maine:
And (needless) fear in Autumn rife,
The South-wind's hurtful to our life.
Wandering Cocytus Flood, with slow
And heavy Current, thou must know.
And Danaus infamous train,
And Sysiphus with endless pain.
Thou House, Land, lovely Wife must want,
Nor of the Trees, which thou do plant,
(Thou dead) will any wayt on thee,
But the despised Cypress tree.
Thy worthier Heir, drinks precious wine,
Which thou with hundred keys did shrine;
And with it the rich pauement dewes;
None such the high Priests Banquet shows.
Ode. XV.
Against the excess of that Age.

Iam pauca aratro.
MAgnifique buildings will leave shortly, now,
Few Akers of firm land, unto the Plough;
Now many are beheld huge Pooles to make
Of much more wide extent, then Lucrine Lake.
The solitary Plane, the Elm supplants,
And now no sort of odorous flowers wants,
As Roses, Violets, and Venus-Mirtle,
Where th'Oliue grew, to former Lords so fertile.
The Laurel now, to Phoebus piercing eye,
Through his thick branches passage does deny.
No such Praescript, did R^mulus exact,
Nor Elders, nor rough Cato did enact.
Private Revenues, then, were short, and low,
And each man sought to make the public flow.
Proud Galleries no private man, then made,
Of ten foot wide, to let in Northern shade.
Nor did our Laws, then, suffer us disdain,
A casual Turfe, for Pillow to retain;
Commanding towns to build, at public charge,
And the gods Temples, with new stone enlarge.
Ode XVI. TO GROSPHVS.
All men desire tranquillity of mind, which can neither with Riches, nor
Honors be acquired, but only with bridleling our Appetites.

Otium Diuos rogat.
Soon as black clouds have hid the Moons bright eye,
And Pilots cannot best known Stars espy,
The Mariner tossed in Aegean Sea,
Straight to the gods for rest makes humble plea.
The Thracians fierce in war do ease require,
And Quiuer-bearing Medes repose desire,
Repose, which not with gemms, purple, or gold,
(Believe me Grosphus) will be bought, or sold.
No Wealth, nor Consulls Lictors that make way,
Can from the Heart disturbed tumults fray,
Nor cares which round about gilt roofes do fly.
He with a little lives happily,
Who having on his homely Table placed,
His Fathers Cup, and Salt kept vndefac'd,
So lives, that fear, nor sordid lucre keep
His waking eyes from soft, and gentle sleep.
Why do we (boldly) many things propose
In ^^ort lived age, which Time does quickly close?
Why lands with other Son enflamed change?
Who from himself, though far from home can range?
Strong Ships are boarded by consuming Care:
Nor does she brauest troops of Horsemen spare:
More swift she is, then the light footed Hind,
Or tempeft-raising storms of Eastern wind.
The mind in present cheerful, hates to care
For what beyond it lies; And does prepare
To temper bitter things with laughter free:
"Nothing in all respects can happy be.
Death quickly snatched brave Achilles hence,
Nor did with Tython's long lived age dispense:
And that (perhaps) of time I may obtain,
Which thy expecting hopes shall never gain.
You many fertile flocks of sheep command,
Siciliax Kine about you lowing stand.
Your Mares for Chariot fit, are heard from far,
Lowdly to neigh: Nor garments wanting are,
Of Purple cloth, dipped twice in Afric Die;
While a poor state, by upright destiny,
To me is given; mixed with a slender name,
Of Greekish Muse, and scorn of vulgar Fame.
Ode XVII. TO MAECENAS being sick.
Whom he resolves not to sur^iue.

Cur Me querelis.
WHy kill you me with your laments?
It neither gods, nor me contents,
Macenas (first) should yield to Fate,
The Grace, and Pillar of my State.
But if a speedier stroke of death,
Rob thee (my souls best part) of breath?
Why stay I in the other, Sole,
Not pleasing to my Self, nor whole?
One day shall see us perish both:
I have not sworn an idle oath.
Go, when you please, I will not stay,
But be your partner in the way.
Chimaera's spirit breathing fire,
Nor hundred-handed Gyas, Ire;
Shall this my fixed vow abate;
Thus Justice has it pleased, and Fate.
Though Libra in his full aspect,
And feared- Scorpius, direct,
My Horoscope with rage infest,
Or, Capricorn, that rules the West;
Our Constellations both agree
In admirable sort. And thee
loves radiant luster, has exempt,
From Saturnes Beam maleuolent,
And slack'd the wings of speedy death,
What time the people with loud breath,
Thrice in the Theater did sound
That gladsome newe^: Even then a wound,
By a tree's fall, my skull had broke.
But Wood-god Faunus, from the stroke,
Me then did happily assist,
(Patron of each Mercurialist.)
Then pay thy vows, thy Temple build,
And I a tender Lamb will yield.
Ode XVIII.
He affirms himself content with little, while others are wholly addicted
to their desires, and increase of riches, as if they should always line.

Non ebur, neque aureum.
No gilded roof, nor Iuory fret,
For splendour in my house is set;
Nor beams are from Hymettia sought,
To lie athwart rich Columns, brought
From Afric; nor an heir unknown.
Altalus wealth, make I mine own.
No honest Clyents wives you see,
Laconian Purples weaue for me:
A loyal heart, and gentle vain,
Of wit I have; which does constrain
Rome's richest men, to seek the love,
Of me but poor: Nor gods above,
Do I inuoke for larger store;
Nor of Macenas ask I more.
To me, my only Sabine field,
Sufficient happiness does yield.
"One day thrust's on another fast,
And new Moons to the Wane do have.
When death (perhaps) is near at hand,
Thou fairest Marbles do command
Be cut for use, yet do neglect
Thy grave, and houses still erect,
And would abridge, the vast Sea's shore,
Which loudly does at Baia rore:
Enriched little, less content,
With limits of the Continent.
Why often pull you up your bounds,
T'enlarge the Circuit of your grounds,
And greedily your list extend
Beyond your neighbor straightly penn'd^
Both man, and wife with sordid brood,
And ancient household gods, that stood
In quiet peace, must be expeld;
Yet is no habitation, held,
For the rich Landlord, so assured,
As in deep Hell to be immured.
Then whither do you further tend?
Th'indifferent Earth, an equal friend,
As willingly opens her womb,
For Beggars grave, as Prince's Tomb.
Gold could of Charon not obtain,
To bear Prometheus back again.
Proud Tantalus, and all his stock,
He, in the bands of Fate did lock.
And called, or not called still is pressed,
To give the laboring poor man, Rest.
The end of the second Book.
ODES OF HORACE.
The Third Book.
Ode I.
Life is made happy, not with Riches, but Mind's Tranquillity.

Odi profanum vulgus.
I Hate, and from me do exclude,
The most illiterate Multitude.
You knowing Spirits, favor bring
To me the Muses Priest, who sing
To Boys, and spotless Virgins, Verse
Which none did ever yet rehearse.
Kings awful, their own Subjects sway,
And Kings themselves do love obey:
Who famous for the Giants fall,
With brow austere does manage all.
Say one, more large in furrows plant
Trees, which another man does want.
What though one boast a nobler strain,
Affected honors to attain:
One better life, and Fame pretends,
Another has more troops of friends:
With equal Law, never failing death,
The rich, and poor depriues of breath:
Casting that name, from forth his Vrne,
Which next by lot to death must turn.
To him, who over his wicked head,
A drawn sword sees in twine of thread,
Sicilian Feasts, with dainties graced,
Procure not Palate-pleasing taste;
No chant of Birds, nor charm of Lyre,
Can to his eyes, soft sleep inspire:
Delicious Sleep, no whit disdaines,
The homely Cottages of Swains:
Nor shady banks, nor Tempe grove,
Where Zephirus does gently roue.
He who desires, but what is enough,
Fears not the Ocean billows rough:
Nor stern Arcturus force, that sets,
Nor rising Kid, who storms begets:
His Vines, nor ruined are with hayle,
Nor do his crops in Harvest fail:
His fields, now blaming water-falls,
Now parching Stars, now Winter-thralls.
Yea Fishes feel the Seas grown straight,
With Bulwarks raised, of wondrous weight:
Here the Surueyor, with his train,
And Lord himself, filled with disdain;
Of his firm Land's too narrow ring,
Building materials frequent bring:
But angry threats, and restless Fear,
Go with their Master every where.
Black Care, in ship, with him abides,
And sits behind him, when he rides.
But if, nor Phrygian Columns, can,
Nor use of Purples brighter, than
Heavens Lights, disturbed minds content,
Nor Falerne Vine, nor Persian Sent.
Why Pillars proud, should I erect,
Or Gall'ry of new Architect?
Why should I Sabine's Country Grange,
For much more busy wealth exchange?
Ode II. To his FRIENDS.
Boys are to be enured from their tender age, to poverty, warfare, and
painful Life.

Angustam amici.
LEt able Youth, it self enure,
By wars sharp use, want to endure.
And mounted on his Horse, with Spear,
No whit bold Parthians valor fear:
Let him exposed to open air,
Live, and attempt, the hard'st affair.
Whom wife of Tyrant, used to war,
Viewing, from hostile walls afar;
And Maid for marriage ripe may cry,
With sighs, which from sad passion fly.
Oh, that my royal Love, vntrain'd
In martial feats, would be restrained,
Not to fierce Combats fatal stroke,
That wrathful Lion to provoke,
Whom bloody angers direful rage,
In thickest slaughters does engage.
"It is a sweet, and noble gain,
"In Countries quarrel to be slain.
Death, the swift flying man pursues
With ready steps: Nor does he use,
To spare, from vnauoyded wrack,
Youth's supple hammes, or fearful back.
Virtue disdaining base neglect,
Does shine with taintlesse honors decked:
Nor takes, or leaves she honor's choice,
To please the people's ay'ry voice.
Virtue, vnlocking Heaven to praise,
Does dauntlesse try, denied ways.
Vulgar assemblies does despise,
And leaving Earth, to Heaven flies.
Yea, trusty Silence is not barred,
To have a merited reward.
He, who to blab the holy Rites,
Of secret Ceres Phane delights,
Under the same roof shall not be,
Nor in frail Vessel sail with me.
"Jove often neglected, makes the Just
"To smart with those are stayn'd with lust;
"Seldom Revenge, with halting pace,
Leaves bad foregoing men to trace.
Ode. III.
A man with virtue adorned, fears nothing. Juno's Oration of Troye's
overthrow, and the end of that war. And how the Roman Empire shall take
beginning from the Trojans.

Iustum and tenacem.
He, that is just, and of resolved mind,
No voice of Citizens to bad enclind,
Nor angry brow of hasty Tyrants threat,
Can shake his solid thoughts from Virtue's seat.
Not the South wind, which does rough Adria stir,
Nor potent hand of thundering Jupiter;
Yea, should the world dissolved perish quite,
The so ^aine ruins would him not affright.
With this same Art, the wandering Hercules,
And Pollux, did the fi'ry Turrets seize.
Twixt whom Augustus placed, with rosy lips
Nectar, the Gods eternal liquor, sips.
With this god Bacchus, high his worth did rear,
By Tigers drawn, untaught the yoke to bear.
With this Art Romulus on Mars his Steeds,
Leaves Acheron, and to Heavens glory speeds.
What time the gods consulting. Juno said
In grateful accents this; Troy, Troy, betrayed,
A fatal, and incestuous Judge has burned,
And a strange woman unto Ashes turned.
Even from that time, that Priams wayward Sire,
Bereft the righteous gods their promised hire,
Which Troy by me, and Pallas once contemned,
With Prince and people, were to flames condemned.
Now the known guest, of that adult'rous Dame
Which fled from Greece, no more shall merit fame;
And Priams perjured stock, with Hector's aid,
No more shall make the warlike Greeks dismayed.
The fatal wars, which our seditions fed,
Are now composed, and angry storms are dead.
Henceforth to Mars my fury will I leave,
And Vesta's offspring unto grace receive:
Him I to Heavens bright mansions will admit,
To drink of Nectar, and with gods to sit:
While the vast Sea, twixt Troy, and Rome is found,
Reign happy banished men on any ground:
Whilst herds over Priam's tomb, and Paris stray,
And beasts preserve their young from hunters pray,
Let the bright Capitol it is glory spread,
And Rome give Laws unto the conquered Mead.
Yea let her, her far-dreaded name extend,
And with the Earth's remotest confines end:
Where the Mid-stream, Europe from Afric bounds,
Or swelling Nilus, watreth fertile grounds.
Rome abler far, to scorn gold, yet unfound,
(Which best is placed, when deepest under ground,)
Then to extract it thence for humane use,
Each hand things sacred foyling with abuse.
What limit of the world, so e're contend,
Let thither Rome, her arms victorious send.
Glad to behold, where the burnt Zones do stand,
Or clowdy Poles, which showry dewes command.
But to the most vnvanquish'd Roman State,
On this condition I prescribe this Fate,
Lest they, too pious, and indulgent yield,
The ruined walls of ancient Troy to build.
Yet if that Fortune by unhappy chance,
Should once again decayed Troy advance,
I Wife, and Sister of love, Heavens King,
With armed troops, would new destruction bring.
If thrice a Brazen wall, by Phoebus hand
Should reared be, it thrice by my command,
The Greeks should raze, and thrice the captive wife
Her child, and husband mourn, deprived of life.
But these things nothing fit, my sportiue Lyre;
Muse whither go thou? Ah! do not aspire,
The gods discourse, thus boldly to relate,
Or great things with low Lays extenuate.
Ode VI. To The ROMANS.
Of the corrupt manners of that Age.

Delicta maiorum.
(Roman) resolve, thou shall desertlesse taste,
Sinn's scourge, for vice of Predecessor past,
Until thou do again, repair
Decayed Temples, and make fair,
The falling houses of the gods, disgraced,
And cleanse their Images, with smoke defaced.
To think thee less then Gods, thy power commends;
Hence take beginnings, hither aim thy ends.
The Gods neglected, did impose
On sad Hesperia many woes.
Twice Pacorus, and twice Monaeses hand,
Our inauspicious forces did disband:
Who with a plenteous prey made glad,
To little chains new links did add.
The Dacian, and the Aethiop fierce in wars,
Has almost razed the City, rent with iarres.
One with his Navy formidable,
With Darts, the other better able.
This Age in Vice abounding, did begin,
Chaste Stocks, and Nuptials to pollute with sin:
The woes which from this fountain flow,
People, and Country overthrow.
The Maid for Marriage ripe, much joys to learn,
Ionick Daunces, and can well discern,
With art to feign, and quickly prove,
The pleasures of unlawful love.
Straight made a wife in midst of husband's cups,
She with young Gallants, and adulterers sups.
Nor does she care, to whom by stealth,
(Light's out) she yield loves lawless wealth.
But asked, does rise, (her knowing husband by)
To prostitute her Marriage modesty:
At Factors call, or Pilot's hyre,
Of lustful shame, a costly buyer.
That youth came not, from such Forefathers strain,
Who did the Sea with Punick blood distaine.
By such hands, Pyrrhus did not fall.
Antiochus, nor Hanniball.
But in those days, a brave and manly race
Of rustic Soldiers lived in this place,
Well skilled in Plough, and Sabine spade,
And so to strict obedience made.
That if sharp mothers bad, at home return,
They on their sholders brought logs new'd to burn:
Soon, as the Sun, did change the mountains shade.
And weary vnyoak'd Oxen home-ward made,
Night gave their labors free dispense,
Chasing the Sun's bright Chariot hence.
"What wastes not with Times devouring rage?
"Our Fathers life, much worse the Grandsire's age,
"Sees us more wicked, to produce
"An off spring fuller of abuse.
Ode IX. To LYDIA.
A Dialogue of his passed Loves, and renewing of them again.

This Ode, though less moral then the rest, I have admitted, for Iul.
Scaliger's sake, who much admireth it.

Donec gratus eram.
Horace.
WHilst I was pleasing in thy ey,
Nor any to thy heart more nigh,
Clasped, that white neck in amorous Ring,
More blessed I lived, then Persia's King.
Lydia.
Whilst you no other Fire embraced,
Nor Chlo^e before Lydia placed.
I Lydia then with honor signed,
More then the Roman Illia shined.
Horace.
Now Thracian Chlo^e I obey,
Skillfull, and prompt in Musick's lay:
For whom I will not fear to die,
So Fate to her the same deny.
Lydia.
Calais Ornithus son does fire
My heart with flames of like desire.
For whom I twice to die, will dare
So Fates, the youth suruiuing spare.
Horace.
But what if ancient Love return,
And us with mutual passion burn;
If I shake off bright Chloe's hope,
And doors to scorned Lydia open?
Lydia.
Though he be brighter then a Star,
And lighter thou, then Cork by far.
More angry, then rough Adria; I
With thee would live, with thee would die.
Ode XIV. To the ROMAN PEOPLE.
This Ode contains the praises of Augustus returning out of Spain, after his
Conquest over the Cantabrians.

Herculis ritu.
AS Hercules, sometime was thought
Bays with life's hazard to have sought;
So Caesar now, to us restores,
Our household gods from Spanish shores.
The wife that is with one husband pleased,
Let her come forth, the gods appeased.
Octauia Caesar's Sister, have,
And Head with humble veyle embraced,
Now Mothers with your Virgins dear,
And sons (late) safe returned, appear.
Now Boys, and you new married train
Of wives, from evil words abstain.
From me this new made Holy Day,
Black sullen cares, shall take away.
Nor fear I in great Caesar's reign,
By force, or tumult to be slain.
(Boy) Crowns, and Unguents now prepare,
And vessel kept, since Marsian war:
If any such concealed has been,
By wandering Spartacus not seen.
Let shrill Neaera here be found,
With golden hair in tresses bound.
But if the Porter, make delay
With churlish answer; Have away.
White hayres do mollify my mind,
To brawles, and quarrels erst inclined.
This in Youths heat, I could not brook,
When Consul Plancus, Office took.
Ode XVI. To MAECENAS.
All things lie open to Gold, but Horace is content with his own Fortune,
whereby be is made happy.

Inclusam Danaen.
Doors strongly fenced, and a Brazen Tower,
With careful Guard of waking dogs had power
Fair Dana^ in stony walls immured,
From night-Adulterers to have secured:
Did not both love and Venus then deride
Acrisius, who the Maid with fear did hide.
For they the way knew free, and safe the hold,
Were but the god once turned into gold.
Gold abler, armed troops to pass, then thunder,
The strongest Fortresses does rent assunder.
The Argiue Angur's house, with all his State,
Desire of gain did wholly ruinate.
With gifts the Macedonian did subdue,
Strong City gates, and proud Kings overthrew.
Seamen are snared with gifts, and golden store;
"Care, growing wealth pursues with thirst of more.
Then (dear Maecenas) well may I detest,
To vaunt my self with elevated crest.
"How much the more, man does himself deny,
"So much the more, the gods will him supply.
I poor in state, seek those that naught desire,
And, flying, do from rich men's tents retire,
And better live, Lord of a slender store,
Then, were I said to hold upon my flore,
What the Apulian painfully has tilled,
And in great wealth be poor, and never filled.
My stream of waters pure, my little Copps;
My certain hope of happy fruitful crops,
From him his hidden in my better chance,
Who Empire in rich Afric does advance.
Though me Calabrian Bees, no Honey give,
Nor wines in Laestrigonian Flaggons, live
Till age make good the taste, though no man knows
That my rich fleece in fertile Gallia grows.
Yet from me, craving poverty does fly;
Nor should I ask you more, will you deny.
I, better will with limited desire,
Pay Caesar little tributes, then aspire
By greatness, to unite the Phrygian plain,
To Alliatts ample state, and royal reign.
"Who much desire, want much: He richly lives
"Whom God, with sparing hand sufficient gives.
Ode XXIV.
Against covetous rich men.

Intactis opulentior.
ALthough you richer be by far,
Then the Arabs Mines untouched, or Indies are:
Though you with deep pyles, land would gain,
Even from the Tyrrhene, and large Pontique Maine.
If, on your head sad Fate preuayles,
Transfixing it with Adamantine nails,
Yet can you not your mind set free,
Or life, from snares of death exempted see.
The savage Scithyans better live,
(Who in their Carts, unconstant dwelling drive)
And rigid Getes, whose common ground
Does in full store of Corn and Fruits abound.
And love their tillage to extend,
No longer, then the yearly season's end:
So as, whilst one man weary lies,
A Substitute, him with like pains supplies.
The Step-dame, there, in peaceful aw,
Commands her mother-wanting son in law:
Nor wife, though rich, her husband swayes,
Or, to Adult'rer spruce, her self betrays.
"Virtue of Parents, is great Dower,
"And Chastity restrained to Wedlocks power,
"Fearful of others touch; that knows
"The breach is sin, and Death the payment owes.
Oh, he that would quite take away
All impious slaughters, and each civil fray:
If he the Citie's Father, care
On statues to be styled: Ah! let him dare,
(So shall he future glory gain)
Loose liberty with bridle to restrain.
But virtue (living) we despise,
And much admire it, taken from our eyes.
But what need sad complaints be spent,
If vice be not cut off with punishment?
What profit Laws, in vain composed,
Without good lives? If neither Climes exposed,
To parched heates: Nor Northren star,
Nor snow hard crusted, can the Merchant scarre:
Wife Mariners, through rough Seas fly,
The greatest imputation (Poverty)
Bids us do that, or suffer this,
Yet does the painful way of Virtue miss.
Then go we to the Capital,
Where vulgar voice, and troops of friends do call:
Or, in the nearest Sea be bold,
Our gemms, and precious stones, with fruitless gold,
The root of many ills to cast.
If thou will fully sins repentance taste,
Let this first scope thy thoughts inspire,
To raze the Elements of foul desire:
And in minds tender, apt to ill,
To seek the sharpest studies to instill:
Youth nobly board, as yet vn^^ide,
Fears hunting sport, and speedy horse to ride:
Far better skilled Greek Tops to ply,
Or Dice, which ancient Roman Laws deny:
Whilst his false Sire, with cunning wi^es,
His fellow-neighbour, and his guest beguiles,
And all this, that he may prepare
Great heaps of riches, for his worthless heir.
"Thus, though vile riches grow: yet will
"Somewhat to our weak state, be wanting still.
Ode XXVIII. To LYDE.
He persuades Lyde, to spend the day dedicated to Nep^^^^ (...)

Festo quid potius die.
WHat do we else on Neptune's Feast?
Be therefore (Lyde) ready pressed,
To broach Caecubian Wines, enclosed;
And let strong wisdom be opposed.
Thou see, 'its mid-time of the day,
And yet, as if swi^t time did stay,
A Butt, thou spar'st, was Cellar-stalld,
When Bibulus was Consul called.
With mutual Songs, we will Neptune please,
And the greene-hayrd Neretdes.
On crooked Lyre, sing thou with art,
Latona, and swift Cynthia's dart:
Whilst our last strain, her praise unfolds,
Who Cn^dos, and bright Cyclads holds:
And Paphos with payrd Swans does view;
Yet (Night) we will pay th^e Verses due.
Ode XXIX. To MAECENAS.
He inviteth him to a merry Supper, laying publiques cares aside.

Tyrrhena regum.
OH my Maecenas, sprung from roy I^straine,
Of Tyrrhene Kings; Behold, I do retain,
Long since by me reserved, to be thine,
A vessel, yet vnbroach'd of milder wine;
Soft rosy flowers, for thee I will prepare,
And supple Unguents, pressed for thy hair.
Then free thee from delay: Nor always yield,
To view from far Aesulus hanging field,
Moist Tybur's Site: Nor let thy eyes abide,
On hills of Telegon, the Particide.
Leave off to see, successful Rome rejoice,
In smoaky hopes, much wealth, and vulgar voice.
To great men, changes often times grateful are:
And under humble roofes, neat srugall fare,
Without rich hangings, or gay purple state,
Does the most busy brow to mirth dilate.
Now bright Andromeda's refulgent Sire,
Shows to this vnder-world, his hidden fire:
Now Procyon, and the raging Lion swayes,
Phoebus reducing dry, and parched days.
The Shepherd tired, with his faint flock does hie,
To find cook shades, or trembling current nigh,
And rough Syluanus thickets: while the shore,
Becalmed stands, from wind's tumukuons rore.
Mean time the good of Rome, in mind you bear,
And of her much sollicitous, do fear
What Seres plot, or Bactria Cyrus state,
Or, Tanais war like-dweller perpetrate.
All-knowing god, with cloudy night does close
Events of future times, and laughs at those,
Who beyond reason fear: Thy present state,
See then with equal mind thou moderate.
All other things, like to a Riuer's source,
Who in the middle Ch^nnell of his course,
Now to the Tyrrhene Sea in silence strayes;
But when fierce Deluges, calm Rivers raise,
He then in heaps rowles down with dreadful sound
Stones billow-gnawn, and trees torn from the ground.
With house, and cattle borne along the flood,
Frighting the hill with noise, and neighboring wood.
He Master of himself, lives merry days,
Who (this day I have lived) and truly, says;
To morrow (Jove) with black clouds heaven embrace,
Or let the Sun show forth his golden face.
Yet notwithstanding God will not agree,
That what is passed once, shall frustrate be:
Nor what the once swift-sliding hour has wrought,
Will he vnfashion'd leave, or bring to naught.
Fortune in adverse chances, sportiue ever,
And bold in scornful pastime to persevere,
Transferreth he^ uncertain honors: Now
To me propitious, instantly to you.
I praise her, while she stays, but if she shake
Her fleet wings, I restore what I did take:
And me with my own virtue, do invest,
Making thin honest poverty my guest.
It Is not for me, inprayer time to wast,
When wracking, Southern ^ind has rent the Mast,
And bargain with the gods, that the vast floods,
May to their wealth, not add my Tyrian goods:
When I, into such dangerous hazard fall,
The Wind, and ^^ll^^^ with his brother, shall
Me with a poor two-oated Vessels aid,
See, safely through Aegtian stor^es conuayd.
Ode XXX. To MELPOMENE.
Horace has obtained eternal glory, by writing of Lyrick Verses.

Exegi Monumentum.
A Monument by me is brought to pass,
Out-liuing Pyramids, or lasting brass,
The Sepulcher of Kings; which eating rain,
Nor the fierce Northren tempest can restrain:
Nor Years (though numberless:) nor Times swift start.
I will not wholly die; my better part,
Shall escape the sullen hearse: Bright Fame shall raise
My memory renewed, with future praise:
While in the Capitol the Priest ascends,
With Vestalls pure, whom silence so commends.
I (though) of humble strain will be declared,
The first, and able most, that ever dared,
Unto Italian Proportion's use,
Aecolian antique Measures to reduce.
Where Aufidus with wrathful stream does rore,
Or Daunus poor in waters, reigns over
Rough barbarous Nations. Take to thee a name,
Which best (Melpomene) may suit thy fame.
And (willingly) thy Poet does request,
My hair with Delphick Laurel thou inuest.
The End of the third Book.
ODES OF HORACE.
The Fourth Book.
Ode III. To MELPOMENE.
Horace is borne to Poetry, by whose aid, he has obtained immortal glory.

Quem tu Melpomene.
ON whom (Melpomene) with mild aspect,
Thou shall thy favor at his Birth reflect,
Him; Istmian Labor shall not higher rear
With Wrastlers title, nor swift horses bear
By Grecian Chariot drawn, for Victors mee'd
In pompous triumph; nor for warlike deed,
A Captain in the Capitol be made,
And decked with Delian Bays, who durst invade,
And break the swelling threats of hostile Kings:
But rather those soft-falling gentle Springs,
Which wash fat Tybur, and Groves thickly grown,
Shall make his worth in Lyrick Verse be shown.
Rome Queen of Cities, does no whit disdain
Me for the Muses sake to entertain
Amongst the Poets, loved Quires to sit,
So that I now, am less with Envy bit.
(Oh thou Pierian) which with Harp of gold,
Do in sweet notes harmonious air unfold;
(Oh thou) who if thou please, to Fishes mute,
The Swan's delicious Song can attribute:
It wholly is a gift derived from thee,
That by each finger, which does pass by me,
The Roman Lyrick Harper they design.
That I do breath, and please (if please) is thine.
Ode V. To AVGSTVS.
That now at length he would return into the City.

Diuis orte bonis.
(CAesar.) thou from the gods propitious sprung,
Our best preserver, stay'st away too long.
We promise of thy quick return require,
Made to the sacred Senate: Oh retire,
(Good Caesar) on thy Country light reflect,
For where thy Spring-like face does beams eiect,
More joyful to the people are the days,
And better does the Sun, transfuse his rays.
Like as a Mother (when the Southern wind,
Her son with envious tempest has confined,
Beyond the billows of Carpathian Straights
More then a year:) His home-returne a waights
With vows, and prayers; And the gods implores,
Her ey not stirring from the crooked shores.
So stricken with their faithful heart's desire,
Thy Country (Caesar) does thy self require.
Behold the Ox, safe, wandreth up and down;
Ceres, and bright Felicity do crown,
And feed the Land. The Seas are calmer framed
For Sailors use. Faith fears to be blamed.
No chaste house, with Adulterie's defiled;
Custom, and Law, has spotted sin exiled.
For Sons like Syres, the Mothers we commend.
"Companion punishment does vice attend.
Who fears the Parthian now, or Scythian bold;
Or Monsters, which rough Germany does hold.
Or Caesar being safe, who will regard,
That fierce Iberia stands for arms prepared?
Each man in his own hills, does close the day,
And Vines about the widow-Elme display.
Then frolike to his banquet he retires,
And thee a god, in second Cups admires.
With many prayers, he does his Vows inflame,
And powers full goblets out unto thy name;
Thy Godhead seeking with his Lars to please,
As Greece their Caest^r, and great Hercules.
(Good Caesar) render long repose we pray,
To glad Hesperia: This we (sober) say
When day first breaks: This moystned, when to rest
The Sun inuites us, wa^ing in the West.
Ode VII. To LUCIUS MANLIVS TORQVATVS.
Since Time changes all things, let us live merrily.

Diffugere niues.
NOw snows are quite dissolved, fresh grass we see
To fields returned, and leaves to every tree.
The earth with various change each season ranks,
And falling Rivers glide within their banks.
Aglaia dares (naked) on the ground,
With Nymphs, and her two sisters dance a-round.
The year us warnes immortal things to doubt,
And Hour, which circumvolues the day about.
Soft Western winds, on Winter mildness bring,
Soon withered Summer, wears out the Spring,
Then mellow Autumn, powers his fruits amain,
And instantly dull Winter turns again.
Yet speedy Moons celestial harms restore
To after times: when we are gone before,
Where Tullus, good Aeneas, Ancus trade,
Naught are we else (alas) but dust, and shade.
Who is it knows, whether the heavenly powers,
Will add to this days sum to morrow's hours.
Your greedy heir in nothing shall have part,
Which you in life shall give with bounteous heart.
But when you once are dead, and powers divine,
To you, an equal sentence shall assign;
Then (oh Torquatus) blood, nor eloquence,
Nor piety, can life again dispense:
For neither chaste Hypolitus, was free
By Dian set, from Hells obscurity;
Nor were Laethean bands, by Theseus
Dissolved, for his dear Pyritho^us.
Ode VIII. To MARTIVS CENSORINVS.
There is nothing which can more immortalize men, then Poets Verses.

Donarem pateras.
TO friends I would give freely (Censorine)
Pieces of richest Plate, and Bowls for Wine,
Three-footed Tables, (valiant Greeks reward:)
Nor from my choycest gifts should you be barred,
Were I with artfull figures richly sped,
Which Parrhase drew, or Scopas pourtrayed.
In colors one, in stone the other bold,
A man sometimes, sometimes a God to mould.
But I have not this power: Nor do suppose,
Your wealth, or wish, wants such delights, as those.
You Verses love, for Verse we make a shift,
And know what price to set on such a gift;
Not Marbles with deep Characters engrau'd,
By which to valiant Captains life is saved,
And spirit after death: Not speedy flight,
Nor threats of Hanniball, rejected quite:
Not flames of Carthage better sound his praise,
Who did his name from conquered Afric raise,
Then Ennius Muse: Nor can reward be won,
If paper tell not, what was bravely done.
What would become of Mars, and Illia's brood,
If spiteful silence, Romulus withstood?
The strength, and grace of Poets powerful wit,
Makes Aeacus in fields Elizian sir,
Snatched from Stygian floods. "Muses deny,
A man deserving praise should ever die.
"Muses give heaven: So dauntlesse Hercules,
In loves wished Banquets does his palate please:
Castor and Pollux bright Star does redeem,
Storme-beaten Vessels, which do shipwrack'd seem.
God Bacchus brow, adorned with verdant Vine,
Does happy end, unto our vows assign.
Ode XIII. To VIRGILL.
He describes the approach of the Spring, and inuiteth Virgil under condition
to a Banquet.

Iam veris comites.
SOuth winds, the Spring attending still,
Now Seas do calm, and Sails do fill:
Now Frostes do not make Meadows hoar,
Nor Winter-Snow, swollen Rivers rore.
The lucklesse Bird, her nest does frame,
Bewayling Itis, and the shame,
Of Cecrops house; and that so ill,
On Kings rude lust, she wrought her will.
The Shepherds of rich Flocks rehearse,
And to their Pipes chaunt rural Verse:
And seek his Godhead to appease,
Whom flocks, and hills Arcadian please.
These times do thirsty Seasons send:
But if (thou Virgill) Caesar's friend,
With pressed Calenian Liquor hie,
For Wine, thou shall sweet unguents buy,
And purchase with a little Box,
Wine, which Sulpitius safely locks.
New hopes most powerful to create,
And bitter ca^es to dissipate.
Unto which comfort, if thou have,
Come hither with thy Unguents fast.
I Will not (free cost) my cupps carrotise,
As rich men in a plenteous house.
Then leave delays, and Gaine's desire,
And mindful of black Funeral fire,
"Short folly mix with Counsels best.
"It Is sweet, sometime to be in jest.
Ode XIII. Against LYCE.
Who being old, it become a scorn to young men.

Audiuere Lyce.
THe gods have (Lyce) heard my vow,
My vow is heard. Thou Art old, yet thou,
Vain would (forsooth) be counted fair,
And quaffe, and wanton with the air:
And (dru^^^e) with trembling voyee invite
Slow Cupid; who (...) more delight,
On Chia's rosy cheeks to stay,
Both young, and skilled in Musick's lay.
For he, delay not booking, flies
From withered Oaks; and from thee hies,
Whom rotten teeth, and wrinckled face,
And head of snowy hair, disgrace.
Now cannot Coa^n Purple's use,
Nor brightest gemms, the Time reduce,
Which once swift-winged Age has closed
In public Calenders disposed.
Where is thy beauty fled? (Ay me)
Thy color fresh, and motion free?
What have thou of that, that entire,
Which erst inspired amorous fire?
And did me from my self divert;
Next Cynaras, thou happy were,
For pleasing beauty, and sweet grace,
Discou'red in a lovely face.
But Fates to Cynaras did owe,
Short life, and Lyce like the Crow;
They here suruiuing longer hold,
That seruent young men may behold.
Not without laughter, and much scorn,
A flaming torch to ashes worn.
Ode XV.
The praises of Augustus.

Phoebus volentem.
MY Muse by Phoebus was rebuked of late,
For singing wars, and vanquished cities fate:
Like those, who in the Tyrren Ocean's rage,
Do little Sails advance. (Caesar) thy age,
Affoordeth plenteous fruits, unto the fields,
And to Jove's Capitol our Ensigns yields,
From Parthian Pillars snatched, and after iarres
Has closed Ianus Temple free from wars.
Confusion has with Order rectified,
And wandering Liberty in fetters tied.
Has antique arts recalled: By which it is known
Hesperia's strength and Latin name has grown.
Imperial pomp has spread, and glory won,
Stretched from the rising, to the setting Sun.
While Caesar is our Guardian, civil war,
Nor violence, our peaceful rest, shall mar.
Not anger, which swords sharpeneth, and confounds
Cities, unhappy made with mutual wounds.
Not they for thirst, that drink in Ister deep,
Shall once refuse, the Julian Laws to keep.
Not Seres, faithless Persians, nor the Getes,
Nor those, which near to Tanais have their seats.
And we on holy Eeues, and holy Days,
Amongst free Cupps, to merry Bacchus praise:
With wife, and children, standing in our sight.
(First Gods inuoking with religious Rite)
Will gladly (as our grandsires did) rehearse,
(And tuning Lydian Pipe to various Verse,)
Heroique Captains, Troy, Anobise^gone,
And brave Aeneas, Cytherea's son.
The end of the fourth Book.
CERTAIN EPODS OF HORACE
Epod I. To MAECEMAS.
Horace will wa^^^ (...) M^^ccn^^, going to the Actiack war^^^ against M^
Anthony.

I^i^ lib^^nis.
IN low built ^arkes, thou will not fail,
Amongst lofty tow^ing Ships to s^yle;
And do (Macenas) much e^cline,
To make great Caesar's p^rill thi^^.
What shall we do? Whose life is blessed,
If thou surniue: If not, distressed.
Shall we (commanded) idle be:
Repose is toil, if not with thee.
Or shall we undergo these pains,
With minds which no soft ease restraines?
We will? And through the Alps ascent,
And Caucasus, where none frequent:
Yea to the utmost Western parts,
Will follow thee, with constant hearts.
You Will ask; How can thy labor please,
Vntrayn'd in arms, and weak with ease?
"In company, Fears little seem,
Which men in absence, great esteem.
As Bird, her plumelesse young ones, left,
More fears to find by Serpents rest;
Not that she can with presence, bring
Force able to resist the sting.
This warrfare will I undertake,
Or any other, for thy sake.
Not that my many Ploughes are found,
With Oxen more, to till the ground.
Or Beasts to Lucan Meads are sent,
Calabrian feruors to prevent.
Nor Tusculum, my Village clear,
May to Circaean walls, come near.
Thy favor me enough has stoar'd,
Which I, as Chremes will not ^oard
Within the earth, nor ever shall
Spend like a wastfull prodigal.
Epod II.
The praise of the Country life.

Beatus ille qui procul negotijs.
He happy is, who far from busy toil,
(As elder ages) tills the soil
With his own Cattle, which his father left,
From thralling interest bereft.
He is n^ot moved, when warlike Drumms do beat,
Nor fears the angry Ocean's threat.
He Pleas, and Suits abhorres, and does refuse,
The grace of mighty men to use.
But either does to tallest Poplars twine,
The tender offsprings of the Vine.
And cutting branches off, which vselesse were,
Graft those, which better fruit may bear.
Or, vieweth in some winding valley's maze,
His wandering Herds of Cattle, graze.
Or, does pressed honey in pure vessels keep,
Or, sheare his wool o're-burdned sheep.
But when with mellow fruit ripe Autumn crowned,
His head vpreareth from the ground.
How he to taste the grafted Pear delights,
And grape, that with the Purple fights.
Which to Priapus, as a gift redounds,
Or, old Siluanus, God of Bounds.
Now under aged Oak, he hours does pass,
And now reposeth on the grass.
While gentle Rivers from high banks do glide,
And Birds their warbling notes divide:
Small streams, on purling pibbles murmr keep,
To summon soft, and easy sleep.
But when loud love, rough Winter sends below,
In stormy showers, and chilling snow.
Then he the hardy Bore, from place to place,
With Fleet-Hounds, into Toils does chase:
Or else, the fearful Hare, and fortaine Crane
With pleasing spoil, in grinns are taken.
Ah! who in thought, amongst such delights retains
Least sense, of love's disturbing pains?
But if (in part) a modest wife direct
The house, and children dear affect.
As Sabine erst, or swift Apuli^^'s dame,
Parched with tawney Phoebus ^la^^e,
With old dry w^od, a blessed fire make to burn,
Against weary husband's wished return:
And folding glad some stocks in wouen grates,
Dryes up their dugges, which milk dil^^es;
And broaching new wines kept in vessels fair,
An (unbought) Supper does prepare.
The L^trine Oyster (sure) not G^i^^head bright,
Nor Turbot, ye^ldeth more delight;
If Winter such, when Eastern tempests rore,
Do drive upon our Terrhene shore.
Ionick Partriges, not Afric Quail,
Upon my palate more prevail,
Then does the unctuous Olive choycely culled,
From fertile Branches newly pulled:
Or Sorrel that in Meadows does abound,
And Mellowes, bodies making sound.
Or Lamb, on Terminus his Feast that dies,
Or Kidd redeemed, from Wolfe's surprise.
Amongst these dainties, what content it yields,
To see the fed-stocks leave the fields.
To see the weary O^e with neck worn ba^e,
Dregging the turned plough and share:
And Hinds (the plenteous household swarm)
'Bout shining L^rs to sit, and warm.
This said, rich Al^hins that money lends,
To lead a Country life intends;
And in the Ides his De^^^ called in amain,
But in the Calends lent again.
Epod VII. To the people of ROME.
An Exetration of the ci^ill war, raised, on the one side by B^u^^ (...)
Cassius; (...) the other, by Octauian, M. Anthony, and Lepidu^ the Roman
Cons^lls.

Quo, quo scelesti.
AH Tr^ytors, whither have you? To what end,
Do your right hands, to shethed swords descend?
Is there so little yet, of Latin blood,
Powered on the Champaine fields, or Ocean flood?
Not that the Roman should with flames abate,
The Towers of Carthage, ^^^^ous of our state:
Or Britton should (unconquered to this day)
Be taught, (...) chaln^^ to ^^ead the Pacred way.
But that (which now ^lie Pa^^hian would de^^nd)
This City should be (...) by civil hand.
Amongst Wol^^s, and Lions never was this use,
But beasts, whom nature diffrent does produce.
Does Fury blind? Or greater power command?
Or sinne's offense? Oh let me understand?
They silent are: Th^^ (...)
And fears their horror-strucken minds invade.
It Is so: Sour ^ates do Rome with fury stain,
And tyrannous offense of brother flame.
Which on ensuing ages laid the guilt,
When Remus harmless blood on earth was spilt.
Epod. XIII.
To his merry fri^^ds, that they should pass the W^^^er (...)

H^^rida tempestas.
ROugh tempests have the brow of heaven bent,
And showers, and snowe^, cause thi^^^^ ^^^^^e's des^ent.
Now Thracian Northwinds, Sea, and woods affray.
Friends, let us take occasion, from the day;
While strength is fresh, and us it well becomes,
Let Age be lightened, which the brow benummes.
Boy, see you broach those elder wines were pressed,
When Torquate first, the Consull's place possessed.
Speak not of other things. God will perchance,
These to their seat, with happy change advance.
Unguents of Persian Odours, now delight;
Cares driving with Cylenian Harp to flight;
As noble Chiron to Achilles sang.
Vnvanquish'd Mortal, that from Thetis sprang,
Thee Troy expects; which Simois rolling Tide,
And small Scamander's colder streams divide,
Whence to return, so Fates thy thread undo,
Thou can not back with thy blew Mother go.
All Sorrow there, with wine, and Song depresse,
(Sweet comforts, of deformed heaviness.)
The end of the Epods.

