HORACE HIS art of Poetry, pistles, and Satyrs Englished, and to the Earl of
Ormounte By Tho. Drant addressed.

(...)
(...).
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, nere to S, Dunstones Church, by Thomas
Marshe. 1567.

DE SEIPSO.
COelo musa beat, iuueni sua messis in herba est,
Men's mea diuinos sollers nutrire furores
Se fouet, and bubulam pedibus quas^ spargit arenam.
Sic verides ausis anni, vis insita fandi
Sic iubet, and florens studium, feruorque decorus:
Qui tacitus sinit ire dies, inglorius annos
Fortunatus erit nimis, and Jove iudicat aequo.
Me fati modus immodicus pungitque tra^itque
Dissimilem long natum primoribus annis.
Nec fludij ratio, nec sors est aequa labori,
Moxlicturus iter, mox non meditabor auena.
Vatibus in^rtis nunc omnia tristia vertunt.
Gestamen laxant humeri, sub pondere vertix
Nutat, and haud veris me recti sacra cupido
Ludit imaginibus, numen promissa benignum.
Persona^ and nostras hoc frustra forsitan aures:
Non deerunt Maecenates, s^nt (Dranta) Marones.
(...)
(...).
COME..I'AY.TROVE.

Aureus Ormontus fama super aethera notus,
Hic honos, haec merx est, sic sunt sua premia laudi.


TO THE RIGHT HOnorable and very noble Lord, Thomas Earl of Ormounte, and
O^orye, Lord Butler, Vicounte Thurles, Lord of the liberty of Typparye, and
high Treasurer of Ireland, Tho. Drant master of Art, and student in
Diuinitye, wishes increase of honor, with all felicitye.
Now it is (right honorable Lord) that this Horace my book will needs be
abroode, and the rather from me shall have frank pasporte, because sum part
therofis heretofore alredie passed. The glory, and grace of a book written is
much what in the noblenes, and magnificence of the patron. Nor any thing does
add more estimation to true nobilitye, then patronage of learning. Well was it
for Horace that he was cherisde of Maecenas, for he obtained through him
opportunitye to study: better was it for Maecenas that he cherised Horace, and
procured him that opportunitye, for he lyfted up his name, and made him
immortal. VVheras, nathles the wit of the one, and the port of the other, all
their wide fames hadd long ere this time been drenched in the dust, and rakte
up with their cynders, had not the Poet been stayed by his patron, and the
patrons glytterynge honor by the Poett displaide. No potentate of all the
world, not he that has covered the Alps with souldyers, nor he that has made
the Sea land with ships, nor he that has conquered from East to West,
either lives more clear to his posterity, either has more fair inditements
to his commendation, then has this faueror of learning, this scholars frinde,
the Lord Maecenas. It is Gods justice that those which support the most
precious things of all other, learning, and wisdom: should have the best
guerdon of all other, that is immortality. They say the right way to eternity
is to please the gods and the poets, who beautify, and adorn every meritte
in every person. The very Crounes and Scepters of best Monarks, and princes
had been rustie, wembde, and warpde with oblivion, hadd not they with the
goodly eloquence of great clerks, and Poettes ben streked and filed:
otherwise the fames of kings, are intumbed with their bodies. Sum thing it was
that made the bell of Augustus his brute to be ronge so loud, that made king
Ptolomye to he so much redd of, that made Alphonsus to be so much red of,
that made the great gentlemen Medici of Millan to be so much read of, that
made Leo the tenth in Erasmus, Longolius, Bembo, Sadoletto to be so much read
of. Nor the report of Fraunces the french King so freshely blasened, nor of
Charles of Lothering so well celebrated should euel have been deserved, had
they not boulstered learned heads against malice, and ignorance: and yielded
courteous acceptance to painful labors. Horace (gentle and honorable Lord)
being once of his patron Maecenas so dearelye tendered, is loath now (turned
out of his latin coote) masterles to gadde abro^de at wide adventure though
his own doings do justly speak his own commendations, yet my humble suit
is, that under your lordships protection he may be preferred. If we wey both
profytte and delectation Lambinus wrote truly, emongst latin poets Horace has
not his fellow. This is he* whom great Augustus writ should be looked to as
him self, whom Maecenas loved as himself, ripe, pythye, excellent for moral
precepts, full of pretye speeches, full of Judgment, him I partlye
interruptinge my study of good advice chosed to translate before all other,
whom under your worthy patronage in principal respect I thought to promote,
fytlye deuisynge to have so trime and elegant a poet, under the name of so
noble an Earl, and goodly a gentleman.

Your good honor Humblye reuerencing. Tho. Drant*

To the Reader.
We write Poesis apace and of all hands, sum with more, and sum with less
learning, and sum with more luck then learning. But if our trial were as
strayte, as our utterance is sp^die, or if our reader were not rather slight
earde, then cleareeyde: the good books (which be few) should be better
known, and those which be evil not become so many. To pass by them which be
pas^e, and to speak of this my book which is out of my hands passinge, it
stands before you good readers, and posteritye, as before the great inqueste
of the Assyses, by your verdicts to stand, or to be cast, to be made sumwhat,
or stark nowght, guilty, or not guilty. And for as much as each sensyble
creature has this by nature, both to provide for, and do away that which
may be harmefull to their young, I shall do but thing natural, to tender
mine own, charitablye to say for that, which can not say for it self,
honestlye to inform the ignorant of a truth. That which has been, or may be
said against this translation issues out of these three places: either that
no translation ought to be had, or that I might be better occupied then in
thus translating, or that the book by me thus Englished is hard and
difficulte. As for those who would have nothing removed from the native tongue
where in it was written, because they dote more fullye, and grossly then the
rest, I would they had the greater part of Heleborus. If they understand
Latin I send them over to Tullies academicall quest^ons, there to be assoyled
of their so nyce a scruple. If they be meare English, and so in that case but
stantes pueri ad mensam, their assertion is less autenticall, and I will
dissemble my want of an answer whilste I hear further of y^ pith of their
profes. But to those which would have the things which I do to seem trifles in
comparison of my degree, profession, and other studies, and do marvel that I
will now any longer enlincke my self in things so small, and base, quasi
nostris non responsura lacertis, or as who would say Aquila non capit muscas,
because they would make me proud, and seem to speak lovingly to render love,
for love, I shape them this one answer out of many. I think so indeed, there
is none of my time, and progress in schools w^lde have taken this author in
hand, because the pains is great, and the gaynes not great, whereas if the
gaynes had been much, and the pains but prettye, there would have been, as
great posthaste to have first enteraunce in him, as there is now busy
demaundes why I should be a stickler in matters so triflinge. No man that had
been trained up in studies Philosophical, or that had the circumstances, of a
translator was toward the turning of him that I know. And sure that he should
have been translated by any other then such an one, it would have been an
untoward practice, and an unfruitful. I therefore in good south of tender pity
took sum truce with my better, and more profitable studies, matchinge my self
with Horace the poet. Neither be the things in him light trifles, except
lewd calling of them so, can make them so, but ever among he has good,
sound, de^pe, massye, and well rellest stuff. He that would come to the
vpmoste top of an high hill, not being able directly to go foreward for the
steapnes thereof, if he step a foot or twain, or more out of the way, it is
not tho out of the way for that it is a more conueyghable way to the top of
the hill: so to cum to be able vtterers of the gospel, which is the top, and
tip of our climing, we must learn out of men to speak according to the man,
(which is a bystep from the pathe of diuinitye,) yet very, and most necessary
for that we live with men, speak with men, and preach to men. Thus therefore
for me to step aside by melling with humanitye, is not to tread out of my way,
or lose my way, but to find my way more apparaunte reddie before me. And
though it be loss of vauntage, or loss of now and then a^ honey sweet word
from sum good bodies mouth, yet loss of understanding, and good learning,
that I am sure it is not Further to speak all my mind at once it is not mine
hole study, but a parcel exercise, a pa^aunce, a recr^ation. And as yet to
forgo it for a time I would not, so to say that I will use it any long time
I mean not. Thus much lovingly to those loving ones, who be so tender hearted
to my estimation ward, that they would eftsoon have me let drive at greater
things, and shake hands with these tryfles If yet they further be troublesum
from question to question, surcharging me with to much babble, and questions,
and all that for kyndnes, they will kill me of honesty with kyndnes. If
neither considering my deed nor intent they will by word of mouth be
answered, then wellfayre my last shootanchor, glum silence: for that is an
approved good answer to all such the like idle questions. Now to our heuie
frinde, that says this book is so toto hard To say the le^e he deals
very hardlye with me. And certainly if it be in my defaulte that it is an
hard book, my hap very hard, and my discretion well harder. For have not I
made a fair forward thinckest thou (gentle reader) to take truce with mine
other studyes, and doings, wherein I was coum^ted sum body, and to become a
sillye translator rythmical and thereunto an hard writer which is indeed to be
a no body? But all things cannot be easy to all persons. But what if our
heuye frinde have a heavy head, and an hard head to? What if he can
perceive my words, and not conceive the Authors meaning? It is hardlye said of
him to say that I am hard, his own wit being hard or the Aut^or being
hard for that he is not by him understood.

That it should be so hard (to speak first for my self) the defalte is
either through me the translator, through the, the Reader, or Horace the
author, or us all. That it should not be hard through me what have I not done
which might be done? I have translated him sumtymes at Randun. And now at this
last time welnye word for word and line for line. And it is marvel that I
being in all mine other spea ches so plain, and perceaueable, should here
desyer, or not shun to be hard, so far forth as I can keep the lerninge, and
sayings of the author. But I fear me a number do so think of this book, as
I was answered by a prynter not long agone, Thou gh says he (Sir your book
be wise, and full of learning, yet peradventure it will not be so saileable)
signifying indeed that flim flames, and gue gawes, be they never so slight
and slender, are sooner rapte up then are those which be lettered and Clarkly
makings. And no doubt the cause that books of learning seem so hard is,
because such, and so great a scull of amarouse Pamphlets have so preoccupyed
the eyes, and ears of men, that a multitude believe there is none other style,
or phrase else worth gra mercy. No books so ryfe or so frindly red, as be
these books Hic meret era liber socijs, et trans mare currit,
Et longum noto scriptori prorogat euum.
Whether they be good or no, easy they are sure, and that by this Argument. For
good things are hard, and evil things are easy. But if the setting out of the
wanton tricks, of a pair of lovers, (as for example let them be cawled Sir
Chaunticleare and Dame Partilote) to tell how their first conbination of love
began, how their eyes floted, and how they anchored, their beams mingled one
with the others bew tie: then of their perplexed thowghts, their throws, their
fancies their dryrye driftes, now interrupted, now vnperfy ted, their love
days, their gaude days, their sugared words, and their sugared joys. Afterward
how enuyous fortune through this chop or that chance turned their bless to
bail, seuerynge too such bewtyful faces, and dewtiful hearts, Last a^ partynge
to ad to an oration or twane interchangeably had betwixt the two wobegone
persons, the one thick powdered with manly passionat pangs, the other watered
with wominishe tears: Then to shryne them up to god Cupid, and make Martirres
of them both, and therwyth an end of the matter. This and such like is easy
to be understood and easy to be indyted. But to fynish my process, If only
these be poesis, or be poesis or have any comparison to a learned making or
poesy: Principio me illorum dederis quibus esse poetis Excerpam numero:
I take them to be ripe toungued tryfles, venemouse Allectyues, and sweet
vanities. To be short, (as it is best for a man to be with his friend) he that
is least acquainted with such trashe, and pelf will better perceive such
things which be sauerye and sappye. If there be such hardness as is said to be
in this book, to me it is not hard, nor through me it is not hard. Whether it
be through Horace his diffuse speech, or unknown knowledge, or through the
Readers suspected ignorance, let it there rest, and to them be applied. To
impropriate it to me it were neither honestye, norwysedom. For of truth there is
no such cause Why. Certainelye Horace himself is hard, and very hard, neither
any man which can judge, can judge it one and ye like labor, to translate
Horace, and to make, and translate a love book, a shril tragedye, or a smothe,
and plat leuyled poesye. This can I truly say of mine own experyence that I
can sooner translate twelve verses out of the greek Homer, then six out of
Horace. Praise I seek not for nor except I be a fool I care not for. To do
that which I do, is and shall be to me recompense sufficient. I never hard
tell of any man that was great gayner by poesies, and the better the poet is,
the more commonly is he hated. Homer was so contenmed that beggerye was his
best life: and so hated of a many of trewands that Zoilus for very rancoure
fell a whippinge of his Image: Uirgill for his goulden verses, was recompensed
with a certain od cast of bread. Horace had his tillage ground taken from
him: Seneca was dun to death by his tyrante scholar Nero, Sophocles, was
accused of dotage by his own children. It is a kind of people which ought
much to be loved, and no one kind more enuyed. The cause, and date of their
hatred are both in these two verses contey ned. Vrit enim fulgore suo qui
pregrauat arts
Infra se positas, extinctus amabitur idem.


Of the Art of Poetrye.
A Paynter if he should adioyne unto a woman's head
A long maires neck, and ouerspred the crops in every stead
With sundry feathers of strange huie, the whole proportioned so
Without all good congruitye: the nether parts do go
Into a fish, on hye a fresh Welfauord woman's face:
My frinds let in to see this sight could you but laugh a pace?
Pisoes trust me, that book shall be much like unto this same,
Whole fancies like a sickemans dreams so rudelye hang in frame,
That head and feet do square from th whole. Poets, and painters aye
Have had like charter to attempt all kind of work (you say).
I know, I crave this liberty, and give the like also.
But not that matters wild, and mylds without reason should goo
Blended as one, seeing Poets may, this leave they do not find
Serpents with byrds, Tiger with lambs to join against their kind.
To big beginnings, and vauntynge otte times a purple clowte
Of words impertinente is brought, to help the matter out:
When wooddes, Temples or rivers course which hastily does gly de,
When rushing Rhemus is descriude, or rain bows painted pride.
Such babble (God wot) needed not, but sum of that sort be,
There common place, and theme is still upon the This proverb grevv upon a
badd painter, that could paint nothing but the Cypress ^ree.
Cypress tree.
If that sum man would have strange things, and geson gear depainted,
Howcan he earne ought in such case that is with nowghte acquainted?
"Let things be formal of one kind and do not chop it up
"To make tone part a gallon pot, and tone a prittie cup.
"The more deal of us Poets, both the old, and young most part,
"Are often begylde by show of good, affectinge to much art.
"I labor to be very breife, it makes me very hard.
"I follow flowinge easynes, my style is clearly marde
"For lack of pith and sauerye sense, Write lofty, thou shalt swell:
"He creepes by the ground to low, afraid with stormy vain to mell.
"He that in varyinge one point much would bring forth monstruouse store,
"Would make the dolphin dwell in wooddes and in the flud the bore.
"The shunning of a fault is such that now and then it will
"Procure a greater fault, if it be not eschewde by skill.
Our black smith Imus oftentimes in brass will undertake
The nales and hayres of sundry men right conninglye to make.
A much unhappy workmanship which never cums to end.
If ever I should take in hand either to make or mende,
Er I would do such parcel acts and nowght to full end bring,
Erste would I wear a crooked nose or in the same a ringe.
Pick out such matter ye that write that's meetest for your strength.
Try well your backs, what theie will bear, or what not bear at length.
He that has chewsde his matter such as he can well assail,
Nor ticklinge eloquence, nor him shall lightsum order fail.
This is of order, as I judge the vertewe, and the grace,
Sumtimes to speak, sumtyme to leave, and pass bye for a space,
That one might speak, and cast it of until a further time.
Let him with choice chewse, and refuse that would set forth a ryme.
Thou must be subtle, and warye in placing of thy gear.
By witty composition its excellent to hear.
A known word straunged hansumlye. If we have neade to show
New words for things, which things them selves are now invented new,
Words never used of other men is best for to devise.
License is granted if it be used in shamfaste wise,
And novel words invented late. shall better credit bring,
If sparinglye, not violently They sourde from greekishe spring.
The Romans to Cecilius, and Plautus leave to faigne
Why should they give, and from Uirgil and Uarye it detain
T'inuente a few words if I can why should they so me hate?
Since Ennius, and Catos toungue our mother toungue of late
Inritchde, and brought up novel terms. it is, and ever shall
Be lefull to give kame to that, that has no name at all.
"As wooddes are made debayre of leaves by turnyng of the year,
"The oldest fall: So antique age of words away do wear.
As lusty youths of cresciue age do florishe fresh and grow
And crepe in creditt and conceit, which whilom were full low
"And we, and ours are due to death. havens, and creakes, the ground
"Now tamde with plough, which heretofore unfruitful has been found,
"Attempts of kings, which were deuisde for wealth of nations then
"Shall perish all, and perish shall the facts of mortal men.
"Much less of speeches long can live the honor and the grace.
Full many a word that now is dashd shall rise gain in space.
As these in space must feel their fall, if use do like them ill,
Who has to judge, autorish, reule, all manner speech at will.
The facts, the seats of kings, and dukes and baylful battles sad,
What kind of verse is best for them In Homer may be had.
In rymes vneauen, at first complaints and after in that kind
Were written fancies dumpes, and all affections of the mind.
But who the prittie Elegies first on their feet did set,
Grammarians strive, and that case is in controversy yet.
Rage armed first Archilacus with his Iambus verse.
Our commodies, and tragedies, in which we do rehearse,
For interchaung of talk right meet, which does in sounding pass
The noise of crowde, to set forth things. that vearse invented was.
The Musies taught in lyrike verse the Gods, and their of spring
The warlike victor, and that horse, which price away did bring,
Amors of youth, and and banquets francke on instruments to sing,
If I nor can, nor know to keep an order due at all
Ne color brave my writings, why, should they me Poet call?
Lewd that I am why do I shame to learn which I ne know?
One may not think things comicall in Tragike blasts to blow.
Phyestes feast is ill set out with simple words and tame.
Let all things have their comlye room well fitted in the same,
Sumtymes the commodye looks up and liftes her voice with all.
And crabbed Chremes for his thrifte with open mouth will brall.
The tragical does sumtymes talk as meanelye as one can:
Sir Teliphus, and Pelius, both pore, and exiles then
Put out no puffes, nor thwackyng words words of to large assyce
If by their words they mean to move affects in any wise.
Not lore enough in Poesis, let them be sweetlye find,
And let them lead to where them list the hearers plyante mind.
"The cheares of men as these will smerke on those that use to smyle:
"So are theye wrinchd, when theye do weep and chaungd within a while.
"If thou wouldste have me weep for the first must thou pensyfe be.
"Thy harms shall hitte me, when I spy^ that they have harmed the.
If Teliphus or Pelius your words be out of place,
Wise men will sleep, whiles theye are spoke and laughe at them apace
Sad words be set a sorye face thretynge the vysage grim
For iokand, wanton, for the sage right seriouse words be trim.
Nature before the outward act does frame us to each hap
By secret workinges of her own: In pleasures she does lap,
Or shoueth on the heart with ire, or presses to the ground.
The vanquishd breast with dolors dinte, then shunninge to be bound
To inward passions of the mind, she powers out at long
The drirye drawghte of al her thoughts with benefyt of tongue.
If unfit for the personage the talk do run awrye,
The nobles, and the prease therewith will strike unto the sky.
The page, or pear, whether does speak It skilleth nothing more
A fresh hot younker cock brain, wild, or old man, sage, and whore.
A matrone ritche, or paynefull nurse, the marchaunte venturer,
Or he that few good fassions knows th'unciuill ground tiller.
The Colcus, or assyrian, at Thebes, or Arge up brought,
If circumstaunces ye not marked the matter will be naught.
Writer, of who so thou shall write speak, as the most men say,
Or if thou feyne, feyne then the things as truthlyke as you may.
If thou would set Achilles out As other men have done,
Let him be swift, chasing, vnprayed, inflamde to vengaunce sone.
Let him deny that laws were made for him or any such.
Let him by weapon bear him stowte, and thereby chalange much.
Let Medea be ferse, on mowde, let Ino still be sad,
Ixie trothlesse Io wandering, Orestes never glade.
A strange attemptate to the stage if that thou dare commit,
And darste a personage unseen, in nou ell manor fit:
Mark well, wherewith thou did begin, and use the matter so
That top, and tail in like semblaunte, and tennor true may go.
Much hard it is in proper talk to write a thing unknown.
Better it is the Ilyads to stage ageine were drawn,
Then that thou should in practice put things known, nor hard before.
A public matter may be thought to cume from pryuate store,
If that one do not tread out right, the trodden, used way.
Thou shall have no regard at all word for word to out lay.
If thou would turn things faythfullye and do not imitate
So iumpingly, so precyselfe and step, for step so strayte,
That what for shame to wade on still or else to end the thing
As it began, thou can not move ne yet thy foot out bring.
Begin not as that Poet once that foul mouth Cyclike lowte
Pryams fortune, and famous fightes, at full I will layt out,
What will our promiser tell us for such a gaping fit,
The Mountains travail, we shall have a mouse to laughe at it.
How much more cicumspectlie he which nothing did a miss,
How were his wits aduysed well when he invented this.
Set out my Muse to me the man Since Troy taken (quod he)
Which did the manners of much men, and sundry Cytties see.
Not smoke of flame, but flame of smoke he would have to proceed,
And learn of him, if thou woldst make a poesy in deed.
Not Antiphas, Scylla, Cycloppcs, Charibdis to displaye,
Nor Dyamede from brothers death how that he came away.
For writing of the Trioane war and Greeks fair buskinde legs,
He does not fetch his matter down from Lady Ledaes eggs,
He hastes on unto the happes, the hearer he does draw
Into the thickst, and lets ^im taste, as he the whole did know.
The things that he does quyte despair, t'intreate to good effect,
To spare his labor, and his words he does it all reject.
So feyneth he, things true and false so always mingleth he,
That first with midst, and middst with last, may cotton, and agree.
What I and all require of the this for thy learning hark.
If thou would have us stand stock still, and to the end to mark,
That when the Epilogue is done we may with frank intent,
After the plaudite stryke up our plausible assente:
Of sorts, and ages thou must note the manor and the guyse.
A decensie for stirring youth, for elder folk likewise.
The child as he can speak and go Childhoode
furthewith is glad of play,
Amongst his mates, and gathers heart to cuffe, and learnes to fraye:
And this he has peculiar he changes without reason.
No one thing is, that can like him but for a very season.
Unbearded youth, at last rid from Youth
the Tutors b^g charge,
Horse, hawk, or hownde, fla unt, and caroust^ into the field at large.
Plyaunt as wax to any sin most spytefull, and most fell,
To those that seek his proofit most by warning of him well.
A slack prouyder for him self a squanderer of goold,
Hawrie, hastye sone hot in love, and sodanly as could.
Man's state, and mind does turn that trade he ginnes to cast his eye Manhood

To rytches, and acquayntaunce strayghte and hauks to be on hye.
He takes good heed, not to commit through giddines of brain
The fact, which he for very shame must needs undo again:
Old men have much encombrances Age
the myser spendes his wit,
In gettinge, and the gotten spares nor dares he spend of it.
Couldlie, and toto tymerous his sentence he does give
Prolonginge, hoping, past his work, desyerouse aye to line,
Churlishe, wranglinge, a prayser of the time he lived in.
A solempe Censor, and chastner of every young man's sin.
As years do help us mightily whilst we cum at a stay:
So after they disuauntage us, and break us to decay.
Least youth of age, and age of youth do say, and play the part
To shape out things accordyngly besetes a Poets art.
Matters be ei there done on stage, or to ulde how they were done*
The things reported to the ears move not the mine so sone*
As lively set before thine eyes, in act for to behold:
Such acts as may be done within no reason is they should
Be showed abroad: And many things thou maiste remove from sight,
Which good, and ready eloquence may staight way bring to light.
Medea may not openly her tender children slay,
Nor wicked Atreus men's gutts in sethinge vessels play.
Nor Progne turn into a bird, Nor Cadmus to a snake.
I trust nothing thou shows me so but in woorst part it take.
The play that would be sought after and often cum in place,
Must have five acts, nor more, nor less for therein is a grace*
God must be none brought on the stage, but in such case and time,
When mortal man, cannot reform nor dignely plage the crime.
Enoughe for four to speak in sight, And if the need be such
That more must talk, cut of the last and let them not speak much.
Th^autor the Chorus must defend or else some other one
Whose innocensie, or manhood deserueh praise alone.
Let them not singe twixt act, and act that squayreth from the rest.
Such let their songs be, as will tune unto the purpose best.
Let them lean ever to the good, and join in verdict clear,
Rewle the unruly, and love them which to offend they fear.
Let them praise homely, simple cheer, and wholsume justice praise,
Laws, and safe rest with open gayts, and peace in all the ways.
Let them conceal things credited, to God often let them pray,
That luck may grow unto the meek, and to the proud decay.
The shawme was not as it is now with copper wrythed in
In trumpet wise but small it was, few breathinge holes, and thin.
Fit for a Chorus and as yet the boystus sound, and shryll,
Of trumpetes clange, the stalles was not accostomed to fill.
Came thither folk sone numbered, for why, the crowde was small
A thriftie flock, a shamefast flock, and thereto chaste withal.
But when by conquest they began their borders to extend,
And broad their walls abowte the town for pomp were made to bend,
And when that men had felt a sweet in daily belly cheer,
So banquetinge each hollyday without remorce or fear,
Their music, and their melodye increased more and more.
The hobbes as wise as grauist men, rid from their travail sore,
The most untoward and untaught, most contemptible clown,
As perte as pie does press amongst the wysest of the Town.
So, motions and wantonness, unto his former art
The minstrell adds, as hoyting he as any of his part.
Then with the twanginge instrumente the singers voice did match,
And that did novel Eloquence, and lofty speeches hatche.
A solemn speak mete for great things, which knows after clappes:
A speech wherein the Delphique Phaebe might tell men of their happs.
He that strove first in Tragic verse, but for a silly got,
Set out Satyrs incontinente, things rustical (god wot.)
With wholesome bitter grauitye he proved to make sport,
With allurements, and new conceyts, to please a doltishe sort,
A sort past grace, and dronken to, vnrewlie, rude and rash.
We may not so praise Satyrists, which sumtymes for a crashe,
Make many merry with their taunts, and give them leave to play,
So that both godds, and noblemen in splendent vestures gay,
Sham not their garments, and them selves with common ale house talk.
The Tragedy must shun the ground, yet not in welking walk,
And retche to hye, though to prattell of peltinge bables small,
Is not of nature Tragical, nor fit for it at all.
The matrone blusheth, that is bod to dance in open day,
So sober Satyrists must be amiddste their frollicke play.
To those that only love the rewde, and signifyinge word
In Satyrs, I a Satyriste Pisoes do not accord,
Nor will not so confound my terms, that difference none be,
Twixt Dauus, and bold Pythyas* The shrew, the damsel, she
Who could cosen old Simo fire and at hishands could gain,
A tallant by collusion, and slight ligerdemayne.
The rural Gods must have their speech if they do speak in prese.
I would indyte familiarlie and utter with mine ease,
That each man may assure him self, to do the like again,
But when he shall attemptate give* he shall but sweat in vain.
Order, and composition, so in them selves excel.
And mean matter cleanly set out deserves praise so well.
The rural gods (if I can judge) must look in any case
That they speak not like civil folks, brought up in peopled place.
Their rymes may not to gamesum be, of rybawdrye to ry fe,
Or slaunderouse: for unto sum it brings offense and strife.
The noble, honorable, rytche, and also most of those
Which ought can do, will snuff, and take it peper in their nose.
What Tom, and Tib do rectefie, what lykes the carter clown,
The wise men take not in good part, nor cover it with crown.
The foot of Syllabs short, and long Iambus a foot of ii silla bles whereof
the first is short the second long.
Iambus has to name.
A much swift foot, and trymeter (the verse which of the same,
Consists) is cawld, with six wight feet it speedily does strike.
The first and last as all the rest in pure verse are a like.
That more slowly, and more grauelye, it might cume to our ears,
It now the stade Spondeus foot within it quiet bears.
In the fourth Room and second room Iambus still has been.
In Ennius or Accius, Spondie is seldom seen.
Bugge verses which cum to the stage with weight of words alone
Louslie laid out, to sone suruayd, having of science none.
A learned judge will pass on them as giltye of great crime.
What though sum judges can not mark the iarringe of a ryme.
And what though Romans Poets to an ample charter have?
should I go write at Randonne tho, and vage abroad, and rave?
Or should I think my faltes would be subject to all men's sight?
Within the hope of pardon, I employed have my might
To escape from scapes, and them to shun by all possible ways:
With all my heart I do confess I never erned praise.
The presidentes of greake writers to know, and understand,
Reed them, and turn them day and night with never ceasing hand.
Our forefathers, which Plautus rymes, and tothesume sweetened vain,
With lodes of commendations did praise, and praise again:
It was in them great patience, follye I will not say,
So to admire his verse, or vain, nether is very gaye.
If I* or you the taunting grace can judge from scurrill gere,
Or can measure the law of sound by fingering, or by ear.
Thespis to find out Tragidies bestowed first the pains,
And led about his players, and his playing stuff in waynes.
Sonnets to singe, and things to speak in that vnparfit case,
The personages were disgysde by smering of their face.
Next him of vise^des, and attire was founder Eschilus.
How that the stage adornde should be he first instructed us.
To excercyse loud speakinge, and to couche alofte our voice,
To teach all kind of iesturyngs with cumlines, and choice.
Next came the antique commodie and she wun all the praise.
Her license has made dissolute and lawless now a days.
But stayed was, and whiste she was whishde to her utter shame,
Because gone was her privilege so bitterly to blame.
Our Poets left naught un assayde, and they not worship least
Deserved have, who of them selves aduenterously have c^asde
Further to trade in greekishe steps: and bouldlye starte up then
The iollie iestes of natyue land in natyue toungue to pen.
As Italy in Chiualris, and manhood does excel:
So ere this time in perfitte speech it might have borne the bell,
But that our lither Poets all of one disease are sick:
Theye cannot stay to scum their stuff, nor lumpishe travail lick.
You Pisoes (blood of Pompelie) those verses reprehende,
Which long deliberation and rasinge did not mende
And has not ten times bettered, and on the fingers scande,
Correcting, and perfyting them with ouernotynge hand.
Because Democrites iudgd art to be more basse then wit,
Therefore those drummidories seek^ so slightly after it.
And for because from Helicon the same man did exclude
All those, which were not straught of sense: those lurdons are so lude
To let their berde, and nails grow out to shun the open bayne,
Of hills, and dales, and secret steades he feanes him to be feign
Though all the pothigaries stuff can scarcely purge his nowle
He thinckes him wise, his solemn bushe because no man does powle.
O dottrell I, I might or this have written noble gear
But that from collor, I am purgd at spring time every year.
"It matters not, I am therefore a whetstone in my wit,
"Which can cause Irne and style to cut ne cut it self a whit.
"I will teach others how to do, the pains I will not take.
I will tell them how to be ritche, what diet, what will make
A Poet good, what does become, and what vnsetting is.
To what virtew will us conducte, and error lead amiss.
Of right writing dame wisdom is the fountain, and the well,
As do the books Socraticall purposedlye the tell
And words will cum upon the fast at elbowe waytyng due
If that the matter in the mind thou will before suruew.
He that has learnde, what he does owe unto his country dear,
Unto his parents, brothers, frinds, what duty he does bear:
What does concern the Senator what does the judge behoue:
What does become the chifetan best to set upon and move:
Him dare I warraunte of my word that he can tell, or none,
What properlye is incidente to persons euerychone.
The learned imitatour, I do wish that he should cast
An eye into the life of men and practyses now paste,
That he may to the very quick his lyuelie phraises lay
Sumtimes an honest merye tail (lasciuiousnes away)
Delytes, and stays the people more, then do a thousand rymes
Deuoide of matter, shrill trifles and waterde well with crimes.
The muse gave wit to Greeks, to Greeks a trowlinge tongue she gave:
Who only glory, and renown were couetouse to have.
The Romans now do teach their sons no other kind of arts,
But all day long do set and part, a sum into his parts.
Learn them to multiplye an ounce by ounce and many ounces,
So that this thing to multiply still in their mind reiounses.
And nu^led once in casting counts and care to multiplye
When to cancard coin casting once, their wits theye do apply,
How can we think that they can make or that their verse should be
Worthy in Ceder to be writ or kept in Cypres tree.
"The Poets seek to proffit the, or please thy fancy well,
"Or at one time things of proffit and pleasaunce both to tell.
"In all thy precepts be thou brief that learners quicklye may
Conceive thy words, and that the same in faithful mind to stay.
What s'euer is superfluose, to much, and oftens told,
Does fill the hearer paste the brim that long he cannot hold.
"The things that's fainde for pleasure sake be next to true in place.
No commodie can hope to have all credit in each case.
To bring in as a trim devise an old wyfes chat, or tale
Of wiches buggs, and hobgoblings, such trashe is naught to sail.
Unprofitable Poesies, the sage sort will not hear
And austere works, the youthful sort will ouerlooke them clear.
"He bears the bell in all respects who good with sweet does minge:
"Who can in delectable style good counsel with him bring.
His books the stationers will bye, beyonte Sea it will go,
And will conserve the authors name a thousand year, and mo.
Yet certain Peccadilians which escape yea in the best,
Are to be borne the better with by reason of the rest.
For not the lute string always strikes, as hand, and mind would have.
It will sound base, and low when we an high loud stroke would have.
Nor yet the bow does ever hitte the thing which it does threate.
If that the more deal of the work be bewtifull and neat,
A few scapes shall not grieve me much, with negligence let lie,
Or which because that we are men must now and then pass bye:
What then? he that compyles a work, and warned does offend
In one thing often, is perdonles if that he does not mende.
As may that minstrell well be mockd, and woorthelie I wisse,
Which ever of the self same stringe does use to stryke amiss.
So he which often is ouerseene is Cherilus to me,
Whom writynge two or three good rimes I marvel at with glee.
Yet am right wroth that any good should cum from such a sotte.
Good Homer now and then him self will slumber well I wotte.
If that our work be long and hug^ so hard it is to keep
Our selves wakinge, it is dispens^ if sumtymes we do sleep.
"A Poesy is picture like, the which if thou stand nere,
"Delytes the much: sum picture more if further of thou were.
This has a better grace in dark, and this in open day,
The scanning skill of viewinge judge can it no whit afraye.
This Poesy has had his time it was well liked once,
An other has been lykd ten times, An, A per se for nonce.
(O eldeste of thy brethren all) although with fathers voice
Thou art well taught, and of thy self thou haste a sauerie choice.
Yet take this sainge of my mouth and take it with the clean.
Sum thing there is, which will admit a tolerable mean,
The attorney and the counsaloure though theye be mean in plea
Unlyke to them which at the bar and benche do bear the swea.
Natheles in estimation theye both have been, and are.
And many a man for their aduyce will seek to them from far.
But that mean Poets were the best that never granted yet
Or God, or man or monuments or evidence of writ.
Ill sawses, or ill melody when we do suppe, or dyne
Is little worth, for those aparte, the feast might have been fine:
So Poemes first deuisde, to sport, and recreate the mind
Are best, or worste by standinge in or qualynge from their kind.
He dare not turney, nor yet tilte which never knew the play:
The stool ball, top, or camping ball if such one should assaye
As has no manor skill therein, Amongste a mighty croude,
Theye all would screeke unto the sky and laughe at him aloude.
Yet he that knows no foot in verse will bouldly versefy.
What else? he is a gentleman, ten thowsande francklins lie
By him to spend, and besides that so woorshipfull a man:
Such qualityes, and of great crime no man conuicte him can.
Yea, gentle men are goodlye men, what so theye will, they may:
But Piso, against nature thou shalt nothing do, or say.
For so thy self art minded to: But if in after time
Thou shall have great affection to publishe any ryme,
Let it be first examined, by Metius his ear,
And by thy fathers, and by mine: kept cloase a nine long year.
The scrowles which be at home with the at leisure thou may mende.
The faltes that's passed once in print, are passed without end.
The holly one great Orpbeus the gods enterpreter,
The saluage folk from beastlyke life, and murder did deter:
So said the Tigers to aswage and Lions rampinge power.
So was it said of Amphion founder of Theban tower,
With twang of harp to stir the stones, with orisons deuyne
To lead th'unwylde creatures to where he would assyne.
This was the wisdom in those days, this counted they their gain,
To part things public from private and sacred from prophaine.
For to inhibit wandering lusts and wedlock knot to tie,
Laws to ingrale in during brass, and rear up towns on hye.
So got the godlike poets first their honor, and their name,
And for their verses all the world did celibrate their fame.
Then started noble Homer up, and Tyrtheus with verse
Did make the lusty youthful bruits to battle fresh, and fearse.
By verses were men's fortunes told and rewles to live aright,
And princes favors were procurde by verse, and ryming sleighte,
"Uerse is a solace, after work, a chase for noble game,
"And perdie man to versifie it need be thought no shame.
"For madam muse could tune the harp, Appollo knew the same.
If verse praise worthy written were by nature or by art,
Demand has been, but I am thus resolved for my part,
"That neither study can do good without a welthie wit,
"Nor yet the wit not well applied can proffit one a white,
"So wit, and, study lincked are, so does the one require
"The others help, so louengly in one they do conspyre.
He that does study to cum to the mark, which all men would,
Has sufferde, and done much in youth often sweating, and often could,
Refrainde from wine and Uenery. The minstrel that does singe.
Was taught, and fearde his master first er he professed the thing.
Now its enoughe to say, that I can passing poemes make,
Since each man bragges, the lagge of us A shendefull shame him take.
I think it shame to cum behind, to grant I do not shame,
In that which I was never tawghte me skillesse in the same.
The Crier, as he cawles in on the company to bye
In portesaile of his marchaundise as they do thither hye:
So does the poet, ritche in land, and ritche in banqued goulde,
Assemble al his parasyts to hear his praises toulde.
If that a poet usually mantayneth lusty cheer,
And will be surety for pore knaves in suites them to vy bear,
I marvel if that his fortune and goodlucke should be such
To know false flatterers, from true friends, their faces will be such.
If thou have given any ought, or further do intend
Beware to any merry greek thy verses to commend.
He will cry well, notablye well, passing, exceeding well,
He will wax pale from friendly eyes his tears he will expel.
Dance, and bedunche the ground with foot as those which hired be
To wail, and morn at funerals (as far forth as we see)
Both do, and speak more heuily and rufull in their kind,
Then those which inwardly with grief, are gryped in their mind.
So be the iesters gesterings and glosinge words, above
The praises of the well meaning, who doubtless do the love.
"Great princes use to make much of, to feast, and feast again,
"With strong, and heady drinks t'assay what was the wit and brain,
"Of those to whom their amitye they meant for to admit.
"To prove how they for grande affairs and trusty things are fit.
If thou profess a poetry be not deceived, bewayre,
And shun the flyring feasting face which outward looks so fair.
If one unto Quintilius, did any thing rehearse,
Friend (would he say) you must correct both such, and such a verse.
If he replye, that he ne knew better to make the same
He would assaye yet twyse or thryse and bid him mende, from shame,
To lay his rude ill turned stuff again into the frame.
If thou had rather to defend then to amend thy miss
Thou should never have conference, nor counsel more of his,
Thou might march on in thine own ways without his further suit,
And hug, and, busse, and cull, and cusse thy darling apishe fruit
Th'vnsauerie verse the goodman, and the wise will reprehend,
Blame those diffuse, and obscure rymes, which to no good can tend.
Bald lattin he will note and mark, with scraping of their thum,
And ornaments superfluouse from better chaffer scum.
He must make manifest dark drifts, and argue at things strange,
He must like Aristarchus tell what each one ought to change.
And think not much his very friend in trifles to offend.
"These tryfles will prove earnest things, and seriouse in the end.
When all the world shall them deryde and grievously them grudge
And when al shall with auckwarde doume and sinister them judge.
To those which have the fawling evil and lothely leprosye,
That be frantike and moon sick, none dare bouldly pass him bye:
All men do fear the poet mad, the wise sort will him shun,
Young boys him vex, the foolish flock will do as he has done.
He that does belch out puffinge rymes, and gaddingly does straye,
Is like the fowler, who to catch his birds, as old men say,
Gave back for nonce, into a trenche, and though a prease past by,
And though with rope to hail him out were present help hard by:
What if the fellow, says one, went in with his good will?
Through this and such the silly segge lay ^lasde in puddle still.
To know how vile, vain glory is, how perilous a thing,
Empodocles of Sicilie to what end it did brin ge
Tell you will I: of immortal to purchase him the n ame,
For vain glory he scipped quick to Etnaes fyerye flame.
In good time poets, if they will, may make them selves away,
And who so lets such an one* as rightly might one slaye,
May happes he has assayde before how to procure his bayne,
May happes if he were now fore stayd^ his staing were in vain.
Still would he be besides him self nor would not lay a side
The fancy toward famous death wherein he had a pride.
And no man knows, what cause he had to write such frantike gere
How irreligiouse he has been deuoyde of godly fear,
But mad he is, and like a bear most ragingly he straynes,
And if he could with all his force dispatche him of his chains.
Learnd, and vnlearnd he would confound, he redeth them so fearse,
And does their works so snapingly, and snatchingly rehearse.
Whom he has seized, on, he houldes and does with reading kill,
The horseleach will not leave the hyde but having sucked her fill
Horace his Epistles to Maecenas
OThou the matter of the first the matter of these last
Uerses of mine, (Mecenas Lord) this is thy very cast
Yet once again t'acquaint me with my wonted ryming game,
Me, that am thoroughly tryde in that and victor in the same.
"Not age a like nor mind a like, the valiant man of war
May leave his arms, and live at length^ a part from scirmage far.
Him needs not when his race is run the people much to pray,
He has license by law of arms in time to go his way.
A thing I have within my self that beats upon mine ear,
And dassheth often in such sort that clearly I may hear,
How it does warn me to be wys^ to rid me from this race,
And timely to, lest I becum a tired ^ade in space.
A crooked caple, who when he has trauailde any while
Will halt down right at length and pante, and make a number smyle.
And therefore now I lay my rimes. and other toys a side
Deuysing things of hone stie, and therein holy bide.
That which may serve to guide my self I muse upon and make.
And least thou ask what Chifetan I, to what sect I do take,
To none so bound, to swear unto what s'euer he shall say.
To where the tempest carries me a stranger borne away.
Sumtymes I skude about the town in ciuyll matters drounde,
A champion roughe and practyser of virtue strait and sound.
Sumtymes on Aristippus lore by stealthe I cease on it,
The things to me, not me to things, I would they should submit.
"Long is the night to them whose grief alrest does quyte exyle:
"The labouringe man does think one day^ alonge, and dreary while:
Slow seames the year unto the wards which houlden down must be
In custody of stepdame strait: Slow slydes the time to me,
Unwelcome times, which do for^ow my hope, and fixed mind,
With courage to accomplish that which ritche and poor shall finds
Of proffit like, the which thing to if it be left untold,
The not knowing thereof may be like hurt to young and old
Remaynes, with these few principles my self to rule, and stay,
And through my skill surcreasd in me thus to my self to say.
Though one cannot like Linceus with pearsing eyesight see,
To mende his sight he may not grudge inoynted for to be.
Like lusty Glyco thou dispayres in lymmes to be so stout
Yet may thou exercise thy self to shun the knottie gowte.
A man may clim a step, or twain though he go not beyond.
Thy breast does boil with couetyse, with lustinge vile, and fond,
Sainges there be, and sawes there be to cure thy greedy care:
To master thine assaltynge fyttes to purchase thy welfare.
And doste thou swell with love of praise? Such sacred salues there be,
Read the prescriptions through but thryse and I dare warraunte the,
"Th'enuyouse, angrye, drunken, slow, the lover lewd* and wild
"None so outeragiouse, but in time he may bec^me full mylde.
"If he to good aduertisemente will retche his listenyng ear,
"And meekely bide with patience the counsel he shall hear.
"It is virtue, vice t'auoyde and wisdom chief of all
Folly to want: these two ills lo do vex the at thy gall.
A slender stock, and sharp repulse. to shun, and void these twain,
How do not thou disease thy mind, and plye thine head with pain?
A pare thou scuddes to traffic with the furdeste folk of Inde,
Through Seas and rocks, through fire and all lest thou be cast behind.
Contemn those things, which suddenly thou doste wish, and admire:
Will thou not learn nor hear, nor trust, the wise at his desire?
Who would (layest thou) goo practice fence In every town, and streate,
And then refuse Olympus crown if he with it might meat,
A pleasant thing, so pleasauntlye without much stiflynge duste:
Good toylinge fast, and for the best since travail needs I must.
Silver is baser much then gould, and goulde then virtew worse.
O, neighbors, neighbors, first get coin first hardlye pragge the purse,
And then seek virtue after gould, so say our merchants lo:
So chaunte the young, so chat the old, all occupyers so.
Their powches, and their counting books are glewed to their hands,
For this we see, nor can but see, the case on this sort stands:
Though thou haste wit and courage good, and manners mylde by skill,
Though thou beeste crafty, and can welde thy pleading tongue at will,
If thou haste all things competent: an other more then the,
Thou art thought course, and he a king: thy better must he be.
The Roman children have a song, which carrall does they call
A king and keaser if to sin thy self thou doste not thrall.
"Not tobe giltye or war wan at any falte at all,
"A bulwark that, to bear all bruntes, be that the brazen wall.
The lawyere Rossy made this law, that all should be estemde,
For only wealth: that blood, and skill as nowght worth should be deemde.
Per friendship whether better now Sir Rossius laws, and toys,
Or that which I did carrall call the ballad of the boys?
That ballad crowns all just lyuers, and every worthy wighte.
"Seek crowns of fame, for well living, not goulden crowns for sight.
Who gave the better counsel? he which biddes the learn to thryue
By right, if not to catch, and scrape whilste thou art man alive.
To sail in wealth, (a ship forsothe where thou maiste plain behold
The rufull falls which they have had that put theice trust in gould):
Or he, that biddes the stand vprighte gainste fortune, and her pride,
And chearelye wills the to be bold not once to skew a side?
If sum ask me why I joy not from bar, or benche to talk
Sythens I use so commenlye mongste lawyers for to walk
Why I do not embrase or fl^e which most men love or hate
As once unto the Lion crasde the fox that subtle pate
Did make reply, so answer I: the foteprints do me fray
Which lie and look toward the cave, none lie or look this way.
Should wise men seek to please the most? what proffit, or what gaynes?
Whom should I eye? the people is a beast of many brains.
Sum men will mell with public things, and those delight to hyer:
Sum seeking welthie wydowes can with toys set them on fire:
Sum can (like fishes in a truncke) keep old men for their pay:
Many by secret usury, do crepe up at this day.
But be it so, that diverse have a diverse trade, and way:
Does any one well like his trade, one hole hour of the day?
No coaste of all the world I weane like Baiie town of pleasure:
Yet sail the posting carles from thence, in hope to heap up treasure.
If (on gods name) they change their place, which way those lurdans draws,
Th'artificers must bear their tools the carpinters their sawes.
In wedlock (Lord) how he admyres the bless of single life?
Unmaryed, he swears him bleste, alone which has a wife.
What knot can hold this Proteus, that varies thus in hew?
The poor man What? merry I hope he too must change his stew.
His parler, and his bedchamber, Yea he will have his barge
As surlye as the ritche: a boat upon his proper charge.
Mecaens if I meet with the without my frisled top,
Not notted fine, and fashion like, thy manor is to stop,
And ieste at me: my cote is bare, my gawberdyne amiss,
Thou iestes at me: I marvel much what sport thou fyndes at this.
If that my mind were chaungeable, and were not always one,
Taking, reiectinge, retakinge the fashions left, and gone
Glowing, in no state of my life in steddie plighte, and sound,
Thou thinckes, and knows me to be mad, but will not ieste at me
In iuster case, as reason would: as far forth as I see,
Thou weneste that I do want no leache, nor phisickes helpinge cure
From praetor sent: nathles thou art a buttres safe, and sure
Of all my state, thou chafes at me for payring of my nail
Amiss, at me thy frinde, and eeke an hangeby at thy tail.
In fine, such follye fondes a man, and fondlye makes him roue:
The wyseman a nes vnfalliblie, second to only Jove.
His own man famous mannerlye lastly of kings, a king.
Healtheful in soul except his corpse sum kind of sickness bring.
To Lollius.
I Have perusde at Preneste him (frind Lolly great of fame)
That pende Troies broils, whilste thou at Rome didste practyse to declame.
Who, what proffits, what is good what is bad, (and very seelde does slip)
Does better tell, and more at full, then Crantor or Crysipp.
Why I so think, (if leisure let) lend me thy listninge ear.
The hystorye of Paris love, (for which as we do hear
Great Greece empayred very sore, which wreakinge Paris sins
Did wayne away with ten years fight prolongde by lingeringe twynnes)
Of foolish kings and foolish folk conteynes a fumishe flame.
Antenor would have compremize to cut away the same.
What says our Paris? what says he? compel him shall their none
To cease to bathe in worldly blis, and flow in joy alone.
Duke Nestor silly carkinge segge the tempeste to appease
He cummes, and goes, twixte king of Agamenon
men and awful Achilles.
The king for love, both twain for ire are in a chafinge fitt^,
What so the princes dote in life, the commons smarte for it.
"Through treason craft, mischief, and lust, through wroth of stomach
stowte,
Theye spare no sin within Troy walls, nor none they spare without.
Again, how virtue, and a wit at all assayes can ease
The Poet made a mirror in the witty Vlixes.
Who taminge Troy, the manors, and the cities wyselye viewd
Of many men: (for him and his whilste he through vaste sea rude,
Did shape return) who though he bore full many a bitter shower,
Yet had the adverse waves of him, no soueraintie, or power.
Thou know y^ mearemades sweet records, dame Circes charminge cup,
Whereon if he like to the rest had once assayde to sup,
Fylthie and fond, a strumpettes slave, subject to her desyer
Then had he been, a dog unclean, and sow, the frinde to myer.
We are a sort of lubbers, bred to help to eat up corn,
Kighte wooers of Penelopie, knaves, Parasytes forlorn,
A youth but to well practysed in making of a feste,
To sleep to twelve a clock at noone, we think it but a ieste.
And when as we are couchde in bed, we hear the minstrells play,
With twanging of an instrumente, to chase our dumpes away.
"Thieves rise at all times of the night to murder, and to quell.
Will thou not break thy deathlyke sleep, to keep the sound* and well?
If thou neglecte forecastinge still for to enjoy thy health,
Take head, for dropsies breed of flowthe, all sodainlye by stealth.
If at day break with candle light, thou buskle not at book,
"If thou to sum good exercise, or study do not look,
"In love, or malice shalt thou plunge, Yea, though thou be awake.
A little mote out of thine eye why doste thou haste to take?
If ought there be that noyes thy mind most part thou art content
Or thou begin to cure the same to seek an whole year spente.
"The fact begun, tonehalfe is done, be wise and take good heart:
Begin: who so dryues of good deeds, he plays the farmers part,
Who will not ouerslip the brook whilste that the water fall*
The water runs, and kepes his course, and ever keep it shall.
Men seek for moneie, and a wife, fruitful, and fresh of hew:
The earth vndreste, with shredding share, the husbandmen subdew:
He that has once sufficient, let him wish for no more:
Not house nor grove, nor yet of gould, or silver ample store
Can rid the owners crasie corpse fro fellon shaking fever.
Nor can the mind of man from carke, (for all their vigor) sever:
That owner needs must healthful be, and other men excel,
Which having riches competent, does cast to use them well.
The wisshinge, and the tremblinge chuffe his house and good does please,
"As portraytures the poreblind eyes, as bathes, the gowtie ease.
"As music does delight the ears With matter stuffde, and sore.
"The vessels sowers what so it takes if it be foul before
"Do, way delight, for pleasure bowghte with pain annoyes in the end.
"The Carle wantes aye, let thou thy drift to no excess extend.
"Th'enuiouse fool does pine away at others happy state,
"The tyrfants of Sicilia did find nothing to grate
"Their gawles so much, as envy did. who can not stay his i^e
"Shall wish undone which teene bad do, and wilful fond desire*
Ire is short wrath, rule thou thy mood, if it do not obey,
It rules forthwith, it thou with bitte, it thou with chain must stay,
The plyante steed of tender neck, the horsekeper does tame,
To march forth lightly where him list: further, to prove the same,
The hounde which does commence his game with opening at the skin,
Do th practice pursuit at the beast and length through fern and finne.
Then children lean your hearts to lore, the best things eeke imbrase
What iuse (look) first bemoysts a shel, the shel thereof a space,
A long space will reteyne the taste: But if thou slack or stay:
Or if thou beist to forwerd else, and run to fast away:
I tarry for no trewands, I, which from their studies slack,
And those that will vauntcurrers be Not I will draw them back.
To Julius Florus.
FLorus, in what part of the world Augustus son in law
Duke Claudius does warfayre now I travail much to know.
Or Tracia or Hebrus floode congealde with winter frost:
Or seaes twixt towers, abordringe next that glyde away, and post:
Or fertile feeldes of Asia, and mountains hold you still?
What does our busye bend of Clerks? to know it is my will.
Who takes upon him to indite Augustus, worthy acts?
Who powers into the world to cume his wise, and warlike facts?
What Tytius? to Roman cost that shortly cums to dwell.
Who did not fear to drink the drawghtes of Pindars hidden well.
Bold to disdain, the ryuers known and common puddles vile
How might he fear? how minds he us? does he in lattin style
Address his Thebane melody with Madam muse his guide?
Or is his swelling lofty vain in tragic practice tryde?
How does Sir Celsus? warned once, and to be warned much
To seek for matter of his own, as also not to tuche
The works which have been demed good By Phoebus Pallatine:
Lest if the birds perhaps do cume to ask their feathers fine:
The crow bereft of borrowed hue do make a merry game,
To se the thief that had so much have naught to shrowde his shame.
Florus what do thou enterprise, in what study or ryme
Do thou bestir? as does the be bestir herself in thyme
Thy wit is not of meanest sort, it does not lie vnskowrde,
It is not harshe through negligence or otherwise untoward.
If thou doste whet thy tongue to plead, or play the civil judge*
If thou do make a lovely verse, there is none alive will grudge
To fee the with the first reward of victory the crown.
And couetyse, the cause of care: If thou could cast it down,
O passing florus passinge man thou mighste go forewarde free,
Aduaunsed by thy thy heavenly wit* as it would conduct the,
To this work, and this exercise, lets spedely draw near,
If we will be unto our selves, or to our Country dear.
I wish you furthermore to write and written to me send.
What heart thou bearst to Munatie, if he be yet thy friend.
If that thy frendeship soulderd ill, has stayed no longer while:
And if it now be knapte in twain which I did reconcile.
But, whether you hot stirring blood, or lack of practice vex,
Like beasts vnbroake, vnusde to toil, Bruits of untamed necks,
Sirrs, whersoeuer you do live, me think it does not well,
To break so strait a knot of love: further I will not mell.
I have against your home coming a long deuoued cow.
Which graseth here within my groves and fattes her self for you.
To Albius, Tybullus a deuysor
Tybullus friend and gentle judge of all that I do clatter
What do thou all this while abroad, how might I learn the matter?
Do thou invent such worthy works, as Cassus poemes pass?
Or doste thou closely creepinge lurcke, Amid the wholesome grass,
Addicted to Philosophy, contemning not a whitte
That's seemly for an honest man, and for a man of wit?
Not thou a body without breast, the Gods made the t'excell
In shape, the gods have lent the goods, and art to use them well.
What better thing unto her child can wish the mother kind,
Then wisdom, and in fyled frame to utter owte his mind,
To have fair favor, fame enoughe, and perfect stay, and health,
Things trim at will, and not to feel the empty ebb of wealth?
Twixte hope to have, and care to keep, twixte fear and wrath, away
Consumes the time: each day that cummes think it the latter day,
The hour that cummes unlooked for shall cum more welcum ay.
Thou shall find me fat, and well fed, as pubble as may be,
And when thou will a merry mate, to laughe, and chat with the.
To torquatus
If thou can well vowtsafe to suppe with thin, and simple cheer,
And eat thy potage holy up, (a mease of homely gear)
In skellet course: at sonsette then Torquat I tarrye the.
Thou shalt cum home and help to drink a cup of wine with me.
Wine, pressed in taurus consulship, twixt Sinuce, and Petryne,
And merry Mintorne, If thou have sum better that is thine,
Or pray me cum, or bid me cum, If thou will be my gest*
My chimney shines, mine householde stuff, is hansumly up dressed.
Do way vain hope, foul strife for goods and bablinge in law cases.
The day licenceth sport, and sleep, To morrow Cesars graces
Nativity assoyleth al, scotfree we may hold tagge,
In friendly chat this summers night, and let the world go wagge.
"A way with wealth, if that a man have not a time to use it:
"The niggarde to strait to him self, what does he but abuse it?
"Who sekinge how to benefit his heir in all he can,
"Does well deserve the second room, next to a frantike man.
I will go quaffe, and strew my flowers, In fresh and fragrant wise,
And for a time will be content not to be counted wise.
What, does not lively drunkenness? deep secrets it bringes out Dronke^*

It confirms hope, the naked man it makes in battle stowte:
It does discharge the pensife mind, It teaches arts a pace,
Whom have not fraighted goblettes made, to utter with a grace?
And eke in pinching poverty made lowse at heart and free?
This fit for me, I glad of it, this charge I take to me:
A factor I to take good head that table clothes be cleave:
The napkens fayr^ ^e sluttishnes do turn the gess to teene.
That flagons and the vessels scourde do show to the thy face.
That what passes through friend and friend go not out of the place*
Through pratlinge pyes: that like with like and mate may set with mate:
Septicius,, and Brute with the according to your state.
Except Sabin per company be bod to better cheer,
He shall be one? I take on me to compass all this gear.
There is a room for shadows to, as lesters, and for such:
Unless the crowded company perfume the place to much.
Write thou the number that will cum, cum straight, and stay no more,
And through sum posterne slip thou from thy clyent at thy door.
To Numitius
NOwght to admyre Numitius is almost such a thing
As can conserve a man in bless and bless unto him bring.
Sum such there be not once agaste which dare behold the son,
The stars, the times, from point, to point, how they do roll and run,
What think you of the goodly gifts, which in the earth we find?
What of the sea, that ritcheth those of Arabie, and Inde.
Plays, triumphs (gifts of such as seek with folk to have a grace)
How do thou look upon this gear? what Censur, and what face?
Who dreades the lack, of such like things, in such sort does admyre,
No doubt the same, as he that does them fervently desire.
Both parties are distrubde with fear, both drenched in one cryke,
The fear to lose, or not to have, does fray them both a like.
Joy he, sad he, wish he, dread he, what matters that at al,
If at all things which he shall see better, or worse to fall
Then he hopd for, with powting looks he glares upon the ground,
Or else in body, and in mind be sickly, and not sound?
The wise man may be counted mad, the rightuouse man unjust,
If he after virtue it self more then enough do lust.
Go now, and lay thy looks upon thy silver, and thy goold,
Thy marble statues, brazen works, and Monumentes behold.
Past virtue since we may not pass, this earthlye dross admyre,
Becum in love with jewels, gemmes, and colors cumd from tire.
Rejoice that thousand eyes do gase on the, whilst^ thou doste talk,
Take this with the from market place both late, and earelye walk
Home to thy house: forcastinge that thy neghbour should have more
Wheat (by the dowry of his wife) dehuskd upon the flore:
Let it grieve the that sum man cumd of basse, and cowrser kind,
Shall Be admirde of the for wealth, and thou owte of his mind.
"Nothing but virtue, nowghte but it, what s'euer lies below
"Age will make seen, age will dig up: and those things which we sow
"Most fresh, and sheene, age will attache Though thou beeste famous known
In court, of kings, though through the streets thy brute abroad be
blown*
Remaynes to cum, to where all kings and kesars have been drawn.
If that thy sides, or Renes becume With twitchinge stitche attainted,
Seek how to chase that grief away to make it disaquaynted.
Wouldste thou live well? who would not so? If only virtue can
Procure such life, vain toys resyne, stick stowte to virtue then.
Think not that words do virtue make, as trees do make a wood, The best
merchandise is virtue.

Take ship betyme, lest sum forestal, and bye up all this good:
This pretiouse delytefull good* treasure of greater gain
Then all the chaffer that transfretes from Portugal, or Spain.
Disburce a thousand talents thus, and then a thousand moo,
Three thousand, and four thousand thus* for virtue let them go.
But Madam money can do much, she brings a wealthy wife, Money.

Bringes trusty frinds, gentry, and stock all pleasures of this life.
Yea, he that has the coin in store in pleading of a case
Shall tell his tale more pythelie, with more delyteful grace.
The king of Cappadocia. with all his rowte of men,
Lords, lordings, princes and their pears* lack money now, and then. The
causes of the lack of money.

Well if theye lack, manteyne not thou, a swarm of idle pages.
Bye not such suites of vain attire, whereon the world so rages.
Lucull demanded on a time to lend as I hard say,
An hundred cotes t'adorne the stage and make the players gay.
And how should I that number great betake to you quoth he
Natheles in south I do not know I will go home to see.
Straighte way when he had searchd his house: rewrytte again this mome,
That he had which he know not of Ten thousand clokes at home.
Or take the one half, or all of them. that house (says he is scante,
Where howsould stuff vnoccupyde not thought upon does want.
Yea, true, such stuff is very good the master to deceive,
(And he not knowinge) is a pray for every pilferinge knave.
If wealth alone can blessed make, and the conserve in bliss,
Let all thy care, both more, and sum, be cast to conquer this.
If bravery or honor can make the an happy man,
Lettes by a cut throat rutterkin which in best manor can
Recyte thy tytles, and thy names, who also much reioyses
To Crave and iog those on the side that have th'electinge voices.
Who will, and dare retche forth his hand, and man the through the croude,
Bear of the heuie multitude, crack thus, and cry aloude:
My Lord my master now a days does bear alonelye swaye
Throughout the hole nobility: If that him list to frown,
From burnishd carre of Iuorie the maiestrate goes down,
And thou thy self most smerkinglye (to further on thy page)
Say father, brother, to each one, as best becoms their age.
If well suppinge be well lyuinge, this matter is dashste, lets go,
To fish, to hunte, and whether that our throat will lead us to.
Like Gargill, who betyme would cause his nets, bore spears, and men
To go abroad through flocks of folk, that theye might see him, when
He marched forth, and for to make the men to marvel more
He would in couarte carry forth and bring in sight a Bore,
As who say he had conquered him. Let us go quaffe, and swill
On full gorge, nor once mind what is good, or what becummes us ill.
Worthy to have our memories Portrade, in war or ayle.
Ulixes men of Ithaca a gredie sinful sail:
To whom pleasure inhibited did seem of value more,
Then was to see their natyue soil, so wisshed for before
If he say true that says all bliss consistes in love, and sport,
Then live in love: in daliance is best to keep a port.
Its nether so, nor so say I. wealth, honor feastinge, love,
Do bread no bliss, virtue it is that stauleth us above.
Live, and fair well, if thou know ought, Better then these things be
As touching bliss) frindlye confer, if not, use these with me.
To Mecenas.
Five days my promise was to the in country town to have been,
And now am wanted (false of word) all Auguste, as I wene.
If thou wouldste have me safe at ease, that nothing should me grieve,
What thou doste grant me being sick, the very self same leave
Thou will grant me, that stand in dread of sickness, more, and more.
Whilste summer swage, and the fig tree her pryme fruit have I bore:
Whilste the Indytors of the dead, (For so their name theye have)
Be led by pomp with Sergeaunts sad the Epigrammes to grave:
Whilste parents paile, do dread, and fear their children should be sick:
Whilste busy toil, and work abroad make fevers green to prick:
Whilste head does rageand sickness raines, and each man breaks his will,
And makes a new, at point of death (Sir) let me tarry still*
On Albane hills when winter shall spitte out his flaggie snow,
Thy poet shall cumme to the sea and soiorne there below.
Framinge him self to plye his book with lesser grief of mind
He will see the (my dulcet frinde) with warmie western wind:
And with the swallowe very first that cummes into that place,
If he may be safe conducted and welcum to thy grace.
Mecenas thou haste made me ritche not as the Calabere
Does rych his gueste, who when he cu^mes does set him down a pear.
Fall to (says he)
Gueste. I have enough

Oste. well if you list not eat,
Yet bear them to your babes at home Perhaps a welcum cheat.

Guest. Mine oste, I am as well content I thancke you to my pay
As if I should eat all your fruit and carry it away.

Oste. Sythens I can not rid them* hence and that you will forsake them,
I mean to give them to the swyne to see if they will forsake them.

Horace. Of foolish and of prodigal this is the proper guyse
"To give such things as theye them selves and others do despise.
"Those francklings who by such a sort persuade them to be francke,
"Ne shall, ^e have at any time deserved any thancke.
The wyseman knows both what he geues, how worthy that theye be
That take, and is discreate enoughe the brass from dross to see.
I for my part will never fail to be a thankful man:
Worthy your praised benefitts by all the means I can.
If thou wouldste have me keep with the, and never to depart,
Thou must call back my years of youth my lusty sides and heart.
Restore mine hair, my foreheade once with abrune hairs yclad.
Where nothing now but scaulpe alone, and baldnes can be had.
Restore to me my fyled speech, the causes why I smyled
The doulefull dumpes in Bacchus feast whilste Cupid me begyled.

Fable. Once through a narrow rifte did creep an empty cub with pain,
Into a basket full of wheat: and being fast, again
With pragged paunche assayde to go out of the same in vain.
To whom the wesell: to escape quod she thine only shifte
Is, to creep out as thou camste in all empty through the rifte:
This same, or such like parable if thou apply to me,
I must cum empty from thine house if thine I leave to the.
For all was thine, through the came ease to live at my desyer.
As cloyde with wealth, or strife not I this call my life requyer.
And yet this joy so clear, so sound which in this life I find,
I would not change for all the gould of Arabie, and Inde.
Often haste thou praisde my shamfastnes, my father, and my king:
I have praysde the before thy face in absence eke the thing.
If I thy bountye can acquyte consider thou my best,
With all my heart, what so I can it ever shall be priest.
Telemachus, Ulysses child the mark at full did hit,
Who used to say that Ithacke ground for geldinges was not fit.
For that the ground in houltes, and hills and dales consumed was,
Not euenlye stretched out in plain nor prodigal in grass.
I leave quod he to the Atryde the things that fitter be,
So I Mecenas graund affairs leave fully unto the.
Small men small iestes. Not regal Rome stands now with me in grace:
But desert Tyber and Tarente that sluggishe warlesse place

Fable. Philippe a famous counsailor an hearty, and a stowte,
Came from the hall at eighte a clock to suppe, or there about.
And being nowan aged man and therefore not so strong
Complainde, that from the hall to home his journey was so long.
And spyinge in a barbars shop a young man in a chare
At ease yplasde, who quyetlye his nails did purge and pare:
Sir boy quod he, go learn, tell me, (the boy did straight obey)
Who? whence he came, what wealth, what friends what parents, and what stay?
Goes, commes and brings him word, how that Vulteus was his name
A prayser, hamsumlye to live. Whom no man can defame.
A speedy, and discret worker in bounty frank, add free,
Fiew friends, and commonly at home he uses for to be.
And when he has dispatche himself, of busnes for that day,
Then with a menny of his mates, abroad he goes to play.
This tale thus told Phillippus longde Wtth Vulte himself to talk.
And bad his boy incontinente back to the shop to walk,
To pray the young man suppe with him, The page returns again:
He half mistrustes the case, says he, and thanks me for the pain,
But cannot cume: and as I guess by vysage made to me,
The horesonne either does contempne, or fear to mell with the.
Next day Philippus went to him and found him sellinge gear:
Rags to the country rusticall. approaching very nere
Philippus first saluted him: Vultie himself did purge,
Because his busy bargaininge, so daily did him v rge,
That he ne came, and spoke not first. Vultie I perdon al,

Phi If thou will sup to night with me* what time I shall the call,
Yours to command Phi: at nine a clock I trust you will not fail.

Vult Whilst that, go make your merchandise God send you good retayle.
At supper when he had at full Laid out his lauishe mind,
At length to bed to take a nap he fraighted, was assynde.
Next day this Vultie cums again for law matters to look.
When that the fish was known to like this secret hidden hook,
They dubde him for a daily gest. next holly day abroad
To see the suburbs not far thence with Philip forth he rode.
And coming to his journeys end he began to mar uaile sore,
At Sauines pastures, at the air, and praysde it more, and more.
Philli p he smyled in his sleeue, and hops more to smyle,
Willing this Cokney to entrap, With this same merry wyle:
He geues to him seven sextarcies, and promises seven more
To bye this ferme: with fair sweet words he eggs the cockescome so
That for to make the ambage short, and not to draw it on
More then it needs, our citizen is now a Corridon.
He trimmes his vlmes, bosting of lands and vyneyardes, he does rave:
Consumes with carke, and waxes old with couetose to have.
But when his gotes through ill disease, his sheep decaid through theft,
His corn deceaude his gredie hope, his ox at ploughe dead left:
Displeased with his damagies, at midnight on a jade
To Philippes house al suddenly he posteth in a br ade.
Whom when Philipp see ouerspred with scurfe* and busshie here,
You study Vultie overmuch you took to much of care,
Says he) forsouth quothe the other tho, the name of wretch is due
To me (lands Lord) cawle thou me wretch if thou will cawle me true.
By thy good nature, thy right hand, and househould gods therefore,
"Humblye I pray my former plighte to me pore wretch restore.
"He that does se his own offense how that he did retire
"From better trade, and better things then those he did desyer:
Let him not shame, but straight return with all possible speed,
And willingly resume the trade, and life, which he did lead,
This is from me the best advise, that he is like to get,
Let each man meysure out him self with his own foot, and met.

To Celsus albinouanus
MY muse at my request wish well, to the great puisante mate
And secretary to Nero that much renowned state,
If he inquyre once after me, or question what I do,
Say me to threaten many things and goodly matters to.
To live not well, nor pleasauntlye: not for because the hayle,
Does bruise my vines, or parchinge heat mine olyues does assail,
Nor that my neat do go in feldes from home removed long:
But that I am in mind then corpse less well at ease and strong.
Wroth with my leaches, and my self for that they do restrain
From me such things, as they do think in time would be my bayne.
Things noysum those I long to have, from holsom things, I fly.
At Rome Tyber at Tyber Rome a giddie marchaunte I.
This done my muse demand of him how he does, and what cheer
Throughout the ost, and with Nero What stroke he does now bear,
If he shall say that all is well that no wght can make him sad,
Then show the eftsonnes iocant to, and be thou very glad
At last remember to instill this precept in his ear
Celsus as thou can fortunevse so all men will the bear.
To Septimius
SEptimi, Only Claudius. perceaueth as I dene
What good account you make of me how you do me esteem
For needs with importunity (I wis he will compel
That I should set him forth to the, and go about to tell
That he well for his worthy wit on Nero may depend,
Nero, that to dishonest books in no wise will attend.
He knows your favor to be great, so depely he does prye.
What knows not he? certes he knows much more of me, then I.
I said most things that might avail t'excuse me in this case,
Yet was afraid lest I should seem to much my self t'abbase
By cloking mine ability: fit for my self alone.
So I that from the greater vice so feign would have been gone,
Not to be thought an hypocrite deserve now to be named,
In this my suite a citizen that is of naught ashamed,
But if thou thinkeste it praise worthy that at my friends request,
I have shakde of all shame fastnes, and bouldly done my best:
Let him retain unto thy house, thou shall find him no doubt
Aright good fellow of him self, and for his courage stout.
To Fuscus Aretius
I that admire the country soil interely do wish well
Fus^us to the, in cittye ay that like it so to dwell.
In this thing only we are found unlike in iudgmente others,
In all things else we tune in one as it were german brothers,
The culuerdoues of ancient league the treweste twain that be,
Are not in more consent of wills and hermony, than we.
Thou kepes thy neste, the city still, I love on husshing brooks
Of cuntrie gay, on mossie stones onmedes to cast my looks.
What will thou man I live I reign since I resignde these toys
Which you advance up to the skies with mighty rowting noise.
Like as the seruauut that is used to course, and fulsome meat,
Thinks it of small effect, or none on wafer cakes to eat:
So I would have good cuntrie cheer my nature to suffice,
Your iunkets, and your delicates, of truth I do dispyse.
If men must live accordingly as nature does them call:
And if a plotte for howseroume must be sowght for, first of all:
The cuntrie did thou ever know and place of better bliss?
Is there, where wynters bitter brethe more tolerable is,
Where more cool air does temperat^ the dogs star stewing rage?
Or does the lion in his course more beninglie aswage.
When furiouse he has receaude the traueld prickling son?
Is there, where sleep through rankerouse care is less then here undone?
And do the erbes I pray you worse delight the nose, and eye:
Then Lybique stones, or what so else the city setteh by?
Where does there purer water through the leaden conduyts glyde,
Then that which in the fawling stream with murmur, sweet does slide.
The city eke like cuntrie towns to have their fruit, and flowers
Build pillors to support their trees their orchardes, and grene bowe^s
In city to, do we not say that building is the best
Whose prospect serve to see the fields more fitly then the rest?
The citizens thinks nature base, and art is their desire.
Tushe, expulse nature with a forke yet she will still retire,
But chefely, if that she be evil she tarries then no space,
The victris has a swifte recourse by stealthe unto her place,
The man that can not well decerne but uses still to buy
For Sidon silk, a wullen webb of wateringes forged dye,
Has not like loss, nor yet like grief to grate him on the gall,
"As he which twixt falshoode,, and truth cannot decerne at al.
"Who so was to much ravished and to much joy did take
"In flow of wealth, him change of flow yea to much shall yshake.
"Make it away what s'euer it be thou ginnes for to admire.
Fly great doings: above all things seek not for to aspyer:
Well may one pass in cotage pore the princes and their pears
In true and perfect liberty and see more pleasante years.
Fable. An heart the better cheuailer as it came then to pass
Did chase an horse that fed with him from eating of the grass.
The horse that always went to worse besowghte the help of man.
The man he takes him up with spurs and bitt, in all he can.
The tryumpher after that he was parted from his foe
The man from back, the bitt from mouth he could not rid them fro.
So, he that fears poverty his fredom cannot houlde.
Fredome, better then mettells all better then choysest goulde.
That fool shall bear in deed a Lord, and live a daily thr all,
For that he will not know to use and live upon a small.
"The state of men, if it for them be not according fit,
"Is like a shoe, or else a shoe is very like to it:
"The shoe that's greater then the foot will make the fall or trip,
The lesser shoe does hurt thy foot (for pardie it will nip.
Its wisdom to live merrily (Fuscus) upon thy share.
Correct me well and thriftely (good Fuscus do not spare,
If I should seem to scrape up more then well suffice me can.
Collected coin is Lord or low^e to each possessinge man,
"More worthy to cum after him constrained with a cord,
"Then that it should so have the head, and lead the lowtishe Lord.
Behind Dame Ceres ruinnouse church I oighted these to the
In all points very well appaied but that thou wast from me.

To Bullatius,
How have these Bullate pleased the Chios, and Lesbos known?
How Sames fine, whose buildings brave throughout the world is blown?
How surly Sardis Cresus town who made it bear a name?
How Smirna and how Colophon? greater or less then fame?
Or in respect of Tybers fluddes and fields, semes all things nowght?
Or does sum dame of delicates resort unto thy thought?
Or does not (for that Lebedus has ircksum seas, and land:
Or roisting Rome so populouse now in thy favor stand?
Lebed in deed is dissolate and that full well know thou
The smallest village in a shyer more peopled then it now.
Peopled, or not, to live even there I would be very feign,
For gittinge mine and I of them to be forgot again.
Where I may see, and safely see Neptune of dreadful name,
How he at will the waltering waves does often control, and fame.
But he that posts from Capua to Rome mucke weete with myer,
To rest him all day in his In is not that man's desyer:
Nor he that lately has catchde could the stewe, and baine does praise,
As things that fully make a man happy at all assaies.
If thou be tossed upon the sea with Sowth wind pusant fell,
Thou will not yonte Aegaeum sea. sell all thou have, and dwell.
We travail all, not all a like, I travail to remain:
Thou here to catch, and there to snatche do go and cum again,
What is Rhods to content a man or Myttelene the gaye?
A warm furde freese coote on thy back upon a summers day.
A linnine stop in spitting snow, in winter, Tyber fludde,
In hot August a nosehighe fire will do the as much good.
Whilste we are lusty, and fortune does keep her friendly cheer,
At Rome praise Chios, and Samos and Rhods that lies not near.
Apprende with greatfull hand each hour that god has lent the here:
Things pleasant now for to be done deffer not for a year.
To where soever thou do cum or what hap thou do find,
Thou may live there, if that thou will, with a contented mind:
If by wisdom, not well dight house our cares are al undone,
If those change weather, not their wit, which yont the sea do run.
Tuc diligence has littell skill we far and near do skip,
To purchase wealth in every coaste in wagon, and by ship.
The worste place here as pleasant is as that which thou wouldste find,
If thou had grace, to judge a right, and qualefie thy mind.
To Iccius.
ON Agrippes goods in Sicilie which thou have in thy hand,
If (Iccie) how to use them well thou would understand,
I cannot see how love himself could give the better store.
Do way therefore thy practysde plaintes, bemone thy self no more.
"For he that has the use of goods, cannot be judged poor.
"If that thy belly, sides, and feet, and all thy parts be well,
"Not wealth of kings can add to owght that does this wealth excel.
If that midst all these present goods, thou bibliste not at wine,
But art content with erbes and roots to set the down and dyne:
This dare I say thou lyuest hard, to get the coin in houlde.
That fortune liquide river straighte might turn the into goulde.
Or, that money should seem to chaung, thy nature but a small,
Or that thou do think abstinence surmountinge pleasures al.
It is no marvel if that he let bease eat up his corn,
Whilste that his mind contemplatinge, on pilgramage was borne:
For thou this dross, vneasefull dross doste set but little by,
No small wyseman, as it should seem, thou have thy mind on hye.
What stays the seas from drowning all, what orders all the years:
If planettes meue them selves, or else are wrounge about in spheres:
Why is the moon now bright now dark, what to her roundnes bringes:
What means, what does the great conflict, the striving peace of things:
Empedocles, or Sartyues pate, which of the twain does dote:
Thus art thou often times occupied, or should be I wot.
Fish, garlic, onions what it be, thou vseste for to eat:
I pray the of thy coortesie do Grosphus well entreat.
There Is not the thing that is not good that he will of the crave,
The good man has the fieweste frindes, when he most needs to have.
Least thou beeste ignoraunte what is as now our Romans state,
The folk of B^sca, by Agrip, the Armenianes, of late,
By Nero were discumfited: Phraates took his mace,
Kneeling upon his marribones, to Cesars aufull grace.
The goulden Lady plenty has. let fall out of her horn
Such store of grain, as Italy has seldom had like corn.
To Vinnius Asella
AS I have taught the long and often when thou for me should ride,
Thou shalt present to August hand my books in clawsure tide:
(Asell) present them unto him, if thou have markde those three
That he is well: that he is glad: and asked for them from me.
Be not to rash on my behalf, it will disgrace the gift,
If thou beeste to officiouse a profferer to swift.
If that my book be burthenouse shift the of it be time
Least thou ass like vnloden the with greater note of crime:
Then will they laughe at Asin^: thy fathers right surname,
On the his son, the common voic^ will then bestow the same:
More meet to bear through cliftes, and flndd^s and puddills (will they say)
Then here in court in mannishe shape the Asses part to play.
Thy purpose once accomplished, arrived at the port,
Thou must retain thy bookishe charge in hansum civil sort:
Not as the lamb under the arm^ the sheppard does retain:
Or drunken Pyrrhe bears her wool her flycesie filched gain.
Or as the drunken dissolute does prate his cap in hand.
And brag not to the company that shall abowte the stand,
That thou have swet, and taken pains. in bringinge of such gear,
As will embaite our Cesars eye, and tickle up his ear.
I pray the hartly to take pains, (good Asell) do thy best,
Auaunte, adieu, take heed to trip, and break not my behest.
To his Balie in the Country.
BAlie, the baliue of my firm, which makes me so glad,
Which thou contemnest daintelye and demeste very badde,
My ferme of five fair families, which once was wunt to have
Five Senators from Baria, men credible and grave.
Balie, I say let the and me in this one point compare,
Or thou canste pluck more thorns from field or I from mind more care.
Whether the lands lord, or the land shall be more trim, and gaie.
Although the pensife piety of Lamia do me stay,
Who comforteles his brothers death a mourner does lament,
Yet th'itherwarde assuredlye my heart, and mind is bente.
And burns, and burns to braste the bonds which do enclose it so,
That it ne can go scope abroad where it would gladly go.
I think the country, thou the town, to make a man of bliss:
"He that does like an others love his own condemned is.
Both fools alyke, without respect the country we do blame
"Our mind the cause in ficklenes Which ever is the same.
A Citizen, in secret wise thy farm thou do desyer:
A farmer, thou the townish games doste burn for, hot as fire.
Thou knewste me to be still one man much pensife ay to be
When mine vnwelcum business to city draws me.
We love not one thing thou and I, and therefore disagree.
Those places which thou thinkete rude erksum, and desolate,
A man of mine opinion thinckes pleasant: and does hate
Things gaie to the: the vitlinge house does bring thy stomach down
And eggeth on thine appetyte to cum into the town.
And that my ground, incense, and rather then grapes does bear:
And for because to whittle the the tavern is not near:
And that thou have no trippinge trull to mince it with the now
That thou mighst foot it unto her as nimble as a cow.
The glebie field, and clottrie glebe with mattocke thou must tame:
Yoke the wild neat, and with burdens of fother feed the same.
The river turns the to a toil, if that a rain do fall,
Thou must go learn to make a dam to save thy meade with all.
Now hark, and mark on my behalf what makes us to square.
I that did shine in silken suits and glitter in mine hair,
I that could make the wily shifts scotfre to live in pleasure:
I that in time, and out of time karoust it without measure:
Now me to feed on simple cheer it is a heavenly hap:
And swetely by the husshing brooks to take a snurting nap.
Not any there with way ward eyes for my good luck shall spyte me,
Or poison me through secret grudge or bitterly backbite me,
The innocents the country clownes when they see me unfit
Upturning cloddes, their harm is this, theill stand, and lawghe at it.
The carpintor does grudge and think thy state to be to good,
And that thou have to much of neat, or orchard, fruit and wood,
The sluggishe ore does wish to bear the caple for to draw:
I would wish all with good intent to use the art they know.
To Valla.
YT were but well that I should cum, that thou should writ to me
What winter now at Velia, what wether there mih bt be
At Salerne town: what country folk, and eke what kind of way.
For Musa the physician, told me this other day,
That Baiae was not now estemde as it was once in price.
They hate me there at Baiae of late in greuouse wise,
For that I use in winter time to bathe me in such baynes
As be not warmie like to theires, nor so aslake my pains.
The place is full of mertle tries: and many a holsom lake,
Of brimston, good to cure the gowte, of truth I did forsake.
All Baiae murne, and grudge to see the sickmen, and the sore,
How each does bathe him self else where, and comes there no more.
The place is chaungd, y^ Innes are chaungde the horses they go by,
And no man now to Cumae, or to Baiae does hye.
The people they do shun the town, the horses must obey,
Guyded by twyning of the bitt unto their masters pay.
I pray you also write to me the nature of that ground,
Or this, or that, to feed the flock more plentiful is found.
If that their water in the poules and cesternes closely stand:
Or if it sweetly bubble through the silver channeld sand.
As for the wynes that you have there I force not on them I
How s'euer it be in country town I love it by and by.
But when I cum to seadyke side then do I hope to drink
Lively, and myldlie rellesde wynes, wine that will wake one think
Of cherie things, and that will flushe into my mind, and veins,
Assuringe me, that I shall be a man of ample gains.
Wine that will make me speak in tune, to prattle with a grace,
Wine that will make my param our esprysed on my face.
Of hairs, and bores write unto me, which soil has better store,
Of sea fish, and of dainty fish which country has the more.
That I may cum brawne fed from thence: This write thou unto me:
So meet it is, as also meet that I should cum to the.
When as with spence of parents gods Sir Meui once began,
Among lusty laddes for to be cawld a jolly gentleman:
The wandering varlet that knew not often times where he should go
Undynde, and had not wit to know his true friend from his foe,
Cunning to speak all kind of speech against all kind of men,
Th'vndoer tempest, and the hell of all the shambles then,
What s'euer he could get, or scrape his appetyte to staunche
He gau e it all to gratify, his gredie gutted paunche.
When from his wicked dasterde mates he could but littel wype,
Then like an horse he would deuowre a chitterling, or trype,
And as a man half mortified, of god he would desire,
That all the glottons wastefull wombes were brent with flaminge fire.
When he had got sum greater pray, and turnde it all to dust,
I maruaiie not (by God) qu^th he If many men do lust
To eat good things, what thing is like amorsell of good meat:
The Turtle, and a piece of souse, no better thing to eat.
Such one am I, things small and safe mine use is for to praise.
In ebb of wealth, against the ebb my courage stern does paise.
In dainty flow of happy tide I think you only wise,
To bathe in bliss above the rest and live in cyuill guyse,
Which have the fermes, and manners fair, with goulde the pragged purse,
Rents and revenues standinge firm. at all times to disburse.
To Quintius.
QVintye in that thine often demand make thou no further suite,
If that my ground feed me with corn or with the olive fruit.
With aples, mede, or propping elmes that clad with vinetrees be,
The fashion of my feelde shall be at large set out to the.
Adioyninge hills, except they be with darkesum dale vndun:
But so that on the right side still does shine the rising son:
Or left side the de clining son that does the fie ldes surview:
The temprature is laudable: Naie, what if this be true?
The oak trees aid the herd with maste the herdes man with much shade.
Well might thou say that fresh Tarent were broug ht into this stounde?
The well m ay well becalde a stream that spr ingeth in my grouude.
Hebrus that meteth Thracia, coulder nor purer is
To cure the head, to cure the womb it runs holsom, this
The dulcet dues in September, if thou dare credit me,
Make me to cum against winter still so healthful unto the.
Thou lyuest well, if thou will seek for to fulfill thy fame.
At Rome we all have given to the of blessedness the name.
I fear it thoe, thou do believe more others then thy self,
And put not in wysedom bliss, but in sum baggage pelf.
If many say thy sickly corpse to be at healthful stay,
To please those many thou will feast, and revel all the day:
Hyding thine ague, whilst it cum, and shake thy trembling arms:
Lewd shamefastnes of foles it is to hyde their propper harms.
If one should often record to the thy works by land and seas,
And by this language should assaye thine empty ears to please:
Great Jove knows not, in whose sole hands thou and thy city be,
If that thou love the people more and they love better the.
Can thou impropriate to the Augustus worthy praise?
Or will thou let them call thee wise reformde at al assayes?
Per friendship can thou answer to so burthenouse a name?
Both thou, and I, I think it so would gladly have the same.
He that gave these great names to me, and tytles now to day,
To morrow if it pleases him, may take the same away.
The people geues, and takes away, the case is very badd:
I lay them down, yet for my part I mean not to be sad.
If they should me dispoyle of fame, and burden me with theft,
And swear that I my parents life with rope had erste bereft:
Byte me with thousand infamies, should I my cheer estraunge?
False tytles please, false slanders fray, and many men do change:
Whom? none but liars and the lewd. who is, a goodman? who?
He that can keep the fathers laws, their acts, and statutes to.
Who does abridge long suite, and stryfes that cum into his hand:
And by whose suertiship, contractes in perfect state do stand.
But what if all the house, and street do know him full of sin,
Fair hewde without, observing laws, and filthy foul within?
I have not stolen nor run away a servant says to me.
He is not bette (what would he more) not beatinge is his fee.
I have not slain: thy hanged flesh the ravens shall not fat,
I am thrifie, a good husband: his master grauntes not that.
"The crafty wolf suspectes the trappe, the gosshawke fears the snayre,
"The puttocke from the bayted hook, her knabling neb will spare.
"The good hate vice for that they love virtue with all their heart.
"The wicked they hate wickedness, for fear of further smarte.
In case thou walk pretensedly, and thereby hope to gain,
Thou shalt becum for to confound things holly, and prophaine.
If thou pur loynst one met from out a thousand met of beans,
My loss is less, thy fact not less in this thy filchinge means.
An Ipocryte whom all the world for holly life admyres,
When he does offer ox, or hog, in sacrifieing fyers,
He speaks t'Appollo, and Ianus that all men may it hear:
But muttreth in his mumbling lips an other kind of gear.
Lauerna Dame of treachery with craft inspyre thou me,
That I may seame an vprighte man, an holy one to be:
Beduske my fraud with clouds, my sins Induce on them a night.
And let me seem to be in life a leminge lamp of light.
What better is the couetouse, what then a slave more free?
He for a dodkin that will ducke, In faith I do not se.
He that will covet greedely, he that will be afraid:
That such an one is fre in deed, no man shall me persuade.
His arms are lost, he has forsook of manlines the stounde.
Who hasting to advance him self is daunted to the ground*
Couetus If one may sell his prisoner, what wise man would him slay*
He may do service very good, that may he by my fay.
He may plowe, sail, and winter to amid the salt sea foam:
He may bear out, bring into us, provide for things at home.

Wise Man The goodman, and the man that's wis^ is ever boulde to say,

Governor Penthus thou governor of Thebes, what do thou on me lay?
What shall I bear unworthily? I Will take thy goods from the

Wise Man What gods? my substance, silver, beds? take al those goods to
the.

Gouerner With gyues, and fetters I Will tame the under a galow dyre

Wise Man But god (I hope) will reskewe me, at mine instant desyer.
Perceauinge this, death on my back, straight forth the tyrant bringes:
That is his worst: death is the last and utter line of things.

To Saeua
Though Seua) thou art wise enoughe* and by thy self can tell
In every kind of coortesie to use thy betters well,
Yet further learn the judgment of a very friend of thine,
As if the blind to him that sees his footestep should assign:
Yet mark it thoo if thou can cull owght from these words, I say,
That thou may take unto thy self, and after bear away.
If grateful ease, if profounde fle^e, be such things, as do please the,
If crackling carts, if tauernes no yse, if stiffling dust disease the:
Avoid the town, and go abroad: Not he does live the best,
That has the most. In city sure is not the joyful rest:
Nor he lives ill that often times semes to live but base, and vile.
A much poor man does live often best, and does the world begyle.
If thou would seek to pleasure thine, and well thy self demean,
Wait on an inche upon the churl, attire thee neat, and clean.
Not Cynicus (quod Aristip,) with colewoorts need have dynde,
If he him self a seruitor to princes had resynde.
Not Aristip (quod Cynicus) himself would had resynde
A seruitor to princes, if with worts he could have dynde.
Which of these twain has better spoke? or tell, or learn of me.
I would judge Aristippus taunte the better for to be.
For he the sharp Diogenes deryded in his kind:
Thou art (quod he) a common cokes, I to my self do find
Good pastime to, the better mine and eke more noble glee:
I play my part to ride alofte that kings may pamper me.
Thou asks vile things, and art much worse then he that to the gave,
Though thou pretend to stand no neade at any man to crave.
All huie, all state, all kind of life did Aristip besette.
Seekinge the best, yet well appaied with that, which he could get.
Again, wise meek Diogenes much would I marvel I,
If he to sum civility himself could now apply.
Not Aristippu would desire in purple to be cladd:
In all places he gladly ware apparel good, or bad:
And could each kind of personage so gaily on him take:
The Cynecke hates a purple weed warse then a dog or snake
Or he would wear a suite of silk, the winter should him kill:
Well give him cloth, and let the fool go like a Cockescome still.
To conquer Realms, and at the Carre the Captynes for to to lead,
Does touch Jove's throne, an heavenly thing a lofty praise in deed.
To please those in authority, is not the meanest praise:
Not each man's chance, to Corinthe town to sail the moystie ways.
Sum will not mell, distrustinge how their service should take place:
And is it not a manly act to get the princes grace?
Or such, or none in these our days do bear away the bell,
"Sum feel their own unableness, and do abhor to mel
"With burdens toto ponderouse, to heuie for their back.
"An other undertakes all things and of himself does crack.
"But if that virtue be a thing, and not an idle name,
"Experience deserves the branch the prince of all the game.
"Those that speak least of poverty, in talking with the king,
"Often times speed best, and all day seen* the more away do bring,
"Gettinge and catching differ much, to get and get no shame,
That is the head of our good hap, the fountain of our fame.
My Sister has no dowre at all my mother lackes her meat,
My land is naught for to be soulde, Nor good to keep my neat:
This is an open beggerie: An other he does crack,
If he had where to do with all no friend of his should lack.
If that the Crow could feed in whishte* not creake nor make ado,
She might have better cheer by much* less grudge and brabling too.
Per company thou rydest abroad to Brunduis, or Tarente,
Of craggie way, of storms, or could he that does him repent:
He that for pain, or damagies, or feigned lossies wailes,
Is like the strumpats impudent, talkde of in poetts tales.
Who morn so often for want of chains, for want of fair attire,
That none at length will trust there tears, when they would most desire.
That cripple that does often delude, (when his dyceite is spyed)
Must go on foot, whom many me^ did suffer for to ride.
Though he should vaper into tears, and swear upon the same:
Trust me in sadness, take me up, have pity on the lame.
His neighbors all will cry at once: sum costomer else crave
To speed your turn: we know your need, we know you for a knave.
To Lollius
FRancke Lollio if I know the well. thou will be much afraid,
Professing the a friend, to play the ribbalde at a brade.
The minion, and the matrone chaste do differ: (that is true)
Faythles ribbalde, and faithful friend, be things of diverse hew.
This vice has to his contrary, almost a greater vice,
Rude dumpishnes, unmannerly, offensive, and precyse:
Set forth with rugged, scraped hyde, and teethe, as black as geate.
Whilst it would seem a mere franchyse, instalde in virtues seat.
"Uirtue is mean, of vices twain, from both disseuerde plain.
An other is to prove, and priest, to play the slave for gain.
A ^ester at the meaner sort the ritchmans beck, or sound
He fears so, retreates his words, and helps them at rebounde:
As if to crewell scholemaster a child should lattin say,
As if a vice should counterfeate sum other in the play.
An other uses brablarie, for very gotish wol,
With tryfles ^encd, indede says he, or any man should pull
My name from me, or should me let to speak my conscience fre,
I would not live duke Nestors life, in such case for to be.
Caster, or Docill I may doubt, which can the better play.
And eke debate to Brunduis town which is the ready way,
Whom harmefull love, whom hurtful dyce have sodainelye made bare:
Whom pride, and pomp, above his state has trickde and trimmed fair:
Whom greedy thrist and knawinge pyne of silver, and of goulde:
Shunning, and shame of poverty who so that they do houlde:
Him hates the ritchman, that ritcheman, does hate him dedely sore,
That has himself of vices vile ten times more deadly store.
He hates him, or will keep him down, and like the godly dame,
Would have him wiser then him self, of more deserved fame.
And tells him to his own great shame a very lickly tale.
Uylan match not thy self with me my welthynes will quale,
And qualify my foolishnes, and with the same dispense.
Ha done compare no more with me, for why thou lackes the pence.
A narrow gown may him content, that is of humble wit.
Give fo^les the wealth, wiseme n the need for they can bear out it.
Eutrapelus his enemies to troble and annoye,
Would give them gallant gawdie gear, who flushde with pusant joy,
Would take new hope, and new conceits with their new garments gaie*
Set more by whor edom then wedlock ^lepe all the lightsum day:
Lay money out to usury when it is rowsed thence,
Becum at length for to profess the noble art of fence.
And being flitted from his strength to impotence, and teene,
Is glad to drive the gardners jade, ourwhart the country grene.
"Search not to know the pryuie driftes, of any friend of thine.
"Keep counsel close, though thou best wrunge with hasty wrath, and wine.
"Commend not thine own practices, nor other men's disprayse.
When one would have the hunt abroad, thy poemes do not blase.
This ground of strife did Amphion, and Zethus twins deuyde,
Till Amphion of brotherhoode did lay his harp aside.
Yield the t'obbeye the easy rule, of him that is of might.
As often as thou shall leede a feelde, with nets a charged sight:
A sight of bangle eared hounds, rise thou, and lay adoune
Thy conference with bokishe muse and let the shrewe go frown,
That thou may feed yfeare, upon thy hardly purchasde pray.
For those of Rome a goodlye toil, good for thy name (I say)
For life, and limbs confortityue, for the in health the more
That do in course surpass the hounde, in strength excel the bore.
Who can then the more semelely thy manlike armoure weelde.
Often have thou wun with joy of prease at gamminges in the field.
A child, thou knewst both war, and camp, thou wanste thy spurs in Spain
With him that browght standerdes of Parths into their roumes again.
With him, who if that any thing vnconquerd be behind,
With pruice of the Roman rout^ to win it has assynde.
And least thou hyding of thy self excu^es should be found.
(How beit) I think thou dust attempt nothing but just and sound)
Sumtymes thou tryfles out thy time within thy fathers ground.
The O^e deuydes their bargies, and the water scrymage then
(Thou being guide) in foishe guyse is playde by youthely men.
Thy brother foe, the fludd at hand, the ^elde hard by the town,
You strive whilst that swift victory, one of the twain does crown.
If August knew that thou his war resemblest in thy play*
He would praise the with clapping hands friendly I dare well say.
Further for to admonish the (If thereof thou standst need)
"What, of what men, to whom thou speak^e, take ever earnest heed.
"A groper after novelties, in any wise do fly.
"I warrante the learn this of me the same's a very pie.
"Nor wide open ears the things of trust can well conceal at all,
And word once scapde, away its gone, and none can it recall.
The maid, or wife that does soiorne within thy neighbors door,
Let her not wound thine heart with love or thrill thine intralls sore.
Lest that the husband of the wife, and master of the maid,
Do turn thy hoped joy to pain, and make the ill appaide.
"Beware, take heed, take heed, bewayre whom thou for good do name,
"Lest happily his misdeedes at length do shent thy face with shame.
Sumtimes we err, and do defend a much unworthy man:
The guilty party once deceaud defend no further then.
"Speak for thy friend, thy long known friend, if slander him assaye:
"And bear, and boulster out the good which on thine aid does stay.
"For if with Theons venom tothe all g^awde about be he,
"The hasserdes that are coming next will cum most nere to the.
"The case is thine, thy neighbors house when it does flame up bright,
"And burninges thowght but small, or now have grown to dreedful might.
Then whilst thy ship does keep a flote ydauncinge on the plain,
Take heed lest sudden change of wind do bear the back again.
Sad nature, hates the pleasant head, the pleasant head the sad:
"The swift likewise do hate the slow, the slow the swift to bad.
"The tiplinge sottes at midnight which to quaffe carowse do use,
"Will hate the if at any time to pledge them thou refuse.
Though thou do swear, that thou do fear the rumes that cum by night.
Be perte, and clear in countinaunce not malipert, and light.
Sumetimes the sober man is thought the most dunce in the town:
"And he that locketh up his lips is taken for a clown.
Chifely confer with learned men, peruse each lettred book:
That how to live a quiet life thou may consult, and look,
Lest pore, and nedie couetyse do ever make the itche:
Or dread or hope of things that make a man but manelie ritche.
If virtue spring by litterature, or else by natures gift,
What quenches care, what can the bring to constancy, and thrifte?
What makes full contentacion? honor, or dulcet wealth,
Or secret trade, or pryuat life, which stalks away by stealth,
O Lolly friend, what do I think, what thinks thou? do I say
When I of any ioyllie joy or pleasure do assaye:
God grant that I this kind of life, though sumwhat wurse may find:
(If of my life the gods will have remayninge sum behind)
God send me once my commons clear, of Books abundaunt store:
This is enoughe to pray to god that geues and takes away,
God give me life, and wealth and I will set my life at stay.
To Mecaenas.
MEcaenas if thou dare believe thine ancient friend Cr^tyne,
No kind of verse can long be lykd^ that was not write in wine.
Bacchus does make the poets rave, like woddishe gods, and wild:
In dawne of day have smelt of wy^ the maiden musies mylde.
Dan Homer for that he so much in praise of Bacchus could,
Is proud to be a friend of wine: yea Ennius the oulde
Did never prease to puff abroad the feats of battle fine,
Except he were first whitled well and warmed through with win
To thrifty men that had not druncke grave matters he did leave:
The sober sort of poetry he did forsothe bereave.
Ennie said this, they did not miss but practysde it full well,
All night to sprall and strive with wine, all day on it to smell.
But what though one with face austere, with naked feet, and bayre,
Should Cato counterfeate, and in his gallows roundedhayre,
Soould he be like to Catos self in life and virtue then?
He brast him self, that would be thought equal to Timagen
In gesture, voice, and eloquence. Sum follow so precyse
A learned man, that oftentimes they imitate his vice.
If I should say at certain times I used for to be wann,
Sum would wax pale with slibber sauce* sum imitating man.
O imitators seruyle beasts how have your tumultes vile
Full oftens rasde my collor up, and oftens made me mile.
I ever set my fotestepps fre, princelike where none had gone,
But others grounds I have not vsd^ to press my foot* upon,
Who has courage, and confidence shall rule an hooste the best.
Th 'Iambiquae verse to Italye I shewde before the rest. Licambes hanged
himself for grief conceived through Iambick verses written a against him.

Archilocus his rymes and (...) I followde at an inche:
Those words, and matter that so sore Licambes once did pinche.
And least you should my poets head with lesser leaves adorn,
For that I fear the measure, and his art of verse to turn:
The mannishe Sappho, and Alcaeus temper the same man's muse
In other feet: this drifte, and soune they both two ine did refuse.
Alceus seeks no stepfather whom he with verse may black,
Nor does not make with railing ryme his spouse her ne cke to crack.
I, the romish musicion set forth to lattin land,
This author, namde in no man's mouth, nor borne in any hand.
It does me good to hear hi m bring things never brought before,
To see him red with ientle eyes in each man's hand ybore.
If thou will know why in him self, the reader much unkind
Allows my works, and yet abroad does blemishe in them find:
I seek not for the fletinge voice of foolke, with making cheer,
By suppers, or to get the same, by dole of castinge year.
Not I that read the noble books, can so becum the lowte,
To crave grace at the grammar trybes in pewes to seek them out.
Hence cum these tears, this mortal spyte they have against my verse:
I am ashamed on pompose stage (say I) for to rehearse
My wrytings, (wrytings nothing worth) to seem to add a weight
To tryflinge things, and things in deed of very slender slight.
Tushe man, says one, you mean to keep your tricksie, dainty gear,
To exhibit for worthiness to Jove's good graces ear.
Fair to thy self, thou do suspecte al other to be sower:
And thinks thy self the hunnie suck of poemes to out power.
Reply do I, the judgment sharp of curious wits I fear,
And that they should for very spyte my penned poems tear.
"The Theator I cannot like I cry, and ask delaie.
"Feign would I not begin at al so perillouse a play.
"For play ingenders tremlinge strife, and strife outraginge ire:
"Owtraging ire, fell spyteful life, it, deathlyke battle dyre.
The second Book of Q. H. Flaccus his Epistles.
To Augustus
SInce thou sustaines such business and so much bringste abowte,
Defends the Itale realm with arms, with manors sets it out,
Reformes with laws: I should but do the common wealth much wrong,
If I should stay thy well spente time, Caesar, with talking long.
Both Romulus, and God Bacchus, Pollux, and Caster to
For valiante feats of chivalry Saints shryned long ago,
Whilst they made their abode on earth Emongste us mortal men,
Stayde wars, built towns, and laid out fields, they much compleined then,
That honor such so plawsible, did not ensew their acts,
As they did think they had deserud by merits and their factes.
Hercules He that did crowse, and culpon once Hydra of hellish spyte,
And monsters known with fatal toil to fetters frusshed quyte,
Perceaud this by experience, that Monsters all do fall
Through manlines: envy is tamde at death, or not at all.
He burns the most with very blase, that all things brings to pass
With skill, and none loves him, till he be lapde in leaden mass.
Auguste, to the now present here, we present honors due,
And alters make to thy great name, by that name we swear true,
That any thing in any place was never like to the:
And dare aver, and well auouche that never none shall be.
The romish people wise in this, in this point only just
Before the Greeks, and Roman guydes prefer the as they must.
In this case doumes men very good, in that they judge of the:
In other things me thinks they seem not so upright to be.
Hating, and lothinge all such works, as lewd, and full of crimes,
Which were not fetchde from foreign lands, or pende in all their times.
Such fawters of antiquitye that tables made be men,
Devised and auctorished by well known Romans ten,
The stories, and the iestes of kings reiestred long before,
Relegiouse books, and Cronicles, by prophets writ of yore:
These works they say the musies once in Albane mount did tell.
Needs must they cum from mouth of muse, for they so much excel.
The works of Greeks as they be old so if they be the best,
So let us judge of Roman works and then is all at rest.
Then chawke is cheese, and night is day plain speaking is to stut,
Within the Olyue nowght is hard, nowght hard without the nut:
We then have taken up our stand, and cum to fortunes tip.
But since we paint, and singe as well wrestle as well. and skipp
As does the Grecians pickd for nonce, as good in any game.
Why should we then in poetry distrust t'attayne the same?
If time do make men's poems good as it does make good wine,
Then would I know how many years a poet do assyne.
The writer that departed hence an hundred years ago,
Emongst the poets new, or old, where shall we place him (lo?)
Mongste good, or bad: In sadness now to exclude all brabling mood,
How many winters do you wene will make a poet good.
H'is old, and good that has been dead an hundredth years complete.
And he that lackes a year, or monthe where shall he have his seat?
Emongst the poets ancient, whom all men do approve:
Or mongste that trybe which we reject, and never age shall love?
He takes his place amongst the old the case is very clear,
If he cum short of his accoumpt but one monthe, or one year.
I take it thus Our Rome says to that one year breeds no square.
Then like as one from horses tail should twitche out heaire by heaire,
I take out one, and then one year subtracting one, by one
Whilste he deceaude shall well perceive the hundred to be gone:
Who going to his cronicles does judge all rymes by time,
And ercepte death has hallowed it allows no kind of ryme.
Ennie wise, strong, and as he thought an other Homere he,
Of the which dome concerning him (yet diverse other be)
Could not perform his promis tho like Homere to indyte
Though he wend he had Homers soul and even as well could write.
Neuie he is not in our hands his want does vex our mind,
So sacred be the poets oulde and Rome to them sokynde.
If it be askd who was the best: Pacuuius does bear
The bell for lore, and Actius does sound his thumpinge gear:
To Menander the Commicke gown of Afphranus was fit.
Plautus the swifte deliver style of Epicarme did hit.
Cecilius in gravity, Terence in art does pass.
Those Rome does cun, those mighty Rome does crowde thick in compass
Of Theater, does gaze on those to Poets those be mounted.
And all from Liuie to our time be perfect poets counted.
The people sumtymes see a truth, sumtymes are ouersene.
If they so praise these Poets, which in alder time have been,
If they make them A per se Aes that none are like to them:
The people then is misconceaude, such vmpers I condemn.
If they do think that old men write sum hard, sum out of use,
Sum slowthfully, and lowslie to, and do not them excuse,
Wise is that folk, and of my mind and judges uprightly,
I do not blame, nor have not wishte that Liuies verse should dye,
Which crewell, sharp, Orbilius did teach to me a child.
How they I marvel seem so trim, such majesty to bear,
That they to principale good stuff approchinge on so near
Mongste which if one well vttred word have glimpsed at a shine:
Or if there be a verse or twain that seems sumwhat fine:
Uniustlie they presume the hole to be sum preciouse thing,
And dare unto the Stationer as sailable it bring.
I think not much that things are carpde comde from a blockyshe pate,
But that those things are counted worse which were commencde of late.
The license of the ancients I never mente to crave:
There honors and their good rewards I would be glad to have.
If Attaies interlude were good (in case if I should doubt)
For that it spoke of tryfling toys, certes a shameless lowte
Our seniors would blame me al, for that I would amend
Those things, which Esopus the grave and learned Rossie pende.
Or that they think nothing is good that is not to their pay,
Or that to their inferioures they think shame to obey.
And that they think it now a shame to leave their wilsom ways,
Which these have berdles learned once, and in their youthful days.
He that can praise the Anthymmes of king Numa, though that he
Be like my self, yet needs must he of greater judgment be.
He cannot he delight himself in those which dyed of late.
Us eeke, and ours he pincheth at, both deadly he does hate.
If nouel works had been of greeks accounted of so could
As now of us, where now had been these works, which we call oulde?
Or what thing public had there been written, and extante then
Which might be red, and fly abroad amongst the hands of men?
As soon as Greece abandonde war, and began to fall to toys,
(As done those folk which gin to taste at ease of fortunes joys)
Now to horses, now to wrasslings attentyue much it was,
To view strange workmanship in stone in Iuorye, and brass.
Hangde up their lyuelie phisnomies in tables dighted gaie:
Sumtimes did joy in melody, sumtimes in tragique play:
Like as the infant under nurse cries still to have the teate,
And afterward at ryper age does leave her loved meat:
So chaungde thegrekes. For what O Jove is so novel, and strange,
But mind of man still discontent would see a further change
"Things sweat or sower still change by chance and vary from their kinds,
"So changes goulden peace to war so change the luckie wyndes.
"Long was it pleasant unto Rome, a solemn use to wake,
And in thine open house early great busy pains to take:
To gene their Clientes solemn reed and firmly to fore cast
How that their money well bestowde might multiple at last.
To hear their betters teach the worse, by honest trade to gain:
And to extinguishe hurtful lust the parent of much pain.
The fickle folk have changde their mind, each man is burning hot
To be a startevp writer straighte in that a lone, aflote.
The young, the old of grauer wits at supper have with baye
Their pendaunte locks encompasde round and verses they outlay.
Yea I my self that use to say I write no kind of ryme:
Am found more lyinge then the Parthes: and do call for betime
Ere son be up, my trinckets al, my paper, deske, and quill.
He is a fraide to rule the ship that can rule her but ill:
None dare make boulde to minister. unto his patiente
Woormewoode, except he know the thing, and know to what intent.
Physicians with their own art will only have to do:
The blacksmith he with shop and styth does mel, and look unto.
Learnde, and vnlearnde we poemes pen on all hands in each place.
Our error tho, and small frenzy what great virtues, and grace,
It has, consider this with me: the poets fixed mind
Is commonly not couetouse, nor rauishd from his kind.
Uerses he loves, them only plyes his losses, (as the guyle
Of servants vile his house is brent) at those he does but smyle.
No fraud he means to his friend, to Orphaines infants none.
He can diet with grudginge bread, and pe asecoddes all alone.
Good in cittye, though he be but a milksop in the war:
If you grant this that great affairs by small things helped are:
The tender stammering mouth of boys the poet frames by pain:
At the same times from language lewd their ears he does restrain.
Straight he instructs their breasts with rules, as frindly as may be,
Of dumpishnes, envy, and ire a sharp controwler he.
He shows to spend the time to cum by samples past before.
He does reiesture acts well dun, comforts the sick, and pore.
How should young virginnes, and small boys have known how they might pray,
Except the muse had poets rasde to teach them what to say.
The queare thus taught craves help from heaven and feels it cum with all.
This fair, speachde queare through learned prayer waters from high does call.
Turns back diseases, dryues away all dangers full of fear.
Obteineth peace, of corn and grain a much abundaunte year.
The gods above are calmd with verse, with verse the hagges of hell.
The fermers oulde, strong with a small, that led their lives so well,
Their haruist done refreshde their corpse. On hollie days with cheer,
And mind with sport, which such hard hap for better hope did bear.
With wife, babes, servant, to Tellus did sacryfice a swyne,
And to Syluanus offered milk a sacryfice deuyne.
To Genius that makes men mind the shortness of their days,
They sacryficed flowers, and wine and lo by such like ways,
Came first the fraunchyse Fessentine, the rude uncivil sort, Fessentine
liberty, by the which on certain testinat days poets might talk their
pleasure on any man.

Did rail at will in rural ryme through fredom of the sport.
And this license through many years in pleasant plight did stay,
Whilst to a very open rage was turnde the hasty play.
This rage right honest families assailde, and was not blamde,
Whilst honest men took it in snuff to see them selves defamde.
And those that were not blemishde yet in general did fear
To what end might proceed at length this saucy tauntinge gear.
A law was made, and penalty annexed to the same:
For very rygor, of the law they tornde their former trade:
Fair woorded rymes to please the ear began then for to be made.
The conquered Greece, her victor Rome with poemes did delight,
And brought arts into Italy, a realm uncivil quyte.
So vanished Saturnes piuishe rythmes which he before had taught,
And better speech, the clottred clotte of duncerie brought to nowght.
Yet many a winter after that, Did base speech with us stay,
And left among us sum foot steps yet remainyng to this day.
For Rome to greakish writings laid her ear but now of late,
And being after Punicke wars in calm, and quiet state,
Began then first to make the search, and partly for to sin ell
What Eschill, Thespis, Sophocles, had put in writing well*
If worthily they could translate then gave they first assay,
Hawtie, and sharp by nature they and for their proper pay,
They breathe thing tragical enough and luckily are boulde:
But they fear blemishe in their work, and no such shame they would.
A commodie is thought to be a thing of lesser pain,
Becawse out of our daily deeds the most thereof is tayne.
A commodie is so much more of great, and weighty charge,

Commodie. Because her liberty is strayte, at least not very large.
Behold Plautus how he sets out, by what apparaunte art
The beardles lover, heedfull syer, and crafty Lenos part.
Dorsen in paintinge parisits bestows all his vain:
Right dessolute in all the rest, as one that takes no pain,
If he may cofer up the coin or hent it once in hand,
Gramercye let his commodity or settle down, or stand.
He that for brute, and wyndlik fame does bring to stage a play,
Him many hearers will make proud, small number will dismaye.
So small it is, so light it is, that makes the gloriouse mind,
That huffes it up, and puffes it down most chaungeable by kind.
Both commodies, and Tragidies, Fair well say I, if that
The peoples evil voice make me lean, or good voice make me fat.
These two does much exanimate, and strykes the heart full could,
And makes those poets much ashamde, that ought most to be bold,
That often the greater company, in virtue few, and base,
Untaught blockheads, braineles, ere while at buffits for their place,
Though all our nobles like it well in midst of all the play,
To bear ebaytinges, or prick playings, our Rudesbies must away.
Yea now our nobles do at length their ears from toys restrain:
Yet flote their eyes, and head of toys which be but very vain.
They can sustain four hours to see our stagies bravely dight,
Of horsemen tropes, of footmen ranckes, how they are put to flight:
Straight, captive kings are haild in sight with pinnyand arms behind:
The wagon, coche, horselitter, Barge, to follow are assinde:
The captive booties must be seen, all things to please the eye:
To hear a learned commodie we weary by, and by.
Democritus if he were here where he was wunt to be,
He would I warrante laugh a pace, and make a noble glee,
If that the white strange Elephante, or yet the Camel can
Reteyne the people attentive, and make so many scan,
A gawishe sort gredie to gase not gredie to be tawght:
At whom more then at any vice a wiseman would have lawght.
What so is told amongst the^e flock so as it cumes to pass,
As fruitfullie a man might tell a tale unto an ass.
What noise, or noyses to this noise, comparable in sound?
So stern it is, so shrill it is when the echo does rebounde
The rore of wooddes, the rore of seas thou would think to hear:
Such rule, and ruffle make the rowte that cum to see our gear.
Deuyses, pagaunts, vestures strange with which the players dressed,
The people having hard no word to clap their hands are pressed.
Masters why lawgh you so (says one) what did the players say?
Nowght yet (says one) we lawgh to se the goodly garments gay,
The coollor clear, the noble dye upon that purple gown:
Most like unto the purple hue which cums fro Tarent town.
Lest thou should think that I disprayse the thing which I do make
Because it is a kind of charge which other undertake:
That poet on a stretched rope may walk and never fall,
That can stere up my passions, or quick my sprytes at all.
Stere me, chere me, or with false fears of bugges fill up my breast,
At Athens now, and now at Thebes, by charminge make me rest.
Concerning us which study not to serve the staringe stage,
But write, which the posterity may reed from age to age.
If thou do mean to have us pen sum clercklie work in deed,
Worthy Sir Phebe, and to put out our books with better speed,
Cut of the carke that nippes our heart, (a work of passing meede)
That poets with more fervent mind then commonly is seen
May viset often the musies nine, and Helicon the green.
We poets do annoy our selves by many kind of ways:
When I (as cutting down, my vines) mine own works do dispraise.
Or when that thou art cloyde with book, (Like noddies, as we be)
We hurt our selves without respect, in geuinge books to the.
Or if sum friend do reprehende but one word of our vearse,
The hurt is ours that we becum so biting, and so fearse.
When we do say, and oftens say our rymes which none would hear:
When we take thought, becawse our toil to no man does appear,
Which we susteynde in making of our poems fresh and fine,
By drawi^ge them so featly forth, and with so clean a twyne.
Or when we think our matter needs to such an end must grow:
That, when, how we deuisers be, as soon, as thou shall know,
On thine own swinge thou will us call, and make on us with speed,
And cause us write, and work it so that we no more shall need.
It shall concern your honor to to have to write men's acts.
Retayners to the musies house, and famous for their facts.
To make their deeds in peace, and war in stately style to set:
Such deeds as to unworthy Clarks we ought not to commit.
To Alexander Cherilus was welcum at those times:
Who gave him crowns (a princely gift) for raggie rugged rymes.
But as black incke does blur, and does the paper fair defyle:
So good things handled of a fool do seem to be more vile.
The self same king so prodigal, that bowght his trashe so dear,
Made proclamacion to be made that no man any where,
Except Apelles should portraye, except Lysip in brass,
Should cast to counterfeyte his face, which of such courage was.
One painter passinge all the rest his mind was to have had:
One poet to, that poet was* Sir Cherilus the bad.
Though he were king and Conquered, he might be coumpted tho,
A very gowse to leave the good, and fee a lossell so.
But thy judgments which thou doste give will never work the shame,
And gifts which they had with much praise of the which gave the same.
Virgill I mean, and Varius thine own dear Darlings twain.
Thou have deserved well of lore, in quitinge of their pain.
Faces in brass are not set forth so lively in their kinds,
As by a poets workmanship men's manners, and their mindee
Are well discribde* and painted out. Its twyse so leeue to me,
To write a storye loftelie, and stowte worded to be.
As low to creep, and poorly peep: feign would I take in hand
To speak of lands, of hawtie towers, which on the rocks did stand.
Of saluage realms, of fowghten fields throughout the world so wide:
And now reduce to peace again thee only being guide:
The turrets that in peace keep close Ianus the towns watcheman*
And Rome so fearful to the Parthes thee being cheuetaine.
This would I write, if that my power could satisfye my will.
And true it is thy majesty a right great style would fill.
Its stands not with my shamefastnes to undertake the thing,
To bear that which my strength does shrink, and shame unto me bring.
To much a do does hurt him most, that mels with it the most:
Chiefly if he in toungues, and arts be rash to make his boste.
A man may sooner bear away and rather keep in mind
The thing deryded, then that is praise worthy in his kind.
That commendation force I not which does my merits pass:
As eke I would not have my face set out in wax or brass.
For evil invented poecie I would not have a name.
Lest praised so be yonte al home it chance me for to shame.
And lest my wrytings which I thought eternal brute shall have,
Upon one bear, as soon as I be carried to their grave.
I mean unto the mercers shoppes, where frncke incence is soulde,
And what soever spycerie in waste paper is roulde.

To Julius Florus
FLorus, thou inteyre, faithful frinde to virtuous Nero,
If one sell the a stranger boy, and say unto the, (lo)
This fair skinde boy, for such a Sum If thou will shall be thine,
A servant at his masters beck tydie, prompte, priest and fine.
Well trainde in greek, fit for all art^ and one that will in space,
Trim imitate, and counterfeyte each countynuaunce with grace.
He can singe, though not cunninglye Yet sweetlye at a table:
Much words, and cracks do make I know* ones credit seem less able.
When one setts out his wares to much as pretiouse stoofe alone,
For that for ready down toulde coin he feign would have them gone,
Though I be pore, yet nothing shall compel me for to lie,
Cowpes man not one in all this town^ will use the thus as I.
Thou art not all, this will I say, (I speak it unto the)
This boy ran once for fear of whip, and na but once from me.
Bye him, oneles thou doste mistru^ that he should run away.
A man his coin in such a case with small distruste might pay:
Thou boughts me knowinge all my faults, my nature toulde before,
Yet will thou have to do with me and troubleste me right sore.
At our last partinge, what I was I toulde the plainelye than,
For such office most impotente, a lame, unable man.
And that thou shouldste not take me up with visage sad and glum,
Although no letter unto the from me at all did cum:
What vaylde it me? If thou wouldste look^ upon the laws again,
And see how they do make for me thou would not thus complain,
Because I have not writ to the, False of my word say thou:
The law will way with me in this I told theeth is, or now.
Lucullus had a souldior, who with war much weryed than,
His voyage wayges being paid all craftye, as he can
Whilste snorting like a very hog the foretoylede did groyne,
A pridgeman from him pryuilie his money did purloyne.
Then like a woolfe most vehemente against him, and his foo
Incensd, with fellon fasting face he flings, and fayreth so,
The coun^ter Captains standerd straighte he swayed to the ground.
Guarded about with force of men, Enuyrounde thikeand round.
Renoumed for this valiaunce in ample recompense
They gave him twenty sextersies to keep his port, and spence.
The praetor then (I woote not why) began t'assayle a forte.
And lookinge for much good at him spoke to him in such soorte,
As would have moved a very sheep: Go lustye lad, ((...) he)
Prease on with luckie foot to where thy pruice calls the.
Famous shall be thy ritche reward: march on why doste thou stay.
To whom the soldier quiet now demuerlye did say.
Drad Sir a very daster lowte will suffer pain and pyne:
But then when he is spoylde of all as I was erste of mine.
Rome was my norse, and scholemaistres, and in her was I taught
What damagemente the Troiane rowt^ by dyre Achilles ^awghte.
Athens she me instructed so that sciences I knew,
And that wisely I could decerne the false thing from the true.
In Platos schole the moral lore I began to learn a pace
Whylst troublouse times, and hasserds hard distrurbd me from that place.
The civil heat then me vntraynde did animate to war,
Wars wh^h to match, with our August unable were by far.
Thence lighted I in Thessalie of feathers then deplumde,
I browght full low my house, and lands, and all I had consumde.
Bold poverty made me sterte up, to versefie, and ryme:
My verses need not to be fande, or scumd at any time.
Except I would dispyse the art, and dissolutelye think,
That it is worse to versefie then is to swill, or drink.
Howbeit my wit, which I have had begins for to decay,
And each year plucks away from me as it does pass away.
My games, my iestes, my lusts, my feasts, from me they made to go,
And now would steal my poems to. what wouldste thou I should do?
Concerning kinds of vearse, not all delight in any one.
Thou louiste the common verse, and he Iambique verse alone.
Sum lykes Satyrs, and thwartinge speech: I have three at my board,
Not one of them bowte any thing with the other will accord.
Each one from other straunged so that diversely theye choose.
What should I writ? or what not write? He biddes, thou doste refuse.
That which thou craves, and doste always take in the better part,
That other do mislike, and think it, toto harshe, and tarte.
Again, thinckes thou that I at Rome my vearses can indyte
Among so much toil, and such a coil, such soking carke, and spyte.
He calls me for a se wertye, an other for to hear,
(All other business set a part) his new devised gear.
He lies on mount Quirine, and he yont Auentine does lie.
A sunder far, yet to them both to see them both must I.
Thou seeste the gay commodities we silly students get.
No thing does want, nor streate, nor talk^ our studies for to let.
The horse, the carts, the merchantes tou^gues, a clattringe noise of bells,
Now crosbow shot, or peale of gunnes our glass wyndors down fells.
Skrykyng, howlyng at funerals, the bawlinge masties cry:
The hoggs yell out, heers noble stuff, let him go now apply
His shrill tunes, sonets, that does think this place to be so good.
The bookish crew did ever yet delight, to haunte the woodde,
Right Bacchus Clyents, like to him, they hayte to haunte the town,
And under solytarye shade to rest, and lie them down.
Mongste hurly burlye, night, and day wouldste thou have me to sing?
To tread in Poets narrow trace? If Athens could not bring
To sum with seven years hard study great plenty of her ^ore,
Though theye waxte old with book, and car^, Yet block heads, as before
Depart they home with shame enough: I that am dwelling here
Midste wrastlinge waves, and rou^inge (...); of all this busy gere,
Can I in case so cummero^se, in such turmoylinge times,
Find in mine heart to tune with harp^ my iarringe Lyricke rymes.
I knew too Orators at Rome the one was to the other,
In mutual praise for both their gaynes a fast ytrothed brother.
These frantic knackes have Poets to I wis I know it well:
I write Lyricks, he Elegies both woorks say we excel:
Both works becum the musies nine, behold with what a pride,
And what a do we Poets walk, and look on every side.
Dog thou us once, and listen well, and eftsoon thou shalt hear
What goodlye fellows be we twain, why we the laurel wear.
He kills me with his bablarie, and I again him quell.
To Samnet soldiers feightinge ill. we are compared well.
I am Alceus by his doom: and what is he by mine?
What but Calimachus? if yet he would be more deuyne,
I call him great Mimermnus streighte, thus by our wished name
We yrow up both, (as I cast it) to be of flyinge fame.
I hear, and see, and say the best, and this law do I find
Easeful for me, least I stir v^ the waspish Poets kind.
And when my doing^ cum abroad, for good will that theye bear me,
Thaile praise it, be it good or bad, I need not for to fear me.
Evil versefyers mocked be, yet have they to their joy,
Whilste theye indite, and read their toys, most chearie, and most coy.
If thou sayste naught, they praise them selves like good ones as they be.
But if thou will good poems write this will I say to the:
As thou in lawful scanned vearse canste well descryue a thing:
So must thou to into thy mind good law, and virtue bring.
Thou must be bold to sever out words that be not of light,
Words of no weighte, and such as b^ not praise worthy in sight.
Though they do cleave unto thy ryme unwilling to depart,
If they be naught, though theye be vsd of Poets in their art.
Thou must abandon vnquoth words, and bring eeke into ure
Brighte, lightsum stuff, sounding, and grave, not simple, and demure.
Words used by the antique Dans, the fassions once did bear:
But now cast of for very elde, he must bring novel gear,
Which father use has bred, and taught pythie, and plain with all.
To rich his cuntry let his words like flowing water fall.
Cut of process, and sleake, and fyle thou, that which runs not round,
Pick, and cull out with heedefull skill what s'euer is not sound.
Each personage in his right Quue take heed that thou do frame,
In diverse parts the gestures, and the effects, are not the same.
Rather to me for to be thought a doulte, and dissard vile,
If that my follye might please me, or seem good for a while:
Then to be wise, and vexed ay: (as wysemen be most grieved.)
A man well known in Arge there was, who stedfastlye believed,
That he did hear brave melody, and see trim fellows play.
Thus fanseinge, on an empty stage he would laugh all a day.
In all points else an honest man unspotted in his life:
A good neighbor, a good fellow peaceable with his wife.
No brawler in his familye, nor angry for a crewse
Breakinge, no craft of man, or place could him in ought abuse.
When he by wealth, and frindly help recovered by, and by,
Had chasde away with herbs, and drinks his old melancolye,
And cominge to him self again, by God my frinds quod he)
By this your doing you save not but you have killed me.
From whom is gone, pleasure alone the like can no man find:
So pleasante dotage cut away by curing of my mind.
Certes its good for to be wise, and cast these toys away,
To leave unto the younger sort this riminge kind of play.
Not reulie to consume our days in music slight, and clean,
But truly to direct our ways in measure, and in mean.
This thing I oftens talk upon, and often I think of this.
If that no lickoure could assuage thy greedy thrust (I wis)
Thou wouldste tell the physician: the more that thou have got
The more thou wants, confess thy self of this so foul a spote.
If that with certain roots, and herbs thy wounds could well be dressed,
Would thou therefore to heal thy self neglect to do the best?
I said in deed that he was wise that had the coin in store.
But since thou have no more of wit though thou of wealth have more,
Why do thou use my counsel still* If riches make one wise,
Less fearful, gredie, or (for fiew) better in any wise,
This wot I well, and dare speak it thou would ashamed be,
That any man which is alive should leave them more then the.
If that be thine which thou have hyrde, or which thou have of oulde,
That is thine own which was to the but very lately soulde.
Thou bowghst the ground, and so it is that use has made it thine:
Thou boughst it with thy propper goods, what should I more defyne?
What skils it whether thou do liu^ by purse, or by thy field,
If for thy field though long ago thou moneie once did yield?
He that does think that goods, or lands can be his own for long,
A fool is he, a fonded fool and does himself but wrong.
He calls it his, because without controulment, he dare take it,
That thing which changes in one hour no man can stable make it.
That which does run from man to man in flitting fickle guyse,
By conquest, lot, by chop, or change, by prayer, and by prise.
No term of state does dure for ay, heirs cum on, one by one,
As gliding waves in swiftye streams are quickly cumd, and gone.
What proffits meadows, or else barnes, our pastures, and our parkes:
What all, wherefore so gredelie the moneie mucker carkes?
Pearls, stones, jewels, pictures with costelie kind of tainte,
Silver or silks so lively wroughte as hand of man can paynt?
Since death at length things great, and less does wipe away as clean
Successyuelie in such effect as they had never been.
Sum can not cum to have this gear, and sum men do not crave it:
And saying what it is and works, by all means shun to have it.
Why two brotherne, the one should set more by a quiet life,
Then Heroldes palms, and all his pomp preserved still by strife.
The other ritche does never think that he can have enoughe,
And therefore delueth, hagthe, and heuthe, by mooneshyne goes to ploughe.
God knows, that God, which in the stars has temperde each man's fate,
That nature God, which has so clean estraunged each man's state,
That all men differ by their deeds: But he is very sad
To see them evil, to see them good as merry and as glad.
I will take from my little heap, and sewer I will not snudge.
And as touching my successor, I fear not if he grudge.
Twixte prodigal and liberal, feign would I know of the
Twixt sparing, and the couetouse if difference none be.
It differs much to spend always, and spend at honest time:
Differs from both, to catch, and snatche with couetyse, and crime.
Best is, as children use, sumtymes to learn, sumtymes to play:
Sumtymes to get, of our gettinges sumtymes for to assaye.
Need, and an unclean house fro me let these two ills be gone:
Let wether hoyst, or sincke me down, the world shall find me one.
I row not full sail, as I would ever with wished wind,
Yet does the wether serve me so I cum not far behind.
In credit, wit, in virtue, wealth, in outward shape, and face
Behind the first, before the last, I keep the middle place.
Thou art not couetouse thou say, Be gone I like the well.
But did thou with the couetyce all other crimes expel?
Art thou without ambition deuoyde of vain desire,
Without all fear fantastical, and hasty, chafing ire?
Dreams, charms, iuglings witchcraftes, night booggs wunders of Thessallie,
Can thou contemn? the holly day with worship do thou plye?
Can thou forgive thy neighbors falt, art thou not more austere,
And crabde in conversation as oulde age draws nere?
Of al these thorns that prick man's mind, why pulles thou out but one?
If thou can not live as thou shouldste, from those that can, begone.
Ye worldlings, you that have enough, of meat, drink, and of play,
Surrender now, full time it is for you to cum away.
Lest even young folk saying you drink more then for you is meet
Do make of you mere mockinge stocks, and camp you with their feet.
Priscus Grammaticus de Satyra
Satyra est carmen acerbum, instrumentum mordax. etc.

A Satyr is a tarte, and carping kind of verse,
An instrument to pynche the prankes of men,
And for as much as pynching instruments do perce,
Y^lept it was full well a Satyr then.
A name of Arabique to it they gave:
For Satyr there does signifye a glaue,
Or Satyra, of Satyrus, the mossye rude,
Unciuile god: for those that will them write,
With taunting gyrds, and glikes, and gibes must vex the lewd,
Strain curtesy, ne recke of mortal spyte.
Shrouded in moss, not shrynkinge for a shower,
Deming of moss as of a regal bower.
Satyr of writhled waspyshe Saturn may be namde,
The Satyrist must be a waspe in mood,
Testie, and wroth with vice and hers, to see both blamde,
But courteous and friendly to the good.
As Saturn cuttes of time with equal sithe:
So this man cuttes down sin to coy, and blythe.
Or Satyra of Satur, the authors must be full
Of frostred art, infarst in balladse breast.
To teach the wordlings wit, whose witched brains are dull
The worst will pardie hearken to the best.
If that the Poet be not learnde in deed,
Much may the chatte, but few will mark his reed^.
Lusill, (I wene) was parent of this nipping ryme:
Next hudlinge Horace brave in Satyrs grace.
Thy praised Pamphlet (Persie) well detected crime,
Sir Iuuenall deserves the latter place.
The Satyrist loves Truth, none more then he,
An utter foe to fraud in each degree.
THE POET SPEAKS Reverently to his patron Maecenas, bitterly controlleth the
inconstancy of men, and their chaungeable affections, that none of them will
content him with his share: and herupon taking occasion ^e does bend a
great part of his artillarye against the covetous: whose ravenous and
insatiable doings, he does egerly deteste and abhor.

RIght drad Mecenas, what is the cause that none content abide
In trained trade, that whylome choice or chance to them affyed?
But loves, and lykes an others lote, and novel life pursues.
Still flotes and flyts from former fate, Ne brooks the same to use,
Th'unwyldye warryer waste with toil, with grouelyng elde for spente,
O makelesse marchaunte mumbleth he, O state with bliss Yblent*
The fearful merchant he again, When waltring wyndes amayne
With plunging puffes from Sothren cost, and hydiouse hissing rain
Torments the Sea, hoistes up the waves, that does surmounte the sail,
Saunce pere, does deem the souldyers guyse, for why, they tugge, they hayle,
They prease in plumpes on mortal iron, where eftesones either bayne
Is pressed: or gladsum trumpets clang does blase tryumphante gain.
The counsailer for Meede, or fee, that parles, and pledes the laws,
When at cocks crow, his gats are pushte with hastinge Clyentes paws,
Then happy farmer often, (says he, for thou in golden sleep
Art soust: of mout or suite vndreamde, of bar thou bears no keep.
The chubbyshe gnof that toils, and moyles, and delueth in the down,
If happlye he a suertie be, so sent for into town*
Who gapes, who gawes, who pores, who pries, who proggs his mate but he?
Perfaye (says he,) hers all things ryfe, these people blessed be.
The resydue that rests vnroulde, the remnaunte that remain
Of this new fanglde fickle flock, would pose and put to pains
The fabling Fabies tatling toungue: Fabie a common pratler.
to deskaunte and descriue
The route, and rabble all a row A draughte to long to drive,)
But that no tracte need trouble thee, nor ambage breed delay,
Hark well how I will coutche this gere. put case some god would say,
Your lykings all allowde shall be: and thou that erste in feilde
The maces keen, the grounded sword, the Tucke, the targe, the sheilde
Was wunte to wild, with passage moist shall cut the frothie plain,
A merye marchaunte shalt thou row. and thou that didste disdain
To live and lead the Lawyers life, shall mucker in the ground.
Be trudgging hence, your trades are turnde, why stand you still in stounde?
They will not tho, although they might accept this blisfulle boune.
Then what is the cause that Jove thus mockd may not condinglye soon
In irefull mode and dyre revenge engourge his puffed cheeks
Gaynste all this sort? and spreed no ear to them that hensforth seeks
And suies with pratlynge prayer to chop, and change their former plighte.
But lest some man should hold me in hand my tretys is to light,
To much with laughter interlasde, (albeit the gest er may
Harp on a soothe* else God for bid) and toys may keep and stay
Sumtimes the reeder very well, as those that teach in schools,
With buttred bread, or featusse knacks will lewre the little fools,
To learn a pace their A. B. C,) I will be at a point
With nyfles now. I Will turn the leaf, and waightye things disiointe.
The Churl that shreds y^ earth with share, and wreakes the yeeldynge lees,
The marryner that shaues the stream, and furrouse uncouth seas:
The Tauerner that falsethe oaths, and little reckes to lie,
The souldyer that does deal the battes, and makes his foes to fly,
They say the cause they travail thus, that thus they care and carke,
Is this: That when vnnimble age has refte them of their warke.
When ^umbling foot denies to meeue, when hand nil houlde, or hente,
That then they might suffisaunce have, lest easles need them shente.
Not much unlike the little Ant, (a beast of tydye toil)
Who draws, and dragges her delycates orewharte the hil^ie soil
By might of mouth in a l she may, and placed in her cell
She stickleth, and be stirs her self, She huswyfes it right well.
She carues it fine, and mings it thick and shroudes it under roof.
As one that of the wynters wrath Were not to learn the proof,
Ne yet to care for after clappes. Whereby when Ianyuere
That myrethe all the costs with slete and saddes the ginning year
With aspere shours, does cause the clouds and welken aye to weep,
Then Lady Pismyer stirrs no where, she is claspde in closset deep.
She keeps her Chrystenmasse in cave and there they make bone cheer:
They feed and feel the fruit of that, which once they got yfeare.
And wyselye to, but the (alas) no Phoebus flaminge brande,
Nor greuouse numming could that maks the chillyng senseless hand,
Nor fearful fire, that flusheth up and sumes to pitchye smoke:
Nor stormye seas, whose oppen jaws suppes up without all choke
The straglinge ships: nor weapon whet, Nor ought can the deter
From hunting after hurtful horde: for whilste some such there are,
That swim in wealth, and the surpass in rytches or in robes,
Thy glutton mind will never stay, still, still thy stomach crobbs.
What vayles it the so quakinglye to grubbe and grippe the moulde,
And there in hucker mucker hyde thy Idolle God thy goulde?
If that thou spend, and sparple it, no dodkin will abide*
The deuille may dance in crosslesse purse, when coin has took his tide.
And if thou snudge, and save it sound, and cofferte from the son,
What show then has thy hidden (...), what lust is therebye wonn?
Admit on flore thou haste in store an hundredth thousand mets
Of corn dehuskde: what cums thereby? thy belly houlds, nor getts
No more then mine: as if in case to feelde thou shouldeste fair
With scrippe on back, full freight with food^, and straighte, as thou cums
their,
The hungrye hunts must have it all: what makes thou by this match?
As much as he that carries naught, (certes a woorthye catch.)
Or else per frendshyp answer this: To him that doothe propounde
Nature his guide, and treads her steps, what booteth him of ground
Whether, an hundredth acres he or else a thousand tills:
Thou saiste, he fedes the eye^the more* the from the huge hepe fills:
Well sir no force, if that you will but condescende to this,
That our repaste does riot shun, and reasonable is
To keep the soul and Carcas cheynd, to stynte the pyning styng
Of hungers gnaw, and that we have a mean of every thing:
Why the^, what do thou boste so much, thy plumes why do thou spread?
"What better is thy barnes, then our small sackes that serve our neade?
"Much like for southe, as if that thou a pot or pitcher must
"With lyquor lode, and mights it fille at fountain hereby just,
"And yet for fond affection, thou, to please thy gredye eye.
"Shouldste wend unto the flowing stream where greater gulfes do fly.
"At which whilste some have reached far and proferde over fast,
"The ba^cke has burst, that down they lusht, and so be drente at last.
"But he that leanes to temperaunce, and anchoures on her lore,
"And takes so much as serves his turn, and gapes to grype no more
Him needs not draw the drubbled dreggs of foul by durtye poole.
Nor yet for deuelishe thirste to have (as one from virtues school
Exempted quite) fetch from the brim and ouerwhelming waves,
Where now and then (O just reward) in raginge surge sum taues.
The Crystal spring shall work his will, and silver channelde wells
Shall yield enough, where lurcks no dread, where slyme ne slabber dwells.
"But out (alas) the greater part with sweet empoysned bate
"Of welthe bewitchde, do ween their wants abundance in each state.
"For monye maks, and mars (say they) and coin it keeps the coil,
"It byndes the bear, it rules the roste, it putts all things to foil.
"A mann's his money, and no more, wherein confused is
"An heaven of happs, a world of weeles, an hunnye has of bliss.
"O dottrells dome, and is it so? what guardon for these doultes
Shall we deuyse? lets suffer still the foolish frantycke foultes
To wallowe in their wilfulnes, whose under eating minds
Is never cramde, but prooles for more and swarues not from their kinds.
Such one we read of in old time, that dwelte in Athins town,
A man in substance passinge rytche, nathlesse a niggerde cloune,
At whose scarceheade, and couetyce the world did outas make,
But all in vain, he forste it not, he sought not how to slake
Black fame, that frisked every wheare, and bounsed at ytche ear,
"A fig for them (quod brazen face) I force not how I hear,
"They hawk, they hem, they hiss at me, I weygh it not an h^we,
"Whilste I may harbor in mine arc, and lodge within my law
"My darlynge goulde, my leaue^ gueste, my solace and my glee,
"He is the bone companion, its he that cheares up me.
Tantalus. Ah simple cheer consideringe all, grave Tantale in thyn heart,
"His fee did feed his fatale fall, his mucke procured his smarte.
Whose lips as dry, as any kykkes does often assay to taste
The licker, to allay the droughte, that has nigh all to waste
His intralls, sterude for lack of moist, the fluds to eeke his pain
They clim unto his very chinne, and then declyne again.
He catches, and he snatcheth aye, and stille he grates in teene,
And stille shall do, for panges stille spring and freatinge sorrows grene.
I pray the now, what cause haste thou to sport and pleasaunce take?
To faune upon thy foolish goulde which endless grief does make.
For thou induriste Tantalls fate, and taking but his name,
This tale may well be toulde of the, thou art the very same.
Thy house, the hell, thy good, the flood, which, though it do not starte,
"Nor stir from the, yet has it so in houlde thy seruyle heart,
"That though in foysonne full thou swimmes, and rattles in thy bags,
"Yet tossed thou art with dreadefulle dreams, thy mind it waves and wagges,
And wishes after greater things, and that, that's woorste of all,
Thou sparst it as an hollye thing, and doste thy self in thralle
Unto thy lowte, and cockescome like thou doste but fille thine eye
With that, which should thy port preserve, and hoyste thine honor hye.
Thou scannes it, and thou toots vpponte, as though it were a warke
By practysde painters hand portrayde with shadows subtle dark.
"Is this the perfytte end of coin? be these the very vayles
"That money has, to serve thy syghte? fie, fie thy wisdom fayles.
Tharte miss insenste, thou can not vse't, thou wotes not what to do
Withal, by cates, bye bread, bye drink, in fine disburse it so,
That nature need not move her self, nor with a betments scant
Distrainte, and prickd pass forth her day in pyne and pinchinge want.
To wake all night with shiueryng corpse, both night and day to quake,
To sit in dread, and stand in awe of thieves, lest they should break
Perforce thy doors, and robb thy chests, and carue thy weasaunte pype:
Lest flickeryng fire should stroye thy den, and sease with wastefull grype
Upon thine house, lest runagats should pilfer ought from thee,
Be these thy gains, by rytches repte? then this beheste to me
O Jove betake, that I may be deuoyde of all those gooddes
That brews such baneful broils, or brings of fear such gastfull fluddes.
But if so been the pauling cold thy limbs does ouergo,
Or else sum other worse disease has daunte thy body so
That down thou must, and bide in bed, thy vauntage then is great,
At elbowe priest thou have thy friends, who will provide the meat,
And tender the even as them selves, confections sweet or tarte
Theylle minge for the, such as best lykes thy quasye wamblynge heart.
They Will treat the fine physician with potions sound and sure,
By force and virtue of his skill thy corpse for to recure,
And to restore thee to thy sons and kyndely fryndes again.
Alas the while its no point so, thy wife she works thy bayne,
Thy son he inlye lothes thy life, his regreate, and his plainte
Is ever fresh, because that death does linger to attaynte
Thy hateful head, thy neighbors, and thy chief acquaintance all
Thy jack, thy gille, thy kith, thy kin does prosecute thy fall.
"What maruayle is it, when thou haste loud thy silver as thy lord,
"If none love the, whose loutishe life deserude no loving word?
But if thou thinckes th'alyes to lynke in frindshyppe and in faith,
And wenest thou maiste with small a do from breach and foyshe wrath
Keep tide the knot, that nature knit: Ah fillye manne, in vain
Thou doste surmise this fruitless fetch, its far beyonte thy brain:
Perseueraunce in amity, and duraunce still in love
Discordeth much from fickle man, thou maiste as well above
The sluggishe ass a saddle couche, with gold and perle befret,
And strain his jaws, with bridle brave with goldsmithrye ybet,
And so to make him praunce, and plunge, to friske, and gamballs fetch,
To chewe upon the spewinge bit, and at his foes to retche
With harneste houfe* as thou canste learn the frail retyryng man
"To tread in trace of truth outryghte in truth as he began.
"In fine, suppress thy lewd desire: the more thou haste in store
The less pass thou for pouertye, do travail for no more.
Sense thou accomplishde haste thy will, and purchesde wealth at ease:
O be not like Vmidius, whose rauenouse disease.
It is not long for to discourse. he, that he might vpturne
His coumed coin, with shouiles wide, him self durst not adorn
With any weed that wealth besettes, but like a miser right,
More ragged then a tatterde coulte did pass the poreste wyghte
In pieces and in tatter wagges: whylste that he had his wind,
And drew his breathe, he spent no ^ote, a fraide that he should find
Neade in oulde age: but (loo) his wife of greakishe dames most stout:
With grounded are cut him in twain, and rifted him throughoute.
What? is it best like Meui^s the makeaway, to live? prodigal persons.

Couetouse. Or shall I like Nementanus prodigal persons. my gooddes to
giglotts give?
A goodlye di she, who taught e the this? why doste thou thus compare

Poet. Extremyties? Is there no shifte, all spend, or else all spare?
I would the not a nipfar thing, nor yet a niggarde have,
Wilt e thou therefore, a drunkard be, a dingthrifte, and a knave?
There is a difference betwixt the gelded Eunuke Taken:
And Herniosus hot as coals, that rank uncleanly swain.
"A mean there is in matters all, and certain bonds be pyghte,
"On this side or beyond the which nothing that's good can light.
But after long vagaryes fetchde, to come to my request,
How happens it, his own estate that no man lyketh best?
But teenes, if that his neighbors goat a bygger bag does bear
Then his, or yeeldes her milk sum deal more flowyng and more clear:
Nor ever will compare him self unto the greater sort,
Whose state is base, and bad as his, who lives in mean apporte:
But roues, and shoots at further marks, now him he does contend
To pass in coin: now him again, and so there is no end.
"For he that thincks to coat all men and all to ouergoe,
"In runnyng shall sum ritcher find who still will bid him hoe.
Such posters may be likened well unto the carters oulde
Of forayne world, on mount Olimpe whose carts when they were rould
With gyrefull sway, by coursers swifte, to win the glistring branche:
They ierted up their horse with whippes, that forth they made them launche
With boysterouse noise, like thunder clappe^, they made the quaueryng soil
To dindle and to shake again, in hope of laurel spoil.
They never had respect to those, that once were cast behind,
But scourde to give the rest the slip, with course as wyghte as wind.
Right semblablye, this carkynge kind of men do never eye
The route, that they have ouerrun in goods, but haste, and hye
To retche the resydue, and so do ame above their strength,
To prick, and pearse those marks, and whits, that lie without their length.
Lo this is even the very* ground, this is the perfytte cause,
That most mislyke them selves so much, and can no season pause
In blesfulnes: and this is it why very selde we find
"A man so cloyed with the world as he that new has dynde
"Is with his meat and that there is none which in their extreme days
"Will part from life as full from feast to go their homewarde ways*
To bannish all excess of talk, let this suffyce as now,
And lest thou shouldste suppose by space my talk might ouergrow Crispine a
writer against couetouse to excessive in talk.

In bulk the bleareeyde Crispins roole whose tongue on pattans free
Did retchlesse run, even here I cease not one word more of me.

The Poet still blames, ficklenes and unsteadfastness of those, which laboringe
to sail fro the yrcksom poole of avarice, do willyngly contend to make
shypwracke by the unfortunate waves of prodigalitye: he speaks against
fashions: they are thought to be noorses of pride, and follye.

The second Satire.
THe stews, and stained house of drabbes, th'appotycaryes neat,
The beggars, and the tumbling trulles the horehunters, the great
And flockynge rakehell rabblement of rags, and raskals al,
Be pensife, and through plungde with panges to see the funeralle
Of Tigelle, trustye frinde of theires, who whilste he lived here,
Did carolle shrille, and trimly tune his sonets sweet, and clear.
Their cause of greafe is some expressde: he was both free and francke.
(...)* They hanged on him, his purse kept them so croustye, and so crancke.
But this man, clean contrary wise, t'eschue, and shun the name
Of spendall, and of scatter good, and fearyng such like blame
That does ensue outragiouse spence, he will not give nor lend
One cross of coin, to clothe or feed his nedie naked friend.

Prodigal An other, if thou question him why that he does devour
His sire, and his gransyres goods, and turns town, and tower
All into naught, through greedynes and foul delyting throat:
And why that he by gluttonye, and stomach raging hot
Miscounsailed, does make a sale of lands, and lordshippe wide
To bye such curiouse cates, as bests will down his gullet glyde:
His answer is not far to fetch, posthaste he will the say,
That he does thus set cock on hoope and lauishly outlay
This mucke, and dross the world has sent, because he would not seem
Like one of carlish abiecte mind, so vile a thing t'esteme
That answer say the never thriftes, was given in the Cue,
Well fare his heart: the chuffes the same with deep disprayse pursue.
Fusidius, a landed man, a man whose fertyle feyldes,
Whose meadows fair, and glebye grounds revenues ample yeeldes:
A man by art of vsarye, by guyle, and treachers trade,
By fraud, and couin full of goods, is very sore afraid
To spend amongste good company, least on such prankes might spring
A iauall, or a ruffins name, or sum such heynouse thing.
This Fusidie, to fille his purse, and to enritch his store,
What soever cums by users skylle, to get, and gender more,
He lays it to the captain heap, whereof it rose, and grew,
He takes by year the fiftes of all, and so he bredeth new.
And if a man through negligence, perhapps be cast behind,
At parting he shall pay for that such fetches will he find.
Heil go me like a craftye coulte, and listen every where,
To understand the names of those that late delivered were
From government of masters sharp, and ginnes to wear the weed,
That only manhood does beseme: there, there he sowes his seed.
He mings deceit, he plyes the box, he strues me such a train,
That straighte he is with them to bring, (God wotes) unto their pain.
Th'unbridled brutes, the younckers that are paste the cure, and charge
Of Tutors grave, like lustye laddes, do love, to roue at large,
To roiste, and revel with the best, in suits of silks to flante:
The hard headed fathers they deny such spences vain to grant:
Then cums this fox, this Fusidie, with money priest in hand,
He byes before their fathers death their lyueloode, and their land,
Who hearing such malengin wroughte does not abrade, and cry,
Upon the greateste God of all, that flings the fates from hye?
But they, the sillye fonded fools, (such be the yo uthfull brains)
Do feast him for his louesom love, and highly praise his pains.
Certes, a man would scarce believe, how much this lovely wighte,
Whom others love, does love him self, how he does deck, and dighte
His surly corpse in ritche array, what table he does keep,

Menedemus. Almost as great as did the snudge, whom Terence toulde to stepe,
And syncke in sorrows, and in sobbes, for that he chaste his son
To Asie, there to pyke his crumbs, which deed unkind ons done:
He brake up house, put myse to grass, him self fed nothing fine,
With col^wortes, and such carters cates, often would the caytife dyne.
But here, if sum precysly ask, what does this process mean?
It is to show, that whilste sum men take care to keep them clean
From blame, and blotte of one gross sin, incontinente they are caughte,
Entangled with the contrary: like dullerdes never taught.
Malchine, to make him singular, A new fangled minion of that age.
a fashion fresh has found,
He swings and swoupes from street, to street, with g own that sweepes the
ground,
And think you Malchine wants his mates? no fie, that were amiss,
An other pleasant headed child, in no sauce lyketh this.
To prove himself a pretye man, and quaynte in his devise,
He maks his garment to be shapde, not of so large a syse:
For wot you what? he coortalls it, it hardly hydes his rumpe,
Rufillus, heis perfumde with musk Gorgoni, smelles oath pumpe.
Mean has no mantion in the flock* they keep no steedy stay,
In matter, and in novel shape, they vary every day,
Sum one, or other lodes man stille, and what that he does use,
The resydue may not ne, will, for fashion sake refuse.
Fashions in all our gesterings, fashions in our attire,
Which (as the wise have thought) do cum, and go in circled gyre.
Fashions, in notting of the hear, in paringe of the nails,
In Otho, and mustacho beardes, thus fashions never fayles.
In the other sex, who would rehearse their fashion as they be,
Might even as well by augrisme tell, the gravel of the Sea.
Those curiouse, crousting courtly dames, whose spangled vestures sheene
With stones and pearls, of pride, and pryse, and Emrauds heeuenly grene,
Does give the glimmering, gloriouse show, that feeds the gasers eyes,
And dasles quite the simple lokes, with leames, that from them flies:
"The world perchance does think them gay, and in a chief degree:
"They be no bettter creatures, then other people be:
"Noe outward thing does better us, no not our noble kind:
"Not perles, or gold: but pearlesses gifts be praysd in Godly mind.
"All else is toys, and all is vain, and all when they have tryde,
Will once confess these things to be, but nutriments of pride.

He Reprehendethe those, who be sharp accusers of others vices, and can be
content, either not to see, or dissemble their own* He dispraisethe the
Stoics discipline, who thought, al offenses to be a like and equally to be
punished: merylye after his manner, he begins with the minstrel Tygell, and
disaloweth of his mutabilitie of life.

The third satyr
IT is a fault, a common fault, that all our minstrels use:
The more you seem to crave a song, the more they will refuse.
Requ st them not, they never cease: right so would Tigell fair,
A singer of Sardinia though Caesar should not spare,
For his, and for his fathers sake sum music to require.
Yet would his humble suite often times cum short of his desire.
He might have forsde him thereunto: but Tigelle, if it had
Cumde in his brain, would of him self, take on as he were mad,
He, Bacchus ballets would record, sumtymes the trible part,
Sum times, the quauerynge deskantdure sumtimes, to vaunte his art,
A boysterouse basse he bounsed out, and iumbled on his stringes,
No dram he had of constancy: so fickle in his things.
Often times, he ran, as fled from foe, oftetymes in solemn pace
He would proceade, as though he were in serving Iunos grace.
Sumtymes, an hundredth watyng men. sumtymes he kept but ten:
Sumtymes he spoke of potentats, and on his honor then
Was all his talk: sumtymes, let me one dishe well dighted have,
(Thus would he say), and one course gown my corpse from could to save.
To this good husband, that could be with pittance small content,
If sum good friendly man, of hope ten hundred crowns had lent:
Within five days, no groate he had, in purse, ne yet in cheste:
Al night he walkde, whilste morning came, all day he took his rest.
Was never man so little stayde. but sum, will say to me,
And what are you: sum selye saint? nay, hal^e as i^l as he:
One Mauius, did frumpe, and floute at Neuie (then away:)
A friend of his, a stander by, what serray, what I say?
(Quod he): doste thou not know thy self, nor think that we the know?
Meuius.
My self, yes, I wincke at my self: therefore, a wincking dawe. * Po.

This is a wicked, witless love, not to be wincked at:
Since thou doste know, and see thy sin, and use to wyncke at that:
What meaneste thou, in others faults, so pearsantly to prye
With Egles syghte, or Epidaurs Epidaure taken for all kind of ser pents,
that sutle serpents eye?
But if in case, an other carpe* sum crime he sees in thee,
He is too rash, and indiscreet, and no good fellow he.
A sheep, a verey gestyng stock, he treades his shoe awrye,
His gown sitts slack, his head vnkempte, vn^uyle, by and by.
But he his good, and godly to, and one that wills the well,
And though his body be not brave, great wit may in himdwell.
Well, ryfle thou thy conscience, and look thou be not led
With any vice, which nature has, or custom in the bred.
In feildes vnforowde fruit is none, for brakes all over grows:
To blow retreat, and to return from whence my matter flows:
If we do strongly love a thing, and like it very much,
Though faults in it be evident, yet we will see none such.
I would in race of amytie such dotage we might use,
And that virtue by honest name, such curtsye would excuse.
For as the father for ill shape, his son does not disdain:
So friends, at times must bear with friends, though faults to them remain.
"The son he squynts, the father says, he has a pincking eye,
His legs misshapde, the father says, his leg but stands a wrye.
The parents pleasure much to praise, and prattle to the ladde,
Thy foot is very great (says he) thy foot is swelde to bad.
"Have thou a friend that dyets hard? Well, call him thrifty than:
"Have thou a friend, a bragging lout? call him a iollye man,
"The king of fellows amongst friends, for him no better name.
"Have thou a friend with face of brass, that bragges without all shame?
"Count him of stearne, and haughtye heart, that well dare speak his mind,
That will not flatter, nor yet fear, how soever blows the wind.
If he be subtle, call him sage, if wylye, call him wise:
This, thisis it, that winnes thy friends, and wun in friendship ties.
But we, full ill construction, of virtue self do make,
And eftsoon do eclipps the praise, that's due for virtues sake.
"For, if with us be conuersaunte sum humble. lowly soul,
"We call him goose, and disarde doult, and fowlye fatted nowle.
"Add if a man deal waryly, and bear him self vpryght
"Amongst such folk as foster fraud, and practice slylye sleighte,
"For name of skilful, wyttye man, and one that takes good heed*
"He is a deep dissembling man, and crafty for his meede,
"If that a man can not conceal, but tell his verdicte free,
"(As I Maecenas patron mine, have done full often to the:)
"If that he speak to one that's whish^, or looks on his book,
"Or talk not all in printe, or tune, (say we) this coddes head, (look)
"This ass, does want his common sense. woes me and out, (alas)
How do we aggrauate such laws, as against our selves does pass?
For faultles (doubtless) borne is none, and he is even the best,
Whose life sincere admits fiew, and with the least is priest.
A frindely man, (as mete it is) the good with bad will wey,
If much be bad, and more be good, let soulderde friendship stay.
Let us in equal balance pai^e, and do as we would have:
Would thou thine own offenses cloak? in others faults not rave.
It is but right, that mum should mum. and perdon, perdon crave.
For short, in that the vice of wrath will be our tenant still,
And brutish part of modie mind, will lodge affections ill:
Why do we not by reasons rule, and by proportion just,
Deem of the crime as it is done, and mulcte it as we must?
If that the master bid his man, from board to take a dishe,
The man does sipple up the brothe, or feed on broken fish:
His master hangs him straight vpponte: who will not hold him mad Labio a
lauishe toungued losell. who still was barking at August thereupon compted
mad.

As Labeo? and why not thou as frantike, and as bad?
Thy friend offendes, and graunts his guilt, thou will him not forgive,
What art thou then? a testye churl, great pittye thou should live.
If thou him hate and shun his sight, (as Drusos detters do)
Thou shall be dreste, like Drusos self, he for to lend to more, A credito^,

Does sheare, and shave, and powle, and press, well, when his audit cums,
When he most hopes of bestrecept, and to suruewe his sums,
Then, gawlye words (for fear of strypes (when he his coumpts has red)
He does put up, with cap, and knee, at those which from him fled.
Euander cums unto my house, A good fellow
perhaps, he drinks to much,
Or breaks a judge, or stains my gown, or eats my dyat, such
As was preparde, and plaste for me, is he the less for this,
A merry grigge, a iocande friend, for every sillye miss?
Should I go baull a maine at him, as he had piekde my purse,
Or me discryde, his pledge denied or done sum thing, that's worse?
Who almost has at any time thought faltes of equal weight*
Philosophers, (that bookish brood) may teach the thing by sleight
But skille, and practyse counterplea, and profit it denies,
Profit, the nurse of just, and right, as time, and sequel tryes.
When man abandond first the earth, Justice rather by profit then nature,
and scraulde out of the moulde,
(Adum vnwyldye creature) through hunger and through could,
For food, and harbor began they fray: at first, with toothe and nail,
And then, with clubbes, and then with swords, which use had taught t'assayle:
Whilst words, ambasdors of the heart for to bewraye the mind
Were putin ure: and names applied, then to conserve their kind,
They ceaste from wars: made rear up walls: and poundinge laws did make,
That none should ^lche, nor any rob, that nene should wedlock break.
For, or that cytyes had their walls, or Helen came to Troy,
Have women bathde the world in blood, (the cause of dyre annoye)
But of the slain was no record. they raunged, in eatche where,
No spousailes known more, brute then beasts, the make knew not his fear.
The mightieste man, like Bull in herd, did wreake the meaner sort:
Thus, grant you must, that fear of wrong, set lady law in forte.
If thou will calendar in mind, the consequents of tides,
By noting long dissente of time, in what effect it glydes:
Well maiste thou see, that nature telth, What like, what leave we must,
Yet nature has no pollycye, to sever wrong from just.
But reason bears stroke in that: and profit patrons right,
If reason reele, then profytte pants, reason saues both, by might,
And as she does, so will not she use argument, that he
Which stealthe from hedge, and stealth from church, in like offense should be.
Let discipline alle^ied be in measure to the vice,
When light correction may take place, fare not in tyraunts wise:
Ne yet, when great outrage is wroughte, with ferule do not stryke.
Where justice slakes, there fear decays, when thou makste all faults like,
As purloyninge, with burglarye, or robbinge by the way,
Trespass with crime, does not thy doume foredome to us, and say?
That thou indede, in like effect, wouldste execute the thing,
If choice, by voice, had host the up, invested once a King:
A king, each stoicke is a king, for stoics all be wise:
And, wisdom is it self a wealth: Through wealth do princes rise:
Wysedom is all: but thou art wise: then safelye, be of chere,
Thou art fair, strong, and eke a king, a cobbler though thou were.
What will thou more? Sto: yes, Chrysip says, the wise man mends no moyle,
Nor soles no shoes: Poe: lo, thus thou weanes to turn me to a toil.
The wise man, though he leave the act, reteynes the art, as how?
Hermogines sings not at al: Yet musyke he does know.
Alfenus made away his tools, broke shop up long a go,
Is he not an artifycer, or not a craft man, thoe?
The wise knows most, who knows most must bear awayethe name
Of facultye: debar him not, but let him have the same:
To rule a realm in faculty, which, none but wise can tell:
If they can rule, though they rule not, Kings are they by this spell.
The stoicke wise: the wise can rule: to can, is full as much
As though he did: a Realm he can: then, let his name be such.
Can rule, is rule: none can but wise: the stoicke only wise:
The stoike therefore only king by this so strayte a sise.
Yea stoike, art thou creat king, then must thou mainteyne port: VVitte alone
insufficiente in regalitie, if it be bereft of other solemn and laudable
appertinents.

Else, wagges in streets will twitch thy beard and make at the a sport.
Except thou take the to thy hands, and fence the with a stick:
They Will make the braste for agonye, in crowding the so thick.
And thou a wise, witpuisaunt king, that houlds thy crown by wit:
Shall be enforst, to howl and cry, (for such a state unfit.)
In breife, when thou a king at meals, do rise, or sit the down,
So sore precyse thou art that none will bide the, but sum clown.
^ryspine. But if that I miscarye ought, my friends will make the best,
So I to them, so they to me, and this ingendreth rest.
Thus, do I pass my pleasant days and fear no stormye thing,
This private life I would not change with thee, pretensed king.

He Defends Himself, against those who had reported him to have been
slaunderouse, sharp and corrosiue: He touches Lusilius Not to condemn his
doings, but to have them amended Heprofesseth to speak against no man, upon
superfluity or disease of the brain, but upon a mere francknesse, and
liberty of the mind: specially, he rebukes them, which will kycke and
resist when they should be cured.

The fourth satire
THe Poet Aristophanes Eupolis, and Cratine,
And ancients more, whose interludes are saust with sayings fine,
If any person were mislyude in theft or leachers lore,
Or where a roisting quareller, they would display him so re,
Hence, Lusill boroud al his vain, those presidents he took,
The matter sharp, the feet but chaungde, the form full sleke did look.
In deed, the sense was too to tarte, within an hours space,
Two hundredth verses he would make, thought he, a gift of grace.
And would not move his foot with all. But huddle he would roll,
To half might well been scummed of, an idle chatting soul.
A milk sop long to pen a work, much more to pen it well,
The length is not material, the scapes he must expel.
Cri^pinus, that great length lover with finger does me call,
And darreins combats, if I dare: should Crispine me appall?
Nay, there is my glove give velom here, give judges, time, and place,
Lets see which one can more indite, and with a better grace.
Well have the godds appointed me, of no corragious wit,
And speakinge seelde that I ne should, confound the fool with it.
But thou (sir Crispine) in thy mind, assembles fancies often,
As bellows sup and beltch out wyndes, to make the iron soft.
O learn not so to puff and blow, saint Fannie follow well,
That thou bestowde in surlye tomb Fannie an arche Ass or blockheade in
whose memorial was erected a block.
thy statues here may dwell.
As for my works oblivion will raze them out of mind:
A few or none that will, or dare behoulde them can I find.
Wot you not why? corrosyue style, is corsey to the eye.
They dream a thing that blamed here, their counterfette should lie.
They dream a truth for find me one, amongste the sons of men:
"But love of goods, or love of rule, does fond him now and then.
"Sum live catesnd in Cupids chains, and sum love blasinge gold,
And sum a sum of silver white, or curraunte metal would.
Sum keep exchange from East, to Weste, and sore upon the Seas:
Toste and retoste, (like wherlwynd duste ekynge the yr own disease
For mainteyn a unce of gotten stock, or else to make it more.
All these do stand in awe of rymes, and hate the Poets sore.
The Poets proyne, beware (say they) that they may ieste their fill,
They spare no speech, they spare no friend, fools lauishe, and to ill.
And if their toys in letters lymde be printed once in book:
Then all the world must take the vewe, and all sorts on them look.
If this be true: then hark again, I am no Poet, I.
No Poet such as is discryude, am not I so? and why?
Not hea Poet, that can make an haltinge hudlynge verse:
Nor he in paltrye daily talk that can his tale rehearse.
Him Poet dub, whose wit is sharp, whose mind does mount on hye,
Whose throat is shyrle in trumpet wise, to coutche men's acts in sky.
Therefore demand has once been made, if comedies might be
A poecye, sythence in them the spirit puffes not free.
No gourgiouse sound in word or sense, save that in verse it runs:
From prose yt differs but by foot, but (lo) the father burns
In peltinge chafe, for that his son on wantons madded is,
And leaves a spouse of noble dowre, this breeds a tempest, this.
And that with torch n twylightinge he treades the romye streets,
How say you have not commodies their vigors, and their spreetes.
Old Pomponie, if he had lyude, what stir now would he keep, Pomponius an
impacien* nygarde.

(thing comicall) because his son, is drent in debt so deep?
And what though father Pomponie should grate his gaul in twain,
Affection makes no poecie, but lusty, loftye vain.
Its not enough to pen a verse, in vernishde words and pure,
Each word alone must have his sound, and seem not to demure.
Those simple words playmakers use, those use Lusill and I.
So nyse, so neat, so numberouse* that alls not worth a fly.
Disorder but the glydinge gate, the words appears ^ame,
No gloss there is of majesty, not such as in this same.
Foul moodi Mars broke brazen bars bare boulstred boulwarkes back.
These words transposde, yet each one has of Poesye a smacke:
And thus much now, an other time if rymes allowde may be.
But now, why should this kind of style, be so suspect in me.
Promoters seek, and pere each where, and use to work much woe,
Accusing and molesting men, whersoeuer they do go,
Feared, and much adrad of thieves and losels loose of life,
Not fearde of those that pilfer not, nor broch no brabling strife.
Admit thou wart a naughty pack, as diverse other be, * Birrus and Cest^s, for all naughty packes.

I am not one that does promote, why art thou fraide of me?
My verses give no gase from walls, ne yet in tauernes fly,
Not Tigell nor such alegunners my works do ouerprye.
I show them but to very friends, and at their great request:
Not to each hobb, nor every where. sum be that think it best,
Their quaynt devises to proclaim, in market, ^ayre, and mart:
To read them grave, and sound them brave, and to unfold their art.
Such pleasure have pride practisers, who do it not to mende,
Nor learn a decency in things, for no such honest end.
A mallipert a merchaunte I of malice (thou will say)
I use this talk: whence issude this, against me that thou do lay?
Or which of my companions has this instilde to the?
Who pincheth at his friend, not pressed, or if he burned be,
Does not alleuyate his blame, who scoffs to make men smyle,
Who plyes for to be plausible, and does his flowtinge file,
Who can inuente things never mente, who nothing can conceal:
Such one is naughtes, beware of him, and naught to him reveal.
Sumtymes, at table thou shalt see a dosen more or less,
Each seekynge each ortwharte the thums with tauntes, and terms to dress.
Their host they spare, for manner sake, till Bacchus tide be up:
Then out must al, mine host, mine host is scande at every ^up.
Railing thou hates, yet doste thou coumpte raylers but merry men,
Good felows, francke, and free of speech: If I have iested then,
At Rufills taste Gorgonies smell, (two paragons of pride)
I am no freatinge ghost therefore, nor slaundrouse, all things tryde.
If chance we talk of Petills prancke^ how he from tower stole,
A massye piece of bullion gold, (to twyne thy tale in hole)
Thou shaps it thus: (as is thy trade) Petille, I know him well,
I have sum cause to speak for him, for he and I did dwell
Of childerne little in one house, my fellow, and my friend,
Much has he done for me at times, I found him ever kind.
And yet I maruayle how he could rub out this trespass so.
(Lo) here a craftye postles part, Logille a fish vvhyt without and black
within.
lo here a Logille lo
Ha, false malignaunte wreaking mind, this vice I do expel*
As cancre freate, from heart and book, most true it is I tell,
For certainty I like it not, then license me the more,
To guess aloufe, not hard to scratche but clawe about the sore.
My father, he did usually, dehorte me from this sin,
By manifold examples, which, through talk he would bring in.
Still warning me not to ingrate, nor seek not much to live,
But thryftylye, contentedly enjoy that he would give. Old Horace his talk.
Albie and Barns Scatter gooddes.

Maiste thou not see young Albie now how he is cumde to naught,
Backbyting Bar most beggerlike? Ingrayle them in thy thought.
Two presidents, that thou ne shouldste thy fathers good mispende.
But when he would dehorte from love, his talk was to this end.
Dissemblable to Sectans sort, Sectan vvanton and amou rouse. So Trebon.
no brothelmonger be,
Keep wedlock chaste, let Trebons name be warninge unto thee.
The wise men with their moralls sage, by reason could the guide,
Suffyseth me that I can give, such counsel as I tryde.
And if my sawes in time take place, for teacher haste thou none,
When grows, and years shall make the man, youths shipwreck will be gone.
Thus would he turn my plyant youth, and what he wild in word,
For pattern he would bid me mark, The life of sum good Lord.
So, if he would inhibite me, that is no godly deed
My son (says he): and here upon, sum foul report will breed.
For even like as when neigbours dye, the sickmans changing lust,
For fear does stay, and is content, to cum to diet just:
So skillesse youth to see defame of others, may take heed,
And slip not into vices snare, nor listen to her reed.
Hereby I stayed my tempting age, and did no haynouse sin
In easy crimes, and venial I have been trapped in.
And these, (no doubt) will wayne a way and ebb, as they did rise,
By help of years, by friends reproof and by mine own aduyce.
As I lie in my bed sumtymes, on matters thus I muse,
Thrifte would do thus, right does diswade that I should thus me use.
Thus could I make my cheerful friends: this was a foolish part:
Was I so fondlye ouerseene? a fool sone flings his ^arte,
Thus do I mutter in my m^nde, Ere while at cards I play,
(A fault, amongste the meaner faults) forgive me, Thou sa^este na^.
Then Poets all preas on* preas on help at a pinche: no dreed^,
We be so ryotouse a route* who sa^es but we shall speed?
As Jews do measure all by might The multitude cannot be led from their
fancies, no not for truths sake,
that none dare them forsake:
So we by number will men force, in league with us to take*
The fif^e Satire, which the Poet had written of his iorneying ^o and fro,
wholye altered by the translator.

Friend Horace though you may me use as to translate your verse,
Yet your exployte I do refuse, at this time to rehearse.
Not every trick nor every to^e, that flo^th from your brain.
Are incident into my pen, nor worthy of my pain
If all be true, that sum surmise, for diverse think it good,
To have di^criude the clatteringe broils, of Mauors raging wood:
Or for to know the climats hye, to clym unto the sk^es:
To view the stars their placing eeke and how they set and rise.
Or for to read the quiddityes and queerks of logique dark,
To hear the babbling sophisters, how they for naught can bark,
Or for to write things natural, things mistical and geason:
The harmony of elements how they accord by reason.
To stert up in astrology, the casuals of men
To limit, and forlote by art, to show by whom, and when,
Things were conueyde: and to erect through what aspect, and why
Pompey abroad, Caesar at home, were fortuned to dye.
To tell how man a creature, of reasonable mind
Is sociable, apt, and fit to company by kind.
To read the sacred histories of man how he began:
How first he fell, through whom he fell, what of himself he can.
To learn the helps of holy tongue, the doctors to peruse:
To course the scholemen (...) they lie, and Horace to refuse.
Those cackling pyes, that use to prate so much against humanytie.
Are commonly the lewdest dawes, and skillesse in divinity.
The antique fathers used it much, the apostle does the same:
Now al must down in pulling down that fools may get a name.
Some innovation* must be made, or change of used things
Needs must there be: when al would pass, and all would needs be kings.
Moses in writing his five books confearde with profane time,
Yet few or none, that I have hard, appeached him of crime.
From Egypt we may borow still, it never was forbod,
So it be for the weal of man, and glory of our God.
To read sole scriptures is, I grant, a thing of lesser pains,
And those that feign would have it so, would have it so for gains:
Unable for to get of toungues, or scyences a skyll,
Then cry they sole divinity, as though the rest were ill.
Diuinitye is gloriouse, and they but idle praters,
Gainste whose outrage, a man might we^ write forty godly Satyrs.
The wise can read humanitye, and beautifye their wit,
Whilste fools sit tatlyng to and to in talking against it.
A good divine might the translate (Horace) I can it prove:
Who so denies, I do not doubt to cast him down my glove.
And yet such is the matter now whereon thou do indyte,
That I must play the poet needs, and wots not what to write.
Thy laurel green betake to me, thy gown of scarlet read,
And prove a nouice how I can in after steps I tread.
Feign me to have a Poets art, a natyue Poets brain:
A very Poet, saving that I use not for to feign.
Dames of Pernas of Helicon, whence Paegas horse did fly:
(If yours it be) grant this to me, in process notto lie.
Nay, thou O truth, both God and man of whom I stand in awe:
Rule ore my words, that I ne pass the compass of thy law.
What should I write gaynste wickedness how sin has all the hyre:
How wyghtes are wed to wretchedness, captives to their desire?
Ieremye. The Prophets have bewailed that, and he whose voice so shryll:
Both heaven and earth with plaintiff tune, and dolours deep did fill.

Christ. The truth himself when he was here did truly things foretell:
And wept to see the sorye plagues, that afterward befell.
If they moude few, if few would mark the words of such like men:
How may the silly Satyrists hope for amendment then?
In vain for me to stir or keep a racket with my rymes:
The sons of men, will still be men and plyaunt to the times.
What should I write, against wickedness? the world by her aduyce
Has brought to pass, that most believe, there is no kind of vice.
For couetyse is colored, and though the Prophet king
Damn usurers, yet still we see more practice of the thing.
Dame Gluttony is to to hye: she kepes in stately halls,
And gurmundise is fellowship, for so the world it calls.
So lust is now a lordly thing, and swearing has a grace,
Forswearinge couerde under zeal, (alas) the cursed case.
What should one write, dissembling dawe^ (a wondrous tale to tell)
The better birds of noble price by creaking would e^pell.
The popish dawes, whom all men knows, To be still black of hue,
Do swear themselves best protestants, and birds that's only true.
What should I write? by color all true tytles they do steal,
And cover thousand trecheries, under pretensed zeal.
To know the matter perfectly, to understand it well:
Mark here what precise Commod^; to Pertinax does tell.
Think Commodus to be such one, as covertly in heart
Does worship all Idolatry, and minds not to convert.
And yet through show of godly zeal, our church would quite deface.
To help the popish kingdom up, and to reteyne his place.
Think Pertinax a peui^he impe, an impe of popyshe line,
Who still w^ll be a Catholic, though all the books divine,
Do prove his church an heretic. Sir Commodus kepes still
In England for commodity: Sir Pertinax he will
To Louayne, to the mother church, but how they both have s^ed,
Perceive that by their proper talks, and what lives they have led.
The hunger waxes sharp and keen, in Flemmishe bareyn land,
And Pertinax bet home with pyne, takes Commodus by the hand.

Pertinax. God save you gentle Commodus, how have you fared long

Commodus. Na^ verily even as you see, well lykyng fat, and strong,
Of credit never better I: what urgent cause doothe make

Pertinax. You at this time fron^sacred soil, your journey for to take?
When we went to the holy town, from English flock infecte,
Our want was wealth, and coin at will, we were an happy sect.
But our long stay, was our decay, men grudgd to give us more:

B, Sali^. And S^rum with his subtle book has cropte our credit sore*
Before, we gave a countenance, to all the world so wide:
That ou^ intent was wholly bent, to have our quarrel tryde.
Such cautels had we to bear of, that who against us did write,
We swore he was fallen from the Church, of gyddynesse or spyte.
We bare them down that they were naught rash, raylyng, and ill spoken,
Lewd, and vnlearnde: but now our stythe of forgery is broken.
Sarum has walkde so war^ly, (it gr^uethe m^ to name him)
That most of men do see his truth, we wot not why to blame him.
Now they despair our prostrate cause, and of our safe return:
And suffer us in beggary, (Ah silly case) to mourn.

Commodu^* Ah silly case, nay silly fools, you might have lived here,
In wealth and bliss, and even as there, have kept your conscience clear*

Pertinax. In de^de your letter writ* to me, did signifye no less:
But how that you can use it so, I would you should express.
Since I came last into the realm, it was toulde me of truth,
That you above the rest of men, use to be freattynge wroth
With ceremonies, is it so? Jesus, what shoul^e one hope,
They say that you do cast them o^, as brought in by the Pope.
Can you speak so precisely here: and bear us so in hand?
You are no doubt no Catholic as now the case does stand.
No Catholyke: Ah Pertinax thou art a merry man.

Commodus I speak, I grant against the pope, and speak the worste I can,
And profitte him, yet more then you, (perhaps ye gin to muse)
But hark to me, and listen well what practice I do use.
When you did cut the salt sea foam, with framed timbre board,
And yeade to Louaine there to hear, the Latin Romish word,
Then stormi^ge in my thoughtfull breast, and sharp beset with cares,
In mortal waves I wandered still, in maze of my affairs.
Fear cast in all extremities. what should I do, thought I?
To sanctuary of papists to Louaine should I fly?
That were away to beggar m^ to bring me unto need:
And in so doing, I should work, the mother church small meede.
^neas came into my mind, that feynde him self a greek,
And by that means made many souls, Lord Dytis hall to seek.
He can not h urte his foe the most that kepes the furst away:
I was resolude to keep me close, and see a further stay,
I said my wounded conscience did prickle more and more,
And wyshed after some of skyll to remedy my sore.
I said my doubt was dangerous, and therefore feign would have
Some clarkly man, of insight deep, within the same to rave.
This was the t^nour of my ^ale, that I would common feign,
If some learnde man on the other side, would take on him the pain.
The Protes^ants be merciful, and glad to win us all:
In brefe the chief would me at length to common with them call.
Their reasonyng was to and fro, to win me if they could:
And I began as debonayre, to render up the houlde.
Now hearken (oulde friend Pertinax) what was the spedy key:
To open the lock of credits forte, for me to bear a swey.
He that was counted too to fearse and angry with the Pope,
I went to him, and prayde him o^te my conscience for to grope.
Parted from him, I would proteste, and openly would say:
That such one was the greatest clarke that was on live this day.
He that was holden most of zeal, and to the world the best:
Him would I pra^se above the son, and so I purchased rest.
No more demand made of my fay^he. I faynde me very ^elous
Of other men, and said they were drawebackes, and nothing zealous.
And still I praysde my con^essours, and made them so to ^well,
Such pulpit hornetts by my means, That none durst with them mel.
And what that they to feed their mind, Or cholor else would speak:
I maintaynde it with toothe and nail, in all that I could creake.
Then was I dubde as true precise, and faithful by and by,
And none was compted hoate enough, save he, and he, and I.
I whysperde to and fro a pace, and playde my part so free:
That quarells stepped up fast and fast, A noble game to see.
And that the rest might learn to stoop, and I might grow up still:
An other fetch by peecemeale, I into them did instill.
My master lysten well (quod I) take keep, what I shall say.
Me thinks this church, this english church is clogged at this day
With ceremonies, more then needs, to tell you at a word,
I would have all thing s just, as they were left us by the Lord
This knew I was the deynty e dishe, that so their passions fed:
I am not now to learn I trow, to bring a babe to bed.
Now whether for true conscience, or else that they might seem
Sole gospellers, and that the world, might so of them esteem:
Or else through our suggestions, they gnawed so this bone,
That O good God, I would to God they had been let alone.
Nay trust me truly Pertinar men would have been full feign,
To thrust out all those gospellers, and send for you again.
How say you, was not this a drift* and that a drift of hope?
Am I not now, as lege as you, to our good Lord the pope?
If there were talk of gospels gr ace, of francknesse of our liberty,
Then would I whet my tongue to speak, against the gift of pollicye.
And that our service was consumde only in adoracion*
Whereas the pryme chu rch used one prayer, the rest in e xhortacion.
That ministers, (why should they not?) might go even like the rest.
In suits of silk, in cheynes of goldd, apparelde with the best.
That ministers might take and leave their orders when they would:
I went about to make al naught by all the means I could.
This was my greatest ^nchoure hold, I ever cast it thus:
The worse it fared with their church, the better much for us.
Untoward case unlucky case, Ah Pertinar I say
(As erst I said) a trumpe a trumpe was cast down in our way.
And he that cast it, has surueyde. and markde our cards so well*
That al our driftes is now fordone, and you abroad must dwell*
As for my self, who but my self I never felt like ease:
Not stoutest of the protestants dare me in ought displease.
I made my match I trow with such, as dare not but vpbeare me*
What if I know their guilty prankes, and therevppon they fear me?
Those wring, and wrest the meaner sort, whose minds and tongues are free,
And so imbecill all their strength, that they are naught to me.
I now can dubbe a protestant, and eke disdubbe again:
And make a Papiste graduate, if he will quite my pain.
Livings are mine, geuynges are myn^, the countenance is mine:
Promotions come to me alone, or where I will assygne.
Yea Pertina^ if thou will come, of Laberinth ne dread,
I can conducte th^e safe and sound, by virtue of a threde
I know who plays the catte, and how her ioly kittles mouses,
I and my patrons leave small ^ore, in some right famous houses.
And if there be not speedi^ healpe. against me* and my fools.
I Will drive their Gospel from the church, and learning from the Schools.
In deed I study hard my self, but to what end or why?
That I might get the greatest fee, and put all others by.
As now I am, I could not wyshe almost a better stay:
If the precyse crepe up agayn^, I know my wonted play
In the mean time I tell them plain they are the greatest clerks,
And that for their great constancy, the total world them marks.
Yea, I can tell them clawyngly (but that is in their ear.)
That those which have deposde them thus, are persecuters clear.
And if that some by policy, in time do not prevent them,
I Will egg them on to speak some thing, which spoken may repent them.
Well if that those get up again, I keep my jolly stay:
And if sir Pertinax you come, I will not go away.
So that come papist, or precyse, or formal conformable,
The precisde Papist keep his room, like promontorie stable.
And yet, if thou as palpable, my conscience could grope,
Of honesty, I am full true, unto my lord the Pope.
May happs when I have filde my pur^, ^haklockes profession.
with taking all this pain.
I will go turn from Commodus to Pertinax again.

Pertina^* What Commodus, thou turns thy self as one should turn the groate,
Turn round, or else thou will be spyde in turninge often thy coat.
Becawse you talked of gropinge erste, how chauncde it heretofore,
That you against the blessed Pope, so solemnlye have swore.
Speak out man, are you in a dumpe? how durst you so far go?

Commod^ Iuraui lingua, sed men^em non iuratam gero.
I told them then, I spoke with tongue. but never mente it so.

Pertina^ Why do you hear their service still, a thing of such abusion?

Commodus, I could not else abide with them, to help them to confusion.

Pertinax. What say you to the precyse flock, are they resolude that way?

Commodu^ Sum part of them is like my self, the conformable say
That half of those which busylye against those orders clatter,
Are Papists rank: as those may see which will survey the matter.

Pertina^ Why do they make so strait account of things that be but mean?

Commodus Pythagoras, why did he put man's soul within a bean?

Pertinax What if your self for not wearyng hereafter may be wrounge?

Commodus Tushe man I made them long ago, a verey Aesops tongue

Perrtinax. Since you against these churchly rites so long and sore did wynche,
How could you now resume again so bucksome at a pynche?

Commodus I said (as often I use to say) that I was very poor,
Nathlesse would give tone half I ha^ that I might wear no more.

Pertinax. I go to healpe a papist now, that ginnes for to recant,
And I go now, for to moleste a silly protestant.

Commodus O noble force of flattery, Farewell old fellow mine,
But so farewell that you keep close and come to me do dyne.

Translatour. Farewell a pair of hellyshe impe^ of cankred Satan's race:
For you are enmies unto God, And his in every place.
The true precise, none do despise, but all men know it well,
That they in learning and good life, most commonly excel.
Not one of us, but wylls them well to keep their godly name.
Nor ever thought to prejudice, or to eclips the same.
Some be so wise by Papists guile, they can not be abusde:
Yet Commodus has fonded some, it can not be excusde.
If I should write of Commodus, the crafts of such like men,
The trickling tears for hearty grief would ouerlode my pen.
But none will look to Commodus, he bears the bell away,
Some guerdon due for his deserte, The Lord will send one day.
The world is blearde with duskyng shoes, and daselde with a gloss:
But I appeal unto the wise, and crave redress of those.
Come what can come, how much can come, I am at stay in mind:
Their net of zeal, wherewith they steal, for ever to vnwynde.
Since God and our liege Sovereign bulwarks to Truth do stand:
We fear not Commodus his craft, nor Pertinax his hand.

The Poet rebukes those which do commend vices in the nobility, and do
judge such worthy to bear rule, as also those which think, that none base
borne ought to have any access to promotion. He speaks to Maecenas, and
commends him as one which has respect only to virtue and godly qualities.

The sixte Satire.
NOt due descent from haughty house, nor thine Hetrurie land,
(Mine own good Lord) does cause thy name and honor still to stand.
Not fathers sire not mothers sire ^wo cheu^tant sin the field:
(About whose bann^rs such a route of lustye bloods bare shield.)
Induce thee to be insolent. (as most of gentry be)
To make a mock of meaner men, for thou acceptest me.
Whose father was infranchised, and sayste, it does not skyll
Of petigree, so that our own demeanor be not ill.
Of this full well thou art resolude before king Tullie began Tullus a
soppressor of ver tue.

So tyrannous a monarchy imbecelyng freedom, than
By virtues spray, the basest borne might be the noblest man.
Leuinus, he whose ancestors Leuynus agreat gentleman hated of the people for
his naughtynes notwithstanding ^the great admyra tio^ they have to gentry.
king Tarquine drove away:
Through life corrupt, and rainlesse youth did work his fames decay.
Neglected of the commoners, who only do admyre
Nobility, and none but them to honors would aspyre.
If it be so that lawless prankes Yea nobles, discommendeth:
Who will praise us of baser blood except our life amendeth?
For what if Leuyn were estemde and Decie were not so?
Leuyn a lowte and Decie stout, Decius base borne.
Yet Leuins kyndred tho,
Might be induction to the rude, to deem of him so well.
If that the counsayles President, perchance should me expel, Appius*

From Senate house, for vulgar stock, This color would he make,
"That base must bide in baser, room for civil profits sake.
"But glitterynge glory rauisheth the poor and princely state:
"And pleasurs not a jot at length: let Tullie spell his fate*
"He might have past his time in peace declinyng lordly life,
"His royal robes rasde rancour up, and rancoure termelesse strife.
"Such is the world, who bears the swey assuredly is scande,
"How he came up, what parentage, what was his fathers land.
For as the younger that would seem most hansome and most brave,
Does make the mo to mark the more if he such features have:
So* who so thinks to rule in realms, and aufull swey to bear,
To place, displace, to dubbe, disdubbe, to keep the costs in fear:
The riflyng of his petigree, must think erewhyle to hear.
Durst thou (say they) a beggars brat, in such outtakyng rage
Take on thee thus to head the pear, to hang, and draw the page?
Nouie would be a counsayler, Nouie a petifobber Paulus and Massala.
in law I pass him far.
Though not like some of fyled tongue to parle a case at bar,
But, he can set a face of it, with his forpenned tail,
In solemn syghtes he thunders so, that fauters never fail.
Let me speak well, speak what I can, They laugh me still to scorn:
He is to base to rule (say they,) in deed to basely borne.
Now grudge they me, because I am becomde your household guest*
Before, because in war and field my rule was next the best.
Things much unlike for be it so, that honors enuyde be,
As fortunes gifts, yet may I well be suppliant to the:
Which art by choice of ponderyng wi^e, of friends provided (lo)
Not rou^erakers, nor rent rackers, nor staynde with vices mo.
I dare not say that fortune could have wrought me such a bliss,
Not loreles chance, but Virgils lore, did help me up to this.
First Virgils voice, then Varies praise your presence did procure:
At mine income, I lowted low, And muttred full demure,
For bashefull shame did still my vo^e, and much abridge my talk:
Therefore in blasing of my blood* my tongue it does not walk.
Nor how that I do mount on mule, in country gawyshe games:
I platly power out my mind, thou answer also frames
In brief and few, such is thy wont* and after certain days,
Thou calls me home, and calls me frend^, and thus my grief alayes.
A joy to have Maecene my friend, who good from bad does part,
"Not by dissente, but life well led, and ballaste breast with art.
"For if with slender single sinne^ and those but very few*
"My vprigh^ nature be infecte: (as if in cu mlye hue
"A warte or twain be euidente) it is not much to rue.
If gayngroper or muckmunger, I can not proved be,
Nor spente my youth in daliaunce, the case is well with me.
And be in charitable life, with all and every friend:
I thancke my father for this gere, he sent me to this end.
Flauius.
He sent me not to lawyers shop: to learn accoumpts to cast,
To be recorder, auditor, to know to fetch in fast:
Nor as the gentles send their sons, to cha^ter in a plea,
Professing law, learn lawless life, and sail in riotes Sea.
But like the babes of noble birthe, to Rome I was conducted,
With lordly arts that might be seem the best, I was instructed.
My garments such, retinue such that most men did believe,
My gransyres goodds did stay the rou^e, that hangde upon my s^eue.
My master grave, well studied, and much unlike a ^orte
Who dissolute at each small suite, do let their youth go sport.
For few, as tip of all good name he ^aughte me shamfastnes,
That shendful shame through word or fat^ did never me oppress,
Not fearing, though I went to law, on him I should complain,
Nor do: I can him hartye thancke, and praise him, for his pain.
Except I mad, I may be glad, eke of my parente base,
And do mislyke such kind of skuse which sum use in this case.
Pardie (say they) not our fault is, our parage is so mean:
Pardye, say I, my voice and heart does go against that clean.
For if that nature would and ^oulde reclayme my dul^et days,
And bid me pick my parents out, among those, that bears the ^ayes,
Sum would no doubt bid me take one, that liftes the loftye mace,
And praunceth in the purple throne: contented with my place
I would not change: the most of men, will think me straughte of wit,
But you, can wey the weighty state, and judge a right of it.
"For* as authority is great, so substance must be great,
"My viaundes great, my charges great, my friends I must entreat,
"Some, one, or other, must I have where s^ that I be gone,
To town or country far or near, a shame to be alone.
My meny much, my train of men, my geldings fat and fair,
My wagons, coches, hor^elitters, for cost I must not spare.
In city, I must set upon me gold ^espangled mule,
In deeper way, a trounsinge steed, whom uneath ought can rule.
Else sum will check me for my thry^te, Lord Tullus so would thrive,
Who Praetor would ride through the streets, his train no more but five.
Five peltinge laddes, (good senator) at least must wait on the,
And I may rome my mastershipp, wheresoever lyketh me.
My self alone can chepen things, and make my market well,
At even, and morn, in fair, or mart from thence to where I dwell:
To such pore ^ates, as I well like, my supper reddie set,
A pott of drink, a glass of oil, my household stuff not great.
From that to bed, not crampte with care, of that which may betyde,
Nor bente to go a pilgremage, for my great strife or pride.
I rise at ease, walk forth at ease, and then a cast at book,
All secretly, (a joy of joys at it to sit and look)
For weryed with my bookishe gase, I noynte with supple oil,
My loytrous limbs and when sir Phebe with brande begins to broyle:
I wash my corpse in cooly shade, my dyat ^male and thin,
Of pretty pittaunce, not so much as stomach would let in.
I calculate the coursinge stars, how each does run, and rain,
When noysom dog does flame in rage, I cum not at the bayne,
But sytt at home: this is the life, so iollye, and so free,
That cherishes and cheareth up, and so recumforts me.
As though my father, grandfather, and uncle erste had been,
Lords treasurers, and le^te me knighte, and rich in chyldhood grene.
A DERISION OF CHIding and brawling. The strife is betwixt Rupilius king of
Preneste, and one Persius: a wonderful vndecente thing, for a noble man to be
a scoulder.

The seventh satire.
THe fellone tongue of Rupilie, that t^aytor mungrill king,
How Persius has dreste in kind, it is no novel thing.
As common as the carts way that. This Persie for the most,
Did make his bode at ^innia: with Rupilie at host
With gybes, and glickes, and taun^ing str^fe a brawler sharp and sore
Rash, arrogante, and by use had of r^aldrye such store:
That from a dosen cacklinge drabbes, the bell he might have bore.
Well, to the king like dog, and catte, these two did then agree,
Like champions fell, their toylesum tongues they used as weapons free.
For ^che man seeks to noy his foe, (the old fayde saw does tell,)
With prowes, and those martial feats, wherein he does excel.
Twixte Priams hautie Hector, and corrag^ouse A^hill,
So keen and mortal was their wrath, that he did Hector kill.
And for no other cause I trow, but that, in those same twain,
Like force in principallitie, and parfytnesse did rain.
Dasterds will quickly part them selves, unequal if they be,
(As Glaucus was to Diomede) the weaker shrinketh, he
Departs in peace as recreante, his ransom maks him free.
Lord Brutus was lyeutenaunte, then of Asia the less,
When Rupilie, and Persius, to combat do address,
Like as two masters of the ^ence, vnshethe their blades of might,
So these same two, tongue p^isaunte knyghts, with scoulding ginn the fight.
The auditorye numberouse* the Persie ^nset gave,
The people laugh, he praises Brute, and his retenue brave.
Duke Brute, the son of Asia, his men he calls the stars,
Balde Rupilie he rattles up, to combat if he darres.
He calde him hurtefull hateful dog, to earth, a greeuouse sign,
Like pleasant stream beset with wood, so flows his talk divine.
(...) Then Rupile let issue out, his well ycouched words,
Throughseasonde, as the drubled lakes, that keeps aye in fordes.
So perfyt and exact a scoulde, that women might give place,
Whose tatling tongues, had won a wispe, to stand before their face.
The Persie see his foe so fell, A railers to^g insupportable, therefore not to
be aun svvered by words, but repressed by rigor of the maiestrate.
and how he did him snape,
Thought impossible to resist, ne wiste he how to escape.
Lord Brute (quod he) my liege lord Brute* for all the gods above*
Thou that art wont to hasserd all, to win thy countries love,
To wringe the maces forth their hands, to daunte the dukes a down,
Be wrekde, be wrekde (thy only praise) upon this doggishe clown.

The gardine God Priapus being erected as a watch to drive away birds and
thieves, complains him self to be sore scarred of the old VVitche Canadie,
her fellow sorcerers Sagana, and such like. He partlye touches the manner of
their practisynge.

The eight Satire.
I Was sumtimes a very block, the body of a tree,
The wryght uncertain what to make a stool, or God of me,
His pleasure was to make me God, mine office is to fray
Both birds and thieves, that would cum filtche our fruit from hence away.
As images (most commonly) the woorkemen use to make,
To purchase ease, or wealth to men, and for their lucre sake.
This orcharde was a sepulcher indeed, a public grave,
For Nomentane and Pantolabe* and every rascal slave.
The plat of ground, was broad and square, and of a mighty length,
Sum tombs there were right beautiful, and of a during strength.
This place that was a dampishe soil, and white, with dead men's bones,
Is now a pleasant paradise, to walk in for the nones.
The velvet grass, the holsom herbs, the trees in motley lyuerie,
Both art and nature have bestowde, abundantlye their tapestrye.
I am molested very much with fowls, and cleekynge thieves.
Yet most these charmynge sorcerers, undoubtedly me greues:
Who do with poison, and with spells, bereue men of their wits:
I can not stay these mother mabbes, but they will charm by fyttes.
When as the moon begins to show her young and cumlye face,
They cum to gather dead men's bones, and hurtefull herbs a pace.
I saw my self old Canadie, about twelve of the clock, Canadie a vvitche.

Bare foot, her locks about her head, Ytuckde in pukishe frocke.
She howled with on other hagge, a coolor sallow man
Made them to look, like gastefull goosts, (good for to curse and ban)
These two with teeth did rent in twain a lamb of blackishe hue,
The blood resorted to an hole, purple, and smoking new.
Thence did they cite the damned souls, from Plutos palace large:
The souls, that al things should expound, as it was given in charge.
Stood statues two, the great of wull, of wax was made the less,
The greater gurnde with visage grim, as though he would oppress
The less, which lowred lowtishlye, dispairinge all redress.
The one she calde of Hecatie, King Plutos chamber fear,
The other calde Tisephonie, that has in spite no pear,
Feindes, serpents, furyes, hellish impes. the moon inflamde to read,
Thou mightes have seen, the witches couch behind the tombs of dead
For being spyde, If that I lie, the dawes defyle my noule,
And all the thieves of Rome cum in, and of my fruit take toule.
What should I show particulers? by course how they did speak,
The witch and goosts how they did houle, again how they did squeake,
How they enterred in the ground a speakled serpents hyde:
And hare of woolfes, and by and by a flame there out did glyde.
And as the flame did grow in bulk, and began for to increase:
So did the waxen image (lo.) by small and small decrease.
I markte the drabbishe sorcerers, and hard their dismal spel.
The matter went so hard with me, (there was no other boot)
I let a escape? Dame Cannadie she moude her aged foot,
And trotteth on her way so hard, that all her teethe out fall:
The other Trot lost her read hyue, she hid her bushe with all.
There mightes thou find their coniutde herbs, their threades, and knackes
of art,
And for to see the beldams scarde, have laughed out thy part.
In general he controwleth people inquisitiue, and importunable tatlers, That
he does dialogue wise, and yet without namynge of any person.

The nynthe Satyr.
I Chauncd, to room me in the streets, (as often I use to do)
Musing, I wot not of what toys, but scanninge to and froe.
Runs unto me a certain man, whom erste I uneath see.
Embracing me, oh pleasant lad, how mightes thou fare (quod he?)
Horace. Well at this time, and wish to the, all that thou canste require.
When as I see him haunte me still, I askde him his desire.

Str. Why pardye sir, know you not me? I am a great lernde man.

Horace. If it be so, I deem of you, so much the better than.
Lives feign, I would have left him there, and heruppon, I went
Now swifte, now slow, and told my boy trifles to none intent.
In faith I was through bathde in sweat, and thought them in good case,
That were well in their chamber set, or in sum secret place.
When he would praise the town, or strets, I answered naught again.
I see, (quod he) you would that we were parted very feign.
But all for naught, it may not be, I Will wait upon you now.
(Quod I) sir spare your coortesie, I have no need of you.
I must go se, a friend of mine, whom you did never know,
Nigh Cesars Orchardes, yonde Tyber he dwells far below,

Strange. No busnes I, needs must I walk, have with you for this day,

Horace Then (like the heuye lodened ass) mine ears down did I lay,

Str: Sir if you knew my qualities, there is no reason why,
Or Viske, or Varus should be more, entire to you then I. Viske, and Va rus
two iolye Poets:

For who, for number or for grace, dare mell with me in ryme?
Or who can dance so footingly, observing tune and time?
I can singe so melodiouslye, that very Hermogene
Would envy me, or if he hard would yield to me I wene.

Ho: I thought to interchaunge a word, thy mother lives she,
Or any of thy kynsfolke else, that stands need of the?

Str: In good time they are brought to stay, and I remain alone,

Horace Dispatche thou me, so it must be: for many years a gone,
Sabella (I a very child) Sabella a-Prophetes.
did reed my drerye fate,
In folowinge form, with tender hand, pressed upon my pate.
Not poison keen, nor enmies sword, this babe away shall draw,
Not stitche, or coughe, or knobbing gowt* that makes the patiente slaw,
A prater shall become his death, therefore, let him always
If he be wise, shun iangling iackes, after his youthful days.
We came to Lady Vestas church* the fourth part of the day
Whilst language passed to and fro, was passed clean away.
He stood in bonds, (as he told me) in court for to appear,
Or sentence else definitive should pass against him clear.
If thou do love me friend (quod he) to th'arches with me draw.
Nor can I stand upon my feet, nor know the cyuile Law.

Horace: I doubt if I should leave my cause, or else thy frendlye company.

Str: I pray the me, not yet (quod he.) before me, by and by

Horace, He preseth on: my victor guide I do succeed a pace,

str: How does your Lord Maecenas now, how stand you in his grace?
It is a rare and wittye part, in friendship long to dwell,
Horace, I tell the as a friend, thou have vsd fortune well,
If that thou woldste plant me in once, (in forfitte of my head)
Thou shouldste no doubt, have me a friend, would stand the in good stead.
Within a months space or twain, Maecenas I would claw
That all the reaste might blow their nails, or go to shough the dawe.

Horace. We live not so, as thou doste think, no house, more pure then this,
Nor none, that from those mischeues vile, more clean and spotles is.
His riches, or his learning is no prejudice to me:

Str. There is a place accordingly, for each in his degree.

Hor. A thing thou tells incredible. I tell a sothefast tale,

Str. Thou makes me glow feign would I cum to be of his counsel.

Hor. If that you will, you have a grace, his favor for to win:
The first assault is very hard, by suite thou maiste get in.

Str. I will not fail brybes shall corrupt his cheefist serving men:
Though once or twice the gates be shut I will not cease yet then:
* I Will wait my opportunity, to meet him in the ways,
"To lead him home, to curtsey him, and cap him when he stays.
"There is no good for to be bone, whilste we are living here:
"Except we lie, faune, flatter, face, cap, kneel, ducke, crouche, smile,
fiere.
He pratlyng thus, a friend of mine one Fuscus Aristie,
Met me, who knew this chatting sir almost as well as I.
Stock stille we stand, he askde my whence, or whether that I would:
I haylde him back, and by the hand, of friendship did him houlde.
Squinting his eyes, he began to nod, to call me thence away,
And yet dissemblingly he thought, to dallye and to play
My heart in choler perboylde was: I wis my friend (quod I)
You said, that you a matter had to tell me secretly.

Fuscus. An other time. I must go see the circumcised Iues
In keeping of their Saboth day, what holy rytes they use.

Horace I love not that religion.

Fuscus I, of infirmity
Am scrupulouse: and therefore sir, I pray the bear with me.
Hereafter I will be your man, both when and where you will,
This day dismis me to go room, throughout the streets my fill.

Hor. The churl departes and left me stille to feel my sharp distress.
By chance there cums this fellows foe, who now had got redress
At him by law: varlet, (quod he) I charge the for to stay,
And pray you (Horace) give me leave, my mind to him to say.
Co ntent (quod I) you may be bold, to work your will for me,
My troblesum companion arested then I see.
Both parties cry, the croude grows great through great Appollos grace,
It was my luck for to escape* so comberouse a case.

Some Had Evil spoken of Horace for reprehendinge Lucille. he protests that
he by no means, means to defame the person, but to have his, or their
doings bettred. Pretty other c^nceites and notes of versefying

The tenthe satire
Forsooth, I said, (Lucill) I said, your verses run not round.
Does any love Lucill so well, to praise his iarring sound?
But he through tickling up the town, with mirth has wun a name:
And yet this does not prove him lernde though I should grant the same.
So might our minstrell Laberie Laberie delec table in minstre^y, and yet not
learned.
be coumpted learned than,
If merye mirthe, and only mirthe, could make a learned man.
To make the reader laugh a pace, is not a Poets part:
I mean not all: though therein be a pretty piece of art.
He must be quick to make his pause, and sentence fall in time*
Else tracting long, to weryed ears, will make a lothsum rhyme.
His treatice interchaungeable: now merye and now sad,
In Poets puff, and now again in Retorique flourish clad.
Sumtimes a fable trimly told does work in better force.
Then if the plaintiff Poet should besing his musies horce.
Sumtime to spare his eloquence, and speak not what he can:
Such were the ancient interludes, so where they liked than.
And so far to be imitate: but neither Hermogen
Demetrius:
Nor other, who would seem to be, so gay devising men,
Did ever read (I dare make good) those lettred Poets works,
Save Catul, and Caluus, whereas such paltrye baggage lurkes,
Tush, now I glaunce, and blame amiss for Lucill has devised
A tricksye work in Lattin coat, and greakishe gardes comprised.
An auntrus act, I promise you, O thou that knows not much,
Cease to admire a man for that, the matter is not such
As it is thought, to sprincle here and there a word of greek,
Sum assehead doultes in baggish style, of greek are not to seek.
Except thou think that diverse tongues are better when they meet,
As mixed wynes, (what else?) become more wholesome and pure sweet.
Well, in thy verse use Greek at will, beware, that when at bar Petillus:

Thou pleadest for thy clyent, there thou go not ouerfarre.
I mean as if some passing man should stand in plea thy foe, Publicula or
Coruinus:

And sweat again to grauaile the, and work thy clyent woo,
Use not thy two tongude phrases then, Canues a town where was spoken both
grecke and Latin:
like one of Canues town,
Thou may perchance become non suite, thou and thy cause borne down.
Once on a time, a Greek poem I dreamed to indite,
(A Roman I disioynde by sea, vnured so to write)
Lord Romulus did bid me stinte, in pitchye silent night,
At midnight, when such vysions are coumted most of might.
In grekish tongue (says he) to write write upon writing still,
Is as to power on fatted sow, more draffe drink and more swill.
Therefore whylst Alpine shriketh out Al^ a tragical Poet.
the murdered Memnons baine
And Rhene descriues, I leaving Greek am of my Satyrs feign.
Which neither shall in Guyldhall once, be judged of the Mayre:
Nor feed the eye on stately stage, to make a meyny stare. Fundanus a comical
Poet:

Fundanus may at his good lust, of ninctie fyncties write,
(I say) of harlots heedful guile, of Dauus what a spite
He wrought to Chremes by his craft, That faculty therefore
I leave to him as captain in scoffing comike lore.
And Pollio, the princely iestes, in lofty Iambiques may
By virtue of that gracious verse in tragike wise display:
So Vary makes his Elegies, of quick, and lively might,
And Virgill, well in rural rhyme, His gamesome Muse can dight:
A Satyr I, more sauerly, and with more luck attempted,
Then Varro, and a number such* (al arrogance exempted.)
I do not say, before my time, But Lucille did devise,
Nor ever meant to prejudice his crown in any wise: Lavvt^ll Crown.

But now and then outtakingly, he will be ouerseene,
And bring such stuff, whereof the most omitted might have been.
I pray you (Lucille) say me soothe, nor be you not offended,
Has not your wisdom said or now, that Homer migtt be mended?
And has not ioly Lucill to Actins.
the doleful Actle changed?
And for to carpe him for his phrase Enius
al over Ennie raunged.
Yet when he speaks of himself, He speaks not as he were
A better clarke, then those he blamde. Why may not we inquyre
In way of talk? if his hard style, a matter good has marde:
Or if the matter too untoward, has made his style to hard.
If that a man think it enough, and for a Poet mete,
Twixt meal and meal, two hundredth rymes, to rear upon their fete:
Like Casse, whose lauishe eloquence, Cassus burned for his folishe books
was rushyng as the streams:
Therefore were burnt, his corpse, his books, (his ha^tye trauaylde dreams.)
If this be good, Lucill is good, in such respect may he
Of pleasant head, and deep device, and clarkly judgment be.
He may be thought to have enritchde Grease, with his Satyr verse,
Much better then an elder sort, which I could now rehearse.
Right happy Lucill, that did see so plausible a time:
If he had been in the se our days, he must have razde his ryme.
And paerd of all that was not trym, and so have bent his brain,
"That both he should have scratchde his head, and bitte his thombes for
pain.
"For now, who looks to bear the bell, his doyngs he must cull, Horace*

"At home with him, and better add, then he did erste out pull.
"Contented to have pleased the wise, let go the skyllesse hobbes,
Who would esteem the clappynge of a flock of luskyshe lobbes.
(Not I in sooth): the judgment of one worthy personage,
In learning ripe, in virtue just, in verdite sharp, and sage:
Give me before a thousand lowtes, and all their loud suffrage.
Tigell he kepes a prat^lynge stille, his pages do me pynche:
Prate what they can, the worste they can, I mind not once to wynche.
Such careless, brainlesse, senseless shrubbs, such sucklyng maultwormes who,
Does take their words, but as of course, and so can let them go?
The lord Maecenas and Virgill, The wise clerks of that age.
Plotie, and Varius,
Valgie, and our drad sovereign the great Octauius,
And Pollio (I fawn not now, nor flatter, thanks to pyke)
Fuscus, and eke the Viscie both, I would they should me like*
Thou Messala, thy brother to, You Bubilie also
You Seruie, and thou Furnius, both you and such like mo,
Friendly, and learnde, which now for have unnamed I let go,
Your praise I say, feign would I have, full sorry and full sad:
If I ne can fulfill the hope, which of my self I had.
Sir Tigell, and sir Demetrie, Your dumpishe domes in schools*
You may be stow there as you list, emongst your flock of fools.
As for the wise, they wink at them, nor will not on them look:
Go boy go note these sayings well and put them in a book.
Q. HORA. FLACCVS HIS second Book of Satyrs.
The poet is at Altercation with himself, and reasons if he should
anyefurther proceed, in inditynge of Satyrs, since he was thought of some
envious persons to be sharp spoken, and indede a backbyter. He demands
counsel of the lawyer Trebatius: he defends his own deed, and
conuincethe his misiudgers.

The first satyr
SOme think my Satyrs too to tarte, to keep no constant law,
And some have thought it lously pend^ what so of mine they saw.
And weane a thousand such like rimes, one might within a day,
Write and dispatche: (old friend Trebat^) what would I do? a way
To me prescrbe: you bid me rest, my Musics to appal.
Na, trust me truly by my thryfte, that were the best of all.
But I must needs be doing still, you bid me, I know what,
To swymme in Tyber all the day at night to keep a chat.
To drink for life, to quaffe carouse, to load my tottye noule,
And by such means restrain my pen, and to surcharge my soul.
Or if I have such urgent lust, and lyking to indite,
That then I should of Cesars fraies and passing triumphs write.
For that would fetch us in the pence, and help me for to live.
Alas (God knows) full feign would I* my courage will not give
Me so to do. Not every man the warlike troops so gaye,
The morishe pikes, and broching spears, the frenchemen slain in fray,
The puissaunt Pe^cie pluckte from horse praise worthy can displaye.
Why might I not just Scipio, thy martial feats have praised,
As learned Lucille once tofore such bloody bankets blased?
I will assaye* as time shall serve, unless I wait my time,
It is in daine, to exhibit to Caesar any rhyme.
Whom, if a man attempt to claw, inflexible he stands,
Yet, better were so to presume, then for to file our hands
With bankroute slave Pantobolus and Nomentanus prankes
Sith causeles all mistrust them selves, and cannes me little thanks,
What way for me? they say, that I am subject unto drink,
And shotishely upon excess, lay out what so I think:
Like dronken folk that hoppe and skippe, when lickour lodes their brain,
And when through ill affected eye, Pollu^ and Castor* Jupiter and Ledas sons
brethren to Helena.
one candell seems twain.
Borne of one egg, Pollux on foot, and Castor loves to ride,
Each man his mind. In studying how many ways be tryde?
I keep one stay, writing (they say) in melancholy mood,
Like Lucill, saving that my wit, is not all out so good.
"Lucill, as to his very friend, so would he to his book
"His secrets good or bad bewray, look on them, who would look.
Him follow I, in Lucanie, or bred in Appulte
I wot not: For Venuce my town Venucinum, just between Lucanie, and Appulie,
there was the poe^ b^ne. (...)
betwixt them both does lie.
The Romans Venucine possess, so sent into that place,
Lest people nigh abordering might win the same in space.
And thereby noy the Romish wealth, what so my country is:
What so my wit, my bitter style strikes not a whytte amiss.
It may be lykened to a sword, In sheathe for my defen^.
Since no false losels hurt me then, why do I draw it thence?
O king, O father Jupiter, Would God the times were so
That ruste might well devour this sword, that none would work me woe.
But work they do, but who so does, though he be diuelyshe fell,
I blason far and nere his arms, and wanton touches tell.
He may go howl, and pule for woe, the citizens will scorn him,
And cause him wyshe full many a time, his damme had never borne him.
The Lawyer when that he is chaft, will threaten judgment fell.
So Cannadie our sorceresse with poison will us quell:
Each officer does menace eke, the worste that they can do:
All brag of that, which is their best, and therewith fear their foe.
And that nature allows of this* mark thou these notes with me:
The wolf with toothe, the bull with horn. and how this same might be,
Dame Nature teaches inwardly* thou doste again reply,
Strong Sheua would not with his sword, his mother cause to dye,
Though she had wrought him much mischief. No maruayle, for the ox
Strikes not with tooth, nor wolf with hele* strong poison used this fo^e.
So he and they, the good and lewd their weapons have by kind,
And use the same to work their wealet the gifts therefore of mind
Shall be my best artillery: For whether quiet age
Abides me, or black wyngde death encompasse me in rage,
Come wealth or want* at home, or else perchance an exilde man,
I will not fail, to write my state, if possiebly I can.
Trebar^ My son, if that thou write to sharp, no doubt thou shall not live,
Some one or other, will to the Thy fatal wound ygeue.
Why? Lucill lyude, who ever used, all fayners to detecte

Horace. With Satyrs sharp, and quippies round, of death he never reckt.
But blamed those, which ontwardly do give a shyning shoe,
And inwardly are chargde with sin, that uneaths they can go.
Good Lelie did not hate his wit, not he that got renown
For pollecie, and pruice too. For beating Carthage down.
I say they were not miscontent, That lewd Metellus once, Metellus and Lupus
noble men, yet repre hended for vice: Scipio and Lelius not repyning^

And lowtishe Lupus were reformde, with Satyrs for the nonce.
He would not spare the officers, nor private men to blame.
A friend to none save honesty, and those that use the same.
With doughtie stout duke Scipio, and Lelie learnde and wise,
He would ieste very iocondlye, One point of wisdoms, not to be merry a among
a multitude:
and franckly in his guise,
At meals when he sequestered was from the unlettered sort.
What so I am, though far I wot from Lueils wit and port.
Yet envy self cannot deny, but I have led my life
Amongst the best, though some men think me dedicate to strife:
Me thinks my ground is good and sure, except you friend Trebate,
By law do disalowe of it, I will pursue my state.
Beware, beware, the warnde may live, be circumspect, and slawe,

Trebate Lest you by words undo your self* through ignorance of law.
For who that writes slaundrously, we lawyers must amend him:

Hor. And who that writes true and well, our Caesar must defend him:
If that a man speak of azeale, And blame the bad alone,
Dispatche your rowles, there is no gain, the Lawyer may be gone.

Under the Personage of the stoike Ofelsus, he controlleth the gluttonous and
riottous: he shows the variatie of meats them selves, not to be so
dilectable, as they are so made by abstinence, and sharp appitite. He
commends much frugalitie, which is chiefly in sparing and thryftie diete.

The second satire
How good it is, and laudable, to live but* with a small:
It passes me for to discriue. Ofellus told it all.
A rudesbie, and unruly, wise, and yet unlucky man,
Who never could bring to an end, The thing which he began.
"Learn abstinence, O learn of me not when your paunche is full,
"Or when with gross vpflynging fumes, Your sight is maid and dull:
"Or when your lust leanes to the worst, and will not brook the best,
"Come soberly, not ouerchargde, with intrayls all at rest.
"Some thing to say: the wastefull womb, does plague and kill the brain:
"As that judge does his country hurt, who gapeth after gain..
When thou doste trace the hastyng hare, or tame the Iennet wild,
Or fight in field, like Romayn stout, (unlike a Grekyshe child,)
Or when thou do at footebal play, or tennice for pastyme:
Whylste love of game does ease thy toil, and help away the time:
Or when thou slyngest in the air: with might avoid the stone:
What so thou doste, do earnestly, and when thy toil is gone,
Thou shall have stomach quick and sharp, that when thou comes to dyne,
It will not look for sweet conceits, or fragrant friskyng wine,
If that the rude and ugly sea, do let the fyshers art,
If food do fail, of bread and salt, to take and eat thy part
Thou will be glad. Why is it thus? How sounds this with reason?
The smell of hoate and smokyng roast, though it be dear and geason,
Does not delight of it own self: thou makes the culleis good.
Thy sweat and pyne makes sweet and fine, and savors all thy food.
What taste is there, if thou beiste gordgde? ne can it well endue,
In Lampre, or in Leueret, or choppyn oysters new.
Nathelesse, I can not thee persuade, but if they both be dreste,
The Pecocke, and the pubble hen, the Pecocke tastes best.
Begyled with apparances: because her costly sail
Is rare: and that a circled pride she bears in her tail.
As though that were material: her feathers do thou eat
So gaye to thee? or is she else, in brothe the better meat?
The flesh of both is much alike: thou loves the pecocke tho,
Because of gallant gawyshe plumes: well, let it then be so.
The dog fyshe, that from Tyber cums* Tuscus, a street in Rome, nere to a
creke of the sea,
or stream in Tuscus street,
Why is it worse, then that, from sea, where wrastlynge waves do meet?
O doting world, above therest, they love the Mullet great,
And yet do mynce her small andsmal^ before they do her eat.
Thus may we see, the sight is all: If sight may things ercell,
Great Porposes should be in price: na, sothly I can tell
Why they be not: this Porpose fyshe, with us is every where:
A Mullet for the mincing dames, Far sought, and dear bought good for Ladies:
for that is rare and dear.
The temperate will little eat and feed of simple chere.
Some gluttons would eat greater fish, to satisfye their mawes,
(Like hellishe Harpies) from a pan, with gredie gnawing jaws.
But you, you wastfull southern winds corrupt their viandes all:
It ends not much: for Bore or Brytte do taste to them as galle.
When to much havoc has them cloyde, then gyn they sore to long
For Rapes and Helicampane root, and do the beggars wrong.
So kings (to have their courses just) Reject not pore men's cates,
As eggs and oil, with such the like receaude and used of states.
The Heraulde Gallo for a dishe The dishe was a fish ^avvled Acc^ipe^ser a
^hile usual yea and noble, afterward contemptible:
He used upon a day,
Was ill rebukde. But they to blame: for Brtttes few durst assay
The Brit did scope abroad in seas, The Storke did keep her nest,
Before paunche pampring Pretorie told how they should be dressed. Pretorie (...)
friend to the k^chin,

If some the roasted Cormoraunt, delytefull would report,
Our youth (soon taughe to naughtynesse) would try it for a sport.
The covetous and sparinge man we must not note for one,
(As ofell says) if thou percase from one sin wouldste be gone,
And thereby hap into a worse, that were a bootlesse case.
Canis, in whom for his desert, that name may well take place, Canis a coue
touse miser, Oulde olyues

Old Olives, add the dogtree fruicte, and lees of changed wine,
And vile unpleasant greasye oil, to lothesome for a swine.
(If he did feast his friend at home, or keep his native day,
Or solemnise the time by chance, in surely rych arraye) One good note of a
churl to be liberal of that which is naught: Demand:

Abundance of such corrup stuff, Among his, he would outlaye.
What diet shall the wise man then, twixt two contraries use?
Shall he the trade of couetouse, or prodigal refuse?
Unspotted he, that kepes him fre, and leanes to neither side.
R^plye: He shall not be like Albutye, who, when he does divide,
His household charge emongst his men himself will nothing do:

Albutye Nor yet like Neuie wait at boorde, for that is foolish too.

Neuye:: Now lysten well, how great the fruictes, of sparing diete be,
First good for health, for this thou must persuade thy self with me:
That many things annoyeth man, And meats do much offend,
"Though they be pleasant, yea and good yet, when thou doste them blende,
"As fyshe with foul, roste meats, with boylde, to choler goes the sweet:
"The moist to fleume, for stomach fleume a guest is most unmeet.
"Again the corpse chargde with excess, does ouercharge the mind,
"Abandonnyngto earthly things, the soul of heavenly kind.
The temperate may soon dispose his members to their rest,
And rise again delyuerly, to labor quick and priest.
He shall be in the better plyte, In time that happen may,
As when the year by compaste course, shall bring the pagiaunt day.
Or if he take confortatiues to help him at his need: Worthy fruits of
temperance.

For years will come, and crasye age, who daintily must feed.
In age or sycknesse, what shall be, delityng unto thee?
Who haste prevented in thy youth such pleasure as might be?
The rammyshe Bore, they wont to praise, not that they had no nose
To feel him smell, but to this end, that he which did repose
Him self with them, might egerly fall to, and eat his meat:
Because they would not gluttonlyke, their whole provision eat
In those days, I would have been borne, in such an honest time:
"I love well hospitality, If riot cause not crime.
If thou do stand in awe of verse, or force a rymers reed:
Take heed, such sorts, and subtilties of cates will make thee need.
Both shame and harm they will procure, again, add to this same,
Thy kynsmen wroth, thy friends made foes thy self foe to thy name.
"Wyshyng for death, and shall not dye, but live to wayle and moan
"Thy wanton wealth, thy beggars plight thy treasures that be gone.

Trasie. (Says tauntyng Trasy) may not I lay out my coin at will?
My rentes come to me thick and thick, my want is foyson still,
Not three kings can dispende with me, who says, I may not spend?

Poet. Therefore, the surplus of thy goods apply to better end.
"Why want the silly needy souls refreshyng at thy hand?
"Why do the temples of the gods, without repayryng stand?
Thou corsye carle, thy country dear, from hougie substance such
Shall she have naught* wylt only thou devour alone so much?
"O ieste, unto thy very foes, For, whether may have more,
(If fortune frown, and grefes grow on) esperance to his store?
Thou: which was married to thy mucke, and fresh in gay attire,
Or he: that dreading chance to cum, a little does desire,
And keeps it well, and warylye to help in hopeless tide:
"Like as the wise in golden peace for stormye war provide.
For more belief in this behalf, I then a little boy
Can now report, that Ofellus, put not so great a joy, Ofels talk ^n
prosperity

Nor pleasured so in his chief wealth, as in his worste decay.
This was a common talk of his when he bare greateste sway.
Alls one to me: on woorkyday I never could be taken
With better meat, in feelde or town, then roots or chimnye bacon.
I and my sons keep thus in feilde, our cattle seelde forsaken. Horace, A
more honest kind of liberality.

But if some old acquaintance cum, who has been long away,
Or sum good honest neighbor else through sletie drisling day
Do cease from work, we merry make not with such costlye fyshe,
But with a chicken, or a kyd, and grapes our second dishe,
A nutte, or else sum kind of fig: the table tayne away
We drink about, and afterward^ for Ceres gifts we pray,
So fly away the freating cares, that bring the wimpled age.
Let furiouse fortune frown and fume, and roste her self in rage,
She can not much empayre our cates: Vmbrenus a soldier who had the ground
given him by Augustus.
my servants have not found
Their cheer much worse sense Vmbrenus has got away our ground.
It matters not, for nature gave not me this proper land
At first, nor him, nor any else, he chaste us forth with hand,
His beastelynes will chase him out, or sum expulsive law,
Or else his heir that shall survive, when he must couche full law
Now Vmbrens ground, of late O fells (a thing not very stable)
Now mine, now thine, so must we take, the world as variable.
Let nothing cause your courage quayle, in care be constante stille,
And bend your breasts to bear the blows of fortune that be ille.

The Poet shows a great skill or vvorkemanshipp in this Satyr, especially
in that the earnestlye studying to make others good, is himself partelye
contented to be controwled by the stoic Damasip, as a sluggarde, and
pretermiter of duetifull occasions.

The stoicke proves sin to be a certain kind of madness.
Damasip. YOu write so seldom unto me, that tower times in a year
Scarce cums a pen within your hand, perusinge written gear.
Half angry with your self I weane, that drente in wine and sleep,
You spending time in sylent pause, of Satyrs beres no keep.
Perform thy promis once at length, go to, what shall we have?
Thou coms from Saturnes* feast I trow from drink thy self to save.
"Will nothing be? You blame your muse, so do your Poets all
"Accuse your pen, when to your mind, your sentence will not fall.
When thou camst to the country town, to live a part from strife,
Thy visage gave, as though thou wouldste have written books or life.
Menander and dan Platos works, why do they on you wait?
Why brought you Eupolis to town, and Archilog his mate?
You mean for fear of spiteful folk, all virtue to disclame,
Thou caytife shall com to contempt, shun idle joys for shame:
Or else surrender all such praise, as thou have got before:
By work of wit, in full intent The Poet content to be reproved but not at
such a peuishe Merchant as
to mell with it no more,
For this sage counsel, (Damasip) the heavenly gods I pray,
To send a barber speedely, This stoike damasip.
to wype your berde away.

Horace In deed, and know you me so well how coms it so to pass?

Damasip, I sufferd shipwreck of my goods, whilst I a merchaunt was.
And therefore now can spare an eye, the world to ouervewe.
Then was I plunged in affairs, as they me drove and drew,
To know what vantage by exchang, to clippe, and wash my goulde,
By subtilties in mineralles, my state for to vphoulde.
By such like sort came I to have* an ample wea lthie share,
To purchasse orcha rds for mine ease and bowers bright and fair.
My wit so deep so sore to deal, such luck to win, or save,
That me a Mercurialiste, to surname then they gave,

Horace I know it well and marvel much, If that be rid and gone:
Except thou have sum worse diseas which needs will rain alone.
As Phisikes cure from head to breast, diseases can convey,
As by excess of much madness, drive lythargie away.
Per chance you setting fraud a part, the mad man's part will play.

Dam^, Friend Horac^, you are mad likewise, And so is every fool,
If stoic ke Stertein taught us once, true d^rine in his school.
Of whom, I learnde this trade of life, no trewande in my lore,
He dubde me then a stoic Stage, and bad me morn no more.
Though all the world should go to wrack, (for from a bridge I meant
All headlonge to have horlde my self so things against me went.)
Approchinge nygh, O do not so, friend Damasip (quod he)
What thirlinge throws does twitch thy heart? The stoicke Startine supplyeth
with his talk almost all the satyr folovvinge,
what shame confounds the?
The people cawle thee giddishe mad, why, all the world is so:
If thou be mad, and thou alone be drounde: I let the go?
But what is madness to defyne? Crysip that noble clarke,
Calls all fools mad, and all whose minds are duskde with errors dark.
"This rule makes mad a noumberouse swarm of subjects and of kings,
"And none exemptes, save those in whom the well of wisdom springes.
Now lean thine ears, and listen well, perceive how all be mad,
Yea those who earste to make the worse, such mockeries have had.
Admit there be through darkesum wood a speedy footepathe way,
"On right side sum, on left side sum and all do go a stray
"Through wilsumnes of wilderness: the error is all one,
Though through miswandringe diversely, they diversely have gone.
Thou may be mad, (friend Damasipp) A reason to prove al map, which tread
not in one true footepath of wisdom.
thou maiste be much unwise,
Thy mockers staringe mad also, though in an other guyse.
One manner frenzy is, to fear when nothing is a miss,
As hills on plains, or seas on mountes, this kind of bugg, or this,
An other like a desperate, nothing at all to fear,
To trudge through deep, high, hoate, and could, to prease upon a spear.
His friends reclames, his sister dear, his parents, and his wife,
Theirs rocks, theirs Seas, great dread (say they) sweet kinsman save your
life.
He will not hear, for all their cry, no more then Fusie could
When he through force of drowsy drink, was falue in slumber coolde.
He should recite the drunkards part, he druncke his part away,
The people egde him for to speak, he wiste not what to say.
One way or other all are mad, as Damasip, which oulde
Pictures did bye was mad, and he that lent to him the goulde.
"Most mad is he, that takes a trust, not having hope to pay:
"Most mad is he, which may make boulde and dare not his assay.
"Assay (quod you) but who would trust, for now the world is such,
"That lend a man, a thousand crowns, or more, or nigh so much,
And take a bil of his hand write, an obligation make,
"So lawyer like, so clarklie drawn that none could it mistake,
"And bind him strait to keep a day in pain of marks and pounds,
"Show witness, write, and what thou can or lowse, or shake thy grounds
"The One will he do: like Proteus to shapes ychaunged, he
"Sometime a Bore, a bird, a stone, and when he list a tree.
No doubt he will attempt all shifts, to shift him self from the.
If wise men use for to do well, and fools for to do ill,
What say you to our creditor, our usurer Petill. Petill usurer

Is he not mad? wh^ when he lendes, for increase, asks more
Then the pore debtor can perform, though he should swelt therefore,
Ye lecherouse, luxuriouse, ye supersticiouse:
Ye shottishe, dotishe, doultish dawes, that nothing can discuss,
Draw on my Clyents one by one, be not agreist ne sad,
Stand still in stound, keep whishte (I say) whilst I do prove you mad.
I charge you, you Ambitious, and you that mucker good,
To gerde your gowns, to sit and harcke whilst I do prove you wood.
The couetouse, of Helibore the greater part must have,
Or rather all the pills, for th 'heade One part of a mad man to seek vain
glory after his death:
as they which most do rave.
Th'e^cutoures of Staberie, engrayled on his grave,
What were his ample legaces, and what to them he gave,
For so he bad in testament, and if they would not so,
That then to maintain sword plarot,) most of his goods should go.
Arrey did superuise this will: Areus superuisor of the will:
who should give them in wheat,
To preserve sport, as much as half a country could well eat.
What though I did (misiudge menes I had a wittye meaning.

Staberie No doubt you had, to this intent was all his gilefull gleaning.

Stoicke: To have his heirs engraiue in stones his honnorable will:
Neade was to him a wickedness, yea an ungodly ill.
Therefore in deed full dredefully. he wayed it as gods curse:
If at his death, then in his life, one dodkin he were worse.
For all and every thing (quod he) virtue, renoumne, and fame,
"The corpse, the ghost, does crouch to coin and serve unto the same.
"Which who so has all at his lust, him needs no further thing
"He may be famous, stout, and ^uste, a wiseman and a king.
And this is even as good as if by virtue he up grue:
But Staberie or Aristippe, Aristippe a Philosopher that flattered Alexand er.
of lykely, judge not true.
Who trauayling in Lybie cost his gold did cast away,
Because it did from ^orneyinge, his men a little stay.
Which is the madder of the twain? but we ne can, ne will
Sample, against example bring, to samples that be ill.
If that a man bye instruments, and horde them in a place*
Him self not weyinge of the sound, nor forcinge musikes grace:
If that a man should bye him stuff and tools to set up shop:
Or bye him sails to hang in ship to hale her by the top:
And never mean to practice ought, is he not staring mad?
Why is not this our couetouse as much in frensye clad?
Who hoordes his money, and his gould, and uneath dare auouche it,
Because it is so preciose, to peep at it, or touch it.
If that a man an hudge heap great of corn should ever keep,
With stretched arm, and club in hand, for fear berefte of sleep,
And being owner durst not take, one grain, (misdreadyng waste),
Eatinge most bitter roots, and leaves, vnmilde unto the taste:
If one have many vessels full, a thousand ^nn of wine,
And drink nothing but vinaiger, vntastie, and vnfyne:
Go to, if one of five score years do lie on couche of ground,
And have his down, and fetherbeddes, (where he might sleep full sound)
Stufte up in chestes, for worms and mothes: sum will not houlde them mad,
Because the most of wealthy men, be now as vile, and bad.
O hateful head, forlorn to God, spares thou for time to cum?
Na, na, thou spares that thy lewd child may spend the total sum.
Each day will spend sum portion, (thou thinckes) if thou do spend
Oil to annointe, oil for thy board, amongste thy meats to blende.
Further, thou sayste, it is the best, to live upon a small.
Why doste thou then forswear thy self, and filtche in places all? Testie
anger a kind of madness.

Haste thou the wits, that beats thy men, because nothing can please the?
Which thou with purse, haste purcheste dear, to aid the and to ease the.
When thou doste poison thy parents, and strangle up thy wife,
Art thou not mad, though in Arge town, thou drove not out her life,
Nor yet with sword as Oreste did, or do not it inacte? A man is mad at the
first co^ceyt of mischief.

Yes if for hope of gain thou have, but thought upon thy fact,
Was he not mad before his blade had brusde his mothers baine?
Or forthwith, as this cruel fit, Was crepte into his brain?
Sense that Orestes has been clepte giddie, and mad by name
After the crime, he has not done a fact of haynouse blame,
His sister dear, nor P^des, he never stroke with sword,
To him, and her sumtimes he gave a foul untoward word.
Her feinde him worse, as him to speak, his pearsinge choler would:
But thou in heart kilste all thy friends, that thou mightes have their goulde.

Opimie. The penyfather Opimie, who had so much in store
Who holyday and workyngday, did toil whilste he were sore,
Was troubled so with lythergie, for sleep he could not stere,
His heir went round about the chestes, with blythe and iocaunte cheer:
A frendlye quick Physician, to make, Opymie starte,
Contriude it thus: he had them bring, a board into the place,
A sort eeke to unseal the bags, and tell the coin a pace.
He rearde the sickman from his bed, Sir (quod he) houlde it fast
Or else no doubt* those will have all* and sparple all at last.
In my life time?

Phi. awake betime, be lively then in deed

Opimie. What shall I do?

Ph. fail to thy meat, there is no way but feed.

Opimie. Else, will thy spirits be forfaynte, thy vigor fall away,
Thy stomach weak and languishinge, will bring the to decay.

Op. You give me naught.

Ph. drink up forth with this Ptysande made of ryce.

Op. What shall I pay?

Ph. a small

Op. how much.

Ph. Two pence.

Op. alack, the price.
Such costs is worse, then sword or thief, cum death I will not rise.

Damafip. Now who is made?

Sto. Each foolish man, what is the couetouse?

Dum. A fool and mad.

Dam what if a man be nothing rauenonse,
Eftsoon shall he be coumpted sound? no:

Dam Stoicke tell me why?

St. Put case the restless paciente* full ill at ease should lie,

Sto. His pulse does show, he has no stitche, nor straininge at his heart:
Is that enough to warraunte him, forth of his coutche to starte?
Sharp pa^ges may twitch him in the raynes, and twitche him in the side:
So, though one be not couetouse, yet may he swell with pride.
"They neade no salve, to say a sooth. that use not for to lie*
"Nathelesse the testie may take pills, to purge melancolye.
"Almost as ill to hoorde thy goods, that they give no relief,
"As if thou shouldste bestow them on, an arraunte pilferinge thief.

Oppidie. "Old Oppidie two manors kept of long in Canuse town
En^lde to him by due discente who sick, and lyinge down,
On dead bed, then calde for his sons, (which were no more but twain)
And thus to speak unto them both, the parente would him pain.
Aulus, my son, when thou in youth, A pretty no^ for parents.
counters in purse didste bear,
And frankly on thy play^eers wouldste, bestow them here and theare,
Tyber my son when thou thy nuttes wouldste tell and tell again,
By this I gatherd, that in you, two diverse sins would rain:
That Aulus would be ryotouse, that Tyber naught would spend,
Wherefore, for gods own love dear son unto my lore attend.
Au^us, look thou diminishe not, nor Tyber thou increase,
That, which your father thought enough to mantayne you in peace.
And, that which nature lymiteth: Lest, ticklinge glory may
Incense your hearts, take here an oath, before I pass away:
That which of you shall sewe in Rome, for room, or for degree*
Shall take him self as most deteste, and quyte accurste of me.
Alas, Aulus (mine elder child) to give the gifts of price,
To deal amongste the Citizens* that they gainste the may rise
That thou maiste walk in pomp, and port, Like Agrippe.
thy statutes stand in brass,
What vayleth that? when all is gone what vayleth that (alas.)
Except to win a princes fame, and plausible estate, Esope his fox.

Like fox: thou wear a lions skin to seem a lions mate.
"What though thou warte a prince indeed? Insolence no ted in princes in
Agamemnons personage.
in pride thou might offend,
As Agamemnon, in whose words most princes words are pende.

Tucer. Sir king, why may not Ajax be enterred in his grave?

Agamemno^. I am a king, my lusts a law, your answer (lo) you have.

Tucer. Most puissaunt prince, my suite is just, if any can say nay,
Without all stop, or ieoperdie, his sentence let him say.
God grant your noble majesty, to see your natyue soil.
Leege prince, take pause a space, and then, my pore demand assoyle.

Agam. Demand at once? Tew: shall duke Ajax the next to fearse Achill:
Who famous was, by saving greakes, vntombed tarrye still?
That Priame, and his folk may joy, to see him lack his grave:
By whom their Troiane younkers slain, no country toumbe could have?

Agamem. A thousand sheep he slew in rage, the famous Vlixes,
Menelaus and me with sword he thought he did disease.

Tucer. When thou in Auled for a cow, didste slay thy loving child,
And salt her head ou alter stone, waste thou then mad or mylde?
In what degree did Ajax rage? what did he? slay the sheep.
From lemans bayne, and daughters baine his blade he could ykeepe.
Perchance he curste and band at large the, and thy brother to:
With me, nor Vlixes his foe, he never had to do.

Agamemno^, The lingering ships, that they might sail from haven where they
stood,
Of purpose good, I pacifyed the wrothefull gods with blood.

Tucer. With blood of thine, thou mad king, thou, with mine, but I not mad.

Agam. Who does confound things good and ill (as you) is even as bad,

Stoicke. To follow shows, and vttershapes, to guess but at the good
Is folly leude as is the deed, that coms of angry mood.
Ajax he slew the silly lambs, therefore, distraughte of wit:
And thou for tytles, and renoume, fell murder doste commit.
(Have thou thy wits?) or art thou good, all swelled up with pride?
If in a coche, a fine fleesde lamb, a king should cause to ride,
And give it rayments neat, and gay, and give it maids and goulde,
And call it pugges and pretye peate, and make as though he would,
In worthy wedlock it bestow: the Praetor would fordoe it,
And make his friends look to his wit, for fear he should forgo it:
What if a king for a doumbe sheep, his daughter sacrifice*
I wene the king will grant himself* not to be very wise.
Fondness is madness, so is sin, and who that huntes for name Bellons
goddess of war
Is like Bellona chatinge dame, Bellons goddess of war that loves to see a
mayme,
Who scales fames forte often times does see, dyre feats, and use the same.
Against the riotouse, as he promised.

But now a crashe at Nomentane to reuellers a while,
No reason is this foultishe flock from madness to exile.
The prodigal, by wit word has ten talentes: in his heat,
He biddes the costerdmongers, and thappothycaries neat,
Foulers, fishers, sculls, podingwrightes, the trulls of Tuscus streate,
All cooks and all the shambles eeke, to morrow him to meat
At home. How are they occupyde when they are met in one?
The baude (a spokes man for the rest) its thine (says he) alone,
What so all those or I, possess* at home or any wheare,
Demand it (master) when you will. now sir unto this gear,
Hark, how our younker frames his tale, Ah trusty friends (says he)
The fouler wades through frost, and snow that he may banquet me,
The fysher draws the wyntrye seas, whylste I do sytte at ease,
In faith good fellows, feign would I, your great turmoylyng please:
Take thou some thing, take ten times more, take thou as much again,
And thou threfolde, because with me, your wife has taken pain.
Young Aesope, snatchde a ryng away, from madame Metells ear: Metells, a
lady of Rome

The pearl well worth five hundredth crowns, He drunk in vinigeare:
He is as much besides him self as braynlesse in this case,
As if he had it drent in flood or in some vyler place.
The brood of Quinctus Arius, Arius, a noble man of Rome,
the famous brethren twain.
Through lewd conceits, and babysh pranks do make their stomach feign,
And lively with the Lynnets flesh, that be of costly price.
Be these men wene you, well in wit? be these men mad, or wise?
To build an house of chippes and cards, to watch the trappe for myse:
To play at even and odd, to ride cockhorse in chyldyshe guyse:
If these should please a bearded sire, the fool might have a hood,
Much more, to haunte and harlots house, does prove an old man wood.
"An old man, for to spyll his tears, to please a woman's mind,
"Is as an old man should in duste, go taue, and toys out find:
I would have all these naughty packes to do like Palamon:

Palamon. As he for shame upon a time, With drink all ouergon. A fondlinge
known by his ensigns.

The badges of a fondlyuge, as, brave napkyns, braceletts, rings,
"He laid away, and went to school, to learn more sober things,
"Command a child, to eat a pear, he will not eat a byt:
"Command him, not to eat the pear, the child will long for yt.
"So fares it, with our fondlyng (lo) though he desires to go,
And would this coyishe paramour, vnbodden wend unto.
Ye when she daygnes to send for him, then mammeryng he does doubt,

Phedria. What should I go* as suppliant? or bear my sorrows stout?
She shut me out, she sendes for me, should I come there again?
No, though she should upon her knees, Pray me, to take the pain.

Stoike: Me thynkes the servant Parmeno. has much the better brain.

Parmeno. The thing master, that has in it no measure, nor advice,
"By reason, can not well be ruled: Love has in it much vice.
"There Is stormy war, and caulmie peace, which (passing as a blaste,
"And flotynge on, in blind success) Who seeks to make feast,
"Shall take in hand, an hard attempt, miraculons, and geason:
As if be would at once he mad, and have his perfect reason.

Stoike, "A man that faultreth in his speech, for age, and yet is glad,
"To play at quoytes, or spancounter, may well be counted mad:
"A man, that faultreth in his speech, and will by sword and might,
"Obtain his love, or murder her in cruel bloody plyght:
As Marius slew Hilade, Marius a known Roman: esp^sed withdraw the love of
Hilade. Oulde dotage mere madness. Supersticion proved madness.
and slew himself also,
Because she sought by godly means, his dotage to undo.
This perturbation may be calde, a wodnesse of the mind:
Such wyck e dne, and madness have no diverse names by kind.
An old man late enfraunchised, in dawning of the day,
With hands fair wash, would walk the streets and most deuoutlye pray.
The more deal was to this effect: O Godds above, (for you
Can do the thing) let me a ye live in earth where I am now:
This man was sound enoughe in corpse, in mind I think him mad,
Except his master like not that, who soulde him of a ladde.
Such folk, so supersticious, In old time. if any sold a servant, who
afterward proved mad, it turned to the sellers endamage.
Chrysip doothe greatly charge,
And pleades by right, that they should sail in madame Madness barge.
O Jove, which both can eke and ease, all dolor and all teene,
Rue on my child (the mother cries) who now five weeks has been,
With fever quartayne, felly toste, of thou will heal my son,
Bid me to fast, what day thou wylt, Voues from the panyms.
thy great will shall be down:
"My son likewise recouerde done, in Tyber flood shall stand,
"If thou wylt send him help by chance, or by physicians hand,
"And so she will (to keep her vow) her child in Tyber set:
"The boy through chille benummednesse, his ague worse shall get.
This woman maddeth of her self, or by the will of God.

Damasip. Thus Stertin theyght wise man of Greece, taught me, and gave a nod
As to his friend, at knittynge up: this armor he me gave:
If any man be busye now, his guardon he shall have.
Who so that calls me wood or mad, may learn his propre lack,
And know the ferdle of his faults, that hang behind his back.
Friend Damasip, though you have lost your traffic and your ware:

Stoike: Yet may you gain, for some will give that you their faults may
spare.
Because there is many kinds of mad, in what sort do I dote?

Damasip. Yet to my self I seem not mad, nor from my wit a jot.

^toike* No more seemed Agaue to her self, when she of doleful child,
The head detruncte, did bear about, she thought her self full mylde.
If soothe it be, that I am in add, yet Stoicke tell me this,

^amacip. What vice is it, through which I seem so much to do amys?

(...)* Thou art a very little man, scarce three small cubits hye,
And yet thou buyldes a hautie house, and makes it threate the sky.
Thou laughste at Turbo sword player, a little dandie prat,
To see him stout* thou less, and stout: I deem thee mad for that.
Thynks thou, to buyld like lord Maecene, to do, what he shall do?
A match unmeet betwixt you twain, and ill appointed too.
The mother frogge upon a time abroad to feed, or play,
A Calfe kylde all her young with foot, but one, that scapde away:
Which brought the tidings to her damme, how such a myghtie beast,
Had slain her noble progeny, (to tell a blouddie feast.)
Canste thou with swellyng make thy self, (quod tholde) as bygge as he?
The young assayde, it would not prove The text applies the swelling rather
to the old frogge, but it skillech not so presumption be eschued in old and
young
(quod tholde) so let it be.
Now moralize this fable, and iwys it touches thee,
That still will swell, and make thy match above thine own degree*
Besides, thy pratlynge Poemes to, be matter plain and clear,
To prove thee mad, in poemes mad, yfeuer any were*
It is a madness, thee thy coin, so frankly to disburse.
(Friend Damasip,) abate thy spence, be counsailde by thy purse.

Damasip: Well Stoicke, thou haste taught us plain, that most of men be wood:
As not to prove me so, again, I pray thee be so godd.

The Poet commoneth with the Epicure Catius, who reueleth unto him a great
company of scholetrickes of that sect. The poet nippeth him floutyngly, as he
did else where the precisde Stoike, and such the like fondlynges.

The fourth satire.
Horace. FRrom whence, and whether Catius? I have no time, farewell,

Catius. To teach a school of new precepts, not such as do excelle
Pythagoras, or Socrates, or lettred Dan Plato.

Horace. I grant my gylt, at ill aspecte, to speak unto you so:
Nathelesse, I hope your maystershyppe, Will bear with me this ones,
Some dayntie doctrine of your sect. and novel for the nones
Propounde, of nature, or of art, for you in both do pass.
Yea sir, to speak of matters all, that aye my cummynge was:

Cati. And for to speak accordyngly, of rude and homely matter,
A Romayne, or an Alyen, that taught you so to clatter?

Horace* I will disclose his mysteries, but not bewray his name:

Catius. Least some, myslykyng his precepts, the author elfe might blame. The
Epecure his school.

Eggs long and white, be nutritive, much better then the round:
Eggs roasted hard be costiue, yea unwholesome and unsound.
The gardeyne herbs be not so sweet, As those on mountains be
The watrye soil the virtue slakes, that it is not so free.
The Moushrom that does spring in meades, or in a supple ground
Is best, for such as grow else where, most noisome have been found.
If guestes come to thee at unawares, in water myxte with wine
Souse thou thy hen, she will become, short, tender, neshe and fine.
Who after meat* eats Mulberies, soon ryped of the son:
Shall live in health and iolytie, Ausidius, an ill scholar for the Epicure his
dyete.
whylste many summers ronn^.
Aufidius myxt heddy wine, and honey all in one,
No crafts man he: for simple wynes do breed a force alone,
A lonely force in simple wynes: Meathe urine does provoke,
The Muge fyshe and the Muscles cheap, In purgynge bear a stroke.
So Coos wine with sorell meynt has virtue to expel.
Shelfyshe in growing of the moon, is best to eat or sell:
Not every sea, has fyshe a like: Pelore in Lucrin grows,
The Murer fish from Baiae cums, whence purple color flows,
From Circes choppynge oysters new, From Micen vrchen fish,
Of scaled Scalop Tarento bragges, as her proper dyshe.
To furnyshe well a feast, is hard, a thing not learnde in haste:
He that would do it gorgious, must have a practisde taste.
Its not enough to freight the boorde with sea fyshe out of measure:
There must be brothe for squaymous folk, and spices all of pleasure.
In Vmbria the maste fed Bores, do charge the vessels great:
Uessells, which have not in them borne, the common sorts of meat.
The Bore is ill in Laurente soil, that feeds on reakes and reeds.
Somtymes, from goodly pleasant vine* a sower tendrell speedes. The Epicure a
Benefactor to the Calat.

Who lykes to eat the fruitful Hare, her forepartes are the best,
The choice and use of fyshe and flesh by me first were expreste.
I made them so delicious, so welcome to the taste:
Some can vouchesafe their wits and pains in pastrye for to waste,
It is not much commendable, to know a knacke or twain:
as if in brewinge spyced wynes thou should bestow much pain:
And sauce thy meat with foystie oils, thy guess would the disdain.
If thou will purge Mounteflascon wynes, and make them pure and clear,
Set them abroad in open air, when many stars appear.
The greuouse smell by force of air, will pass and fade away:
Through streynyng of them through a clothe, the good smell would decay.
To mingle in thine egg at meals a little sack and saulte,
Does mende the yelke or white thereof, if it have any fault.
With Afrike cocles or with shrimpes, he that is cloyed may
Be fresh again: in stomach sharp, the Lettise it does play.
The strong may eat good looshiouse meat^, in kytchins which be dreste,
The kitchen physic, is for them, simplye, the very best.
It is behouable to know, of sauce a double kind,
The one, of simple olyue oil, as we in art do find.
The compounde has that goes thereto. Constantinople bryne,
Herbs shred, and minced very thick, some kind of compounde wine:
An oil from Venefratum brought, (Lo) that is passinge f^ne.
Most commonly, that fruit is best, that lyketh best the eye.
Some grapes may be conserude by means, some pressed by and by
I taught the way, to keep them green, without all ylde or fault,
To eat Hearryng with juice of grappes, white pepper, and black saulte.
All those I badde, for to be borne, In vessels of great pride.
A fair broad fish must aye be borne, in vessels large and wide
To lashe out all, is not the best, it can not be denyde.
Much thing does hurt the stomach much, Tve Epicure cannot find in his
ha^t to eat withdraw a poor man nor to have him eat or drink in his company.
as if thy boy, or maid
Has eat in syghte, or have thy cup, with slauysh hand assayde.
Or in some creuyshe motes do stycke, unmoved to or fro:
Therefore broomes, napkyns, must be bought, With many trinkets ^o,
It is a fylthy ouersighte, if all things be not clean:
To rub things with thy purple clothes, I wis it would them steane.
To have such necessary things is hansome, and less dear,
Seclude neatenesse, and then no waste, Can make delitefull cheer.

Poet. Sir Catius, for Gods dear love and mine, my prayer is,
An other time, to lead me where I may hear more of this.
Though well I wot, you could for skille, have played the masters part,
Yet nothing like the Epicure, the father of the art
Besides, his grave and modeste looks, and reverent attire,
Would make one hear him much the more, with zeal, and great desire.
Whom you perchance esteem the less, because you hapie still
Enjoy his sight: but I do wish to go unto my fill,
The crystal fountains hard to find, and there from virtues rife,
To take an practtise perfect rules, of pure and blessed life.

Ulysses At His Home Coming being brought to great extremity and misery
asks the counsel of Tyretias, a prophet in hell* how he may be ritche
again. In Ulysses consider the state of poverty, in Tyretas talk, the
ungodly counsel, of the devil, and the privy suggestions of the world, and
her practices.

The fifthe Satire
Ulysses* TYretia at my request, tell me a little more,
How may I be, so ritche a man as I was once before?
By what means, or what policy? (Prophet) why do thou smyle?
O suttel pate, art thou not well, from shipwreck, and e^ilo

Tiretias To have escapd, thy household gods and Ithacke isles to see?

Ulysses. O Prophet soothfaste in thy speech, (alas) but see thou me,
How bare and beggarly* I cum, into my native land?
(Thou having so foretold my fate) nothing in plight does stand:
The woers spend up all my goods, and howses do defyle.

Tyresias My stock, and virtue without gooddes, are thought as things most
vile.
To cut of talk, since poverty thou do abhor in heart,
Now harken how from deep distress, a wittye man may starte.
Be sending pretty presents still, be sewer thy gifts to give
Unto the wealthy ritche man's house that is not like to live.
The Turtle dove, the orcharde fruit, the honors of the feelde,
The rich must have before gods self, what so thy ground does yield.
Who though he be a periurde man, of currishe kyndred borne,
All gored in his brothers blood, a runagate forlorn:
Yet coortsye him and worshipp him, and if he would it so,
Thou may not stay to wait on him in place where he shall go.

Vlixes Can I becum a page to slaves, to get a silly catch,
Who erste in Troy, even with the best was wont to make my match?

Tire Therefore, still poor. Apply the world, and bear it as it is,

Vlixes Yea I have borne, and can abide, things waightier then this.
(Good wysarde) tell a speedy way, and drive me of no more:
How may I fill my pouches full, as they were heretofore?
I said, and eftsoons say to thee, be pregnaunt aye in guyle,
Thou must be forging old men's wylles, And if that in thy wyle
Thou art perceyude, if none will byte, but all from hook do fly:
Thou ones deceyude, despair not tho, persiste thine art to try.
If there be in arbiterment a matter great or small,
Inquyre upon the parties both, and circumstances all.
If the one be rich, and chyldrenles, though all the ground of strife
Proceed of him, set thou in foot, and plead his cause for life.
The other, if he have a wife, or hope of progenye,
Though all the world proclaym him good let thou his quarrel lie.
Do clepe the other, by his names, (fair words with fools take place:)
Right worshipful, your virtues (say) has made me plead your case.
I have some practice in the law, to parle and mainteyne plea,
In faith, I rather would mine eyes were drenched in the sea,
Then any of these fyled tongues, Your worship should abuse:
Or spend your goods. Well go you home, and cease you thus to muse.
Pluck up your he art, leave all to me, try what a friend can do.
In heat or cold, I am your own to ride or else to go.
Assay the consequence hereof, some one or other will,
Name thee, an hearty friendly man a man of wit and skyll.
Thy hunger shall be great excess, thy want much welthe at ease*
The Tunnye and the whale will be, scarce presents thee to please,
But here a ca^tion for the, least some should replye again,
That thou do good to sole old men, as gapyng after gain.
If thou can spy a wealthy man, that has a wearyshe child,
There, show thy self officious, much debonaire and mylde:
And cast out talk as though thou could, prove thee, his second son,
Then plye the old man, so to say perchance, when he has done,
The child may dye, then who but thou? make enter on thy right,
Such loose begynninges oftentimes, grow up to force and might.
If that the old man offer thee his testament to read,
Make, as thou could not, for great grefe, put it a way with speed
But take a superficial sight, if thou must all possess:
Or diverse mo cooparteners: them thou with craft must dress.
By threatninges or by flattery, by smothe talk get thou all,
As Esops fox allurde the dawe. to let her break fast fall.
As Corauus with such like sort, deceived Scipio.

Vlixes Why art thou mad or mockst for nonce, for dooming hard things so?

Tire Laertes son what so I say, must be or else not be,
For great Apollo has bestowde. a prophets gift of me.

Vlixes Unfold this fable unto me, this mystery bewraye.

Tire What time the young man, fear of parths, begins to bear a swaye,
Angustus Prince by line extract from duke Aeneas race,
When he shall bear the countenance, and welde the wrathefull mace,
A noble dame to Corauus, shall Scipio the bold
Dispouse, and yet for couetyse her dowry large withhold,
Corauus shall a feoffement force, and eke the writting seal,
A cutting write for Scipio, which he ne shall repeal.
I give the furthermore in charge, if any doting syer,
Be ruled by his maid or man, thralled to their desire,
Acquaint thy self, forthwith with them, Praise them, that thee away,
With grateful praise, and like for like, they may again repay.
But what of them? seek ever to A vvorldlye rule to seek acquaintance at our
better A safe rule Cnmaepuali aequale tibi ius erit.
the chiefest, and the best,
Praise him, laud him, so shall thou be, in time a welcome gueste.
In case the carle be leacherous, his bydding do not bide:
Bring him thy chaste Penelope, to whom thou wast affyde.
P^nelope, so temperate, so continent a dame,

Vlix, Whom such a route of reuellers, could never stain with shame?
Those younkers came not for to give, but hunger for to staunche,

Tyr. They came for lucre, not for love, Prostitution practiced for couetise.
to paumper up the paunche.
But this (lo) were a present way, for her and the to live.
Loss made your dame, so temperate, Her truth to none to give.
I being then well elderly) at Thebes, there was a wife,
Who charged strayghtly her assigns, whylst she was yet in life,
That they should anoint, and hold her fast, if she cold wrast away
That the^ their hope should want his hire and mis his wished pray,
These show to the that he that would rise up by deadd men's bones,
Must play the bawd, the slave, and lout and painful for the nones.
Bear well thy self, serve in such sort, that naught may be amended:
The testie, tethye, waspishe churl, with pratlinge i^offended.
Yet sumtimes that thou merely, like Dauus in the play,
Abate thy looks, as though the man with presence did the fray.
Be ever ducking down to him: if all things be not warm,
Beseech him thou, to keep him close, lest happily cum sum harm.
Be still, and whisht, whilst he speaks ought stretche out thy listninge ear,
And never cease to magnifye, whatsoever thou do hear.
In case he will be blasoned, sound and resounde his praise,
Forge and devise, puff up his heart by any kind of ways.
What time the wretch draws to his end releasing the of pain,
Then will he say, give Vlixes, a quarter of my gain:
Of al my substance of this world. which voice when thou do hear,
Alas (say thou) Dama my friend, shall he no more apeare?
O Dama friend will thou be gone? how may I have so good*
So trusty, true, and steadfast frend^? howl, cry as thou were wood,
Weep if thou can a little crashe, disse mble al thy joy,
Upon his toumbe an hansome cost, and labor eeke employ,
That neighbors may commend thy act^* and yet a further note:
If one of thy coparteners g to rutle in the through te,
Take him aside, and salve him fair, and tell him if he please,
He shall by house, and land of you, for use, or for his ease.
Much more (as thou do like of this) to the I could have said
But I must to my hellishe task perforce my tongue is staide.
Proserpina our tyrant Queen* so vengeful, and so fell,
Does hayle me hence, to bide the smart* with smould red souls in hell.
Ye worldings make such shifts as those, adieu, and fare you well.

Moderat And Sparinge Living h^ghly commended the contry much preferred before
the City: the pleasure of the one, and the trouble of the other.

The sixte satire
THis was the thing I wished for, an hansum room of ground,
An orchard place, a fountain bright, with stones empounded round.
Sum trees, to over shade the same, the gods this good beheste
Have granted me: they have fulfilde. and betterde my request.
Content. Grant this, friend Mercury, (for nothing else I crave)
Grant this god good, for term of life, this liuelod I may have.
If I got not my goods by fraud, nor poor man did oppress.
Nor thorough riot, or negligence, do mean to make it less?
And do not use to wish so vain, Vain vvishes propes to foo les.
as foolish worldlings do.
O that yond piece of ground, were mine it mames mine orcharde so.
O that it were mine happy chance, to find a pot of goulde,
To purchasse fearmes, such worthy fermes as now are to be soulde.
As some have done, as he to whom, God hercules did bring
A gubbe of goulde, who sense has bought a worthy wealthy thing.
A manor, here and now does till his ground and cherelye singe.
If god have lent me any thing, I thancke him much for that.
And pray him, for to make me sheep, and cattle very fat.
And, for to fatten all I have, except my wit alone:
If that be fat, adieu good lord, our musies may be gone.
Since I am cumde from city now, into the country town,
What shall be done (my ryming muse?) shall I in satyrs frown?
Not lewd ambition vexes here, nor washye southern wind:
Nor fruitless harueste, burninge time unto the feeldes unkind.
Thou father of the morning tide God Ianus, by thy name,
In whom, men take in hand their works and set upon the same:
O Ianus, help thou on my verse, thou knows the cruel coil
In City kept, as eeke the ease of quiet country soil,
In Rome, I needs must rise bytime, to be some surety,
To speak to him, and him for them they still do call on me.
Though whiskinge wyndes do shave the earth, and though the snawishe day
Be short, and sharp, I must abroad they will not let me stay.
If that I speak not pleasingly, but vprighte in my mind,
Then sure I am in places all, enough of foes to find:
I must be crowded in the throng, and stay, when I would walk,
What ails this fool? how shoues he on? such is their angry talk.
Or if we to Maecaenas walkd (for that is all in all,)
That makes our great unquietness to seem to us so small.
(I make no lie) as soon as I draw near the Palace place,
An hundredth suitors call to me, to speak unto his grace.
One calls on me, at two a clock, to moute hall for to go.
The scribes pray me, for maine affairs to have the moute hal fro.
If there be any grauntes drawn out, that tarrye for the seal,
They cry on me, unto my lord the thing for to reveal.
A seven, or eight years now it is, since that Mecaene my lord
Did dub me his, and ^ad me cum aye welcome to his board.
Not to debate of graunde affairs: in waggen for to ride,
To tell, or hear sum tryfled thing, I placed by his side*
As thus, how that the day does spend, in maygames, and in play
The Tracian or the Sarian, which bare the prise away,
And of the season of the year, and how the morning could,
Did nip the fool in summer tide, that look to nothing would.
Such talk, as into ears of drabbes, safely man might power.
Through this, mine hatred quickened first and kindled every hour.
For if in case the noble duke did solace him abroad,
(Lo) yonder (said they) fortunes whelp, and mokde me where I rode.
If from the preeuie council cum sum muttring of the war,
Then, who that meets me, questions me, and greetes me fair from far.
Good master, (you do know those gods because of near access)
People Must we to war on Dacia, our selves in ar moure dress?
I hard it not.

Peo. By gisse, (Horace) you will not leave your mockinge:

Ho: Then on my head (in stiddie wise

Hor* let all the goddesbe knocking*

Poe* Caesar made promise he would give* his soldiers ground to till:
In Sycilie or Italy? Sir what is Cesors will?

Horace, Me swearing that I know nothing, they marvel, as at one,
Of famous taciturnitie, and secret gift alone.
In City, thus I spend my days, in much recourse of care,
O manor place, when shall I see thy groves so fresh, and fair?
When shall I soundly plye my book, and at my vacant hours
Cut from the world profoundly sleep, amid the fragraunt flowers?
Pythagoras, when shall thy beans, or colewortes sybbe of kind
Refresh my hungry appetyte, whilst I have supte or dynde?
O nights, and suppers of the goods, in which both I and mine
Make chere at home: my iolli men do feed so clean, and fine
Of all the townishe delicates, of what, so lykes them best,
My strangers francklye take repast, with lively heart, at rest.
When that our sobre company begins to warm with drink,
Of purchasing, or supplantinge we do not eftsoon think:
In trothe, our talk it multiplyes, but not of baude, or queen,
Or who does friske it best in daunee, no it is chaste, and clean.
Of knowledge, most behoueable, as if in riches be,
Or in virtue, the chefest good, (I clepde felicitye.)
If frendshipp spring of use, or gain, or do to virtue tend
What is the good calde sovereign, what is her very end.
If any praysinge hurtefull goods, of ignorance do fail,
Our neighbor Seruie, hearing that, steps in to tell his tale:
Full gosseplike, the father sage, begins his fable then.
The country mouse, did enterteyne, within her homelye den
The city mouse, the old hostess, Fable toulde.
her old acquainted friend
Does welcum, loath to sparple much: and yet for to unbind
The corsey anguishe of her geste with syghtes of dainty fare:
Not hurded pulse, nor long stalkd otes, (the prodigal) does spare.
She serves in mouth the curnell dry, the gobbets chewde of larde,
To please her geste, with cheefeste meats, was cheeflie her regard:
(Her geste that tasted on each thing with toth of much disdain)
The rural mouse eat new thrushde chafe, and put her self to pain:
Reserving wheat, and cockle flower, (two dishes of much joy)
Unto the fine fed citizen, a stranger all to coy.
At lenghthe bespeaks the city mouse: my friend why like you still,
To live in country fastynglye, upon a craggie hill?
How say you? can you find in heart^ to haunte, and set more by
The city, then the saluage woods? march on, be boulde to try.
"Our earthelie soul is ruinouse, not possible to fly
"From dinte of death, by any means, the longeste liude must dye.
Wherefore good sister, whilste thou maiste, do bayth they self in bliss,
Remember aye, how shadowye, and short this life time is.
These sayings moved the rusticall, full lightly leapeth she:
They both begin this gay exployte, the city for to see.
Benighted cum they to the town: (for midnighte then did hyde
The middle part of roumie sky) when both at equal tide*
Did press their foot in pa^lace proud: where scarlet vesturs read,
On Iuery beds did gloss with gleames, as it were glowing gleade.
Much was the noble remainder, of gorgiouse supper paste,
Which was bestowed in baskets shut, not clasped very fast.
Therefore, this stranger (country mouse) on purple quishion set,
The townishe dame (as nurturde well,) her noble cates does fette.
A feast, of much variety. she like a seruinge page
Did dayne to go to bring, to taste, in proper personage.
The trauailer, does like her change, and quyte deuoyde of fear,
As dedicate to feast, and wealth, does glade her self wit cheer.
All suddenly, the clappynge door, does fraye them into flore,
Affrighted sore, a runde they trip, Dismayed more, and more.
Also the vaste, and ample house, of mastie dogs did sound,
The mowse, beset in sorye wise, does shape her answer round:
Farewell: I need not such a life: the harmless wood, and cave*
Can comfort me, with fatche, and tare, and so my body save.

It is good and profitable for the Master sometimes to hear, the true, and
honest instruction and advertisement of his servant. In old time, servants
might speak in the month of December, whilst Saturnes feasts were
solemnised, frankely and at randon. The Poet brings in Dauus, detectynge his
masters practices.

The seventh Satyr.
Dauus. ERe whiles, I listened to your words, and sumthinge would have said,
But, I a servant, and Dauus, was half, and more a frayde.
Dauus, a true, and trusty page, so much as sense will give.
A friend sir, so far unto you, as I my self may live.

Simo. Because our auncitours so would, the freedom of Decembre
Enjoy, speak out all things amiss, that thou doste now remember.
Some men do stifflye stick to void, and still pur sue their pray,

Dauus, Sum to and fro, now well now worse, and keep no common stay.
Like Priscus, changing of his ringes, who such attire has bought,
And chaungde his suites, so often a day him self has chaungde to naught.
His house, and land, to morgage laid, yea, need does him compel,
In simple cotage to abide, where scarce a slave would dwell.
At Athins, very studente like, at Rome, a lusty lad*
I marvel, what unstable stars what byrthsygnes once he had.
Volauerye sticks to one trade, for gowte he can not rise,
And therefore now he fees a man, to cast for him the dyse.
Such constaunte folk be better then those chaunglings in and out,
Who plunge in every follye, which their heads can bring about.

Simo. Will thou not say, thou stretche hemp, thou whom thou means in thy
pratlynge?

Dauu^. I mean even the S. How so sir knave?

Da. For, thou will still be tatling
In praising state of foraine times, but if that thou might choose,
And God would place the in those worlds, no doubt, thou shouldste refuse.
Or thou in heart didste never think, which thou in word have said,
Or thou not stoutlye cleauiste to the truth as half vnstayde.
Scarce fully yet resolude to pluck thy foot out of the myer.
At Rome thou loves to be abroad, abroad, thou doste desire
To cum to Rome, and do extol that life above the sky.
If thou be no man's geste abroad then doste thou magnifye
The private cheer as though thou wouldste, be bound to live so stille:
And thinckes it well, that thou ne goyste to tipple, and to swill.
But if sum bid the cum indede, thou lins, not then to cry,
Oil, water, haste my servants haste, away thou doste the hye.
Full many silly seruiters, that wait with empty paunche
Say to them selves, when will this churl his glutton stomach staunche?
I am a s^elfeaste bellyegod, idle, and full of slouthe
A gredie gut, and at a word a servant to my tothe.
Since thou art even as ill, as I, and worse to, in thine heart,
How durst thou first begin with me, as though thou better warte?
Thou can disguise thy sin with words, thy wickedness unfold,
Thou art more fool then I, which erst, The satyr al tered
for fyftie grotes was ^ould*
Explain thy brows, restrain thy hands alay thine anger fell,
What Cryspins porter toulde of the I will make bold to tell.
(Quod he) Dauus, that sillye fool, has not his masters cast,
His heart is ever in his tongue, for if the fact be past
He takes no sounder rest, whilst he. has chatterd out the thing,
Then does the swine, that has her groine new wounded with a ringe.
In open day, in open streets, he praunces, and he prates,
He makes the younkers al a flote, to break the brothells gates.
His acts are ever euydent, and therefore rife in talk,
Because he does not make pretense, nor under coler walk.
His master goes in sage attire: that geues a sober shue,
His master solemn in his words: that makes him seem so true:
Dauus in sight of all the world does as I said before.
Simo does all that pryuilye, much willing to do more
Simo is rich and rubbes it out: for goulde has this by kind,
To louse or tie the tongues of men, and to content their mind.
Simo may be a goose, a sheep, a noddie, and a daw,
And have not gifts, or qualities, to counterpeyse a straw:
Yet Parasytes will term him good, and wise, at all assayes.
I wisse, read goulde can make a daulte, a paragon of praise.
If Dauus do but talk amiss, a cockescombe, or a bell:
Such badges might beseem often time the masters very well.
The royster wears not alwayplumes, nor yet the devil a tail,
If every fool did were a bell, there would be iollye sail.
Simo can lay to usury, and yet by plea of sleighte,
He will persuade the thing to be a sin of little weighte.
So drunckennesse, is belowship, furye, is manhood foulde,
Fondness is francknesse, and scarcehead, for thriftynesse, is houlde.
In fine, no crime, no vice, no sin in Simo, must us known:
No fault in Dauus but forthwith with trumpet it is blown.
Yea, Simo can cloak leacherie, or clepe it, by such name
That now it seems, a neyghborhood, a thing of little blame.

Simo, He slaundered me, (Dauus my man, I am no leacher, I.)

Dauus* Nor I a thief, though, I would steal, and yet for fear pass by
A piece of plate, but this I say, take punishment away:
Nature would break her bridle straighte Masters the more disolute for
default of correction.
unruly without stay.
Canste thou be calde my gouernoure which art to vices thrall,
To fansyes, pleasures, wrath, and teene, sythens, I shun them all?
If all the customs of our court, would franchyse thee in liberty,
Thy fear of goods would make the slave, and keep the still in villainy.
Also an other argument: if that your customs all,
A servants man, a substitute, or fellewe servant call,
What am I, in respect of you? for thou haste rule on me,
A wretch, subject to thy lust, as any wretch can be,
My master, to a senseless block that's moved by others might,
Pufte up with pleasures plungie puff, may be resembled right.

Simo. Who then is free?

Da. The wise that can his own affections stay,
"Whom neither need, nor death, nor grefe of massye gyues can fraye.
"Who can be lord upon his lusts, and hawghtie roumes despise.
"Strong and sufficient in him self, in full and perfitte wise.
Nor pass upon external things, commoditye, or gain:
On whom fortune, his heuie friend does make assault in vain.
Can, thou not note, by these few things who may be coumpted free?
Admit, an harlotte pickde thy purse, and much abused the.
And calls the to her house again from yoke, and servile snare,
If thou best free, rid then thy self, thou can not quench thy care:
In deed, a tyrant forces the, and broddes the forward still,
Does twine thy chappes, and prick the forth Appityde atyrant.
full sore against thy will
When* thou do gase on woman's shape, by Pausies hand portrayde Pausie a
copayo^

And I of other painters works my steadfast looks have laid?
(To mark the ranks, the warlike troops in letter lymmed plain*
And how thy stryke and how thy ward, and how they take their bayne:)
Thou altogether womannishe her portrature do view Sin is su^uevving
effeminate pictures.

Who sins more, or thou, or I? speak soothe, and say me true.
Dauus, iscounted slack, and slow, if he do them survey:
Simo does love antiquities, and judges well they say.
They count me naught, if that I do but make a little chere:
It is a virtue thought in the to banquet all the year
Why is the pampring of the paunche, so hurtful unto me?
Because, my back does bear the blows, if ought displeases the.
How do not thou deserve the whip that costly cates does bye,
And eats, and drinks, and reuells still Without all modesty?
Dainties becum no dainty things, One commodity of gluttony.
where there is naught but cheer
Thy stackering stumpes, thy corsye corpse at length will hardly bear:
The servant, if he steal but grapes, is straight attachde of felony:
My master sells his lands for meat, does he not sin in gluttony?
A gain thou art not with thy self, thou never art at leisure,
Thou can not rest, nor take a pause, nor muse at things of pleasure.
Thou shunst, to reason with thy soul, her counsel thou do hate,
Per consequens, thou shunnes thy self A very hard thing to hear our faults
without collar, Dauus-Simo Dauus
(full like a runnagate)
Thou thinks by sleep, and bibbing wine to banish out all woe
Thy conscience will work the teene whersoeuer thou do go
Ah sirre, where might I get a stafe? wherefore? Simo: or else a stone?
My master maddes, or makes rymes* he museth so alone.

Simo: Except thou will be trudginge hence, and make no more delays,
Thou shall go to my manoure place, to work these nine long days,

Against the Epicures vsages, that to keep a riotous rout of seruinge men, is
no treue hospitality. Against excess in belly chere. Horace talks with
Fundanus

The eight satire
Horace* How do you like the Epicures repaste, so rich, and gay?
This other day I sent for you, and then I did hear say,
You dynd abroad.

Fund. In faith my friend it liked me so much,

Horace* That ere this time, I do believe, there never was one such.
If that it be not tedious, nor do not you displease,
What meat was first, your angrye maw that began for to appease?
First had we brawne from Lncanie, the father of the feast,

Fundan^ Said, he was slain when southern wind his blustering blastes
releast.
Rapes, Radishe, Lettice, Sher wicke rotes, brothe start in taste, and quick
Came next to make our stomach slow more vrgently to prick.
Fair tre^chers then was called for straight, the purple carpet dressed,
Each man desires to syte next him, that tauntingly can jest:
Rybauldes, and cock scombes are in deed a sauce unto our feast.
Fools have with us a privilege to tell who, what, and when,
Fools speak often times, the very thoughts of wise and witty men.
There was the costly Cullices the Turbut and the Pyke,
The Porpose and the Porpentine with many such the like.
Pyge, partrige, peacocke, sparrowe* ^wale, so many of a row,
That scarce the eater leaves rome, to fetch his wind, or blow.
All things, so formally brought in, so solemnly assaide,
As though on alters to the Gods the banquet had been made.
What drink you masters (quod our host) Gascoyne or Rennishe wine.
We have of al sorts in this house, both lately brochde and fine.
Then when that wine had won the field, and maisterd al our guess,
Lord what it was a ^oy to see, how some it down does pre sse:
Like as the thing that heavy is, of Nature so is made,
(Except the same by violence forholden be and staid,
To fall to ground: like as the oak, of substance styfe and stout
Cums dow^e, when he with dynting axe is hewed round about:
So do our hoglings sink forthwith, (their head a Baccus barge)
Wine is I tell you, burtheynous, and passing full of charge.
Some singes of love and lovers fittes, and, how Cupidos dart
Did smite him (gentil soul) amysse, so deautyful an heart.
Some mourn and blame their sorry fate, The diverse sorts of drunkerdes
why Fortune should be such,
That they such blouddes should nothing have, and others ouermuche.
Sum chyde, some chatte, some rave, some reele, and some can take the pain,
Of curtesye to give mine host, his supper up again.
Some will unfold bygge mysteries, and fram his matter so,
As though he had above the rest, got Phoebus by the toe.
Some will lament the state of times* and how that all is naught.
How things be risen in their price, and how they have been bought.
Some swear that they have lived ill, and how to morrow day,
They will accord with all the world, and gynne on other play.
How Virtue is a perelesse dame, how few do her embrace:
This will they preach in gestryng wise as though in public place
The thing were done. (lo Horace, lo) our suppers and our cheer:
We spare no cost, we may not ask if it be ceape, or dear
We keep a troop of serving men: a crewe of lusty brutes,
And these for our great honors sake, must cut it in their suits.
These be our handye instruments, to worchen all our will,
Not scrupulous for to inquire, if it be good or ill.
So many, so officious, that not one hear may lie
Amiss on us, but he or he, will spy it by and by.
We laugh at those* when they are drunk, those make a sport alone:
To scoff at strangers, when as they with drink are ouergone.
So so, no more C^pide cannot from hyue of honey lick,
But one or other be forthewith will sting him with her prycke.
The world the hyue the combs, the wealth, which who so does assaye,
"Pleasure in face, poison in tail, Like Scorpion they will pay,
"The stynges that prick be choking ^ares, These honey tasters have:
"Whilst they are toste within the^ selves, to seek, or how to save.
"Wealth is a thing most venomous, and few or none we find,
"But pleasure has like Circes cups yturnde them from their kind.
"Why should the w^se esteem so much, a rowte of waytyng men?
"Who, in their age most commonly, what are they? beggars then.
Brought up so lewd, continue lewd, retchelesse, and ydell swaynes*
Not knowing art, or handycrafte, nor able to take pains.
To keep them brave, doothe even as much thine honor true v^holde.
As if thou shouldste make thee a tail, and gylde the same with gold.
"Is hospitality in those, in ^eding any such?
"In keeping strong and heddy drinks, in beluing overmuch?
"Like spunges never satisfied, and like Vlixes foes,
"From meat to bed, from bed to meat, and so their circle goes.
"Deuisers of all wantonness, what should I tell you more?
Good to increase, and multiplye their lord or masters skore.
I do suppose, that if men's wealths, should answer to their wylles,
That night and day would scarce suffice to revel out their fylles.
Each man is counted of most price and meet to be a Lord,
As he with dishes can depaint, and ouercharge aborde.
No talk how wise, how virtuous, or to take pains how able,
But if he keep great store of drink, or honorable table.
There fore some people parasites, that they may seem to pass,
Will spend out Malueseye, Muscadel, and fumyshe Hypocrasse.
And make their cooks so looshiouslye, their delicates to dress
Their very meats so insensiue, brought in, in such excess:
That I do loathe them more in mind as things more full of harm,
Then if that witch, that Canadie, had cursde them with her charm.

Horace to his book
ME thinks my book thou ginnes to look, to sail for to be gone:
And now forsouthe to lie out sleakd with printers poomise stone.
Thou hates for to be locked up, with claspe for to be shitte,
Though shamfast books have well esteemed and ever likd of it
Thou sorye to be showed to fu^ community do praise:
Not so instructed Book of me, go fly thy fancyed ways,
Thou never must return again. Ah wretch why did I long?
What have I done? (thus will thou say) when sum have done the wrong.
This well knows thou, the reader cloyed* will eftsoon at the snatche,
And thou by running thus abroad, thine ill report do hatche.
Except that I an Augur false to rid the hence mistake me,
Thou shall be dear to Rome a while, whilst thy good days forsake the.
Then must thou be an obscure book for moughtes on the to eat,
A goodly dishe, thou must becum the sluggie mough her meat
A passinger through each hobbes hand, when thou ginst to be vile,
Thou must becum to wrap up spice to trudge about a while
On pedlers back, from town to town and I that warnd the still
To lurk with me, shall have good cause to lawght at the my fill.'
As he that drew his ass up th'hill the auckward best drew back,
Angerd at last, he cast him down to feel his fatal thwacke.
The practice known, the proverb known and talked on all the day,
Who can, or would hold back the thing, that needs would be away?
And stamering age to petyte laddes in corners al will reed the,
This occupacion bides the to, thou may have joy to speed the,
On sum hot day when al thy frinds are reeding the yfeare
Deliver up this speech to them which I will tell the here.
My father but a bondsman borne and I at first but poor,
I stretchd my wings, and from my nest did mount aloft, and sore,
That look what praise from me for birthe and base kind thou do take:
So much praise pardie more is due to me, for virtues sake. Horace of himself.

Do tell them that I ever pleased at home, abroad those men
Which bare the cheifest swey in town and were the lode stars then.
Of stature small, gray headed soon, of sonning very feign,
Hasty to wrath, but so that I was straight way pleased again.
And let them know that I had lyud four times eleauen years clear
When Lollius and Lepidus were Consuls in their year.
FINIS.

