An apologye made by the reverend father and constante Martyr of Christ John
Hooper late Bishop of Gloceter and Worceter against the untrue and
sclaunderous report that he should be a maintainer and encorager of such as
cursed the Queen's highness that then was, Queen Marye. Wherein thou shalt see
this Godly man's innocence and modest behauioure: and the falsehode and
subtyltye of the aduesaryes of Gods truth.

Newelye set forth and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queen's
Majesty's injunctions.

Anno. 1562.



To the Godly reader Henry Bull wysheth grace and peace with unfeigned fayeth
and a good conscience in Christ Jesus our Lord.
IT has always been the practice of Satan and his subtle soldiers the
papists, even the sworn adversaries of Gods truth, that when they can not
preuail against the same by tyranny and torments, they labor to deface it
by most impudente sclaunders and lies (the chiefest defense and stay of their
kingedome) as thou shall see (good reader) in this treatise following. For when
they could by no tyranny nor cruel handlinge dyscourage this man of God from
the constante confession of the truth, they stirred up most shamfull and cursed
lies against him that he should be a priuye maintayner of such as cursed the
Queen, but to their own perpetual shame and ignomye. For whilst they have
sought by this mean to bring Gods eternal veritye in to contempt and too
make it more odious to the world: what else have they done but dysclosed their
own wickedness and malice and given him occasion so to paint out their
falsehode and lyinge spirit in their right colors, by this pithye, learned,
and worthy little piece of work: that all men may hereby clearly perceive whose
children they are, and they them selves shall need no other glass to see how
like their father they look, the father of all falsehode and lies. And to the
end that this their wicked dealinge, which have thus proudly set them selves
against God and against his Christ in his poor members, may be ye better
known and regestred to the world and the posterity to come, to their shame
and confusion, and to the auauncing of gods glory in the innocente sufferinge
of his saints, thus torn and rent by tyranny, torments, lies, and
sclaunders for his names sake: behold the providence of god, who has now
brought this work to light, which otherwise by the negligence of some was
like to pearishe. And here have I just occasion to discommende those men which
do defraude the congregation of such worthy monuments. Great was the care of
this blessed man and other for the church of God, and many fruitful works
did they write in prison, in bands, in setters, but few are come to light:
and shall we like careless and ingratfull people suffer these Godly labors,
these painful trauales, thus to pearishe? how desirous they were to have them
published, to witness to the world that which they taught and sealed with
their blood, and to profyt their brethren: it appears by this authors
earnest request to the readers of this treatise, which is that they will not
keep it close to the^ selves, but as soon as they have red it, set it abroad
and communicate it to other. And that request which he make the concerning
this treatise, do I here generallye make in his name and others and in the
behalf of the church of God for the rest of their works, to them in whose
hands they remain, that they will not suffer them to be suppressed any longer
(for that is it which Satan and the ennemies of the cross of Christ do
most desire) but cause the^ to be set abroad in printe to the commodity of
many. And truly it might seem to be a labor no less commendable for the
learned then profitable for the household of God to be as diligent in searchinge
and setting forth of such worthy works, as in penning and publishing of new.
So full are they of heavenly doctrine, so full of power of Gods spirit, so
full of comfort, and consolation, being written as it were out of gods
sanctuary, with the finger of God, by men even then out of the world and in
heaven already: that in deed they are most worthy to be sought for as precious
Iewelles and treasures.

For God knowethe what lack we have of such trumpettes to stir up our
dull hearts in these daungerouse days, wherein all states of men have turned
this great blessing of God bestowed upon us (I mean these breathinge days
and time of rest from antichrists tyranny) in to a securitye, and are become
like men rocked a sleep. And many that seemed to be zealous, earnest, and
constant in the Lords quarrel so long as these captains were in the battle,
and they them selves with in the sound of the trumpette, are now well cooled.
Pray we therefore that the Lord would warm them, heat them, inflame them
again with the zeal of his house, that we may have many such valyaunte
captains, such worthy prelates and sheepeheardes as this was, over their
lambs watchful and careful, in preaching dylygente and paynefull, in zeal
feruente, hearty, and sincere, and of like fortytude of spirit to help and
maintayn the trauailinge says of the gospel, that we may enjoy still this
fatherly blessing of our gracious God, and escape the wrath to come and plagues
at hand for our unworthy receauinge again of this great benefit of his
word and liberty of conscience. Whhiche plagues we may assuredlye look for
with double woo, unless by speedye repentance we seek, to remove the cause
thereof. God for his Christ's sake, grant us hartelye, earnestlye, and
effectuouselye so to do.

Amen
An apologye against the untrue and sclaunderouse reports made against me John
Hooper late bishop of Worcetour and Gloceter that I should be a maintainer and
encourager of such as cursed the Queen's Majesty's highness.
IT is the use and fashion of all wicked and evil desposed persons (gentle
reader) that when one way will not serve too bring their wickedness to pass,
they assay and prove (as Terence says) an other. The whole congregation and
company of Godly and charitable people be not ignoraunte how falsely and
vncharitablye the papisticall cleargye has for this year and half, openly
and priuelye by all means labored to persuade not only the common sort of
people but also the magistrates, to judge and condemn me in their conscience
for an heretyke. By the which means they have much preuait led against me, but
yet not as much as they desire and look for. Wherefore seeing plain allegacion
of pretensed and falselye surmised heresye as yet sheadeth not my blood,
without the which that whoryshe and unbridled false supremacy of Rome was
never satisfied: now because the princes and the magistrates may be their
hangemen, although that wicked power of Antichriste (as all cronicles and true
historiographers do record) would have no power above it, equal with it, nor
none under it, but such as hold their kingdoms and autorities in the world (as
it were in capite) of that wicked and pestylente sea and chair of Rome, which
is in deed the very whore of Babylon that saint John describes in the
revelation of Jesus Christ, Apo. 17.
sittinge upon a seven headed beast, which S John him self interpretateth to
be seven hills, and the children in the gramer schole do know that Rom^ is
called ciuitas septem montium, the city of seven hills. This generation (I
say) that always has shed innocente blood (least the child should
degenerate from the fathers conditions, for he that gave the bishop of Rome
his supremacye was a bloody murderer and traytoure one Phocas that killed his
master Mauricius the Emperor, his maistres the Empress and sire of their
lawefull children) would bear the world in hand, that I were not only an
heretic, but also a traytoure. And to affirm that assertion, they say I have
written to comfort, encorage, and maintain such as cursed the queen. But if
I may (as I ought) be heard indifferently, I shall try my self a true man,
and prove mine accusers to be false in the face of all the world. There be (as
I here say) now certain in the counter in London that wished evil unto the
Queen's highness, unto whom mine adversaries say I wrote letters of
encoragemente, that they did well in so doing: and that if they continued
doing the same still, they should do better. First I do require all good men
too mark the tenaure and contents of the letter which my trende sent unto
me, to advertise me of such men as were taken and imprisoned upon new years
day at night last past: also to mark the contents of mine answer unto his
letter, where withal I did send this letter, that the wicked calls
treasonne. I have set at the end of this apologye the true copy of all three
letters, and other letters then these I wrote not to them that were taken at
that time:

Now mark how my letters will prove this two penye treason that the wicked
would charge me with all. First I knew of nothing the congregation did but
of prayer which they used, as they be bound by Gods laws in the vulgar
tongue (let the papists say too the contrary what they will) and there they
gave God thanks for that they had received at his hands, and asked of him the
things that they lacked and prayed also for the Queen and the magistrates.
Mark the information of the letter that aduertysed me wherefore they were
taken. Now do the wicked papists feign matter, and change prayer, wherein I
required them too persevere for the Queen, in to cursinge of the Queen. Mark
again the place where prayer and seruinge of God that I commended was done: in
a Godly man's house (says my friend) in bow churcheyard. The place where the
queen by report was cursed, was in the counter by the stocks in London.
Further mark the time when the thing was done that I commended: before they
were taken, as my letter to them does testify. Mark also what the persons be
that are accused of this cursinge: such as yet until the tenth of Ianuarye I
knew not nor have heard of. And to those that be accused of the crime, my
letters were not sent nor never came. Yet does the wickedness of the wicked
papystes say that I encoraged them in evil doings, my letters never coming
unto them, nor when I wrote knew I of any such cursing. Farther, such as be
taken and imprisonned for that fault, I never knew of, nor of any such
thing too be done by them, until (as I said) the tenth day of January, which
was (as I have learned) at the least sire days after the fault was done, and
three days also after my letter was written and delivered to them that were in
an other prisonne, from such as did this crime. Wherefore if the wicked were
not paste all shame, charity, love, and honesty: how could they of
conscience blow and blaste abroad such wicked lies and scaunders, that
neither agrees with the matter of my letter, nor with the persons, nor with
the place where the crime was committed, nor yet with the time when the curses
were used.

There was never true subjects in such danger as we poor English men be at
these present days. The falsest men of the world, yea the Satanicall
papists, may say what they will, so that they speak against any that
lauoureth God, his word, and the holy catholic church of Christ: and his
accusation us it never so false by that time it has been in the consistorye
court and handlinge of the Bishops one day or two, it shall have some fair
pretensed color to make it appear true, and also to be done only for
conscience sake, as all their religon is hipocrisye and colored with holiness
in name. I have been always a true manne to all the estates of this realm, I
will stand with the law in that point and reprove mine accusers what so ever
they be. As for my truth and loyaltye to the Queen's highness, the time of her
most daungerouse estate can testifye with me, that when there was both
commandments and co^missions out against her, whereby she was to the sight
of the world, the more in danger, and less like to come to the croune: yet
when she was at the worste, I rode my self from place too place (as it is
well known) to win and stay the people for her party. And where as an other was
proclaimed, I preferred her not wythstandynge the proclamations. And to help
her as much as I could when her highness, was in trouble, I sent horses out
of both shyres, Gloucester shyre and Worcester shire too serve her in her
great danger, as Sir John Talbot knight and Wylliam Ligon Esquier can
testify the one dwelling in the one shyre, and the other in the other. Seeing
in aduersitye I was with her, and did her service, then I being at liberty: It
is falselye and wickedlye conspyred by the papystes, that now she being in
real possession of the croune and in prospertytye, and I a prisoner in
captiuitye, would be against her.

But where as the pope will for a penye of two pence give remission of all
sins a pena et culpa the wicked may say and do what they lust: and the
innocent lambs of Christ suffer what so ever God shall permytte the members of
Antychristes kingdom to lay upon them. Yet may the Godly see the pretensed
and false ymagined treason of these Antichrists against me. Doubtless it is
not because they bear good will and loyaltye to the Queen's highness that they
would bring me in to her dyspleasure. For all the world knows she has no
more nor no greater enemies then those that desire to leave no mouth open in
this realm too speak and sound the name of Jesus Christ in fayeth and
understanding. I take record hereof at the bishop of wynchesters book of
true obedyence, of Bonners Epistell intoo the same book, of Culbert Tonstalles
sermons, and Doctoure Sampsons, oration made only advisedly, purposely, and
deliberately against the Queen and the pope, and be openly in all men's hands,
as well with in the realm as without. But such be the inscrutable judgments
of God that her highness should punysh her poor, true, and loving subjects
that never offended her, and also make false traiterous bishops Judges of truer
men then they be them selves. Doubtless if ever I had written or spoken the
tenth part of treasonne that her own bishops books do contain, I know their
charity is so burning and seruent that the crows and birds of the air
should have eaten my flesh before this day. Yet I am not sorye, but
doubtelesse (I speak and write from the bottom of my heart before God) very
glad to se mercy showed unto offenders. But I speak it to this end that I
verily suppose, as the Queen does forgive offenders: so would she not wittingly
punish me and other true men that al ways have done her good and no harm. For
she is by the laws of God as much bound to be indifferent and favorable to
true men, as true men be bound to give her obedience. And (be it spoken
without all pride and malice) I defye him whatsoever he be (the magistrates
being honored) that dare open his mouth to the contrary. But alas sauinge I
would not offend the law of my living God, that commands me to obey al
magistrates and laws (which disagree not from his holy word) it were for me a
more easy death to be hanged like a traytoure, then burned like an heretyke.
But saying death must ensue the true religion and faith of Jesus Christ: I
will not appoint God what death he shall take me out of this life by. I am in
Christ wholly and thoroughly at a point with the world. I pray dailye and
will pray for my persecutors eue^ as for myself. But their tira^ny and death,
that they will kill me with all, I contemp^^e and pass nothing of. I am no
better then my master Christ was in his seru^ce. if I die therefore by his grace
whether it be by fire, or sword, or halter, it is all one to me: and the
rather death commethe the better shall it be welcome. For the sooner shall my
soul rest with Abraham Isaac and Jacob in my heavenly fathers kingedome:
Whereof in Christ I am assured to be a right heir, ordained to the same of
mercy by him: before the world was made.

The phariseis did not lay only heresye to Christ's charge: and in deed the
manner of his death upon the cross was not appointed for heresye among the
Jews, but rather stoned too death. There was never a pair of stocks in the
town that Ieremye the prophet scoured not, but still his accusers, the false
priests made their acusations in both states as well in heresye as in treason:
least the king should not punish the poor preacher for preachinge, but let
him go. So Christ's accusers (the holy bishops and preastes) when they
perceived that Pilate sauoured the innocenie cause of Christ, and said he
found nothing that they laid against him worthy of death, they made him (poor
man) eat that words (judge as he was) and told him, if he let Christ live
and would not proceade to condemn him he was not the emperoures friend. This
has been always the pleadinge of the Satanycal clergy even since that
wicked see of Rome falsely challenged supremacye, even to put the princes and
judges of the earth in the headde that all true preachinge of Gods word
against their wickedness, superstition, and ydolatry, was treason. But all
kings, Queen's and magistrates civil, shall at the day of their death answer
with eternal dampnation of their souls, for the sheading of all innocent
blood within their realms and offices. God does not bydde the king and Queen
commit matters of religion to the bishops, neither does he will them to give
bishops power to condemn when they lust, and so afterward commit such as
they have condemned to the secular powers: but does command all princes to
be learned them selves, Deu. 17.
to hear them and to judge them selves such doubtsull and weighty causes by the
word of God. Iosu. 1.
It is both against Gods laws and man's, Psalm. 11.
that the bishops and clergy should be judges over any subject within this
realm. For it is no part of their office. They can do no more but preach
Gods word and minister Gods sacraments, and excommunicate such as Gods laws
do pronounce worthy to be excommunicated. Who would give a sword in to a mad
man's hand? There be not living more malicious, cruel, craste, devilish nor
tyrannical tyrauntes, more merciless, then the bishops and cleagye under that
wicked bishop of Rome: as the cromcles and the histories of the bishops lives
do plainly record. And no marvel: for as the bishop of Wincher says in his
bake of true obedience: where so ever the Pope has supremacye, there Christ
is dishonored: and the kings suffer wrong. Yea he says more (let his book
be judge) that there can be no truth where as the bishop of Rome is chief
head. And therefore he says that no prince can or may give ye pope any
such authority. For a king can no more give that part of his office that
touches the governance of the one part of his people which is the cleargye,
for matters of relygion to the bishops of Rome: then a wife may geeue the
use of her body from her husband too an other manne. Yet as Saint John
says, the princes of the earth shall be made so droncken with the cup of
that whore of Babylon, that they will deliver their power to the beast: but
yet Saint John says playnelye, although the kings do give too the beast
against Gods laws their kyngedomes, yet be they none of the beasts.

But now the bishop of Wynchester and the reast of his fellows against
their oaths, their sermons, their preachinges their books, yea their own
knowledge and conscience fall under that wicked and false pretensed power
again: and do make him the headde of Christ's church, whom they al be not
able to prove to be any member of Christ's church. Grant it were as true as
it is false that Christ had given such supremacye to Saint Peter (who they
say was bishop of Rome although I never knew man yet able to prove it) and his
successoures, yet no man should obey the things done by the Pope, For the
word of God is plain that he is an excommunicate person in that he teaches
doctrine besides and contrary to the word of of God. As Saint Paul says
plainly. And how far both the doctrine and the use of the sacraments under
the tiranye of the bishop of Rome, be from the word of God, it shall appear
plainly to all the estates of this realm, if my Lord Cardinal of his
charity will accomplish the reasonable and gentle requests that I have made
unto him, I trust as gently he received my letters: so he will grant me and my
fellows that be in duraunce our lawful requests. But this I do write (good
reader) not to make discourse of any matter, but only for the majesty and
honor of Gods word, to declare mine innocence of treason or any evil will or
malice that I bear to the Queen's highness or any superior power. Doubtless I
thank our heavenly father I have read to many times the word of life and
marked it to well, to fight against or curse the magistrates. I pray God to
give them understanding of his holy truth, with love to follow it: and the
harm that I would to any man living happen to my self. For the co^mauudement
of God is that we should not only love our friends, Mat. 5.
but also our enemies. And not only wish good and pray for our friends as
dettours unto God and them for the benefits we take at their hands, but also
pray for our ennemies, lamentinge the tirannye and wickedness of sin that
causes them too hate and persecute whom God requires to love. 1 Ioa. 5.
Yet does Saint John in his Epistel command the readers thereof to beware
they pray not for such as be subject to the sin which is to death. But I
suppose that in these late days, wherein the spirit of judgment and
discreation or discerning of sins, is not so abundantly in men as it was in his
time: no man should without a special testimonye of the holy ghost,
particularlye or expresselye judge that sin to be in any man. For the
judgments of God, who shall turn from wickedness, or who shall fall from
versue, before this mortal life be ended, be not reueyled nor known unto
men. And yet in case I knew (as saint John says) a man that sinned unto
death, for whom by the commandment of God I should not pray: it follows
not that I should curse him for whom I may not pray. And I rejoice yt the
inscrutable judge meant of god suffers ye wicked to slander me with that evil
that of al others I have been all my life time (I thank God) least troubled and
in danger withal. For I never cursed man nor beast otherwise then the word
of God wylied me for the time whiles I preached his word to rebuke syn.

I do remember that Saint Augustine in his book of Christ's sermon in the
mount, has many Godly sentences and sayings in this matter. But I mind
not to write a book of it but only to speak the truth of my self against
wicked sklaunderers, that care not so they may hurt, how they hurt, nor so
they kill by what means they kill.

In the psalms and in the prophets he marvelous execrations of the wicked, and
specially against such as with the death of the Godly god about to
condemn the word of God and to oppress it. Christ also and his Apostels
used marvelous execrations, when he said, woo be unto the Chorozain, Mat. 11,
woe be unto thee Bethsaida. etc.

Saint Paul wyshed them destroyed that troubled the church of the Galathians.
Also he called the high priest painted wall to his face: Act. 23.
and Peter killed with a word Ananias and Saphira his wife. Act. 5.
Saint Paul struck blind Elimas the witch. Eliseus caused the wild bear to
tear and kill the children that mocked him. Act. 13.
Elias caused sire from heaven to fall 4. regu. 2.
upon the messengers of Ochosias the king. 4. regu. 1.


These things declare that there were at all times cursings used, and extreme
punishment followed such as were by Gods commandment cursed: and yet such
as did curse remained still in the favor of God.

But these examples no private man may follow, for these men were public
preachers of Gods word, whose office was by all means so to rebuke and
condemn sin, as these were instructed by the word of God. And he that
marketh the condition of these persons, shall perceive that in every one of
them was two persons: the one publik that could speak no more pleasant nor
gentlye to the sinful world then God bad them: which was to pronounce them
cursed and damned for their sins and iniqutye: yet as private men they
wept and sorowfullye lamented the miserye and loss of the same persons that
they cursed as publik ministers.

Ieremye as a public preacher, Iere. 5. 6.
threatened the destruction of his own country, the captiuitye of his natural
prince and king, and the servitude and bondage of al his cuntremen: yet as a
private manne wept and cried out rather with floudes of Tren. 1. 2.
tears then with drops of weping. So did Christ upon Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 2.
regu. 18.
David upon Saul and Absolon, and Saint Paul upon the Jews, and yet
offended nothing at all. Romans 9.
For although God require of public ministers to do that appartamethe to
their public office in cursinge and threatening of his ire and displeasure yet
he takes not from them his natural affection to pity and bewail even such
as they know most justly to be punished: but yet so in measure that the
affection of mercy and compassion murmr not against the will and just
judgment of God. Romans 12. 13.
Wherefore as it is forbidden a pryuate manne to revenge by force his own wrong:
so it is forbidden him too curse or execrate any person magistrate or other.
Yea the public person that preaches, in this point had need to be
cyrcumspecte and too be ware he speak nothing of affection: but all for the
correction of sin to the amendment of sinners, as the Sayncts do ask
vengeance in heaven, Apo. 6.
saying: when will thou revenge our blood upon them or the earth? where as
it may not be thought that the Saints pray vncharitablye against their
neighbors that the world and the kyngedome of sin might make an end in
them. And so do all good men pray now upon the earth, that the kyngedome
of God may come, as it is in the Lords prayer. Mat. 7.


But what do these Ungodly papysies find fault with cursynge, when not
only all hystoryes, chronycles, and records from time too time, ever
sythens the pretensed and wicked authority of the Romyshe bishop do
testyfye, besides dayelye experience, that they have cursed kings and realms
of malice, pride and indignation: and for money have blessed them again, and
so used kings and realms (as their wicked lusts have moved them) as slaves
and beasts contrary to Gods express word. And dayelye it is seen in every
consystorye court, that at the will and pleasure of a wicked manne that is the
Bishops offycer, the innocents be cursed and used woorsse then dogs,
until such time as the officers furye be pacified with Gold or silver.

If they knew Gods laws (^^ they do not in deed) they should see and
find, that no ordynarye excommunication should be used by the Bishop
alone, but by the Bishop and all the whole paryshe.

So we read in the old law that when such excommunications were Deu. 21.
used, the whole congregation stood the one party of the one hill and the
other party of the other hill. Also when the incestious man was
excommunicated. S. Paul alone did not excommunicate him but Saint Paul's
consent and also the whole church 1. Cor. 5.
with him.

Extraordinary excommunications that then the holy men used, which our
bishops at this day neither have power to do nor know what they be: be not in
use. As Saint Paul alone by Gods power made blind the witch Act. 13.
Elimas. And Peter alone by the same power killed Ananias and saphira Act. 5.
his wife. The bishops can but strike and excommunicate with the word of God:
If that serve not, they should commend the matter to God and meddle no further.
But now the bishops have learned Gods word and preach and teach fables and
lies: and who so will not believe them in such wickedness, they strike them with
loss of goods, lands, liberties, friends, wife and children, yea with
imprisonmente, swearde fire, coarde and such like. And to make all appear
well, they strike true men with the false slander of treasonne. But such is
Gods just punishemente for our sins, most iustelye happened unto us. When
we amend our lives he will withdraw his scourge. Thus may thou see (gentle
reader) that such cursinge as these ungodly papists slander me with all,
is both against my knowledge and my doyinges. And as I know I should not
curse any man: even so I know I should pray for all men, and for mine
ennemies also diligently and Chirstianly: for geuyng them as much as lies in
me here and before God: prayinge him to send them more grace and loving charity.

But here I would men should note and mark that as they be forbydde to curse
the magistrates, so be they forbid to say, allow, or commend any thing they
shall do that is not agreeable with the word of God. For the scripture does
not only curse such as make wicked laws, but also holds them accursed (what
Isa. 5.
so ever they be) that call good evil and evil good.

And although God does require me to obey the magistrate yet he forbyddeth me
to flatter the magistrate, either styre him up so do evil, or so commend the
evil, when it is done. For we know not only evil doers shall be damned but
also such as consent to evil doing. And this old saying is true, Romans 2.
the consenters and docrs shall have like pain.

Now these be the bees and stinging waspes that make the bishops so sore too
rage and startle. They have taken the word of God from the people out of all
churches in this realm, that nothing may be said in the vulgar tongue:
which is clean contrary to the word of God and expressly against the same,
as saint Paul says. 1. Cor. 14.
But they say saint Paul there speaks but of preaching alone, which should
be in the vulgar tongue. But I say and will justify it, that they say
untruly in so saying, for the text plainly and expresselye makes as well
mension of prayer said or song, as of preaching. I will pray in my spirit and
in mine vnderstrndinge says saint Paul. etc. And so do the old fathers
altogether say as I say. Read John Chrisostom and S Ambrose upon the same place.

Further, they have banished the holy supper of the Lord, and call the table
where the communion was used, an oyster board, and the bread appointed to that
use, oyster bread: and yet those things both by name and effect, be
contained and commanded us most plainly by the express word of god, And for
ye supper of the Lord, they have brought in private masses of their own, or
else of their wicked predecessors inue^tion: which is clean contrary to ye
word of god: let the book of the Apostles and Mat. 26. Mar. 14, Luc. 22.
euan gelistes be judge. And who so ever will compare the mass (as they use
it) with the supper of the Lord: shall see them as well agree as Christ and the
wicked Phariseis agreed. Now because men can not condescende unto these wicked
things, and call that holy which is dampnable, and that good which is evil:
Therefore be lies, slanders, and false matters picked and feigned against them.
But if they will say good is evil and evil good, the devil God and God the
devil: then shall men have peace with them and not before.

As I am sorye with all my heart, that any manne for troubles should curse his
persecutors, except he have more special testimony of Gods spirit that he
does well then I have: so I like wise I do lamente that those men that be
cursed (who they be I know not) do not examine them selves and search their
own consciences whether iustlye God stirs the people to hate them or no, as
David did being a lauful king and also a good king. When Semei called him
blood sucker and murderer, with many foul words: he entered into yt judgment
of his own conscience and felt that the Lord had stirred the same wicked
man up, being his own subject to curse. Whereby he learned (good king) to
lamente and beware of the sin that made him thus to be cursed. Alas what
manne or woman living is there that one ways or other has not deserved to
be cursed both of God and man. But these carnal and fleshly bishops never
consider that which is principallye to be taken head of in every plage that
god sends: which is the sin in the person plaged.

When the scourge of God so comes, it were best for every man too say to him
self: good Lord although I have not deserved thus to be spoken of one way, yet
an other way I have, for none is pure and innocent in thy sight. Let every
manne remove by grace the cause of cursings and other troubles, which be the
very messengers of God and his scourges: and then God will remove the effects,
which be the troubles them selves. If the party cursed by manne be innocente:
Mat. 5.
he may rejoice to be evil spoken of for justice sake, and assure him self
that God will bless that man curses. Mal. 2.
If he be gilty, the curse is as a preacher sent unto him from God to
admonish him of his sins. And as for the person that curses, if Gods
spirit bear not record with his spirit that he did it for Gods sake and the
hatred he did bear only to sin, and styrred thereunto by the spirit of
God, as the prophets and Apostels were: he has great cause to lament. For
the curse that he would to others shall light upon him self. And such
offenders had most need of coumforte, to call them again to God and to the
order of charity: for that we be bound to do as the scripture of God does
teach. Not too coumforte them or aid them (as my false accusers say of me)
as traytoures in treason, but as creatures made unto the symilytude of God,
fallen in too sin. The which similytude and dignity of God in man should
not be abhorred nor detested for any crime that manne commytteth, but rather
pittyed and comforted: not leafte alone, as the manner of the world is at this
present: but diligently sought and labored for, as Christ did for the lost
sheep, who did not only seek for it but also carried it home upon his own
shoulders when he had found it.

Thus have I spoken and witten (gentle reader) against the papists
proceadinges, as it is my bounden duty, and all men's else that fear God.
For I am sworn by the terryble, venerable, holy, and blessed name of God, as
I trust too be saved by the riches, treasure and meryties of Christ's death:
another dyrectelye nor indyrectelye too agree unto the wicked and pretensed
supremacye of the Bishop of Rome: but with all my wit, learning and other
means resyst him.

This oath (by Gods help) I will not violate break: let the wicked persured
men, that he the wicked popes adherentes, say what they will, and do what God
shall permit them. I fear not death, nor pass of their cruel
imprisonment, which is more vile and cruel toward us true men, then ever it
was against murderers traytoures, and thieves. But that is no now thing. For
there is no offense irremissible with the popish bishops but to believe truly
in Christ, as his word teaches. Cipriane in a sermon de mortalitate, has
these words eius est mortem timere qui ad Christum nolit ire, he fears death
yt would not go to christ. But we desire and groan too be dissolved from this
wicked life and world if it please God. How be it we will not gladlye provoke
enmitye nor yet suffer unprofitable persecution: but when the glory of God
shall perish without the truth be testified: I defye all torments and
tormentours. And let al good men and women rejoice also in Christ, for
doubtelesse the church of Christ was first planted under the gospel by the
death of Christ and his poor servant: and now it shall take no more harm
by the persecution of the Satanicall papists, then gold takes by the
goldsmythes furnace. There is no death can come to the creature without
Gods good leave and permission. Therefore let us rejoice that our time
draws so nere to go from this ruinous and decayed city and tabernacle of
our bodies: for there is an everlasting mansion in heaven prepared for us.
And whiles we do live let us pray to god for this our natural country. For
where as before it was cursed but by wicked manne the Antichriste of Rome: now
is it cursed of God. And where as before it was interdicted but by a false
wretch that would be Christ's vicare in earth: now is it interdicted by the
maker and creator of all the earth: as the word of God does show us, and all
the old counsayles and doctoures. Besides that look upon the Bishops book,
Winchesters oration, doctor Sampsons oration, the bishop of Duresmes sermon
and the Bishop of Londons Epistle. I pray thee (gentle reader) as soon as
thou read this treatise, keep it not close. but make it open and spare not.
For it is not by sword and fire that the papystes can fear us from the
truth of Gods word. Grace and peace be with thee. Amen.

The copy of the letter whereby Master hooper was certyfyed of the taking of a
Godly company in bow churcheyarde at prayer.
MY duty humbly remembered, you hear (I know) of a godly company imprisoned
which were taken upon new years night: yet notwithstanding for as much
(perhaps) as you know not perfectelye how nor wherefore, you shall understand
that being upon their knees in ending of prayer (wherein they gave god
thanks, prayed for the magistrates and estates of the realm and required
things necessary at his bountefull hands) two of my Lord chauncelours me^
(as I am informed) came first into yt chamber where they were in bow churchyard
and immediatlye afterward followed. M. shyryeffe with others, who commanded
the^ all to stay in ye king and queen's magisties name, whereunto they humbly
obeyed: for they came not thither weapened to conspire or make any tumult, but
only like Christians, Christianlye to pray and too be instructed in the
vulgar tongue by the readinge and hearing of Gods word, as their conscience
did enforce them (without the dyspleasure of God) to do. For (as you well know)
there is nothing so greuouse too the paciente in this world, as the gnawinge
and biting worm of a troubled conscience, being accused by Gods law, for
the wylfull transgressing of the same: as by experience we know by judge
Hales: who contrary to the knowledge of Gods word, consented to the wicked
traditions of the papists, Which although in name they would be of the holy
church, and preachers of the gospel of Christ: yet in fact and deed do they
dissente from the same, and mostedetest that godly societye: as by the cruel
handlinge of the Christians by the prelates at this present it does
euidentely appear. Therefore (I say) that they might (without the offense of
God) quietly pray together as they be taught by his word, there assembled a
Godly company together to the number of xxx, divided and sent to both the
counters, where at commandment they yet remain. And with master Chambers,
master Monger, and the rest in the counter at breadstreate, I was yesterday:
who (god be thanked) be strong and do rejoice, that for well doing they are
imprisoned: Not doubting but ye as god has vouchsaued to accept them worthy to
sustain imprisonmente for his sake so he will strengthen the^ rather to suffer
death, then to deny his truth. As the Lord knows, who assist you with his
holy spirit that unto the end you may perceauer in his truth: unto whose
tuition in my pore prayer I humbly commend you. 3. of January. 1554. M.
Chamber. M. Monger, M. Sh. and the rest in the counter do pray for you and in
Christ salute you most humbly.

The answer of Master hoopers letter, unto the former letter.
THe grace of God be with you, amen. I perceive by your letter, how that upon
new years day at night, there were taken a Godly company of Christians,
whilst they were prayinge. I do rejoice in that men can be so well occupied in
this perilous time, and fly unto God for remedy by prayer: as well for their
own lackes and necessityes, as also charitablye to pray for them that persecute
them. So does the word of God command all men, to pray charitablye for them
that hate us, and not to revile any magistrate with words, or too mean him
evil by force or violence. They also may rejoice that in well doing, they
were taken too the prysonne. Wherefore I have thought it good to send them this
little wrytinge of co^solatiou: praying god to send them pacyence, charity,
and constancye in the truth of his most holy word. Thus fare you well and pray
too God too send his true word into this realm again amongst us which the
ungodly bishops have now banished. 4. Ianuarye. 1554.

The coppye of Master hoopers letter delivered in the counter at breadestreete.
THe grace, favor, consolation and aid of the holy ghost be with you now
and ever so be it.

Dearly beloved in the Lord, ever sythens your imprisonmente, I have been
maruelously moved with great affections and passions, as well of mirth and
gladness, as of heauynes and sorrow. Of gladness in this, that I perceived how
ye be bent and given to prayer, and invocation of Gods help in these darcke
and wicked proceadinges of men, against Gods glory. I have been sorye to
perceive the malice and wickedness of men, to be so cruel, devilish and
tirannycall, too persecute the people of God, for seruinge, saying and
hearing of the holy psalms, and the word of eternal life. These cruel
doings do declare, that the papists church is more bloody and tirannicall,
then ever was the swearde of the Ethnickes and gentyles. When I heard of your
taking, and what ye were doing, wherefore, and by whom ye were taken: I
remembered how the Christyans in the primityue church were used, by the
crueltye of vnchrystenned heathens, in the time of Traiane the Emperor about.
77. years after Christ's ascension in to heaven: and how, the Christians were
persequuted very sore, as though they had been traytoures and mouers of
sedition. Whereupon, the gentle Emperor Traiane required to know, the true
cause of Christian men's trouble. Agreate learned manne called Plinius wrote
unto him and said: it was because the Christians said certain psalms before
day, unto one called Christ: whom they worshipped for God. When Traiane the
emperor understood it was for nothing but for conscience and religion: he
caused by his commandments every where, that no man should be persecuted for
seruinge of God. Lo, a gentyle and heathen manne would not have such as were
of a contrary religion punished for serving of god: but the Pope and his
church has cast you in to prison, being taken even doing the work of
God, and one of the excellentes works that is required of Christian men:
that is to wit, whiles ye were in prayer, and not in such wicked and
superstytious prayers, as the papists use: but in the same prayer that Christ
has taught you too pray. And in his name only ye gave God thanks for that
ye have received, and for his sake ye asked for such things, as ye want. O
glad way ye be that ever ye were borne, to be apprehended whilst ye were
so virtuously occupied. Blessed be they that suffer for righteousness sake.
For if God had suffered them that took your bodies, then too have taken your
life also: now had ye been folowinge the lamb in perpetual joys, away
from the company and assemble of wicked men. But the lord would not have
you suddenly so to depart, but reserueth you, gloriously too speak and
maintain his truths too the world, Be ye not careful what you shall say:
for God will go out and in with you, and will be present in your hearts and in
your mouths, to speak his wisdom, although it seem folishenes to the
world. He that has begone this good work in you, continue you in the same
unto the end and pray unto him, that ye may fear him only, that has
power to hill both body and soul, and to cast them in to hell fire. Be of
good comforts, all the hears of your heads be numbered, and there is not one
of them can perish except your heavenly father suffer it to perish. Now ye
be even in the field, and placed in the forefront of Christ's battles
doubtelesse it is a singular favor of God, and a special love of him
toward you, too give you this forewarde and pre-eminence, and a sign that he
trusts you before others of his people. Wherefore (dear brethren and sisters)
continuallye fight this fight of the Lord. your cause is most just and
Godly: Ye stand for the true Christ (who is after the flesh in heaven) and
for his true religion and honor, which is amplye, fullye, sufficientely, and
aboundantelye contained in the holy Testament, sealed with Christ's own blood.
How much be ye bounds to God, to put you in trust with so holy and just a
cause? Remember what lokers upon you have, to see and behold you in your
fight: God and all his holy Aungelles, who us ready always to take you up
in to heaven, if ye be slain in this fight. Also you have standing at your
backs, all the multitude of the faithful, who shall take courage, strength
and desire, to follow such noble and vallaunte Christians, as you be. Be not a
fearde of your adversaries, for he that is in you, is stronger then he that is
in them. Shryncke not although it be pain too you. Your pains be not now
so great as hearafter your joys shall be. Read the ^oumfortable chapiters
too the Romans. 8. 10. 15. Hebrews. 11. 12. And upon your knees thank god
that ever ye were accounted worthy to suffer any thing for his names sake.
Read the second chapter of S. Lukes gospel, and there you shall see how the
shepeheardes that watched upon their sheep all night, as soon as they heard
that Christ was borne at Bethelem, by and by they went to se him. They did not
reason nor debate with them selves, who should keep the wolf from the sheep in
the mean time, but did as they were commanded, and committed their sheep unto
him, whose pleasure they obeyed. So let us do now we be called, commit all
other things unto him that calls us. He will take heed that all things shall be
well. He will healpe the husband, he will comfort the wife, he will guide the
servants, he will keep the house: he will preserve the goods: Yea rather
then it should be undone he will wash the dishes, and rock the cradell. Cast
therefore all your care upon god, for he cares for you Besides this, ^ Pet. 5.
you may perceive by your imprisonmente that your adversaries weapons
against you, be nothing but flesh blood and tira^ny. For if they were able,
they would maintain their wicked religion by Gods word: but for lack of that
they would violentlye compel, such as they can not by the holy scripture
perswade^ because the holy word of God and all Christ's doings, be clean
con^rarye unto them. I pray you pray for me, and I will pray for you. And
although we be a sunder after the world: yet in Christ (I trust) for ever
ioyninge in the spirit, and so shall mete in the palace of the heavenly
joys, after this short and transitory life is ended. Gods peace be with you,
amen. 4. of Ianuarye. 1554.

IMPRYNTED at London, by John Tisdale, and Thomas Hacket and are to be sold at
their shoppes in Lombarde street.

Anno. 1561.


