Speculum Topographicum: OR THE Topographicall Glass.

Containing The use of the Topographicall Glass. The use of the Theodelitus.
The use of the Plain Table, and Circumferentor.
With many Rules of Geometry, Astronomy, Topography perspectiue, and
Hydrography.

Newly set forth by Arthur Hopton Gentleman.

woodcut, labeled circular map showing England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland

Printed at London by N. O. for Simon Waterson, dwelling at the sign of the
Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chauncellor of ENGLAND.
THE Privilege (Right Honorable) is common, and the custom commendable, to
dedicate books to Noble persons, to the end that what is effected by labor
and study, may by their greatness be protected from maledictions and envy;
and therefore we select one, whose eminent virtues (exempt from Riuals) is of
all admired, by all observed, and with all beloved, and there the choicest wits
shelter their chiefest works: the habit of which wonderful glories I find
most predominating in your Honor, which are powerful inducements to animate
this presumption in craving patronage for this work: The Book contains no
nice or new controversies, but matter of Art, verified with demonstrations
Geometrical, as still ready to confirm the truth to the ignorant, or confute
the malice of the arrogant, which though it be not fashioned out with
beautiful lineaments, or painted over with golden phrases: yet is there
dainties sufficient to delight the eye, and recreate the mind, choice of
varieties to beguile the time with gain of knowledge, and easy methods with
facill documents to abjure the barbarous tyrant to understanding. Things of
greatest profit, require lest praise; the white silver is wrought in the black
pitch; painting better beseemes rotten walls then precious stones: the
Mathematikes use no conference with the sence-rauishing Rhetorique, their end
is to instruct, not persuade; therefore superfluous eloquence besto^ed upon a
matter of sufficient excellence, is rather a testimony of a trifling wit, then
a token of true wisdom.

A chief cause wherefore I now prove troublesome, is, my love to your
Lordship, whom I ever honored, and the advancement of the Art that I always
liked. By the one I show my duty to a name emphasizing honor, and by the other
my affection to an Art expressing wonders. Alexander would be painted by none
but Apelles, nor have his picture cast in brass by any but Lisippus. Appelles
asked council of none but Zeuxis, and Lisippus must only censure Prisius:
neither do I in this appeal to any but your Lordship, which, as your self are
honorable, so are your proceedings equitable, so that all England may boast of
your great justice, and all Europe rejoice of your good conscience: amongst
which, my self with the best will ever bear testimony; the great son of the
Macedonian king honored Craterus, but most affected Hephestion, and I reverence
all good wits, but here only appeal to your Honors wisdom, that as it is
exceeding the grauest, so is it more excellent then the greatest; and therefore
by the inferiors fitter to be admired then commended. But because your
cogitations cannot but be defessed and made weary, as well in private
contemplating of his Majesty's serious affairs, as in public negotiating for
the good of the Comonwealth, I think it best to cease trouble, lest I offend
your noble meditations, being leuelled at more weighty entendments: not
doubting but the practizers in these Arts will yield your Honor perpetual
thanks, that for their good have brought this Glass to light, where they may
see choice of delights to satisfy their aspiring wits.

Thus committing this Book to your Honorable patronage, your Honor to the
Almighties protection, and my self to your Honors command, I end, resting

Your Honors in all humble duty, ARTHVR HOPTON.

TO THE Mathematical Practizer.
PLATO says, there was in old time an Oracle given unto the Greeks, that they
should double the Altar in the Temple of Delos (which was a piece of work for
an excellent Geometritian to perform, that had the very habit, and perfection
of the Art) but it was not there literally meant, (as Plutarch in his
Symposiaques has expounded) that they should do so indeed, but thereby they
were iniointed to study Geometry, to the end they might be able to perform any
piece of work of as great consequence. Pythagoras offered sacrifice to the
Gods, to know, when two figures are given, how to find a third equal to the
first, and semblable to the latter. Both which are strong arguments, invincible
proofs, and persuading authorities, as well of the necessity to obtain, as of
the difficulty in obtaining the Art. The remembrance whereof, (kind reder)
has oftentimes solicited me to make good my promise ^^cely granted in my
Geodeticall Staff, concerning the publishing of my Topographical Glass, which
having now accomplished, there remains nothing more, but to crave a kind
acceptance, and favorable construction: so shall you shake off that viscosious
filth of ingratitude, which so much conglomerates the heart of the envious: for
the poison of malice being once fostered in men's breasts without resistance,
buddeth forth daily more malignant fruits, whereby men run a malo in peius, as
the fish out of the pan into the fire: it is vain then to beg applaudites of
such, for Ruby stones are not found in flinty rocks nor redolent flowers
amongst rough thystles. A corrupt stomach yields no sweet breath, and an
envious mind seldom due praise. Art may check, but cann t quite change what
nature c^erisheth, insomuch that where ca^^^^^ation, d^samation, and vile
malediction, are so consonant an^ coherent in the heart, s^eking naught but
contention and controversy, foolish are entreaties to win savors, or
persuasions to purchase kind constructions, turning always the band of
gratitude into the p^ssion of hatred. Leaving them therefore, let us direct our
speech to the beneuolent reader, and kind expositor, that wrings no sense to
ambiguities, that wrests no saying to amphibologies, that seeks no euersion of
the word, nor auersion of the work, that urges no dissension in the method,
or dissipation of the matter, but aims to get benefit by his reading, and to
yield thanks for the writing, embracing that which yields profit, and
rejecting all which is impertinent, that receiving a rose, returns a Hyacinth*
to such do I commend this Topographicall Glass, as a pure transparent
Crystal, wherein he may see a number of art like pleasures, and delightful
conclusions, performed by the method of diverse instruments, as by the Glass,
by the Theodelitus by the Plain Table, and by the Circumferentor, by all which
shall thou be severally taught to describe Countries and Kingdoms to make
Mappes of new discoueries, to plat Manors, Lordships, or Towns, to measure
parkes, pastures, or enclosures, and that after diverse new ways. Also here are
you taught to seek the distance of Towns, the height of Turrets, to convey
waters, to plant Cities and houses, to plat buildings, and to measure all k^nd
of ^imber Stone, Piramides, Columns, Cones, Spheres, Globes, and such like,
in a method differing from any heretofore published: so that if you have any
good Geometrical instrument already, sure also have thou the use thereof; or
if thou want, here art thou instructed to make the same according to thy
affection: for I seek to tie none to my own particular humor: then might I
have referred them unto my Geodeticall Staff. But happily some will say if
there were sufficient instruments before, then what needs these new
inventions? would we have our own wits more excellent then our predecessors.
Of such and such like, I familiarly enquire if Antiquity be only Mistress of
this faculty, if modern wits may intimate or exhibit naught unto the world;
if we must only believe what is set down, without contradiction, should that
be so? how far had this age been from the perf^ct Idea of the Art, whose
excellency turns every heart after the same as the Heliotropion after the
Sun? into what an intricate Laborinth of co^fused errors had we run? The most
ancient Philosophers were as contrary in their sects, as erroneous in their
opinions, till time brought in Truth, truth Knowledge, and Knowledge perfect
Understanding; what a number of sects had we? as Catonians, Peripatitians,
Academians, and Epicurians. Anaximander said the earth was like a column.
Anaximenes flat, Leucippus like a Drum, Democrites like a platter; till Thales
demonstrated it to be round. How grossly did they differ about the Tides? some
referring the cause to rivers falling from the mountain Gaul, entering the
Atlantique sea, as Tymeus: Some to a rising of certain waters, as Plato: Some
to the Sun drawing the winds upon the Ocean which caused the Atlantique seas
to swell, as Heraclitus, till Pytheas demonstrated the cause to be in the
increasing and decreasing of the Moon; whereby Homer said: I praise not my
Ancesters for their knowledge, but for that they desired knowledge. But shaking
off these old differences, enquire of the commodity of the Compasses,
Sea-cards, and new Maps, and of many other devises and engines, that have been
lately set forth more beneficial then any heretofore, of which the old
Philosophers and Mathem^titians were ignorant of and I think if they were
living, they would rejoice to see, as amongst many I will remember G^l^risius
Astr^l^be, the Matter whereof being excellent and a most Art-like proiectment
resembling the true lineaments of the ^pheare, and is now made perpetually
famous with the Edition of the Rete, by our ingenious countriman M. I.
Blagra^e. But my Pen shall not be so much dismeasured to reprove ancient men*
to the end to draw the glory to them that be present. Had we lived then we had
known less then they, and were they living now, they would know more then we:
every thing has his time, before it come to maturity: neither does nature alot
like time to every like action: some things grow to perfection in a moment,
when others require a month. The Bear brings forth in four weeks, when
the Dolphin has near 40. when one fruit fails, another enters into
season: we must first invent, next amend, and lastly perfect: the furtherance
of which perfection it behooves every lover of the Science to cherish, which is
here freely offered unto thy view, though it might have been undertaken (I
confess) by some one of more experience: but he that most can, least will, and
he that worst may, holds the candle: else the world must walk in darkness.
There be many say, the instruments be uncertain, and this or that is better:
but none seeks to reform the same, and contriue one that shall do best: the
professors themselves cry out at the erros, but seek no reformation of the
fault: so that it fares with this, as in the civil actions of the life, every
man curses excess, yet none live temperately: every man praises patience,
yet none will suffer every man blames sloth, yet none will take pains: every
one exclaimeth on envy, yet none leave emulating. But to remit this, and speak
something of the application of Instruments.

He then that will be seen in the knowledge of Geometrical instruments, must
learn by contemplation, to frame his proposition, and by action to manage his
instrument: for I know diverse great Scholars, deeply seen in the Theoricall
part, though in the active, mere nouices: which is a cause that such, so
learned, were never able to correct and amend many defects. For as meditation
causes ability to understand, so action brings dexterity to perform,
because the event of the work is illustrated by a precise observation, as the
life of the proposition is illuminated by a plain demonstration: for as points
found lines, lines surfoces, and surfaces bodies, so good instruments produce
true observations, true observations Symmetricall figures, and the superficial
capacity of proposed platformes. And as lines bound figures, so hedges bound
enclosures: and angles in the field are created by the meting of hedges, as
they be in figures by the section of lines: for you shall know that all
instruments, of what kind soever, if they cannot observe the precise
quantitity of the angle, their work is erroneneous: for though some
instruments express the quantity of angles, as the Theodelitus. etc. and
others regard not the quantity, producing angles Homogeneall, as the Plain
Table: yet, if you fail in the one or the other, your conclusion is error: for
it is as great an absurdity if the angle Homogeneall Mechanical delineated
upon the Plain Table, Prove Heterogeneall, and accord not Symmetrially to the
respondent angles in the field, as if with a graduated instrument you had
falsely observed the quantity thereof: and therefore it is childish vanity, or
at least self conceit, to go about to prefer the Plain Table before a large
graduated instrument, and I am persuaded all good Geometricians will argue the
same: though I verily believe it is possible to separate fire from heat, or
the earth from the center, at turn the obstinate will of the ignorant: for use
and custom has taken such root in such, that it will hardly be supplanted.
It suffices them, plain men to have an Instrument, for then they presume they
be Geometritians. Every horse is not Bucephalus, yet he may be are one a
journey, though he be long and lame in performing it, and can hardly pass
over a mountain: but let every man use his will, and so I will mine here, in
saying no more at this time: only wishing my self present to open any thing
that the young practizer shall doubt of.

From my Lodging this 9. of April. 1611. ARTHVR HOPTON.

The Author to the Reader, concerning the Topographicall Glass.
COme you, whose eyes stand not in envious head,
Whose tongue with Critic humors is not fed,
And in this Glass, unto your comfort view,
Such needful works that much may profit you.
The grounds of Art have brought it forth for thee,
Which we have sucked from famous Geometry,
With Theorm's mixed and demonstrations rare,
Such as in hiddan Propositions are:
Here Is no vain show: illusions have no place,
No spirit confind, no hateful painted face,
No eye-deceiuing glass, no Cristall brave,
Which from the frozen seas we often have.
But in a fair and most perspicuous light,
The earthy Globe lies subject to thy sight.
Whose Center's deep, whose continent is great,
Here mixed with cold, and there with burning heat:
As Phoebus beams do sparkling from him glide,
Or as in torrid Zones we do abide.
This frame enough for all the world to view,
This Glass lays in a small proportion true.
That like an Eagle towering up aloft,
Whole regions thou may view and reuiew often.
Discoursing now of Europe in particular,
And then of other Countries distant far.
Now of Jerusalem that was before,
And then of Rome, by Tybers silver shore.
See here mount Sion and mount Moria then,
That on their backs bare old Jerusalem:
Though now mount Caluarie has got the grace,
Which erst was but an execution place.
Learn here to bound the Alps, Spain, France and all,
That yields those vines whence iuycie grapes do fall.
America, the new found land beside,
And eke those Southern parts yet vndiscride.
See how to measure plot, and part out lands;
As dressed in Floras summer robes it stands.
Or as it is rent up with the tering plowe,
O^ hid with f^eezing ice or melting snow:
See here the height of hills, or see their ods,
That Giants meant to dart against the gods.
See here the Sun, whose beams do Comets fire,
That all the world with terror may admire.
Behold the Moon, and fixed Stars so bright,
That guide the Pilots in the darkest night.
Look how the Planets with the whirling Sphere,
To our Horizon fiery meteots bear.
Gilding the black brow of the ugly night,
With burning Dragons and such fearful light.
Look on them all: see in this little Glass,
Their height so took as never in English was.
Would plant a Town, or situate a house,
Or force the water take a wished course.
Would seek the height or distance of a Town,
Or undermine a Fort to blow it down*
Or what would do belonging to this Art,
But in this Glass thou may behold apart?
Then use him well, my word I pawn, he is true,
Let small defects be but supplide by you.
Of which few escaped my Pen, no store the Press,
Where either be, in kindness use redress.
So shall my Pen not be imployd in vain,
To please thee more when I do write again.
Arthur Hopton.

T: Littleton gener: ad A: Hopton, amicum suum.
Illustris Lector, librum nunc cerne docentem,
Eximias arts, quas tibi scire licet:
Arthurus iuuenis docet in iuuenilibus annis,
Quae priscis annis non reuelata latent.
Flores venturis seclis dat semper Amenos,
Lectori grato suauis odorque manet.
Author communem dignus velit vtilitatem,
Authori digno gloria dignadetur.
I. Passy, in artibus Magister.
COntinet hic paruus mira and secreta libellus,
Quem pretio vili (lector) habere potes:
Que Solis, Lunae, astrorum, coelique potestas,
Inferioraregat corporarite docet.
Cultor agri, pecoris custos, pecudumque magister,
Nauita, mercator, caetera turba virum.
Hinc petas auxilium, quo tutius exigat aeuum,
Authoremque operis semper amore colat.
Constitit authori magno, multoque labor:
Quem tibi dat gratis gratus amicus amans.
Iustitae virtus fama non vltima laus est.
Qua semper florens, stirps generosa fuit.
Arthure, liber hic lumen mortalibus adfert,
Arthure Hoptonum nomine fama viret,
Hoptonides inuenis generosa stirpe creatus,
Arthurus, grata perlege ment^, cole.
Carmina R: Stedmani, profes. Theologiae Oxoniensis, in laudem Authoris.
EDidit Arthurus librum generosus amicus:
Qui feret eximijs lumina clara viris.
Est iuuenis florens suanuis flos gloria patrum:
Mirificis monstrans inelita facta modis.
Lucida nubiferi decantat corpora coeli,
Lucentis solis commoda magna canit.
Commemorat fluvios magno cum murmr iactos,
Attribuens cunctis grandia summa viris.
Scriptoris memorat celeberrima facta recentis:
Flammiferumque noua continet art iubar.
Carmina praedicti R. S.
PRaeualet antiquis geometria scripta libellis,
Terminat in proprijs pascua cuncta locis.
Aestiuis memorat gemmantes floribus hortos:
Candidulaque dabit praemia digna manu.
Inque agro monstrat vestigia certa virenti:
Quae proprijs dominis faedera pacis erunt.
Mensurat radijs liquidos flagrantibus ignes:
Solis and ardentis lumina magna capit.
Pinguas describit terras cum passibus aequis:
Terminat aequali iugera cuncta modo.
Alios brumali mensurat tempore montes:
Aestiuoque canit florida prata die.
Viuet opus, durabit opus, tua fama vigebit:
Et tua posteritas facta sequenda canet.
Errata.
Page 3. line 7. the word) p. 13. pro. 7. place the figure in the 9. page) 40.
l. vlt. for 28 18. omit orleton) 41. omit 10. and 11. lines 68. a stands where
c should) 101.8. the 61) 114.2. I can see) 117.14. one with another) 118. l.
8. your second) 150. c b should be infinite beyond b, a perpendicular falling
from a, thereon at a point h) 153. the perpendiculars and bases be omitted)
161, the figure in p. 164) many times you shall find sum and sign for sine,
with other small literal faults, that you may correct in the reading.

VIRESCIT VULNERE VIRTUES
DVM SPIRO VNICVM CHRISTUM SPERO

woodcut, detailed crest

THE TOPOGRAPHICALL Glass. Containing the description, making, and use of the
said Glass, the Theodelitus, plain Table, and Circumferentor, with many other
Topographicall conclusions, concerning the plantation of Cities, and situation
of houses, with the conueying of waters and such like: as also Propositions
Astronomicall, correcting thereby the altitude of the Sun and Stars, being
formerly observed falsely, in respect of the omission of their Refraction and
Paralax.
CHAP. I. What Topography is, and how it differs from Cosmography, and
Geography.
TOPOGRAPHIE (with some called Corography) is an Art, Topography,
whereby we be taught to describe any particular place, without relation unto
the whole, delivering all things of note contained therein, as ports, villages,
rivers, not omitting the smallest: also to describe the platform of houses,
buildings, monuments, or any such particular thing; and therefore a
Topographicall description ought to express every particular, which caused me
the rather to call this instrument the Topographicall Glass, as being most apt
to describe any monument, Tower, or Castle, any Manor, country, or kingdom,
so do we briefly describe England thus: but we have omitted diverse things, by
reason of the smalnes of the plat; therefore take the plat, the division, and
number of shires, number of Parish Churches in every shire, etc.

A Demonstration of Topography.

woodcut, labeled circular map showing England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland

woodcut, stick figure castle

Geography (as Vernerus in his paraphrasis says) is an imitation of the whole
earth, and his principal and most known parts differing from Topography,
because it respects but places of note, and from Cosmography, because it has
no relation unto the circles in the sphere, only describing the world by
hills, rivers, and therefore Geography may serve well for a general description
of particular places, rivers, etc. in the world.

A Demonstration of Geography.

A description of the world
woodcut, labeled map of the world

As Apian says, we may well gather what Cosmography is, by the bare
etimologie of the world. It is therefore a description of the world, which does
consi^^ of the four Elements, and also of the Sun, Moon, and all the other
stars both erraticall and fixed, with all things else that be contained
within the concauity of the heavens.

First of all, it has respect unto the circles, which are imagined in the
celestial sphere: and such like circles be appointed or imagined upon the
earth, also it does demonstrate the site, symet^y, or commensuration of places,
the diversity of climats, the differences of days and nights the four
quarters of the world, the motion, rising, and setting of the stars, with
such as are moved vertically, with all things else, that appertain to the
consideration of heaven, as the elevation of the Pole, the paralels, Meridians,
circles, etc. So that like Meridians, like paralels, etc. in heaven do
corespond to their like upon the earth, hereby is every town, etc. situate
under some one constellation or other:

A Demonstration of Cosmography

woodcut, globe and cosmological map

Hereby has every town lying into the East or West a several Meridian, and
into the North or South a several parallel of latitude, etc. as you may gather
by the Cosmographicall demonstration before, therefore behold the figure
because this is besides our intended labor.

CHAP. II. Geometrical definitions of lines, angles, and figures.
BEcause the ensuing terms of Geometry be often used in this book, and the
understanding thereof not known (though something common) to all young
practizers, as also for ye they be but stenderly remembered in my Geodeticall
Staff, I thought good to say something thereof. All Geometrical magnitudes take
beginning from a point, which is an indivisible sign in a magnitude.

1 A magnitude is lineall or lineamentall.

2 A line is a magnitude only long, and his terms be two points bounding the
terms of the line.

3 Lines are considered after two ways, first simply by themselves, then also
comparatively amongst themselves.

4 Being considered simply they be right or oblique.

5 A right line is which lies equally betwixt his terms.

6 An oblique line is which lies vnqually betwixt his terms.

What distinctions right and oblique lines do admit.

7 A right line being given there cannot be made a shorter betwixt his terms,
and therefore they be all like unto one, but where as an oblique line does lie
inequally betwixt his terms, they may be divided, so ye the oblique lines be
simple or manifold.

8 Those be Simplex, which be terminated with a uniform and simple motion.

9 The diverse or manifold oblique lines called Helices, are such that be
terminated with diverse motions, and be unequally distant from the center, such
are Spirale lines, Conchales, Ouales, Lenticulares, etc.

Lines compared amongst themselves be diversely affected: for either they be
perpendiculars, paralels, or contrary.

10 Perpendiculars compared amongst themselves, are two right lines, whereof the
one falling upon the other make two right angles, such is a Carpenters squire,
etc.

11 Parallel lines are every where one alike distant from the other be they
right lines, circles or Helices.

It follows to speak of Lineaments, and first of Angles.

12 A lineament is a magnitude more then long, consisting of lines, and is
distributed into an angle or a figure.

13 An angle is a lineament, made by the common concurse of two lines, and
situate within the same.

14 The two terms or lines comprehending the angles are called the sides.

15 Of angles, there be two kinds Homogencall and Heterogencall.

16 Angles Homogencall, be such that have their sides both of one kind, as
both right or oblique.

17 Angles Hetrogeneall are such that consist of mixed side as of right lines
and curued.

These Homogeneall angles do furthermore suffer a subdiuision, and are
therefore right or oblique.

18 A right angle is where one live falls perpendicular upon an other.

19 An oblique angle is made when one line does not fall perpendicular upon
another, whereof there be two kinds, Acute and Obtuse.

20 An Acute angle is an oblique angle, less then a right angle.

21 An Obtuse angle is an oblique angle, more then a right angle.

Of Triangles and Figures.

22 A Tryangle, is a figure, and a figure is a lineament bounded upon every
side. Therefore a Tryangle is a figure consisting of 3. Angles, and bounded
with 3. lines.

23 Every figure has certain terms wherewith the figure is measured.

24 A Center is a point in the midst of any figure.

25 A Perimeter is that which bounds or comprehends the figure.

26 A Radius is a right line drawn from the center to the perimeter.

27 A Diameter is a right line inscribed in a figure, and passing by the
center, therefore Diameters in one figure may be infinite, the center of the
figure is always in the Diameter, and in the concurse of the Diameters.

28. The altitude of a figure is the length of the perpendicular let fall from
the top of the figure upon the base.

Of the kinds of figures.

29 There be two kinds of figures, to wit, Superficies and Bodies.

30 A Superficies is a figure only broad.

31 Superficies be also plain or swelling.

32 Plain Superficies be such that lie equally betwixt their terms.

33 Plain Superficies admit a double distinction, whereof some be right lined,
some curuilined.

34 Plain right lined Superficies, be such that be bounded with right lines.

Of right lined plains.

35 Of right lined plains there be two kinds, as a Triangle and a Triangulate.

36 A Tryangle is a figure comprehended under 3. right lines.

37 Furthermore a Tryangle is taken two kind of ways, as in respect of his
sides or angles.

38 In respect of sides they be either an Isopleuron, Isosceles, or Scalenum.

39 An Isopleuron called also an Equicrurum, is a Tryangle consisting of 3
equal sides,

40 An Isosceles has only two equal sides.

41 A Scalenum, has all his 3 sides unequal.

42 Tryangles, in respect of their angles, are distributed into two kinds, as
Right Angles, and Oblique Angles.

43 A right angled Tryangle is, which contains one right angle which is also
called an Orthogonium.

44 An Acutangled triangle, has all his angles acute, to wit, less then right
angles, and is called an Oxigonium.

45 So that there be triangles in respect of their sides, as Isopleurons,
Isosceles and Scalenumes, and in respect of their angles, as Orthogoniumes,
Ambligoniumes and Oxigoniumes: so also may they be taken mixed or comparatively,
as well in respect of their sides as angles. So have we an Orthogonium
Isopleuron, an Oxigonium Isosceles, or an Oxigonium Scalenum.

Of Triangulates.

46 A Triangulate is a mixed figure composed of Triangles, and may be resolved
into the same again, whereof there be two kinds, Quadrangles and Multangles.

47 A Quadrangle is a figure bounded with four right lines, and is twofold, as
a Paralelogram, or a Trapezia.

48 A Paralelogram is a figure whose opposite sides be parallel, and may be
Rectangled, or Obliquangled.

49 A right angled Paralelogram is a figure whose angles be all right, and is
twofold, as a Quadrate, or an Oblonge.

50 A Quadrate or Square, is a right angled Paralelogram equilater.

51 An Oblonge is a right angled Paralelogram, not equilater.

Of Obliquangled Paralelogrames.

52 Obliquangled Paralelogrames are such whose angles be all oblique, and they
be twofold, either a Rhombus, or a Rhomboides.

53 A Rhombus is an obliquangled Paralelogram equilater.

54 A Rhomboides is a paralelogram obliquangled and inequilater.

Of a Trapezia.

55 A Trapezia is a quadrangle being not a paralelogram.

Multangles.

56 Mixed or multangled Triangulates are such figures that consist of more then
four sides.

Of Curuilines superficies.

57 Curuilines superficies be either simple or mist.

58 Simple, are circular figures and round, being every where equidistant from
the center, as a circle.

59 The terms of circles are the parts measuring the same, which are Segments
of the Peripher, Sectores and Sections, also lines Ascript, and Inscript, as
Tangents, Secants, Radius, and Diameter.

60 The Segment of a circle is a portion comprehended with the Peripher, and a
right line which may be a subtension.

61 A Sector is a Segment contained inwards under two right angles, making an
angle either in the center or Peripher.

62 A Section is a segment of the circle contained inwardly, with one right
line, which is called the base of the Section. Lines Ascript be described Lib.
7. chap. 2. of the Geodeticall Staff.

63 Such figures be called Mist obliquilined, which be unequally distant from
the midst of ye figure, such figures be Ouales, Lenticulares, etc.

CHAP. III. How right figures are created.
I Shall not need to run into an ample discourse hereof, nor tire you with
multitudes, only some few that shall be most requisite in this intended
work, I will acquaint you with, leaving apart the rest.

PROPOSITION I. To create a right angle, or to rear a Perpendicular on any
assigned line.
A Right Angle or perpendicular is created by ye extention of a right line from
both the sections of two arches of equal or inequall Diameters, the centers
whereof remaining in the line assigned, and this creation of right Angles or
Perpendiculars is general.

Example.

A b is the line assigned, c d a right line mathematical figure corresponding
to example description exitended from the section of two arches of equal
diameter, viz. of c b d, whose center is a, and situate in the right line a b,
and of c a d, whose center is b, and situate in the said right line a b
assigned: so that in describing of those two like arches, the wideness of your
compass is not altered, nor the one foot moved out of the line assigned, so
that the right line c d drawn from the section of the two arches, viz. from c
to d, cuts the assigned line at right angles, as at e. Neither is it material
in this case if the one arch be greater then the other, so that their centers
be in the line assigned: as a right line drawn from the section of the great
arch c b d, with the lesser arch fig, as from f to g cuts a b the assigned line
at right angles in the point h.

PROP. II. To rear a Perpendicular, or create a right angle upon the extremes
of a line assigned, and not alter your compass.
IN making of a Quadrant, and performing of other conclusions in this book,
you shall be forced to raise a Perpendicular, or create a right angle upon the
extremes of a line assigned, wherein the last Proposition would stand you in
no stead: therefore work thus:

mathematical figure corresponding to description

A p is the line assigned, p the extremes of the line, whereon you are to
erect a Perpendicular, therefore I open my compass to any reasonable scantle,
placing the one foot in p, with the other I strike the arch c d e, that
wideness resting, I place the one foot in c, and with the other make the
point d, then with the same wideness upon d, I do describe the arch c g h f,
then do I fit that wideness three times in the last described arch, as g h f:
lastly, from f I draw a right line to p, so have I created a right angle f p a
upon the point p.

PROP. III. To draw a Perpendicular from a point assigned to a line assigned.
D is the point assigned and a b the line assigned whereon a Perpendicular
should fall from the point d, therefore mathematical figure corresponding to
description place the one foot of your compass in d, and open the other so
far, that it may reach beyond the line a b, and so strike an arche e f, which
shall cut the line a b in two points, as in e and f, then your compass resting
at any scantle, fix the one foot in f, and with the other strike an arch
under that arch e f, the compass at the wideness, fix the one foots in e,
and with the other cross the last described arch in the point g, finally draw
a straight line from d to c. for that is the Perpendicular to the line a b.

PROP. IIII. To make a right Angle readily.
Divide one line into five equal parts, as c b that mathematical figure
corresponding to description is the longest line, then take three of those
equal parts for a b, next take four of those 5. equal parts for c a: lastly,
couple those three lines together, so have you made a right angle at a.

By this means may you easily open the legs of your Geodetical staff unto a
right angle, or place the graduator at a right angle. To place the legs of
the Geodeticall staff at a right angle.
To place the legs at a right angle do thus: count 40. upon the left leg,
whereto bring the center of the Graduator, then count 30. upon the right leg
amongst the equal divisions, next note 50. equal parts upon the Graduator,
now the center of the Graduator resting fixed, move the right leg, and the
other end of the Graduator until 30. upon the leg, and 50 equal parts upon
the Graduator, touch one the other, so shall the legs rest at a right angle.

To place the Graduator at a right angle upon the left leg.
Now to place the Graduator at right angles, count 40 upon the left leg,
whereunto bring the center of the Graduator, then make 50 upon the right leg,
and 30 upon ye Graduator intersect, so have you placed the Graduator at right
angles.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

Otherwise:

Draw a semicircle a b c d, upon the center c, d a being the Diameter:
finally from a draw a line to touch the circumference as at b or c, then from
b or c draw a line to d, so have you made a right angle, as a b d, or a c d.

PROP. V. To make an angle like to any angle assigned.
THis proposition will stand you in much stead in the use of the plain table,
and is performed thus:

mathematical figure corresponding to description

A b c is an angle, and you be required to make another angle equal thereunto,
which to do, open the feet of your compass to some reasonable scantle,
placing the one foot in a, and with the other strike an arch over the sides of
the angle, as d e: the feet unstirred I place the one foot in the line f c,
and with the other strike the arch i h, next do I take the distance of d e, and
fit it in the arch i h, from i to h: finally, I lay my Ruler upon the point i
and h, drawing a line from f toward h infinitely: so have I made an angle c f
g, equal to the assigned angle b a c: this proposition will stand you in
singular use for translating of plats from one paper to another, and for
protraction of plats and diverse other operations performed by the Plain table.

PROP. VI. To draw a line parallel to any assigned line.
A B is a line assigned, mathematical figure corresponding to description to
which you must draw a line parallel, choose two points in the assigned line at
all adventures, as c d, now open your compass to what distance you please, or
rather to any distance assigned, then place the one foot in c, and with the
other strike a fragment of an arch, do so at d: finally, by the extremes of
these two arches produce a right line e f, which shall be parallel to a b.

PROP. VII. To divide a line into two equal parts, or to find the midst of
any line assigned.
A B is a line assigned, which you are to divide into two equal parts, or find
the midst betwixt the point a and b, which to do open your compass to any
reasonable scantle, and then placing the one foot in b, with the other strike
the arch d a c, that wideness remaining, place the fixed foot in the point a,
and with the other strike the arch c b d: now note the intersection of these
two arches, as at c and d, for a line drawn from c to d diuides the line a b
in two equal parts at the point e.

I will not seek to deliver rules to divide a line into a number of parts, nor
to give any part of any line, because it is performed else where with singular
ease and dexterity.

PROP. VIII. Three points being given to find the center of a circle that
shall cut all the three points.
YOu be taught in the 6. Book of the Geodeticall Staff to find the center of
any Polligon, Chap. 23. therefore here I will only teach you certain easy
ways concerning circles, because mathematical figure corresponding to
description you shall have great use thereof in describing the hour lines in my
Circular sight belonging to the Topographicall Glass, a b c, are three points
taken at all adventure, and you required to find the center of a circle that
shall cut the said three points: first therefore, from a to b draw a line, and
upon the point b erect a Perpendicular by the 2. Prop. which extend infinite,
as b d, then from c the 3. point extend a right line to a, and upon the point c
as before erect a Perpendicular, as c d: now must you note the intersection of
b d and c d, as at d, then draw a line from d to a, for that is the Diameter
of the circle: lastly by the 7. Prop. find the midst of the said line d a, as
e, which is the center of a circle whose arch shall cut the 3. assigned point a
b and c.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

Otherwise:

A b c are three points given, first from a to b I draw a right line, then
from b to c: lastly by the 1. Prop. I rear a a Perpendicular in the midst of
a b and another in the midst of b c, as e d, and f d, the intersection of
which two Perpendiculars, as d is the true center.

Otherwise:

Let the 3. points be a b c, open your compass to some reasonable scantle, let
it be more then half the distance that is betwixt a b, with that wideness
strike a portion of an arch upon the point a, do so upon b, and note the
intersection of those two arches, as f g, do likewise to b and c, and note the
intersection of the arches, as i h: lastly, produce a line from i by h
infinitely, do so from f by g, noting where those two lines intersect, for
that is the true center, as at e.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

More of these conclusions might be set down, but here is sufficient to
perform whatsoever is needful in this Book.

CHAP. IIII. The making and composing of the Topographicall Glass.
The construction of the Topographicall glaffe.
FIrst prepare a piece of wood requisite for such a purpose, or a piece of
plate, if you will have it in mettle, and let it be 9. inches square at the
least, as d b or a c, then upon the center r describe a circle of three inches
diameter, as p q, a quarter of an inch, from that make two other circles, as t
u, which divide into 24. equal parts, as here it is, and set figures
accordingly, an inch, or some reasonable distance from this circle, describe
another circle, and divide the same into 32. equal parts, and there appoint
the 32 winds, as you may plainly see^ next unto this describe another circle,
and there place the Geometrical Quadrant thus.

Secondly, in the Quadrant of this last circle e g, draw the ordinary
quadrant i f h, and divide the sides i f and h f into 120: or 60 equal parts,
then keeping the rule upon ye center r, and each division in the sides i f, and
f h, as you move him from division to division, make marks in the circle e g,
so have you proiected the Geometrical Quadrant i f h into the Quadrant of a
circle e g.

About this circle describe another circle, and divide the same into 360
degrees, as the order is, drawing parallel circles to place the figures, as in
the demonstration.

About this last graduated circle draw an other some half an inch distance or
better, as a b c d, and betwixt the graduated circle r, and the circle a, draw
five other parallel circles equidistant one from the other, as in the figure:
Lastly, upon every two degrees make an Isosceles Triangle round about the
circle: you may better perceive it by the plain demonstration then understand
it with multiplicitie of words.

These Isosceles Triangles serve aptly and precisely to express the fiftieth
part of a degree from 10 to 10 etc. thus.

All the sides of the Isosceles upon the right hand are divided into 60 parts
with the parallel lines, reckond by 10. as 10.20.30.40.50.60, beginning at the
utter circle a, and so proceeding to k, so that if the Index cut the right side
of the Isosceles in the 2. parallel it cuts so many degrees and 20. minutes, etc.

But for the left side of the Isosceles the divisions do begin at the circle
k, and so proceed by 10 to the circumference, as 10.20.30.40.50.60, so that if
the Index cut the second parallel circle counted from k, it cuts 20. minutes.

See the ensuing figures in the folded sheet.

Thirdly, The Card.
you must provide a Card to be placed within ye circle p q, divided into an
120. equal parts, and therein draw a Dial according to the Azimuths of the
Sun, for some particular latitude (but that you may omit if you will, because
my new fight instrument performs it) the deliniating is performed by the
Azimuth as is said: the hours be numbered, and ye months wrote at every
several circle, wherein you most observe the hours See the use of the
Circumfere^tor.
according to the time of year: and because I will not trouble you over long
with the making, behold the figure which I will cause to be printed in a void
paper to save a labor in drawing the same.

woodcut, circular table, containing degrees, roman numerals, astrological
signs etc.

The Index.
Furthermore to this Instrument there belongs a circle of mettle equal in
Diameter to p q, all which must be cut out, only a narrow lymbe remaining just
to contain the breadth that is intercepted betwixt the circle t u, and p q,
the utter part of this lymbe is to be divided into 29. equal parts, as in the
figure, and this circle is to move about the circle p q: at every quarter of
this circle there is an Index left of sufficient length to reach over the
circumference a b c d in the great figure, and of sufficient strength to bear
such sights as are to be placed thereon.

See the ensuing figures in the folded sheet.

Upon the Index i and h there be placed the two short sights marked with k and
l: these two sights have two small groves or channels cut through them for one
to look through, and in the top of the sights at the end of these groves there
be certain things left like pinnes heads, as in the figure: these two sights
need to be no longer then from i or h to the graouated circle, and they be
made to fold down each upon his proper Index: the principal use of these
sights is to square land, and to find where the Perpendicular falls upon the
base of any Triangle in the open field, as in the 31. Chap.

5 As for the Demicircle, it is a smooth piece of wood, but rather brass,
whose breadth or diameter needs not to be limited, but is best to agree with
the diameter of the Planisphere. Appoint therefore a a center, and thereupon
describe a semicircle r r, something more large then the circle p q in the
Planisphere: all within which circle is to be cut out, unless you please to
leave sou^^ certain artificial branches to hang a plumbe neately at, as in
this figure, which will also beautify your Instrument; but they must be so
wrought by the workman, that they let not the Semicircle to fold down. Then
some two inches or better distant from this circle r r describe another, and
according to that circle fyle all the rest of the plate that is superfluous
away even to the said circle.

See the precedent figures in the folded sheet.

This Demicircle so made, he must be supported with Antickes artificially
wrought, and the said Semicircle so done must be placed upon the Indexes g and
f, as hereafter: but first I will teach you to describe the Astronomicall
circles, and Horologicall arkes, as also to project Geometrical lines, etc.
upon the said demicircle.

As for the Astonomicall circles, though the graduation thereof be after a new
order, yet will I not stand to prove the same with Geometrical demonstrations,
referring such to the fifteenth book of Ramus, where they shall find, ye
Circles are as the squares which are made of their diameters, and that their
diameters are as the Circumferences.

You shall therefore do no more but divide the circumference d c into 90.
parts, and so draw parallel lines, and figure the same accordingly, as in the
figure: and note if you make the diameter of this circular sight to agree with
the diameter of the Planisphere, then have you no supporters at all, and this
best.

6 But now for the Horologicall arkes, they be more difficult to perform: you
shall therefore at each end of the former demicircle appoint the moitie of the
Zodiac, even as you be taught in the 9. place of this Chapter: let the South
moitie stand at b r, and the North at o r, then upon the center a describe the
circle the r r, which we call the Equinoctial, and so upon that center a
describe the Tropique of Cancer and Capricorn, which here are both but one
circle. Next upon the said center describe other circles, as the degree of or
or any other, as occasion requires, by placing the one foot in a, and
extending the other to the degree in the Zodiaque assigned. This so done,
repair unto the Table of ye Suns altitude in the first Book of the
Geodeticall staff, Here serves the figure supported with Antickes again.
and there seek the altitude of ye Sun at 12 of the clock, he being in the o
degree of Aries or Libra, then finding the like altitude in the Demicircie b c,
I place a ruler upon the said degree of altitude, and upon the center a, and so
I make a small prick in the circle of the Equinoctial, where the ruler cuts:
this so done. I do the like to the hours of 11 10 9 8 7 and 6 of the clock,
for no further do the hours extend in the Equinoctial: these pricks
precisely done, and apparently noted, I do the like in the circle of the o
degree of and so have you three pricks, then must you find the common center,
of each 3: match ye pricks as you be taught Chap. 3. Prop. 8. and thereby
describe those horologicall arkes.

But now, for that you shall want pricks to describe the hours of 7 and 8
afternoon, and 4 and 5 before noone, you most describe another circle upon the
center a, representing the 30 degree of Taurus, making marks ^or (...) there,
and so proceed as before: so have you finis^^^ all the hours belonging to the
North moitie of the Zodiaque, and they will bend toward the left hand.

Then for the hour lives answering to the South moitie of the zodiaque, look
what you did to the Tropicke of Cancer, and do the same here unto the Tropicke
of Capricorn: and as you used the o degree of Taurus, so deal here with the o
degree of Scorpio so have you made two pricks to describe your arc by: as for
the 3, they be the very same that formerly you made in the Equinoctial: and
if points for the striking of the arkes of 7 and 8 before noone, and 4 and 5
after noone be wanting, draw other blind paralels from some degree of Libra or
Scorpio, or from both, and accordingly find the altitude in the table, and
afterward proceed as before: so have you finished the arkes of the South
moitie of the zodiaque, and they will bend toward your right hand.

So having placed a small sight fixed in the 90 degree, the forepart of this
Demicircle is finished.

7 Upon the back side this Demicircle is proiected the parts of the
Geometrical Quadrant, and Hysometricall Scale, thus.

Take the Diameter of the last Demicircle, which make the Semidiameter of
another circle, as a b, now making a a center, and a b a Semidiameter, strike
the Quadrant of a circle b d c, and within that Quadrant inscribe an ordinary
Geometrical square, as f d e a, then diuids d e and d f, each into 60 equal
parts: next in the midst of the live a b make a point at g, on which, as a
center describe the Demicirle a i b equal unto the former Demicircle, now lay
a Ruler upon the center a, and every of those equal parts, both in the line f
d and d e, making notes in the arch a i b where the said Ruler touched at every
part.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

These parts so proiected unto the circle a i b, you shall upon the back side
your Demicircle strike an arch of the bigness of a i b, as m n o, where place
all those parts, as they be in the ensuing figure, drawing parallel lines for
figures accordingly.

Now if you would likewise place the Hysometricall Scale hereon also, because
there is room sufficient and spare, draw a circle within the circle m n o, as
p q, which furnish as the former with parallel lines, and so from every 15 part
in the circle m n o, the one and of the ruler fixed on s, produce right lines
over the parallel circles, and number them by three, as 3 6 9 ending in 12, just
at 60 in the first circle: now divide every of those parts into three other
parts, by pulling right lines from every 5 part in the said circle m n o, and
then write vmbra recta and vmbra versa, as you may best perceive in the ensuing
figure: this done, your Demicircle is finished.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

8 This Semicircle so finished and supported (as before) with Antickes, he must
be placed upon two of the Indexes in such sort, that the one Anticke stand a^
g, the other at f, bearing the foresaid Demicircle up over the Box and the
Needle, provided that he may fold down at pleasure, with certain haspes or
buttons likewise to fix him upright at pleasure, the Diameter thereof standing
parallel with the fiduciall edge of the Index g and f.

9 In the midst of this Demicircle under 12 in the Hysometricall Scale may
you fix a plumbe, and over the Bore with the Needle a certain point just
under 12, which will serve to keep the Instrument parallel and upright, which
the cross Needle will as well do, but both are not amiss: the old song is,
Two strings are good to one bow.

The moveable Sight.
More is yet pertinent to this Demicircle, and that is a moveable sight, which
is to be moved round about ye circumference of the same fiduciall edge thereof
always concurring or pointing to the center a, as h g. Take therefore a piece
of Brass of the thickness of a shilling or better, appoint therein a center
at f, then take the Semidiameter of the great circle a b in the Demicircle, and
place the one foot of your compass in f, and with the other strike the arch h
b, and from h to f produce a right line; then in the Demicircle take the
Semidiameter of the Tropicke of (...), placing the one foot of your compass in
f, with that widenes describe the arch k l, then take the Semidiameter of the
Equinoctial a r, and with that wideness describe the arch g m, so is g k the
length of the moitie of half^ the zodiaque. Now to place the 12 figure
corresponding to description Signs and their degrees therein do thus: Upon the
point g erect a Perpendicular g i, then making g a center, and g k the
Semidiameter, with that wideness describe the Quadrant of a circle k i, which
divide into three equal parts, next divide every of those parts into three
equal parts, so does every of those parts represent ten degrees of the
zodiaque: now from every of these degrees must you let fall a Perpendicular
upon the line or Semidiameter g k, as you may perceive by the pricked lines q
and r, so is that line divided into 9 unequal parts, which does represent the
one Quadrant of the zodiaque, containing and (...), and to provide for the rest
do thus.

Some reasonable distance, as an inch and better, draw a line b m parallel to h
g, whereunto draw 11 paralels at such distance as they be in the figure,
wherein must be placed the degr. figures and characters of the 12 Signs (...)
as in the demonstration they be: every parallel is divided as g k is, by placing
the one foot of your compass in f, and so fetching each degree from the line
g f to the other parallel, and at the ending of every third degree the line is
struck quite through, so that there be two lines parallel to g m, and k l
struck quite through, and these lines do limit the beginning and ending of
every sign.

You must also note the South and North signs at the head, as here they be.

In the very point h there is the ordinary fight placed, such as be in
Quadrants, so is the graduating of this sight finished.

This fore piece of the moveable Sight so finished, there must be another piece
of like quantity soldred thereunto, or l^ft growing unto the same piece, and
after bended in such sort that it may claspe over the Demicircle, so do these
two pieces hold the said Demicircle straitely betwixt the same, that it may
move straightly and equally along the same; in so much that the arch h b will
always be carried upon the Circumference b c in the Demicircle.

C g and g h do represent the distance of the two pieces one from the other,
which is the just thickenesse of the Demicircle. Neither would it be amiss to
have a small screw pin upon the back or further side of this moveable Sight,
which would make the said Sight move the more steddie.

10 The next thing pertinent unto this Instrument, is a Box to hold the
Needle. The Box.


The Circumference of this Box must agree with the circle p q in the great
figure, for within that ciccle must he stand, the Diameter whereof must be 3
inches; and in this Box must be placed a Needle and a glass, as the order is
and the Card in the bottom which I described before, 120 standing in the
South, 60 in the North, 90 in the East, and 30 in the West.

About this Box must move the Circle that bears 4 Indexes with the Sights,
the which Box must be turned with certain shoulderings to come half a
quarter of an inch upon the said circle, to the end that it may keep the same
down close to the body of the instrument, and that he may move steadfastly
about. This Box is to be fastened through the back side of the body of the
Instrument with screw pins, so may he be taken off at pleasure: the two screw
pins that screw on the socket upon the back side, may also screw this Box by
fastening a rib of Brass upon the bottom of the box, with screw holes
answering to the holes in the socket.

figure corresponding to description

Upon the Box above the glass stands a certain crooked wire. bearing a roun^
knob in the midst just over the areltree that bears the Needle, and just
under the plumbe when the Instrument stands upright.

The Needle.
11 The next thing is a Needle, which must be provided in manner following.

As for the Needle, I would have it made like two Needles joined together at
right angles, as you may see in the ensuing figure, and you shall fl^d it
hereby more true and apt to work then the single Needle is, for it will keep
the instrument parallel and upright without the help of the plumbe, cut the
degree more precisely, and stand more directly.

Now this needle must be touched with a Lord stone, and it is very requisite
that the said stone be good, therefore make choice of one thus: The best stones
be those that come from the coasts of China and Bengalia, the color whereof is
like to iron, or somewhat sanguine, if they be right, they will draw up their
own weight: they be heavier then other: there is another near as good, which
comes from Arabia, they be broad like a tyle-stone and somewhat red colored.

If the Magnes stone have lost his virtue, throw it into the fire, and let it
lie there until it be near red hot, and then quench it in the oil of Crocus
Martis, so shall his power be multiplied.

Your stone thus ordered you shall make clean the North end of your needle, and
rub the very end thereof with the stone, this preconsidered, that the north
point of the stone touching the needle, causes that end touched to point into
the South; so contrariwise the end touched with the South part turns into the
North, so that you must have a care in this point.

figure depicting points of a compass

After you have touched the end of the needle, if it were equiballanced before
you shall find the same end to hang downwards, as it were the heavier, whereby
the unskillful spoil many needles: and this is called the Declination of the
needle under the Horizon, therefore let the end that shall not be touched be
the heavier before you use the stone, and after the application of the stone,
if it be too heavy, you may amend the same.

The needle so touched, the South end thereof will not point just into the
South, Magneticall meridian.
for that the Magneticall meridian whereto the needle points, and the common
meridian wherein the just South stands, differ: for the Magneticall meridian is
a great circle, as the other is, and also passing by the Zenith, dividing the
Horizon into two equal parts, the intersection of which meridian with the
Horizon is the point whereunto the needle turns, which is called the
Variation of the needle: The variation of the Needle.
and at London is one point of the compass or 11. degr. and 15 minutes, west
from our common meridian: and this is the cause that in all portable sun Dials,
the line which the needle stands over, does not point just unto the 12 of
clock mark, nor lie under our common ineridian. Lastly, prepare a hollow
socket of brass with a screw pin, and the socket to be scrwed on, as the order
is, so is your Instrument finished only providing a Staff for the same:
Portable Dyals.
the three footed staff is best to place it at all heights, and in all places.

And one special note you most here observe in the delineating of this
instrument, that is, t^ have a care that the body of the instrument be just
four squar^, and that the sides of the square lie parallel to the diameter of
the circle that is divided into 360. degrees, viz. that two sides apposite lie
parallel to the line a c, and the other two opposite sides to the line b d: and
if you work by the help of the need^^ beware that no one come about you, but
such as you know kind friends, loost, ^^herwise of purpose they bear a
Loadstone about them, which may confound you in your work.

CHAP. V. To set the parts of the Topographicall Glass together.
Having now finished every part of this instrument, and being ready to set him
to work, thus must the parts be joined together. First, upon the center in the
body of the instrument place the circle with the Index f g h i, and within this
circle place the box with screw pins to keep down the circle, in such sort as
before is said, and let the Box be furnished with his Needle, Card, and
Glass, as in their proper place is taught. Next place the great Circular sight
upon the Index f g, and the other sights upon ye other Indexes: place them
artificially as you be taught before. Next put the moveable sight upon the
demicircle, and screw the socket to the back side: so is this instrument
prepared to work as the Theodelitus, Topographicall instrument, Geometrical
Quadrant, or as the Circumferentor, and may serve for ye plain Table, as shall
follow after the rest.

To work as the Theodelitus, and Topographicall Instrument.
CHAP. VI. The description of the Theodelitus, and Topographicall Instrument,
with the necessity of reformation thereof.
The description of the Theodelitus.
THe Theodelitus is an instrument consisting of a Planisphere and an Alhidada:
upon the Planisphere there is described a circle, which is divided into 360.
degrees, etc. Within this circle there is inscribed a square, which is parted
into a certain number of equal parts, which do represent parts of the
Geometrical Quadrant, and no more divisions or graduations be in the
Planisphere of the Theodelitus.

The Alhidada is a straight ruler with a fiducial edge, moving equally and
truly upon the center of the Planisphere, whose length is equal with the
diameter of the circle in the Planisphere, upon the two ends of this Index or
Alhidada as fixed two folding sights.

The description of the Topographical instrument.
But if you make this instrument like to that which Master Digges calls the
Topographicall Instrument, then is there a Box and a Needle placed in the
center of the Planisphere, over which there does stand a perpendicular whereon
is placed a Semicircle, to move up and down upon the perpendicular, and to
move about with the Alhidada. This Demicircle is divided into twice 90 degrees,
both ending in the Semidiameter, which Sediameter stands upwards, the arch
hanging toward the Planisphere: within this Semicircle is described the
Geometrical Quadrant, which serves for height whose parts, and also the
degrees of the Demicircle be cut by the fiduciall edge of the perpendicular:
but in this Glass the Diameter of the Demicircle lies downwards, and always
parallel to the Planisphere, whereas the other is moveable: And as in the other
Demicircle there be twice 90. degrees, here is but 90 degrees in all, so that
they be twice so large as the other. Certainly this Demicircle without showing
further reason, is far surpassing that of M. Digges for diverse good respects
I might well take occasion to speak of.

But, for that happily some will say the Theodelitus before was perfect, and
then what needs this alteration; it was but the Authors particlar conceit,
without any necessity at all. To give such satisfaction, I answer, that there
was a necessity of alteration as well in the Planisphere, as in the
Demicircle. Touching the Planisphere, see how you be taught to attain to the
minutes of degr. cut by the Index by help of the Isosceles Triangles, then is
the Quadrant proiected into a circle, and what commodity have we thereby?
marry much more too me both for the needle (whose largeness is required) and
other circles needful and pleasant to be added hereunto, as the Mariners
compass and other circles to tell the hour of the night by the Moon. And
lastly, touching the alteration of the Planisphere, look unto the 4 Indexes
how requisite they be for the measuring of grounds, and to what great purpose
they stand you in as in the 33 and 34 Chap. Touching the alteration of the
Demicircle, let every man acknowledge the necessity thereof, for that you
could not take any attitude of the Sun, or any other celestial body or
object situate in the heavens or upon the earth, if so the altitude thereof
exceeded 60 degrees, for that you cannot look through the sight in the
Diameter of the Semicircle by reason of the Planisphere, but in deed the same
might be better dealt with then any other thing whatsoever: look also to she
want of a plumbe to keep your instrument parallel and upright for which there
was no convenient place in the Theodelitus, which this Glass has sufficient,
though it be not needful, by reason of the large cross Needle which performs
the same. Briefly, these impediments and defects well considered, let any ^^e
of judgment spe^^ i^ there were not a necessity of reformation, which (...) it
is here done: so I know it by practice and ^ontinuall experience to be
requisite to be done (without offense be it spoken) to any friend of the
composer of the Theodellitus.

CHAP. VII. To search the proportion and symmitry of a country, fields, or such
like.
To find the proportion of countries.
IN this him of worlbe we shall have no need of the needle, or such like: if
you seek the proportion of a field or such like, go into that part of it, from
which you may observe all the angles (and it were convenient if white papers
were fixed in every angle) and there plant your instrument, beginning at what
angle you please, place there for the Index that bears the circular sight,
upon the o degree of the circle in the Planisphere, remaining there, erect the
same by looking through the sights unto the first angle, then the instrument
resting, conucy the said Index to the next angle upon your right hand, and note
down what degree the fiduciall edge of your Index does cut in your table
book. do so from angle to angle rightwards until you come unto the last, and
write them down in your table book, in manner as follows: the instrument
resting vnremooued, convey your Index toward your right hand at pleasure,
observing through yt sights some mark, a convenient distand from you,
according to the quantiy of the field, and there must be your second place, At
this place, plant your instrument by help of your back sight, in such order
that the line where the degrees take beginning may point to your first station.
And here likewise you must begin at the angle which at the last station was
your first angle And note the degree cut by the same Index proceeding from
angle to angle rightwards until you come to the last, still noting the
quantity of each angle done as before.

These angles thus observed at both stations resort unto some plain and smoth
peace of vellam or paper, and there describe a circle, and by help of a
protractor (but indeed the cord divisions upon my Staff be most excellent)
limit out every several angle in the circumference of the circle, and by those
marks from the center of the instrument draw lines infinitely, next protract
the line directing to the second station, which properly may be called the
stationary angle: upon this directing line describe another circle, as far
off, or as near to the other as ye list, and upon this circle protracte the
angles of position, observed at the second station. Now see where the lines
meet, or a like touches his like, so do the intersections of like lines
limit the true proportion.

And to get the distance, divide the stationary line, or line intercepted
betwixt the center of the two circles, into as many equal parts as you please,
and with those very parts divide the lines intercepted betwixt those places
whose distance is required. Now must ye multiply the parts included betwixt any
two sections in the known distance, contained in the stationary line, and then
divide by the number of equal parts contained betwixt the first and second
station, so have you the distance required.

Example.

We will take Master Digges his own example, a b c are the marks in the field
to be measured, d the first station, where you shall set the center of your
instrument, his Diameter or line where the divisions take beginning pointing
directly to a, so do e f g the visuall lines running by the angles of position
of the instrument unto all the angles or marks observed, express my
observations at the first station d. Lastly does h note 90. degrees, which
directs to the second station m. so is d m my stationary line, which must be
measured, and is 300. yard: s whereby I gather a Table, thus:

Degrees. o Angles observed at my first Station. 20 The stationary angle e d h 90.
degrees. 40

Then going to the second station m, where ye shall now place the center of
your instrument, the line where the degrees take beginning, pointing just from
m to d: so do the visuall lines i k l, running to the marks before noted, cut
new angles of position, which you must collect as before in a Table, thus:

Degrees. 55 I Angles of position collected at my second station 74 K 85 L

Now if ye mark diligently where each match lines do cross one the other,
there is the true proportion of such places, and so by drawing right lines from
those intersections, if it were a field, or such like, you have the bounds and
limits thereof. And if the distance betwixt any two places or marks be
required, seek the space betwixt any two places or marks be required, seek
the space betwixt the two stations d m, whicg as I formerly said is 300. yards,
I divide d m into 18. equal parts, and demand the distance betiwxt a b, which
conteines 11 of those 18 parts. Then seeing I am ignorant what number of yards
be contained in those 11 parts, I fly to the rule of proportion, saying
mathematical figure corresponding to description thus, if 18 yield 300 yards,
what shall 10 yield, 183 and 2/4 old therefore multiply 300 by 11, so have you
3300, which divide by 18, so have you 183 2/6 which is 1/^ making a foot.
Whereby I may conclude that between a and b is contained 183 paces and one
soot^. Thus of all the other, as well d a, d b, d c, or m c, m b, m a, as c b,
or c a.

CHAP. VIII. How to take the true plat of a small Island that is encompassed
with some River, or of any piece of ground subject to the sight, that lies in
such order that you cannot have access unto the same, by reason of Marshes,
Fennes, or such like impediments.
THis Chapter is right necessary, as well for the act of Geodetia, and
measuring grounds, as for Cosmographers and such like. Let therefore a b c d e
f be a piece of ground shut up within a Marsh or River in such sort that you
cannot approach to the same to measure it, as the common ^^der is: you shall
therefore seek out some such place as g, far without the said peete of
ground, from whence you may view all the angles and corners therein, and there,
as at g, observe all the angles, as you did at the first station in the last
Chapter, and so seek one a second station, as h, and thence observe all these
angles, as the order is: and as you may plainly perceive by the concurse of the
lines at both stations, as g f, g a g e, g d, g c, g b, and h a, h f, h ^, h d,
h ^, h b, I need not many words and therefore proceed therein, as you did in
the last chapter: so shall a f, f c, e d, d c, c b, and b a, be the true
bounds of the field.

To do this Proposition without calculation.

Appoint your first station g in a known distante from your second station h,
as ten score, and when you come to protract, do not set the said two sta^ions
g^and h down at randon, as I taught you in the third chapter, but appoint
their distance by your stale according to the true measure ten score or 200.
yards, even as you found it in the field then protract the angles at both
stations, and note their intersection as you be wont, which done, if you
desire the distance of any angles or corners, as of f e, apply the length of
that time unto the scale that you set g h by: so shall you find f e 12. score.
In the same order, without Arithmeticke, may you measure the lines a f, e d, d
c, c b, and b a, which is all the bounds of the field. After the same order may
you mete g f, g a, g e, g d, g c, g b, or h a, h f, h e, h c, h d, h b, or any
cross line over the field for the casting up of the contents, as f d, f c, f
b, or a d, a c, etc.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

In the same order may you perform this Chapter by the Geodeticall Staff, and
by other instruments which were over tedious to repeat in the use of every
instrument: and therefore I am to supply that in one, which is wanting in
another, which being known you may use in any.

CHAP. IX. To take a plat at one station by the Theodelitus.
THis Chapter is not necessary for the setting forth of great continents, To
take a plat at one station.
but if you would use it in platting of fields, repair into some place whence
you may observe all the angles, and toward the first angle upon the left hand
direct the Index being placed upon the Diameter, where the degrees do take
beginning, the Planisphere, or body of the Instrument resting, convey the Index
from angle to angle until you have gone round, and then measure the sides
containing every angle, noting the same down against the proper angle, even as
you be taught in the sixth book of the Geodeticall Staff, in the third
Chapter, treating of this Proposition: and then protract as there you be
instructed, or as in the 27. Chapter.

mathematical figure corresponding to description

CHAP. X. To take a plat of Wood-ground by going round about the Circumference.
To measure woodland.
IN this kind of work at every station you must look through the back sight
as well as through the fore sight, and likewise must measure the distance
betwixt every several station, so that the proportion is obtained by the
direction of the back sight. To be short, I would measure this small Tryangle
a b c, I plant my instrument at c, making the Index look to a, lying parallel
to a c: then I note the degrees cut, and before I remove the same, I go to the
other end of the Index, and through the back sight I espy some mark in a
right line with a c, and if there be none, I cause some to be set up, as e, and
so I take up my instrument, and measure a c, and note that down with the
mathematical figure corresponding to description number of the degrees cut, the
Index still resting upon those degrees, I place the center of the instrument
over a, moving the body of the said instrument, the Index still resting, as at
the first it was, until through the back sight I espy the mark e taken at my
first station through the said back sight. The instrument so resting, I turn
the Index to point to b, he lying parallel to a b, and then, as before, I note
the number of degrees cut, and before I alter the Instrument or Index, I go
unto the other end of the Index, and through the back sights I observe some
tree or bush in a right line with b a, which let be f, then must I measure a
d, and note it down against the number of degrees cut at a, now, as I have
showed you in the ending of the first part of the sixth book, The Geodeticall
Staff. Lib. 6.
it rests at your pleasure whether you will observe the angle b or no: for as
you be there taught, if you have wrought truly, you have the line b c already,
and as you dealt with the former two angles, so must you have proreeded if
there had been more.

Now look how you observe the angles and lines in the field, and in the same
order must you protract them upon your paper.

To use a Needle in the Theodelitus.
And here note, that as you work by the back sight with the Theodelitus, so
also may you use the Needle, by keeping the needle at every station, just over
one place, and then noting the number of degrees cut, and so going round, the
work is finished: so that you may hereby perceive the Circumferentor to be
borrowed from this instrument, and used by a contrary application.

CHAP. XI. To draw the plat of a Country, and thereby to make a true Map, and
situate every Town and Village according to their true distance, that you may
know the true distance without Arithmetike.
To make a Map.
TO perform this, you must ascend to the top of some high Hill, Eliffe, or
Tower, from whence you may directly behold the situation of the Country, as it
lies adiacient round about in your Horizon, we hold the Semidiamer of the
Horizon to contain 180. Stadias, and so far may one see: for we must always
when we be at this work, imagine our selves to be in the center of the
Horizon, and thence necessarily must see to the Circumference, The Semidiameter
of the Horizon.
which is limited from us by the Semidiameter. But to proceed, your place
being appointed, there set up the Topographicall Glass upon his staff,
ordering it in such sort, by help of the Needle, that the four Semidiameters
thereof may point just East, Weast, North and South, every one pointing
correspondantly into his like quarter of the heaven: then turn the Index with
the sights to every Town, Village, or Haven, or whatsoever you desire to place
in the Map, espying through the sights, the middle, or most notable mark in
every of them, See Chap. 28.
as commonly the Steeple, if it be a Church Town, noting at every of those
places the degrees cut by the Index in great circle, and also the parts of the
degrees, which are properly called angles of position, and collect you a Table
of your first station thereby.

Then casting your eye round about, search some mountain or lofty place from
whence again you may view all these places and appoint that to be your second
station then turn thereto the Index and note also ye degree cut, this done
repair unto your second statio^ formerly found, where situate your
Topographical Glass in all respects as he was at the first station, turning the
Index and sight about, still observing all such marks you saw before, and note
again the degree cut, or angles of position, writing the name of every place
and his angle by it, so have you collected a second table, which is for your
second station.

These things so done take a skin of vellam, royal paper, or what you
please, and in some place thereof appoint your first station, about which
describe a circle which you must divide into 360 degrees, beginning in that
quarter of the world in which the beginning of the degree in your Instrument
were placed, or else protracting them by your Staff, as you be taught, Lib. 6.
of the Geodeticall Staff.
betaking either of the ways from the center of this circle, to every degree
noted in your first table, there must right lines be produced infinitely,
noting to every of them the name of his place, now protract the line of your
second station, according to the degree cut, and upon that line describe
another circle, which use in all respects as you did the former, taking
direction from the table, observed at your second station.

To conclude, diligently note the concurse or intersection of every like lines
making there on some mark, as with the name of the place correspondent, and so
you have finished.

Now to know how far every of these towns etc. be distant from other, do
thus: measure the distance betwixt your stations by your Geodeticall Staff, or
this Instrument, as you shall be after taught, or by any other Instrument, to
you seeming best, and divide your stationary line, or line included betwxit the
center of the circles into so many equal parts as there be miles, furlongs, or
scores, between your stations, this line so divided, measure the distance of
any place thereby, as you do with an ordinary Scale in a map, taking the
distance of any two places with your compass, and applying the widnesse to the
divided line, for so many equal parts as be then included betwixt the feet
of your compass, so many miles, scores etc. is it between the two places
according to the denomination of the divisions in the stationary line.

Example.

I am desirous to set down certain towns in the County of Sallop, according
to their true porportion and the epact distance of every place from other,
choosing therefore a lofty place for this purpose, as the Cordocke hill, from
whence I may behold all my desired places. My instrument there situated as is
declared, remoouing my Index to the first town upon my right hand, and nearest
to the beginning of the degree in my instrument, I find the same to be Hopton
Castle, which having received through my sight, the fiduciall edge of the Index
cuts 18 degrees, remoouing the Index to the next town Montgomery it cuts 70
degrees, again the next Knookin Castle, it cuts the 134 degrees, and so I
proceed rightwards from town to town, until I have finished so much as my
intent was, whereof I gather a Table as follows:

Degrees Hopton Castle 18 Mont-gomery 70 Knookin Castle 134 Whit Church 170
Shrewsbury 171 Angles of position observed at my first station. Morton Corbet
181 Browne-clee hill 289 Bewdley 290 Hopton 313 Tenbury 319 Ludlow 332
Bridg-north 340

This done, I behold an other high hill as the Wrekin hill from whence I may
observe all these places, and turning the Index thereunto I find the degree cut
to be 213

Then carrying my Instrument to the Wreking, and placing him in all points
there as it was upon the Cordoke, I turn again my Index to the first town
before noted as Hopton Castle, and noting the degree cut, I find it 25. then to
the next Montgomery 52, and so to the rest, as ye may perceive in the table
ensuing.

SALOPIA Milliaria AnG
mathematical figure corresponding to description

Degrees Angles of position at the second Station Ludlow 1 Hopton Castle 25
Montgomery 52 Shrewsbury 81 Knookin Castle 92 Morton Corbet 136 Stationary
Angle is 213 Whit Church 147 Bridg-north 319 Beawdley. C. Wigor. 319 Tenbury
344 Browne-clee hill 349 Hopton 354

With these tables repair unto some such place whereon you would protract the
work, drawing therein a circle upon the center or point f as you see in the
figure, which you must divide into 360 degrees, or else by a protractor from f,
pull out right lines by every grade, noted in the first Table, so is f p Hopton
C^stle, f e Montgomery, f d Knookin Castle, and so forth with the rest, ending
at. f m, Ludlow. Lastly, in this circle, I draw the line f g, by 213 degrees,
then making g a center I describe an other such circle as before (and note the
larger the circle is, the better it is) I did upon f, and from this center g
pull straight lines by the degree noted in the second Table. Now note the
intersection of matchy lines: that is, where the line of Ludlow, issuing from
f, meets with the line of Ludlow, running from g and there make a mark thus,
and thus prosecuting the like in the rest, always setting a mark, upon the
concurse of correspondent right lines (all other intersections not respected) I
have situated all these places in due proportion, noting them with these
letters, to avoid (here and else where) often repetition of their names.

And now lastly to get the distance between every of them divide the line f g
into 9 equal parts, for so many miles by mensuration I find between my two
stations, the Cordocke for the Wrekin, then by my compass, I see how many of
these 9 parts is contained betwixt any two places, whose distance is required:
and so many miles may you conclude the distance of those two places.

If I have described places both without the County of Salop as Montgomery and
Bewdley, and without the compass of our Horizon, as Whitchurch, etc. They were
set down because you should have plenty of examples not thrust together. Here
follows for more liveliness the distance of every place in this map from
the town of Salop: the rest you may gather by your Scale in the same manner.

miles Bridgnorth AH is dista^t from Shrewsbury 10 Bewdley AI 22 Browne-clee
hill 11 Tenbury AK 20 Hopton AL 15 Ludlow AM 28 miles Hopton Cast. AP distant
from Shrewsbury 15 Montgomery AE 12 Knookin AD 8 Whit Church AC 12T Mort.
Corbet AB 6 Orleto^ Bish. C. 10

In the order before set down changing your stations (as having finished all
in view from the Cordocke and Wrekin) you may go to the Brown Clee and
Stilterstone hill, or any other, and passing from one lofty place to another,
you may have the true proportion of all Towns, Castles, Rivers, Hills, and
such like in the whole kingdom, and to reduce them all into the body of one
Card or Map, you must seek a scale proportionable to the quantity of the
paper you will draw the map in, which here, for that I fear I have been
ouer-tedious I will omit, and for that it shall be taught in the Flowers of the
Mathem. in my 2 part of Geodetia not yet published, and elsewhere is performed.

CHAP. XII. To draw the plat of any Region, and thereby to find the distance
of Towns and such like by sinicall supputation.
THis kind of work, To seek the proportion of countries, by sinicall
supputation.
although it be something more tedious and difficult then the former, yet has
it in it self a most exact and certain operation: you must in performance
hereof ascend the top of some high mountain, hill, or such like, whence you
may directly behold all the adjacent towns within the circuit of that Horizon,
and also from that hill epsy some other mountain, to whose sumunity the view
of all the foresaid adjacent towns be subject. This so done, make the first
hill a center, and the other a term, of one of the sides of every angle, and
so with your Instrument by the 25 Chap. or any other Instrument take the true
quantity of the angle that every town makes with these two hills, and note the
same down in some Table book: this so done, get to the next hill, and there
again observe in like manner the quantity of every angle even upon this hill
as you did upon the fornier: finally, get the true distance betwixt the top of
the two hills, so have you a line known and two angles known situate at the
ends of a line known, whereby get the other angle with the two lines unknown,
and then place every town in his due place, as you shall be better taught in
the Example.

Example.

Suppose I ascending to the top of Stretton hills (which be certain lofty
mou^tains in Salop) might view all the adjacent towns set down in the ensuing
map, and withal another hill called the Wrekin, from whose top also I might
well command the view of all the foresaid towns.

Now first I place my Topographicall Glass at a, and then viewing round about
I see my eye apprehends Shrewsbury situate upon the left hand, therefore I
observe the angle g a b by the 25 Chap. and so I proceed to Oswestree, taking
the angle f a b, and so proceed round about, noting the quantity of each
several angle, as follows, a b being always the one side.

Grad. Mi. Shrewsbury GAB 46 0 Oswestree FAB 74 0 Angles observed at Stretton
hills. Welsh-pole EAB 108 0 Mont-gomery DAB 124 0 Clun CAB 168 0

These angles so observed and noted, I bear my Glass to the Wrekin hill,
where planting the same, making the first degree in the Periphere of the
Planisphere point just to a, the Instrument so fixed, viewing about I epsy
Clun, to which I make the Alhidada point, and so by the said 25 Chap. get the
angle c b a 4 degrees. in like manner I proceed right-wards until I have
finished, as I did at b, and thereby do I collect a table as follows.

Degrees. Mi. Clun CBA 4 0 Mont-gomery DBA 24 15 Angles observed upon the Wrekin.
Welsh-pole EBA 38 0 Shrewsbury GBA 64 0 Oswestree FBA 74 0

Now must I get the distance betwixt the hills of Stretton and the Wrekin,
which you shall find to be ten miles, all these things had, I get the distance
of every town, and place the same accordingly in the map thus.

SALOPIA
woodcut, labeled

To seek the distance of towns sinically.
Suppose we would find how far Shrewsbury and each o other towns is distant
from the Wrekin, or from Stretton hills, by the former observations, the angle
g a b is 46 degrees, and g b a 60 degrees: therefore by the 2 Book, Chap. 15 of
the Geodeticall Staff, add 46 and 64 together, so have you 110, which taken
from 180 leave 70, the quantity of the angle a g b, now having each angle,
find the right sign thereof, as in the 7 Book of the Staff, so shall you
see the right sign of the angle g a b to be 71933, of a g b 93969, and of g b
a 89879, and to get the distance of a g, or g b, do thus, multiply the sign
of g b a or g a b by 10, and part the product by the sign of a g b, so have
you a g or g b in the same measure as a b is expressed: as if I desire the
length of b g, first I multiply the sign of g a b 71933 by 10, and there is
made 719330 which I part by the sign of a g b, viz. by 93969, so have I the
quotient, 76/9 1/3 5/9 4/6 7/9 miles, the distance of the Wrekin hill from
Shrewsbury. The like must you do to get the distance of a g, But to a^oyd
division, work a^ in the 7. book fol. 287. or chapt. 32. Co^pendium 3. in the
end thereof.
a f, a e etc. or d f, d e, b d, etc. remembering always to multiply the sign
of the angle, containing the line sought, by the line known, and divide the
product by the line of the angle containing the said known line. And for your
better understanding, I will set down every Triangle with his respondent
sign, so that you may find every side of the same.

Stretton, Wrekin, Shrewsbury.
Grad. Mi. Signs. GBA. 64 0 89879 The Angles. GAB. 46 0 71933 AGB. 70 0 93969

Stretton, Wrekin, Oswestree.
Grad. Mi. Signs. FAB. 74 0 96126 The Angles. FBA. 74 0 96126 AFB. 32 0 52991

Stretton, Wrekin, Welsh-Pole.
Grad. Mi. Signs. EBA. 108 0 95105 The Angles EBA. 38 0 78801 AEB. 34 0 55919

Stretton, Wrekin,Mont-Gomery.
Grad. Mi. Signs. DBA. 24 15 41071 The Angles. DAB. 124 0 82903 ADB. 31 45
52621

Stretton, Wrekin, Clun.
Grad. Mi. Signs. CAB. 170 0 98480 The Angles. CBA. 4 0 6575 ACB. 6 0 10452

To place towns in a Map truly.
Having by this Sinicall doctrine obtained the distance of every Town, as well
from Stretton hills as from the Wrekin, according as you did Shrewsbury from the
Wrekin, you shall place them proportionally in one card thus;

SALOPIA
woodcut, labeled

We will only situate Shrewsbury in true place, proportion, and Symmetry, you
shall therefore draw a line a b, which divide into so many parts as there be
miles betwixt the Wrekin and Stretton hills, viz. ten miles, and according unto
those parts you must make a scale as long as you please, as h i. Now place the
one foot of your compass in h, and extend the other to the distance of
Shrewsbury, and from the Wrekin, according to the doctrine you found it before,
viz. 76/9 1/3 5/9 4/6 7/9 miles, the compass resting at that distance, place
the one foot in b, and with the other strike the portion of an arch: do so
with the distance of Stretton hills from Shrewsbury upon the point a, and the
conclusion will be, that the intersection of those two arches appoints the
true place of Shrewsbury, as g. In like manner must you situate all the other
Towns in their proper places, and then it rests at your pleasure whether you
will find the distance of each one from the other, by Synical supputation, or
by your new made Scale, with your compass for any three Towns not lying in one
direct line, make a triangle, and so find the angles of that triangle, next,
the signs, and consequently, the sides, as you may see in c d b, etc. but
having placed the Towns, the application of the Scale is most speedy and
ready, without more trouble to find the distance of any places.

CHAP. XIII. The ground and reason of the Geometrical Quadrant, and
Hypsometricall Scale.
BY this Topographicall Glass I shall teach you to deliver Altitudes,
Longitudes, Latitudes, etc. 3 kinds of ways, as by the Geometrical quadrant,
Hypsometricall Scale, and by protraction, and because this Quadrant is used by
many, and also contrived in some Instrument: I thought it not much to spend
some time in acquainting you with the ground thereof: Gemma Frisius, Orontius,
etc. writing of the use thereof, conceal that to themselves, but having
occasion in this book (because it is proiected upon my Glass) to speak of
the use, I will likewise take occasion to acquaint you with the reason of the
work, in a brief mannner.

Behold the ensuing figure, for the sites of the square s k and k l, (whereof
the one is vmbra recta, the other vmbra versa) are no other thing then the
Tangents of lesser circles in the semiquadrant.

Therefore if you say.

As a l the whole Seal, is to l r the equal parts of the contrary shadow: so
is a c the distance, to c b the Altitude.

Which is no other then if you should say.

As a l the Radius, is to l r the Tangent, so is a c the distance to b c, the
altitude,

Therefore the Tangents in the Semiquadrant of the lesser arkes may suffice,
because there is the same proportion of the Tangent to the Radius, which the
Radius has to the Tangent of the complement whereupon these consequences may
be inferred.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

I As if you should say.

As d p is to p v so shall it come all to one purpose sayn^g^

As t o is to o d.

II IF the Tangent p v or o x be altogether required, you may easily find the
one or the other -- For

As t o is to o d, so^s d p to p v, -- and as w p (to whom r l is equal) is to
p d, so is d o, to o x, for a distance being got by the help of two stations,
then oftentimes the Tangent p v, or o x, may be defited: in such a case when it
shall happen say.

As v w is to w p, so is a d to d c, or

As t x is to t o, so is a d to d c, take which way you please.

But it is fi^ that the Tangent p v or o x be knowns, that accordingly you may
make choice of the dis^drence of the Tangents at the first and second station,
that is, whether those Tangents be visuall lines of the angles, as w p (that is
to say r l) and p v, or of the complement as o f and o x -- because

I The Tryangles composed of d x o, and b ^ c, be equiangles:

Therefore

As x l is to t o, so is a d to d c.

II The Tryangles made of d v p, and d b c, are equiangled,

Therefore

As v w, is to w p, so is b z to z c, and

And as b z, is to z c, so is a d to a c, because d z, is parallel to the base
a b, in the tryangle a b c

Therefore to conclude.

As v w, is to w p, so is a d, to a c.

Nam quae conueniunt vni tertio, etiam inter se conueniunt, b p.

CHAP. XIIII. To get the length or distance of any place from you how far
soever it be.
THe distance of any mark from you may be gotten by this Topographical Glass
diverse wa^es, the first way I will deliver is by signs, which also may as well
be done by the Geodeticall Staff, or any other Instrument, truly explessing
the quantity of an angle, and for your more ease in work, appoint the angle at
your first station to be a right angle, which is as easy to be made as any
other angle.

You shall therefore plant your Instrument at the place from whence the
distance of the Castle or such like is sought, making the diameter where the
degrees take beginning to point just to the Castle, the Planisphere so resting,
move the Index to 90 degrees, and so through the said fights espy some mark
100 yards or more distant from you, or wanting a tree, cause one to place a
mark by the directions of the sights, in a known distance from you, then take
up your Instrument, and leaving one where he was planted, place him again at
the second station, and then observe ye angle betwixt your first station and
the castle, which note down, and so find the signs and consequently the
distance, for as the Radius is to the Tangent, so is the side given to the side
sought.

Example.

A is a fort, and you standing at b desire the distance of the said fort from
you, wherefore I plant my Topographicall Glass at b woodcut, mathematical
figure corresponding to description the Index, with the sights upon the
Diameter, where the degrees do take beginning, which so resting I turn the
Planisphere of the Instrument about, until through the sights I espy b, the
Planisphere so resting, I move the Index to 90 degrees, and then again through
the sights appoint some other mark in a known distance from you as 673
perches, then leaving a mark at b, I bear the Instrument to c, where by the
25 Chapter I observe the angle b c a, 61 41/60 degrees, now to get the distance
b a you must multiply the Tangent of 61 degrees 45 minutes, by the distance of b
c, which parted by the total sign, yields the Longitude desired, viz. 186109,
augmented by 73 produces 13585957 which parted by 100000 leueth 135
85957/100000 perches the distance of b a.

And if the distance of c a be required, multiply 211273 the secant of the
angle b c a, by 73, so have you 15422929, which parted by the total sign,
leaves 154 22929/100000 perches your desire, and thus must you deal with any
other like question.

CHAP. XV. To seek the distance of any mark seen before you, by the
Geometrical Quadrant.
YOu must call to mind that the Geometrical Quadrant is proiected upon the
Planisphereof your instrument: therefore, place the Index upon that Diameter
where the parts of ye quadrant take beginning upon the left hand, then plant
your instrument at your second statio^ (for you must note that your
observations at your first station, and the finding out of this second station
is all one in this place, as it was in the last Chapter.) So that the Index
upon the beginning of those degrees, may just point to your first station, the
body of your instrument resting, remove the Index to the mark whose distance
is required* and whereas in the last Chapter you noted the angle, here only
note the parts of the Quadrant cut by the edge of the Index: then are you to
consider, if the Index touch amongst the 60. parts upon your left or right
hand. First, if the 60. parts upon the left side the Index be cut, you must
increase the stationary line by the number of those parts cut, and the product
divide by 60. so is the quotient, your desire, but if the Index fall upon the
parts of the scale upon the right hand, you must then multiply your stationary
line by 60. and divide by the parts cut.

Or you may reduce the parts of the right side to the proportional parts upon
the left, See chap. the 19.
and so work according to the first rule in this sort:

Divide the square of 60. by the parts cut in the right fide of your scale, the
quotient is the parts proportional, which you must increase by the the
distance of your stations, dividing by 60. so is the quotient the true distance
of your mark from your first station.

And if the Hypothenusall, or distance of your second station from the mark be
required, square your stationary line, which add to the square of the distance
of your first station from the desired mark, the root quadrature whereof is
your demand.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

A is the place whose distance is tequired, b the mark where my instrument was
first disposed, whence (as in the last Chapter) I depart orthogonally to c, the
Index cutting 37. parts, and about a half in the right side of the
Geometrical parts. Now the distance of b c is found 73. yards, wherefore I
increase 60. by 73. so have 5080. which divide by the parts of the square cut,
as by 37. and better, so have you 135. yards, with certain odd parts more,
the distance of b a.

Or by dividing 3600. the square of 60. by the parts of the Quadrant cut, as
37. and better, the quotient shall produce you a a proportional number: which
number part by b c 73. the quotient whereof is the longitude of a b, as before.

And take this note with you, that the Index will never cut in the parts of the
Quadrant upon the left hand, unless the longitude sought be shorter then your
stationary line; I mean, unless the line known, or measured, be longer then
the line sought. And further note, that the more parts you divide the sides of
your scale into, the easier and truer shall you work.

Another way these kinds of longitudes be performed, and that is by
protracting after observation of the angles, which for that it is already set
down, I omit it here, only you may here protract with a circle readily
divided, Lib. 6. chap. 40. Geode.
as hereafter you shall be taught, if your staff be wanting.

CHAP. XVI. To seek the distance betwixt any two Forts, and yet apprach to
neither of them.
LEt it be supposed that you were standing in an open field, and a certain
Castle and a Fort showed you, to neither of which you could approach, and yet
upon some occasion were required to deliver the distance betwixt the same.

The first thing in performance hereof that you are to do, is to plant your
Glass at the place where you mean to make observation, and then the Index
upon the beginning of the degrees, turn the Instrument and all about until
you espy the Fort upon your left hand: the Planisphere resting, convey the
Index to the other Castle upon the right hand, noting the degrees cut by the
fiduciall edge of the Index. Now are you to view some other mark for a second
station upon your right hand, whereunto turn the Index, until through the
sight you espy the same, noting again the degrees cut but by the Index, ( and
it will be the better to let the Index upon these last degrees be about 90.
for the nearer that the stationary line, running from your first station to the
Fort upon the left hand be to contain a right angle, the better it is.) Now
leaving some apparent mark where the center of your Glass was, take up your
Glass, and bear the same to the place appointed for your second station: and
having planted him there, turn the Glass, the Index upon the beginning of the
degrees, until through the sight you espy the mark or man left at your first
station: the Planisphere resting, convey the Index unto the Fort upon your
right hand, noting the degrees cut next to the other Castle or Turret more
rightwards, noting the degrees cut: finally, measure the distance betwixt both
your stations, all which note down, as well the angles observed at your first
station, as those observed at your second, as also the quantity of the line
that is included betwixt both those stations, and protracting the same upon
paper, by your Scale and compasses, you have finished.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

Admit I standing at a, am desired to deliver the distance betwixt c a certain
Fort, and d a certain Turret, planting my Instrument therefore, as is said, I
observe the angle c a d 49. degrees: then c a b 107. These I note down for
angles at my foresaid station. Now the Index resting at a, espy through your
sights some other mark for your second station, whereunto bring your Glass, as
to b, where being duly situate, make the Index standing upon the o. degree in
the planisphere, point just to a, the Glass resting so fixed, turn the Index
with the sights to c, noting the angle a b c 54. degrees. Next remove the Index
to d, noting the angle d b a 104. In conclusion; by your chain, or some other
rule in this book, mete the line a b, which is 56. score, which had, protract
thus:

Draw a line l i, whereupon lay down by your scale and compasses, the 56 score
e f, then upon e strike the portion of an arch, as k i, whereon protract an
angle of 107 degrees, i e g, then one other of 49 degrees, as g c h.

This done upon f describe the portion of a circle l m, and so protract an
angle e f g 54 degrees, and an other angle of 104 degree, e f h. Finally note
the intersection of the lines, as at g and h. which being applied to your
scale, yeeldes the true distance of c d in the first figure 131 score, which is
1 ^/8 miles. woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

If you will perform this by signs work in all respects as in the 12
Chapter, for look how you found the distance of a g, so must you here of c d.

To teach you to seek Latitudes, as some do, by the Geometrical Quadrant, I
hold it too tedious, for that you must first go find the distance of each
place from your standing, and after use reductions and extractions, so that I
hold the Quadrant of himself or as he is here proiected (for it is all one to
work by either) most fit: so long as you may have always a right angle in your
work, and therefore I will apply the same to Altitudes, and concerning this
kind of Latitudes, hereby brought to find the distance of ships upon the
seas, of Armies upon the land, and such like, for indeed as it is tedious, so
is it scarce possible to sit you with a demostration, according to the sight of
every object, not unlike unto our year books, wherein are comprised reports of
law cases, still noting all such cases of which there is no like president or
report recorded, and as hereby they make their year books grow to a mighty
volume, yet oftentimes rises there new cases of which they have no president,
and whether then must they fly, but to the report of the learned Judges,
experienced in the law: and so in this case, if I should fill a great volume
with demonstrations, yet might there be found certain objects so situate that
fitly would suite with none of the demonstrations: and what then is to be done,
but only fly unto the grounds of the Art, therefore since I cannot suite
you, according to the site of every particular plat, my drift is to acquaint
you with the grounds of the work, that you may be able of your self to pick
a respondent proposition.

CHAP. XVII. To take the Altitude of any accessible Tower Castle, etc. at one
station.
YOu may seek the Altitude of any perpendi^ular body, by this Topographicall
Glass 4. kind of ways, that is, by the Hypsometricall Scale, Geometrical
Quadrant by Sinical working, and by protraction, three of which ways I will
here deliver unto you, as for ye Scale, you may work according as in the 3
book of my Staff, and first to perform the same by the Geometrical
Quadrant, you are to plant the body of your Glass parallel, moving the Index
until he point just to the Altitude required, then must you move the sight
upon the demici^cle until by that sight and the ^^^ed sight in 90 you espy the
simile of the required Altitude, which done behold the parts of the quadrant
cut by the moveable sight upon the back side the semicircle, and consider if
the section were made amongst those parts that stand nearest to the sight that
is fixed in 90, or in the parts furthest from the sight, or in 60, the midst
betwixt both.

1 If the section were made in the parts nearest to the sight the desired
Altitude is greater then your distance from ye same so that such proportion, as
60 has to the parts cut, the like has the given distance to the required
Altitude.

2 If the section were made in the parts of the quadrant furthest from the
fixed sight, the Altitude required is less then the Longitude assigned, and
bears it self in such proportion to the said Altitude as the parts cut do to
60.

3 But if the section be made in 60, then the given Longitude is equal to the
proposed Altitude.

Example.

To make proof of what is said before, let c b be a certain turret, and you
standing at f or a be required to deliver the Altitude thereof, placing
therefore my oye at a, I stir the moveable sight d, until from a, by d I view
the simile e, noting then the parts of the Quadrant cut by the sight d, I find
them 30, then must I measure f g or a b, which I also find 178 yards, these
had I conclude as 60, is to 178, so is 30 to the Altitude, therefore I multiple
178 woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description by 30, so have I
5340 which parted by 60, there remains 89, the Altitude b c above the leuel of
your eye at a, if you desire a c, and the square of 178, and 89 to gather the
square root whereof is, c c.

In taking of these altitudes you must note that you meddle with no part of the
same, but that which is above the level of your eye, the which level you
shall be taught hereafter to observe.

Otherwise.

Having taken the angle of Altitude, you may work this proposition by signs
etc. according as you be largely taught in the 7 book of my Staff called
Trigonometria, Prob, 1.

Otherwise.

Having taken the angle of Altitude you may perform this Chapter by
protraction, as you be plainly taught in the sixth book of Geodetia, Chap. 38
whereunto for breuities sake I refer you, and the rather, for that it is
performed after one and the same method, only if you please, you may protract
with a circle as hereafter.

CHAP. XVIII. To search out heights inaccessible, by the Topographicall Glass.
HEights inaccessible be such to whose base we cannot approach, by reason of
certain impediments, or to which we dare not go by reason of shot, so that out
of this demand many demonstrations might be raised, as to seek the height of
a Tower situate upon the further side of a great River or Marsh, or such like,
or of a Castle fortified with shot, or such like. All which, and more, hang
upon one doctrine, as follows.

Because this chapter is performed by the Quadrant in my 4. book of the
Geodeticall Staff, To take all kind of altitudes by the Glass.
Chap. 4. and that it differs nothing here when you have once noted the parts
cut, as in the last Chapter, I will refer you thereunto, where in deed look
what is there said either in the third or fourth book of the Scale or
Quadrant, the same may you perform in the same method by this Glass, when you
have once observed the parts of the Scale or Quadrant cut: Therefore it would be
more then needs, here to repeat it again.

But because these kind of inaccessible heights be desired of many, I will
teach an excellent way.

You must find out two stations in a known distance, as you please, where
observe the angles of altitude, and so get the complement of ye tangents of
both those angles by the seventh book of my Staff, noting the difference of
the said complements: for as the difference is to the Radius, so is the
difference of the stations to the altitude.

Example.

We have observed the angle a b d to be 29. degrees 40. min. and a c d to be
46. degrees, the Tangent of the Complement of 29. degrees. 40. min. is 175556. and
of 46. degrees, 96568. Now subtract 96568. from 175556. and there rests 78988.
Then multiply 100000. the total sign by 90. the distance betwixt. both your
stations (for so many feet I found it by measure) and there woodcut,
mathematical figure corresponding to description is created 9000000. which
parted by 78988. the difference of Tangents, so have you 114. feet, the desired
altitude. And this kind of work I hold to be most exact, and far more
certain then the Quadrant, But with more ease see chap. 32. Compen. 3.
for that the one side of the Quadrant here bears 100000. equal parts, which
is the more certain by how much the equal parts be more in number. Note the
letter d is here in the demonstration omitted.

Otherwise.

Having observed the angles of altitude, you may perform this Chapter by
protraction, in all respects according to the 39. Chap. of my book of Geodetia.

CHAP. XIX. To know what part of any Altitude is level with your eye.
ADmit g c a Turret, whose height above the level of your eye, is required be
therefore diligent to plant your Glass parallel, which having done, place your
eye at the end of the Semidiameter of the Semicircle, as at a, the fixed sight
in the 90, degr. then bring down the woodcut, mathematical figure
corresponding to description mouable sight to the beginning of the degrees, as
to e. Now your sight passing from a by e, will apprehend some place in ye
Tower, as b. I hereby conclude, that b is equal in height with my eye fixed at
a, and that if I had taken the altitude of this Turret. I had told you no more
but from b upwards, as 89. feet, and to have known the height of g c, I must
have thereto added the length of a f, or b g.

CHAP. XX. How to search out Lengths in Heights.
THis Chapter is right necessary for Architectors and such like, whereby they
be brought to find the distance betwixt windows, Intteyes, etc. To perform
which you may first take the altitude of the one and the other, and so
consequently subtract the lesser out of the greater, the remainder is your
desire.

But if you know not the whole Altitude, first observe the angle of Altitude of
the highest, and then of the lowest place, and note ye degrees of both these
angles, next measure the distance of the Tower from you, and then conclude, as
the Radius is to the distance so is the difference of the Tangents of each
angle unto ye Longitude sought, therefore subtract the lesser Tangent from the
greater, the remainder increase by the distance of the Tower, the product
whereof, part by the total sign, and the quotient i^ your desire.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

B c is a Tower, and you standing at a are required to deliver part of the
Altitude, as c h, first therefore I observe the angle h a b, 11 degrees, then c
a b 27 degrees, next I measure the distance a b, which I find 178 feet, these
had, I take the Tangent of 11 degres, viz. 19080 from 50952, the Tangent of 27
degrees, the remainer is 31872, which increased by 172 produces 5481984, which
being parted by 100000 the quotient is 54 1/^ 9/^ 8/^ 4/^ ^/^ feet, the
distance of h c, by this means you may describe stageme^ts for buildings, and
all such kind of things ingeniously.

CHAP. XXI. To reduce the parts of the right side the Geometrical Quadrant,
into parts proportional of the left side.
IN reducing of these parts you are brought to work always as if it were by
the parts of ye left side the quadrant, that is, by the parts furthest from 90,
which to do, you must divide the square of one of the sides by the parts cut in
the right side your scale, that is by the parts nearest to 90, so is the
quotient the parts proportional, which must be multiplied by the distance of
the stations, and divided by the sides of your Quadrant, let the side of your
Quadrant contain 60 parts, whose square is 360, let the parts of the right
side cut be 30, 360 divided by 30, leaves 12 this 12 you must agument by the
stationary line, and the offcome part 60 so have you your desire.

CHAP. XXII. To find lengths in heights by the Geometrical Quadrant in the
Glass.
IN performing hereof, you must observe the angle of Altitude made at both the
marks in Altitude, whose distance is required, noting ye parts of the
Geometrical Quadrant cut by the moveable sight, and also note if the parts cut
at both your observations were in the side toward 90, which is the right side,
or in the side fromwards 90 which is the left side, or if at the one
observation the parts cut were in one side, and the other in the contrary side.

1 If the parts cut at both the angles were in the left side (which is furthest
from 90) subtract the lesser from the greater, and with ye which remains
augment your stationary line, which parted by the whole side as by 60 leaves
the desired Longitude

2 Now if the parts cut at both lines were in the right side toward 90, by the
last Chapter, reduce those parts into parts proportional and then work as in
the last difference.

3 Or if the parts cut, be at one line in the left and at another in the right,
then must you reduce the parts cut by the right side into parts proportional,
as in the last Chapter, which done (as in the first difference) deduct the
lesser from the greater, and the product increase by your stationary distance,
which divided by the whole side, yields your desire, and so must you deal, if
the one section were made in 60 in the midst betwixt the right and left side.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

B c is a Tower, and you required to deliver a certain length in the same, as
b z, a. I appoint my station 129 yards from c, now planting the Glass truly,
I place my eye at a, taking the angle z a c, and note the part of the Quadrant
cut by the moveable sight upon the back side the demicircle, which is 20, the
Glass resting parallel and equidistant to the Horizon, moving the sight until
I see through the same from a to b, as at m, and so do I find the parts cut
to be 43. both upon the left side the Scale k l, (which I perceive in my
Glass, for that both the sections were made in the 60. parts furthest from 90.
Therefore by the first difference of this Chapter, I deduct 20. from 43. so have
I 23. remaining, by which your line stationary a c 129. yards, must be
augmented, so have I 2967. which I part by 60. so is my quotient 49 2/6 9/6
yardes the length of b z.

And if your station were at d, and the one section made at n, falling out in
the right side o s, and the other at w in the left side s p, and you required
to deliver the said distance b z: then must you work according unto the 3.
difference of this Chapter. I did prosecute the first difference, with an
example, for that neither of the sections will be made in the right parts,
unless you stand nearer to the base of the altitude then the length of the
altitude it self: that is, unless the altitude be greater then your distance
from the base.

Otherwise.

Get the three angles of the triangle b d c thus, observe the angle b d a,
which take from 90. for that b a d is a right angle, so have you a b d: then
take the, angle b d c, which add to a b d taking the total from 180, so have
you the angle b c d, by the 7.60. of the Geodeticall Staff, chap. 1. p. 21.
This had, get the line c a, or a d, and then protract as in the 28. chapter, or
work as in the 32. chapter, Comp. 3. in the end thereof, or as in my 7. book
of Trigonometria.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

CHAP. XXIII. To know how much one Hill or Mountain does exceed an other in
height.
THis matter is not so easily performed, as many ordinarily think it to be,
for to seeks how much one hill is higher then another, is not to stand upon the
top of one of the hills, and by your Instrument find whether the other be
higher or lower then the level of your eye, as in the 19. Chapter, and so to
judge him higher or lower then the hill you be one. But he that will know how
much one hill does exceed another in height, must find how much both of the
summities of each hill is distant from ye center of the earth: or at least, how
much either of their perpendicular altitudes exceed the Semidiameter of the
earth: for the lesser of this excess taken from the greater, leaves the
difference of the mountains perpendicular altitude. For you must imagine, what
hill soever you stand upon, beholding another adjacent mountain 20. or 30.
miles distant, which albeit that hill you behold be equal in height with that
whereon you stand, yet shall he not seem so, nor fall out to be so, being
proved with an Instrument, or line of level: for that where you stand is
always the uppermost place, the other hill being situate as it were upon ye
side of ye earth, which we may prove by a Philosophical Axiom: Omne grave
fertur deorsum ad centrum, vbi quiescit, insomuch that if you travel about the
earth with a line and plumbe at the end thereof, the plumbe will always point
toward the center, so that the excess of any mountains altitude above the
superficial conuexity of the earth is altered (in respect of our sight)
according to the position of the place: and therefore when you be asked
concerning the height of two hills, you must know whether they mean in respect
of the position of the hills, according to the apprehension of your sight, or in
respect of ye swelling of ye same, above the true conuexity of the earth, for
you must understand that the earth is imagined to be round, as a globe, and so
by some it is thought that it was at the first creation, and that these
mountains and hills were since made at Noah's flood, by the raging of the water,
which forced stones, trees, and earth upon diverse heaps, and thereby did
irregulate the globous body of the earth, the which albeit being compared to
the Spheres in in the heavens (by the consent of most Philosophers) is but as
a point having no sensible magnitude, yet to us that inhabit upon the
superficies of the same, the very hills have an apparent and great magnitude,
eleuating themselves above the true circuit of the earth, and as these hills
are much above the true superficies of the earths circular conuexily: so is it
not to be doubted, but that many valleys fall within, and lower then the said
circular conuexity, so that sometimes we may be distant more then the earths
semidiameter from the center, as being upon a mountain, and sometimes less,
as in some kind of deep valley, all which you shall be taught to ^^nde and
prove by the ensuing demonstration.

To perform what is said before, you must ascend unto the top of one of the
proposed hills, which let be b, let the other hill be c, and you desired to
tell which of the top of the hills is the higher: that is, whether b or c be
furthest distant from a the center of the earth. Being therefore at b, (by some
Instrument described in this book) get the angle c b a 87, degrees, then must
you go to the hill c, and there again get the angle b c a, 74. degrees, and so
adding these two angles together, you have 161. which taken from 180. leaves
19. the angle c a b made at ye center of the earth. Having these three angles,
get their signs, and finally the distance of the two hills c b, so have you a
line known, and three angles known, and thereby (as you be often taught) get
the side a c, and a b, which note: for, look which is the greater, and that
hill may you conclude the higher, which here is c a.

Now to get the height of b or c, above the true circular conuexity of the
earth, subtract 34364/11. from the live b a, so have you the height of the hill
b d four score: do so to c a, so (for example sake) have you the height of
the hill c e, seven score above the true circular conuexity of the earth.

If you seek how much the one hill is higher then the other, then take b d 4,
from c e 7: so have you three score, and so much is the hill c e higher then b
d.

And here it is apparent, that if you stand at b, and by a line of level look
toward c, your sight will run to f, above c, so that the lower hill by this
means will seem the higher: for you must note that every line of level does
make right angles with the perpendicular, and every perpendicular points to
the center of the earth, as you may perceive in the figure, for b a is a
perpendicular, making right angles with f b the line of ^euell.

woodcut, mathematical figure of Earth corresponding to description

On the other side, standing at c, you shall see the line of level c g run
far above b, and by this means you may seek the altitude, and difference of
altitudes of hills, which otherwise is difficult to be found.

This chapter may finely be performed by your staff, for that you have three
angles and one side given.

But if you would make experience of the height of hills only by a level, your
best way is to find out a third hill alike, or near a like distance from both
the other hills, and so may you more truly judge of both their heights, and also
of the difference thereof from the top of that hill, even as you be directed
by your line of level parallel to the Horizon.

CHAP. XXIIII. To know if water will run unto any appointed place.
IF you desire to know if water will be brought from any spring head unto any
appointed place, you are first to consider how, and in what you mean to bring
it: that is, either by trenches and gutters, or in pipes of lead, or such like:
for those waters that will come in pipes of lead, will not also come in
gutters, because the pipes may bring the water into a valley, and so convey the
same again up over the top of any hill, being not higher then the original
spring: yea if it be higher, even though you should fetch it at the bottom of
an hill, upon the one side, and bring it over the top of the said hill as low
upon the other side: for if you once can set it running, it will never cease
until the pipes be burst, or all the water spent, the reason is, because non
potest esse vacuum in rerum natura. And for a familiar example: Take a number
of quilles cut off at both ends, and join them close together with wax in a
circular fashion, and put the one end thereof into a vessel that has water in
the bottom, let the other hang over the vessel brims, the lower the better,
it suffices if so the one end of the quilles be as low as the other. Now if
with your breath you draw the water into your mouth through these quilles, and
so take your mouth thence, the water will run through the said quilles until
all be spent in the vessel: and this experience confirms their opinion well
that say: Aqua ascendit, quantum descendit.

But to know if water will come in pipes, after the ordinary fashion to any
appointed place, you must first know, that the ground whereupon the pipes lie,
must be lower at every miles end, by 4 inches then it is at the spring head:
which considered, plant your Glass at the spring head, so that the Diameter of
the Demicircle lie parallel to the Horizon, and equal in height to the head of
the spring, the two sights in the ends of of the Diameter, look through the
same to the place whither the water should run, taking notice of what your
eye apprehends through the sights, for to that place will the water run,
abating 4 inches for every mile the Tower is distant from you.

But say there be certain hills betwixt the head of the spring and the place
whereto the water should run, in such a case you must plant your Glass at the
head of the spring as before, and looking through the sight, note some mark in
the next hill toward the place, then go unto that mark, and if yet you cannot
see to the place, observe some other mark in an other hill, and so forth,
until from the last mark you may perceive the appointed place, in which make
a note for abating, as before, the water will run thereunto.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

A is a place where water is found, and the question is, to know if it will be
brought to the Tower at b, which is distant from a 4 miles, I plant my
Instrument therefore at c, so that the diameter p q lie parallel, and also
equal in heights to a the spring head, then looking through q p toward b, I
cannot see the same by reason of a certain hill, that is betwixt me and b,
therefore I observe a mark in that hill through the sight, as at c, where
again I plant my Glass in some part of the hill, so that the diameter of the
semicircle lie parallel, and in an equal height with the cundit head a: the
Instrument thus planted, look again through the sights toward the Tower, and
for that there is no other hill betwixt your sight and the same, therefore
through the sight espy some mark in the Tower, as b, which mark is just
level with the spring head a, to which place the water may be brought by
pypes.

Note that some hold pipes of earth baked, to be better then lead, and some
hold pipes of alderwood, fur, pine tree, of such wood that has rosen in it
to be better then the former.

And if the ground lie reasonable level, so that you convey the water by
trenches, order the said trenches so by help of a plumbe, that the water may
have current 4 inches at every miles end, then fill the gutter with pibble
stones a foot or more deep, and upon them throw earth, so will the water run
more clear to the place appointed.

Note lastely, that it is best, if you bring your water by pipes, What pipes
be best to bear water.
to let it come by many crooked turnings, and sometimes to fall directly
downwards, and then again to rise by little and little, and by this means
some think one may force the waters issue to be above the head of the spring,
so that in pipes you shall not need the foresaid abatement.

But now whereas in conueiance of waters by this way, whether it be waters to
houses or new rivers, sometimes happily you shall meet with a deep valley,
out of which you cannot get the water by ditches, and to find leuel ground you
cannot, without going a great compass: and having found it happily cannot have
liberty for to cut a trench through the same: such a matter and such a
difference I saw in bringing the new river from wards Ware to London, for
remedy whereof if the flood be great, you must erect arches in manner of a
bridge, 1609
which may extend it self over the valley even from the one bank to the
other, and if the water be but for a house, posts may serve to bear the same:
the like must you do, if you meet with a river, brook or such like.

M. L. does teach you how to solder your pipes of earth or wood, and that is
with unquenched lime and hog's grease, or with rosen and white of eggs, or with
lime, white of eggs, and fylings of Iron.

CHAP. XXV. To take the quantity of any stationary angle by the Topographicall
Glass.
YOu must put the Index with the sight upon ye Diameter in the Planisphere
where ye degr. do take beginning (noting that a stationary angle, is such an
angle that has no respect to the needle, but to the station) The Instrument
then duly planted upon his Staff, you shall move the Planisphere (the Index
fixed as before) until you espy through the sight the one mark upon your left
hand, and for hedges, until the Index lie parallel with the hedge, the
Instrument so resting convey the Index with the sights unto the mark or hedge
upon your right hand, making the said Index point to the mark, or lie parallel
to the hedge, note then the degrees cut by the fiduciall edge of the Index, for
that is the quantity of the angle. This needs no Example.

CHAP. XXVI. The making of a Protractor and Scale.
TAke a fine thin and smooth piece of brass, of what bigness you please,
whereon describe a demicircle, as a b c, upon the center f which divide into
180 equal parts, and so set figures thereunto, as in the figure: some use to
make the like circle upon the other side the plate, numbering therein the
degrees from 180 to 360, but that is needless: now by the Diameter of this
circle a c, there is made a Scale according to 12 in the inch, furnished with
parallel lines, and numbered with figures, as the order is, and as you may see
in the figure at d e, upon the back side the plate: there is an other Scale
made according to 11 parts in the inch, or you may make the Scale d e according
to 16 parts in ye inch or more, and then take 12 of those parts, which divide
into 11 parts, and make a Scale, the use whereof you may p^ainely see set down
in my Art of Geodetia Chap. 53. but the best Scale is Lib. 5. of the
Geodeticall Staff Chap, 2. where I treated of the Jacobs Staff.

You must note further, that for angles of position, the one half^ of the
circle contains the East part of the Horizon, and the other the West, the
diameter of which circle common to both the demicircles, being the Meridian
line, or South and North, points as in this figure.

woodcut, mathematical compass

CHAP. XXVII. To protract an angle, and lay down the ends thereof.
Having learned to take the quantity of an angle by this Glass, it rests
that you also learn how to protract the same, and to lay down the sides
thereof upon paper by your ^cale and compass.

First, therefore to protract an angle upon any point given you are to take the
semidiameter of your protractor, as f a, This is performed with more ease and
better in the 6 book of Geodetia Cha. 2.
and so placing the one foo^e of your compass in g, the point given, with the
other strike the portion of a circle h i k l, now must you ^^te the quantity of
the angle you are to protract, which let d^ 40 degrees. place therefore the one
foot in a in the protractor, and extend the other to 50 degrees in the
demicircle a b c, the which wideness place in this circular base h i k, so
will the two points of your compass fall, the one at h, the other at i,
finally draw a line from i to g, and from h to g I conclude i g h is an angle
of 50 degrees.

But say, you would draw a line by some degree beyond 180 degr. as by 230
degrees, therefore you must take half 230 degr. and set that distance twice in
ye circular base, viz. 115 set once there is h k, which set twice there is h k
l 230 degrees, or deduct 230 from 360, so have you 130 degrees, and so protract
an angle the contrary way of 130 degrees, as h m l, so shall l cut 230 degrees,
or be distant from h in the circular base h i k l 230 degrees: and if you be
reg^^red to lay down the length of every side by your Scale according as you
found the same by measure, first see what length h g should be, which let be 18
perches, therefore place the on^ foot of your compass in d in your Scale
ext^nding the other toward c, as to 18, that widnesse of your comp^sse place
in g h, fromwards g toward h as to n, I conclude g n i^ 18 pearches, do so to
g i, g k, and g l, so shall you find g o 12 pearches, g k 24, and g p 6
pearches, so of any other.

woodcut, radiated circle labeled

CHAP. XXVIII. To observe an angle of position and what it is, as also to
protract the same, and to find upon what point of the compass any thing seen
in the Horizon lies.
AN Angle of position is such an angle that is taken in respect of the needle
or in respect of the South point, insomuch that the one side of every angle of
position is the Needle, and the 02 other the Alhidada, the common section of
the terms of which angle always concur upon the very extree of the Needle,
differing from stationary angles, because they contain the number of degrees,
betwixt any two objects, proposed at every particular station assigned, and the
angles of position the number of degrees distant from the Meridian.

To observe therefore an angle of position, you must place the Needle over his
true line in the bottom of the Box, the Planisphere there resting convey the
Alhidada with the sights to the mark assigned, noting the degrees cut in the
Planisphere, for that is the angle of position, whereby you may see that the
angle of position is not limited respectively, according as he is right,
acute, or obtuse, but only does extend it self to any degree in the whole
circle, and therefore the terms of these angles might rather be called lines
of position, in respect of their situation, and pointing into the several
parts of the Horizon.

Now to protract the said angles, the difference is not any from the work in
the last Chapter, only where you begin to protract, call that point the
South, and so forward in the other quarters of the world, according as you
shall be directed by the letters SEWN, upon the protractor signifying South,
East, West, North.

And if you desire to know upon what point of the compass any thing seen in
the Horizon lies having planted the Glass as before, so that the Needle
respect his due place, turn the Index the assigned mark, noting amongst the
winds, the wind cut by the Index, for into that part of the Horizon the thing
lies. All these need no example.

CHAP. XXIX. To take the plat of any great Champion field or such like,
consisting of 1000 or 1500 acres, or to take the plat of woodland and rough
grounds, by the Topographicall Glass, otherwise then in the eigth Chapter.
SVch a proposition as this cannot be performed by one station in the midst of
the field nor yet at two stations by the intersection of like lines, because it
is scarce possible to see all the angles at once from the said stations, eith^r
by reason of the long distance, or by occasion of hills, trees or such like,
therefore you must get the plat thereof by going round about the perimeter of
the said field or wood, and that you may do, either by angles stationary or
angles of position, but the operation by angles of position is more troublesome
and less certain, therefore it shall be here omitted.

To perform it therefore by angles stationary, you must go unto one of the
corners upon the utter side the field, where plant your Glass, and so take the
quantity of that angle by the 23 Chapter, then measure from that angle unto the
next angle noting it down together with the first angle in some Table book,
then take the quantity of that second angle, and so measure from that angle
unto the 3 angle, noting the same orderly down, and so go round about ye
field, still taking the quantity of every angle by the said 23 Chap. noting the
same down together with ye quantity of their sides, and when you have
finished, upon some plain paper or vellam, by the 25 Chapter, protract every
several angle, laying down the containing sides thereof by your scale and
compass, even as you found the same by measure, and as you be taught in the
foresaid 25 Chapter: The Art of Geodetia fol. ^7.
this requires no example, for that the angles being observed the work
differs naught from the 8 Chap. part. 1. of my Art of Geodetia.

CHAP. XXX. To plat meadows, plain fields, and pastures of no exceeding great
quantity.
THis Chapter is best to be performed by pla^ting your Instrument in some such
place in ye field from whence you may command the view of all the angles in the
same field, the quantity of which angles you must observe by ye 23 Chap.
measuring the distance of each angle from your Instrument, and so protract the
same, and lay their sides down as in the 25 Chapter, and this way I hold the
best and truest in all such cases where the proposed field is not over great,
and if so be that the plat be not required, but you put to measure the same,
your truest work will be by this means, to get the true plat thereof first,
and afterward find the contents, by the 2 part of Geodetia. and for that this
chapter is also already performed in my first part of Geodetia, Chap. 3. after
the same method as it is here, I will refer you thereunto for breuities
sake.

And here note, if you please, having once planted your Planisphere in such
order that the Diameter where the degrees do take beginning may point into
some one angle or other, you shall not need any more to move the said
Planisphere, but only keep him fixed, moving the Index from angle to angle
round about, noting the degrees cut by the Alhidada in the Planisphere at every
several angle, and so to protract the same by the 25 chapter,

These two kinds of ways remembered in this chapter and the last I do hold the
best and truest, as for others many of them be uncertain, as the intersection
of lines and such like, but you may find that remedied in the use of the
Psaine-Table, the which if you can work it there, you need not be to seek
here. Many other pretty ways may you find set down in the several use of
each Instrument, which if you can perform in one, you may soon perform the
same in every Instrument.

CHAP. XXXI. To reduce lines Hypothenusall into lines Horizontall by the
Topographicall Glass.
COncerning ascending and descending grounds, I told you in ye first part of my
Geodetia, that it was not possible by one scale to lay down the true plat, and
also by the same scale to render the true contents: for that if the plat be
true, the contents will be false: And on the contrary, if the contents be
true, the plat will be false, the reason whereof I acquainted you with in the
ninth Chapter of the sixth book of the Geodeticall Staff, where I also taught
you means to remedy the same, and that diverse ways. But forasmuch as we shall
not need with this instrument, to reduce these lines in the field but only
when we protract, I will therefore deliver a way which you may perform by this
Glass, or by your Staff.

In the very place where the ascent begins, there plant your Glass, and in
the top of the ascent, a staff of equal height with your Instrument. Now
turn the Index with the sights toward the staff, the planisphere being
parallel and equidistant to the Horizon, remove the moveable sight in the
demicircle until through that sight, and the sight in 90. you see the top of
the staff, note then the degrees cut by the moveable sight for the angle of
ascent, then measure the distance betwixt your instrument and the staff, which
increase by the sign of the complement of the angle of ascent, and part the
product by the total sign, so have you your desire. For as the Secant is to
the Radius, so is the Radius to the sign of the Complement of the said Secant,
by the seventh book of the Geodeticall Staff, called Trigonemetria.

Example.

In platting of grounds, I come unto an ascending bank, as a b, I therefore
plant my staff at a, as before, and another at b, noting the angle of
ascension c a b, 30. degrees. Now do I take 30. from 90. so have I 60. the
complement of the said angle, the sum whereof is 86602. and the line
Hypothenusal a b, 40. yards: therefore I multiply 86602. by 40. so have I
3464080. which woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description parted
by the total sum leaves 34 6408/10000 yards, the Horizontal line a c.

If the grounds descend, as b d, go to b, and then work as before.

But you shall not need to make this reducement in the fields, until you come
to protract.

And note further, that if the ground ascend as a b, and also descend as b d,
then must you in your protracting add the Horizontall line a c, and d c
together, and protract that in stead of the lines a b and b d, so that by what
is said before, you may gather that the line which you measured in the field,
to be 40. pearches, and rising 30. degrees high, if you will work truly,
should be laid down not altogether 35. pearches.

CHAP. XXXII. Certain compendious Forms of working by my Tables in the
seventh book of the Geodeticall Staff, called Trigonometria.
BEcause I have taught you to perform many conclusions in this Book by my
Tables in the seventh book of my Staff, and for that there were some things
omitted, and some things also mistaken in the said book, I thought it not
amiss here to deliver certain compendious forms of working by the said
Tables: that is, how to work by any Triangle, as you be taught for the
avoiding division.

Compendium I.

If the sign be in the first, and the Radius in the second or third, how to
bring the Radius into the first place, for the avoiding of diuisi^n.

Regula. ^or the sign that is in the first place, put the Secant of the
Complement thereof; Et voti compos eris.

For as the sign is to the Radius, so is the Radius to the secant of the
Complement.

Compendium II.

If the Tangent be in the first place, and the Radius in the second or third
place, to reduce the Radius into the first place, for the avoiding of division.

Regula. For the Tangent placed in the first place, take the Tangent of the
Complement; Et negotium confectum erit.

For as the Tangent is to the Radius, so is the Radius to the Tangent of the
Complement.

Compendium III.

If the Secant be in the first place, and the Radius in the second or third,
how to bring the Radius into the first place, for more ease in working.

Regula. For the secant put in the first place, take the sign of the
Complement, so shall you have a true proportion, the Radius being in the first
place.

For as the Secant is to the Radius, so is the Radius to the sign of the
Complement.

Any other difference that may happen in any kind of obtuse angled triangle is
resolved in the manuduction in Trigonometria* by making a dislocation of the
oblike triangles, and converting any one of them into two right angled
triangles which, for that it is briefly set down there, I will here open it
with an example.

Example.

Suppose you had observed the angle g a b, 46. degrees, and g b a 64. degrees,
according unto the doctrine of the 12. Chapter, and so adding these two angles
together, and taking the total from 180. you have 70. degrees, the angle a g
b. Now let SALOPIA
woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description the side a g be
required, that is, the distance of Stretton hills from Shrewsbury, therefore I
multiply a b 10. miles by the sign of the angle g b a, 64. viz. by 89879. so
have I 898790. which I part by 100000. and the quotient is 8 9879/10000 miles,
the length of the perpendicular a k. Now to get the line a g, I take the angle
a g b, 70. degrees from 90. so does there rest 20. degrees, the angle g a k,
whose secant is 106417. which I must multiply by a k, which was not altogether
9. miles, (yet here we will admit it 9. miles,) so have we in the off come
937723. which parted by the total sum 100000. the quotient is 9 37723/100000
miles, the distance of Stretton hills from Shrewsbury, which is 9. miles, 3.
quarters, and better.

CHAP. XXXIII. To square lands, and to reduce irregular plains into some
regular Figure, and that in the open Field.
TO square any any field, is to reduce the whole body of the same into one
square, rejecting the corners, angles, and crooked hedges, which must be after
measured, according to the figure they represent.

Therefore, briefly to teach you how to square any piece of land by the
Topographicall Glass, you must imagine a b f e g d a piece of ground,
consisting of many angles to reduce the body of which into a square, your
instrument must be twice planted in such places as you (by the direction of
your eye) shall think most convenient for the rejecting of the angles. I
woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description plant the Glass
first at a, then do I move the demicircle, until through the sights in the
same, I may see close by the inward angles, and so I note in the furthest part
of the field, whither my sight runs as to b, where I cause one to stand: the
instrument unremoved, I look through the shorter sights, noting again
whither, my sight runs, as to d, where also I let a mark. Finally, choosing
out some convenient place in the field, as c, where the visuall beams running
thr ugh the sights in the Demicircle* may concur with b, and also running
through the short sights, may in like manner point to d: you have by that
means reduced the irregular field into a perfect oblong.

Now for the corners and fragments that do remain, you must measure them
according unto the figure that they most resemble, even as you may best gather
by the pricked lines in the demonstration without any more circumstance of
words.

But say the irregular field lies most apt to be reduced into a triangle,
which is thus performed.

A b c d e f g h i is the irregulars plain: first therefore I go into some such
corner of the field, as to me seems most convenient for the reducing of the
field into the largest triangle, which let be woodcut, mathematical figure
corresponding to description e, where I note diligently upon both my hands
where the visuall lines run by the very point of the hedges giving out,
excluding thereby all corners and other angles, the which two lines let be e c,
and e a, the like I do at a, looking to c, so have I made a triangle e a c of
the irregular poligon. As for the other figures, you must measure them as
before, according to that they represent.

CHAP. XXXIIII. To search out the Perpendicular in any Triangle or other
Figure, according as it lies in the open Field.
NOw having reduced any plain irregular Poligon into a Triangle, or such other
Figure, whose superficial content is found by the help of a perpendicular,
and for that the length of the said perpendicular is something difficult to be
attained unto the open field, because it is uncertain upon what part of the
base your said perpendicular falls, I have not therefore thought it much
here to deliver you the order how to perform the same.

Let a b c be a certain plain field, which you are put to measure: the
question is to find in what part of the base b c a perpendicular would happen,
falling from the angle a. First therefore I plant my Glass in the line b c, as
near as I can guess under the angle a, as at d, then I move the Indexes about,
until woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description the Index with
the shorter fights lie directly over the line b c, then I look through the
sights in the Demicircle, if then the visuall b^^mes run to a, my instrument
stands right and d is the place where the perpendicular a d should fall, but if
it had not so happened, I must have removed the Instrument, as I had seen
occasion o^ the like must you do in any other figure in the like case, whereby
you may see how necessary the four Indexes be, for the false taking of
perpendiculars is a chief occasion of those palpable errors that be daily
committed, and a principal cause wherefore the common practisers so often
differ.

CHAP. XXXV. To reduce many plats, or all your observations into one, and
thereby to make a fair Map thereof, according to the quantity assigned.
BRriefly* to teach you to perform this chapter, you must first appoint the
Card of the bigness that you intend to make your Map, crossing the same with
two lines at right angles, and that about the midst of your Map, writing at
the ends thereof, East, West, North, and South.

Now you are to seek in your Tables gathered at your observations the greatest
distance betwixt the most Eastern and Western place, and also the greatest
distance betwixt the most Northern and Southernely place, and so accordingly
choose you a Scale, that those places being laid down by the same, may fall
within your Card.

The next thing to do is, to find out some such a town or castle that you
think lies in the midst of the country you would describe (which you may
easily perform by comparing your tables together) and that town place upon
the interfection of the cross lines before drawn, then if you can find some
other town that lies direct East. West, North or South from you* place the
same in the line answering to that quarter, according to the scale wherewith
you intend to set forth your plat; but if so there be no town observed that
lies direct East, West, North, or South from the same, then choose some other
town, and according to the position of the place extend a right line, and so
place the same ANGLIA
woodcut, labeled map of England town upon the said line by your Scale and
compass, according to the true distance thereof from the town formerly placed
upon the intersection of the two lines, and so is your greatest labor
finished. As for the situating of the other towns: perform one and do all;
for the rule is general: therefore search what distance the port town or
village you desire to place, is from either of the towns before situate, and
so opening your compass upon your Scale to the like number of miles, scores,
etc. placing the one foot in either of the places already situate, with the
other describe several arches, noting the intersection of the same, for the
true place of the said town. And thus may you deal with all ports, villages,
towns, or what else you have observed, and here would situate, passing from
one place to another at pleasure, with this prouiso, that the firm foot of
your compass be fixed in his respondent place.

Example.

Let the proposition be to describe England, and therein to situate such towns
as shall be required in that bigness, as is here set down according to my
Scale: the first thing that I do, having appointed my Card, I cross the same
with two right lines at right angles, appointing at the end thereof the four
quarters of the world, as in the Type: then I find out some town that I
conjecture (by conference with my tables) lies about the midst of the land,
which let (for examples sake) be Middle Wiche, a town situate in Cheshire, the
which town I place upon the very intersection of the foresaid lines, and
thereby write the name of the same, searching in my tables for some other town
that lies direct East, West, North, or South; I find none: therefore I take
some other town, as Bristow, drawing a line according to the position of the
same, getting also from your tables the distance of that town from Middle
Wiche, as 97 miles, to which wideness upon your Scale open the feet of your
compass, and then place that wideness upon the line of position for Bristow,
placing the one foot in the mark made for Middle Wiche, making a note with
the other in the said line of position, where write Bristow. These two towns
so placed, let us now go situate Northampton: first by my tables I find the
distance of Middle Wiche from Northampton, and according to that distance, the
one foot resting in the mark for Middle Wiche, with the other I strike the
portion of any arch: the like I do with the distance of Northampton from
Bristow, as in the 12 Chapter is plain. Now the intersection of these two
arches is the true place of Northampton, where make a mark for the town, and
write the name thereof by the said mark, and so proceed, limiting all the
towns, ports, angles, and nookes in the Island in their proper places, as you
may sufficiently gather by the former demonstration.

Having finished, in some void place you may appoint, the Mariners compass, as
in the Card before, and this compass will serve you for many necessary uses,
as it is not unknown to men seen that way.

CHAP. XXXVI. To divide any Empire, Kingdom, or Continent into Provinces,
Regiments, or Shires.
WHen you have taken the plat of any country, and therein situated all the
towns, ports, and such like, yet happily shall it be expedient (or rather of
you required) to separate and distinguish the same into such Provinces, Shires,
or Regiments, as the said Kingdom is divided into. So is England, or the South
part of great Britanie, being a peninsula, divided into 52 parts (but not
equal parts) which we call Shires, then is every Shire subdivided into other
certain unequal parts (as Worcester Shire into 12) which be called Hundreds,
either for that there were but at first so many towns or villages therein, or
for that there is to be required 100 able men in every of them. Other divisions
is England yet subject unto; as first, the whole Kingdom is divided into two
Provinces or Archbishoprickes, to wit Canterbury and York, then these
Provinces are subdivided into Bishoprics, and every Bishopric is
resubdiuided into Parishes, according to which divisions I mind God willing to
describe a Map of all England, etc. But now the way how to attain unto these
subdiuisions is not known. It is therefore to be performed after two kind of
ways: the first whereof is, you must in your Perambulation, as in the 11 and
12 Chapter, observe the bounds and limits of each province, etc. even as there
you do the towns, and to protract it accordingly, distinguishing the same
with certain pricked lines.

The other way is, to find by some records what towns and such like be the
Meres and bounds of the said Shires, etc. The which having placed in your
Map, the division is made by drawing certain lines from town to town, or
if your may be small, having made a point for the place of the town, you may
omit to write the name thereof, and so draw certain pricked lines from point
to point. Even as you may perceive England in the ensuing Card divided into
Shires.

woodcut, labeled map of England

CHAP. XXXVII. The reasons wherefore the Altitude of the Sun has been
hitherto falsely observed, with Tables to reform and correct the same, as well
in respect of his refraction as paralax.
TYcho Brahe a Dane, and diligent obseruer of the motions of the celestial
bodies, found at last by conferring daily practice and experience with the
optikes, that the Sun seemed to us elevated higher upon the vertical circle,
then indeed he is, and his reason he draws from Alhazen and Vitello, saying:
Quandores visibilis per diuersas Diaphanitates spectatur, refracte eius formam
visui occurrere, for they appoint the heavens the Elements etc. to be
Diaphanicall, but Tycho would have the principal cause of this refraction to
be in the vapors, that do continually occupy the lowest Acry Region,
abounding and gathering themselves most together, when the Sun is ^^^test to
the Horizon, which eleuating themselves by little and (...), successively, at
length merely vanish and are nothing ^ale ob^^^^^s as in the ensuing Table of
the Suns re^^^ction the grea^est elevation of the vapors, according to the
said optiks of Alhazen and Vitello is 40 / 50 // of which the ^^^^^^ter of the
earth conten^^^ (...) which (...) ^^^^ce 12 Ge^maino ^^les, but heauing the
ample discourse hereof to the ^^pa^^ of T. B. where the desirou^ may road at
large, but us only return unto the pr^^ticall use thereof, so shall it be
^^^ine by (...) of this refraction caused by the thickenesse of the vapors
a^^ue the Horizon, that the sight of the Sun is altered so that he seems to
rest sooner and set slower thou indeed (...) does, insomuch that the center of
his body seeming to touch the Horizon, the same is then 30 minutes below the
Horizon, neither does the magnitude thereof hinden the same, although he seem
(...) ^^ggat at the setting th^^ when he is in the (...) whereby ^e may (...),
that by occasi^^ of this refrac^^^^ this who^^ (...) Horizon a^ vising or
^^^ting whe^^^^^ there (...) not any pa^^ thereof abo^e the sa^^ and (...)
^^^tificial,

A Table of the Suns Refraction.
Alt. Refraction. G / // 0 34 0 1 36 0 2 20 0 3 17 0 4 15 5 14 30 6 13 30 7 12
30 8 11 45 9 10 15 10 10 30 11 9 0 12 9 30 13 8 30 14 8 0 15 7 30 16 7 0 17 6
30 18 5 45 19 5 0 20 4 30 21 4 0 22 3 30 23 3 10 24 2 50 25 2 30 26 2 15 27 2 0
28 1 45 29 1 35 30 1 25 31 1 15 32 1 5 33 0 55 34 0 45 35 0 35 36 0 30 37 0 25
38 0 20 39 0 15 40 0 10 41 0 9 42 0 8 43 0 7 44 0 6 45 0 5

continuing from Sun to Sun, be longer according to the apparent rising
and setting thereof, then those our Astronomicall calculations for the Poles
elevation,

But to set apart further discourse hereof, behold the Tablet, he use whereof
is this:

Seek the Altitude of the Sun in one of the rows under Alti., answering to
which upon the right hand under the title of refraction is the minute and
section of the Suns refraction, which must be abated from the Altitude
instrumentally observed, because the refraction does always cause the sun to
seem higher then indeed he is.

Of the Paralaxes of the Sun.

IT is evident by the paralaxes of the Sun in the circle of altitude, that
the Semidiameter of the earth has a sensible proportion, in respect of his
far distance from the Sun, which (setting apart other reasons) may most
plainly be seen in the time of Eclipses, especially of the Moon: by which
Eclipses Coperni^us also found that the Semidiameter of the Suns excentricity
did contain 1142. Semidiameters of the earth, which putting aside some few
minutes, agrees with Tycho Brahe. so that the Sun, by reason of his Paralax,
seems to us inhabiting the superficies of the earth lower, and more dejected
in the heavens, then in deed he is; by the neglecting whereof his true
altitude has as yet been falsely observed: but here we must admit a
threefold distance of the Sun from the earth: to wit, most remote, as being
in his Apogaeum, nearest, as being in Perigaeum, and in the mean betwixt both:
that is moving about the center of the earth. According to which threefold
distance from the earth, I have set down the ensuing Table by the doctrine of
the foresaid Tycho, extended so far, that it may serve for every degree of
the Suns altitude through all great Britain, the use whereof is thus:

Take the altitude of the Sun, the which altitude find in the row under Alt.
G. answering to which, under the title Max. Med. or Min. is the minutes and
seconds of the Suns paralax, which must be added unto the Suns altitude,
for that the paralax does make the Sun seem lower, and more diected in the
heavens (in respect of our fight) then indeed he is.

A Table of the Paralaxe of the Sun in the vertical circle, according to his
threefold distance from the earth.
Alt. Max Med Min. G / // / // / // 0 2 54 3 0 3 7 1 2 54 3 0 3 7 2 2 54 3 0 3
7 3 2 54 3 0 3 7 4 2 53 2 59 3 6 5 2 53 2 59 3 6 6 2 53 2 59 3 6 7 2 52 2 58 3
5 8 2 52 2 58 3 5 9 2 51 2 57 3 4 10 2 51 2 57 3 4 11 2 50 2 56 3 3 12 2 50 2
56 3 3 13 2 49 2 55 3 2 14 2 48 2 54 3 1 15 2 48 2 54 3 0 16 2 47 2 53 2 59 17
2 46 2 52 2 58 18 2 46 2 51 2 58 19 2 45 2 50 2 57 20 2 44 2 50 2 56 21 2 43 2
49 2 55 22 2 42 2 48 2 53 23 2 41 2 46 2 52 24 2 40 2 45 2 50 25 2 38 2 44 2 49
26 2 37 2 43 2 47 27 2 35 2 41 2 45 28 2 33 2 39 2 44 29 2 31 2 37 2 43 30 2 30
2 36 2 42 31 2 28 2 34 2 40 32 2 27 2 32 2 38 33 2 25 2 30 2 37 34 2 23 2 29 2
35 35 2 22 2 27 2 33 36 2 20 2 25 2 31 37 2 18 2 23 2 29 38 2 17 2 21 2 27 39 2
15 2 19 2 25 40 2 13 2 18 2 23 41 2 11 2 16 2 21 42 2 0 2 14 2 19 43 2 7 2 12 2
17 44 2 5 2 9 2 15 45 2 3 7 2 12 46 2 1 2 5 2 10 47 1 59 2 3 2 8 48 1 57 2 0 2
5 49 1 55 1 58 2 3 50 1 52 1 56 2 0 51 1 50 1 54 1 58 52 1 47 1 51 1 55 53 1 45
1 48 1 52 54 1 43 1 46 1 50 55 1 40 1 43 1 47 56 1 38 1 41 1 45 57 1 35 1 39 1
42 58 1 33 1 36 1 39 59 1 32 1 33 1 36 60 1 30 1 30 1 33 61 1 25 1 28 1 31 62 1
22 1 25 1 28 63 1 29 1 22 1 25 64 1 29 1 22 1 25 65 1 13 1 16 1 19 66 1 10 1 14
1 17 67 1 80 1 11 1 14 68 1 5 1 8 1 11 69 1 2 1 5 1 8 70 0 59 1 2 1 5

Example.

We will take Tychos own example, observed the last of June 1588, when having
a large Instrument, prepared for that and other such purposes, found the Sun
to be 19 degrees 17 minutes, elevated upon the Meridian, to which in the table
of refractions there did answer 4./ 5.// which taken from the apparent
Altitude (because the refraction does always make the Sun higher then indeed
he is) there does rest 19 degrees, 12./ 20.// the just Altitude by reason of
refraction. But this Altitude is not as yet precise, by reason of the Suns
parallax, therefore in the Table of parallaxes according to the 19 degree of
Altitude, and according to the Suns threefold distance from the earth, find
the parts there set, to wit, 2 minutes, 44 sec. these add to the former
Altitude corrected by the refraction, because the parallax does make the Sun
seem lower then indeed he is, so have you gotten his true and perfect
Altitude, as well in respect of the refraction, as the paralax, to wit, 19
degrees 15 minutes which you observed instrumentally to be 19 degrees 17 min.

Hence comes it that the Poles elevation observed by the Meridian altitude of
the Sun or Stars, and by the Pole it self differ, if you confer two of
these Altitudes together.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the correcting the taking of the Altitude of the Stars,
which by most hitherunto has been falsely observed.
AS the refraction of the Sun is a cause of error in the observing his true
Altitude, for the causes aforesaid, so do the like causes produce the like
error in the Stars, but not so much, for to every degree of the Suns Altitude
the refraction of the Stars decreaseth 4 minutes insomuch that at the 20
degree of Altitude the stars have no refraction at all, as for their parallax
it is nothing sensible, therefore behold a Table for the refraction of the
stars for every degree of their Altitude unto 20 degree, the use whereof is
all one with that of the suns refraction.

A Table of the Refractions of the fixed Stars.
Alt. M S Alt. M S Alt. M S Alt. M S 0 30 0 5 10 0 10 5 30 15 3 0 1 21 30 6 9 0
11 5 0 16 2 30 2 15 30 7 8 15 12 4 30 17 2 0 3 12 30 8 8 45 13 4 0 18 1 15 4 11
0 9 6 0 14 3 30 19 0 30 20 0 0

CHAP. XXXIX. To take the Altitude and Almicanther of the Sun or any star,
and to find their Azimuth by the Topographicall Glass.
PLant your Instrument parallel the Needle respecting his due place, then move
the Index until the very edge of the demicircle point just unto ye Sun, now
for stars look through ye sight in 90 moving the moveable sight upon the
demicircle, until through the said sight in 90, and this moveable sight, you
espy the Star, note then the degree cut by the moveable sight, for that is the
Altitude of the Star, but because you cannot view the Sun, receive his
beams through the moveable sight, moving the same sight upon the demicircle,
until the said beams pearce through that sight, and also the sight in 90, the
degrees then cut is the Altitude, and the degree cut in the Planisphere by the
Index that points to the Sun or Star is the Azimuth or vertical circle.

And what may you see further in this Glass? mary the point of the compass
that the Sun or the Star lies on.

But you must remember, after you have taken this Altitude of the Sun or
Stars instrumentally, to make substractions and additions according to the
refraction and paralax of the degrees of the Altitude taken, even as you be
amply instructed in the last Chapter.

CHAP. XL. To take the Amplitude of the Sun or any Star by the Topographicall
Glass.
BY help of ye Needle, place the Planisphere of the Instrument, so that the
diameters behold the four quarters of the world, the suune or star then
rising, observe the same through the sights upon the demicircle, noting then
the degree included betwixt the Index, which points toward the star, and
the diameter that respects the East, for that is the Amplitude: the like must
you do upon the West side for a setting, also amongst the points of the
compass, there may you see upon what point of the compass the rising or
setting was.

CHAP. XLI. To get the hour of the day, the hour of the Sun rising and
setting etc. by the Topographicall Glass.
TO get the hour of the day, you are first by the 39 Chapter to observe the
Altitude of the sun, the moveable sight upon the demicircle resting at the
degree of Altitude, note then the degree that the sun is in, for the day
proposed, which you shall find upon the moveable sight, for the hour line
passing by the same is your demand.

But with this prouiso always, that you note if the sun be in North or south
signs, for the hour lines of the North signs incline to the left hand, and
the hour lines of the south signs, bend toward the right hand, certainly of
all kind of Horologicall Quadrants I hold this the best, easiest and truest,
not for that it is a new devise of mine own, but by reason of the exactness
of working.

Now for the time of the sun rising and setting is easily collected.

And to get the degree of the sun, every Almanacke affoords you that, for
toward the midst of each month you have there set down, when the sun
enters into the sign there noted, as in October the 14 day, 1610. Sol in
Scorpio, and I demand the 26 day what degree of Scorpio the sun is in,
beginning therefore at the 15 day I call it one, and so telling I come unto the
26 day, I end with the number of 12 whereby I conclude the sun was in the 12
degree of Scorpio. So of any other, here the loss of a day does nothing hinder.

CHAP. XLII. To find the hour of the Night by the Tpographicall Glass, and
to know the time of high water, and also the place of the Sun or Moon.
SEe in any ordinary Sun dial what of the clock the shadow of the Moon
yields, then turn the Index that is marked with f unto the said hour in the
Planispheare, which so resting, seek the age of the Moon in the circle
whereto the Index is fixed, for the hour line in the innermost circle in the
Planispheare passing by the said age of the Moon is the true hour of the
night.

So likewise does the hour line and the foresaid Index show upon what point
of the compass the Sun and Moon then be, and the number of points included
betwixt the said hour line and Index acquaints you with the distance of the
Sun and Moon, which the circle in the Peripher expresses in degrees and
minutes, which is more then was proposed.

To know the tides or high water by the Topographicall Glass.
Seek as hereafter what Rombe or Wind makes a full sea at the proposed place,
and then learn the age of the Moon, these two things had, put the Index where
29 stands upon the said Rombe or Wind found, which resting, seek the age o
ye moon in the mooueable circle, for the hour in the inward circle of the
Planispheare answering thereunto acquaints you with the hour of the full sea
in the proposed place, and for your practice and ease behold the table of tides
ensuing.

The moon south or north makes a full sea at Lands end, south and by east at
the Gore end, south south west between holy Island and Tynemouth, south west
and north west between Tynemouth and Flambrough head, south west and by west
between Flamb. and Bridlington in the Bay, west south west between Bridligton
and Laurenas, east and west between Laur. and Cromer, south east between
Cromer and Yarmouth rode to Laystow north rode* south east and by south
between Layst. rode and Orfordenas, south south east between Orf. and Orewell
woods, south and by east between Naase and ye Ware head of Colnes, south south
west at Grauesend, south west at Lon. bridge, south and by east at Portsmouth,
east and west at Waymouth, west and by South along the coasts up to Bristow,
and the coast of Ireland, from Waterford to Kynsale: if you desire more, you
may have it of any skillful Mariner, or in the tables of the Regiment of the
sea.

One thing note, that it flows sooner by one point of the compass in the
Spring tides then it does in any of the quarters of the moon, especially if
the River have any indrafte and distance from the Sea.

A note of additions to the Planispheare in the Glass.
To the Planispheare in this Topographicall Glass you may also add the
Celestial Zodiac, and another circle of the days of the month inclusiuely,
the same or such like that are placed upon the Horizon in Sandersons Globes, by
which you may gather the sign and near the degr. that the Sun and Moon be
in, and if you do but note the aspects in the Rundle of the moons age in
their proper places, you may thereby find what aspect the sun and moon have
one to the other at any time.

Or thus you may find what sign the moon is in, place the Index marked with f
upon a in the Planispheare where the degrees do take beginning, then count the
age of the moon in her proper circle, under which in the Planispheare make a
mark, to which mark turn the foresaid Index f, noting the degree cut in the
circumference. for that is the distance of the sun and moon, which parted by
30 the quotient yields the number of signs, and the remainder the degrees; so
that knowing the place of the sun by any ordinary Almanacke, hereby have you
also the place of the moon by adding the distance of the sun and moon unto
the place of the sun in the Almanacke, as in March, after the 10 day the
sign is in Aries, and by the rules before I find her distant from the sun 60
degrees or 2 signs: Therefore the moons must be in Taurus, the degrees. are known
by the degrees. that the sun is in, and by the degrees. cut by the Indexes as before.
Finally, if in this utter circle you character the aspects, then also may you
find the aspects betwixt the sun and moon.

Many things Astronomicall might I open in the use of this Glass, which for
breuities sake I am forced to omit.

At this time I will conclude the use of the Topographicall Glass, hoping I
have said sufficient to open the whole use thereof, which contains matter sit
for a great volume.

THE DESCRIPTION AND use of the Plain Table, containing all such propositions
as are most fit and familiar to be wrought thereon, setting aside others, as
pertinent to curious demonstrations, rather then apt to produce exactness and
truth.
CHAP. XLIII. To use the Topographicall Glass as the Plain Table.
To alter the Topographicall Glass to a plain Table.
YOu must take the circular sight, box, needle, and all things of the foreside
the Planisphere of the Glass, and so set the socket that is upon the backside
upon the foreside the instrument, so does the backeside (being a four square
plain board) stand upwards; next must you cover this smooth board with a sheet
of white paper, which fasten thereunto with mouth Glewe, or you may have
folding Rulers, as the plain table it self, to perform the same. Lastly,
have a Ruler with Sights, as in the next Chapter, to stand upon this plain
Superficies, and to the one side of the board, in the thickness thereof with
screw pins fix the needle and box, in such order that the South line (I mean
not the line of variation) make right angles with the side of the said board,
so have you finished.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of the Plain Table, with a description thereof, and the parts
thereunto belonging.
The Plain Table.
THe Plain Table or Geometrical Table is a right angled aequilater
paralelogram, made of a board of half an inch in thickenesse, whose equal
sides contain 9 or 12 inches, the superficies whereof is made smooth and
plain, some use to make him represe^t an Oblong: al is one.

Some for ease in carriage use to make this square board to consist of three
pieces, which they use to join together with certain ledges, such as be at
the end of Table boards, as you may gather by the figure.

The edges of this table round about be abated with certain square channels to
the thickness of half the board, according as you may gather by the shadowed
lines about the table.

a "table" with ruled edges

The ribs or for rulers of the Plain Table.
2 The pieces of this table being set together, then be there certain rulers
of wood joined together with small brass hinges which are made to fold, as you
may perceive by this ensuing figure, which being opened and stretched square,
serve just to fall into the channel made about the 4 sides of the table: and
these rulers in that place have three uses principal; the first is, it ribs
and binds the pieces of the table close together; the next, it holds the sheet
of paper plain and straight upon the table upon every side: lastly, every side
respondently is divided into a certain number of equal parts, which serve to
draw cross parallel lines upon the paper when you change your sheet, as
hereafter: you may gather my meaning concerning the description thereof by the
ensuing figure, better then with many words.

woodcut, corrisponding to description

Box and Needle.
3 To this Plain Table there does also belong a Box with a Needle, and a Card
in the bottom thereof, such a one as is described in the 1 Chap. This Box
must be fixed to one of ye sides of the Plain Table a d or b c, in such sort,
that the line in the box m n lie parallel thereto, so shall k l lie close with
the side of the table a d, then is there an appendix growing to this box,
through which go two holes for passage, that two screw pins may fix the said
box to the body of the Plain Table: as you may gather amongst the shadowed
lines in the ensuing figure.

N m
woodcut, circle divided into four sections

4 To the back side of this Instrument there is fixed a socket of brass, with
two screw pins, as you may perceive by this figure, and in the midst of this
socket there is a scrue pin, which serves to wreste against the Staff that
is put into this hollow socket, provided always that you have a thin piece of
brass within the socket, for the scrue pin, to force against the staff being
put therein.

5 Also you must provide a three footed staff, that is 3 legs or feet to be
fixed in a head of box like a three footed pair of compasses, and set the head
of your staff that goes into the hollow socket bewrapped in a plate of
brass, so shall not the brass pin crush the same being forced here against.

The Rule
6 Next to this Table there does belong a ruler of the full length of one of
the sides: this ruler has two sights, one standing in either end, just over
the fiduciall edge of the rule, they use such sights as be described in the 9
Chapter, but thus I would wish them made, let a ruler be prepared of the
length aforesaid, woodcut, cylindrical figure better then an inch broad,
wherein along the midst, within an inch of either end let there be drawn a
fiduciall line c d, then cut the one half of the rule away and keep the
other: lastly, in either end make two square holes to bear the sights as a b,
as in the figure.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

The two sights.
7 Next provide two sights for those two square holes, as e f for a, and g h
for b, let the one sight be but half so long as the other, as you he taught in
the 9. chapter, and let the pins head h, and the grove or channel to look
through in f, stand just over c d: lastly, for that we will avoid the number
of divisions in the longer sight, which I described in the use of the
circumferentor, woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description let
the quadrant in the 11 chapter of my sixth book of the Geodeticall Staff be
placed with a screw pin in the longer sight, in the slit i k, which you may
take thence, until you have occasion for the use thereof.

If you make the ruler and sights in brass, they were best to be made to fold
up and down, as the order is in such things.

Thus much of the description of the Plaine-table and his parts, which I have
the rather wrote for their sakes that affect the same, for whose sake also I
will something prosecute the use thereof.

CHAP. XLV. Of the absurdities that many use, that affect the plain Table, and
of reforming many inconveniences therein.
Why the plain Table is affected by the vulgar.
THis Instrument is so plain (by reason of the ocular spectation of the work
still demonstrated before the eye) that it has thereby begot it self a
wonderful affectation of the vulgar, whereby they vainly think no work does
relish well unless it be served upon this plain Table. But this opinion is
no less ridiculous then full of many doubts that I have heard diverse plain
Table men propound.

Ignorance of some practizers.
Says one, I think the grounds you teach for the casting up of pieces of
ground, be false: for take a square, and measure the same by your scale and
compasses, and note the contents, and then reduce the same square into
triangles, and so again measure the same by the doctrine of triangles and the
contents produced by the square measure will differ from the triangular
measure: for you must note yt he was a witty fellow yt wrought by the doctrine
of a curious small scale, and a goodly blun^ ^^^re of compasses, as you may
gather by the error he was in: for get the contents of any square, by
multiplying the one side in the other, as is taught, and note the product, then
square one of the equal sides, and double the offcome, the square root where
of is ye diagonall, Lib. 6. cap. 16. pro. 1. Bac. Geod.
then find the perpendiculars by the 21. Chap^^^ of the foresaid 6. Book, and
so working according to the doctrine of triangles, you shall find the product
of the two triangles to agree with the forms square.

But to return to the supplements of the wants in this Instrument.

Inconveniences in the plain Table reformed.
First, the paper of this instrument, by occasion of wet, is oftentimes blotted
and blemished, insomuch that the points, lines, and other observations, be in
many places taken away, and so by reason of hasty taking of the Table up, the
paper is by the wet, so stretched and disfigured, that many errors grow upon a
small scale. To avoid all which, and such like, I thought good to give this
admonition. First let your table be covered as you be wont with a fair sheet
of paper, upon which sheet let there be placed another sheet, well oyled on
both sides with Lin-seede oil, so may you work notwithstanding the rain,
deaw, or miste, only draw the lines something more heavy upon the upper sheet,
that they may also pierce the lower apparently.

And this thing note further in the Table, that when you take plats, oftentimes
they will not all be contained in one or two sheets, therefore you must draw
a number of parallel lines cross wise at right angles, that thereby you may
join the sheets together truly, which the divisions upon the four rulers
performs, and as you measure the circumference of any plat by this Table,
oftentimes cast cross angles, and Diagonal lines over the plate, which will
keep you the truer to your work: This holds not in hilly ground without
reducing of hypo. lines to horizontall.
for indeed a small error herein produces a great absurdity in the closure,
and you may now and then try if the chain measure of your Diagonals agree with
your scale, which if it do not, is a true argument of error.

You must further have a special care in reducing the lines hypothenusall to
lines horizontall, as you be instructed in the sixth book. I have seen some
plain table man, when he was set to measure a bank ascending round about, go
unto the top thereof, and so produce lines from every corner unto one center,
measuring it thereby one station, and he thought it was a rare device, and had
laid it down in Plano truly. But surely by how much the higher the ground was,
by so much the greater was his error, But small banks, and ridges (as some
suppose) this respects not.
for that he laid it down in a greater compass then it should, insomuch that
if he had laid the plain adjacent sides precisely down by that scale
likewise, the want of closure would have contained a reasonable large piece of
ground: for you must needs confess that the lines he protracted upon the
paper, were visuall or horizontall, and the lines measured hipothenusall. Other
things should be reformed in this Instrument, which at this time I omit.

CHAP. XLVI. Things belonging to the use of the Plain Table.
Things belonging to the plain Table.
TO this instrument, as to all other, appertains a chain or wire line of four
pearches long, according to 16. foot, and, or of three pearches long, which is
16. yards, and, let the pearches be noted with brass rings at the ends
thereof, and then divided into halfes and quarters, The Line.
with lesser rings fixed at each quarter and half, that you may distinguish
the same.

A Scale and Compass.
You must also provide a scale of brass or wood, whether you please, with a
pair of brass compasses pointed with steel very neat and sharp: for it is
rude to draw your lines Geometrical with Painters keelers, or black lead, as
M. Lucar would.

Also you must have such sights for this Table as be described in the use of
the Circumferentor, whose use are set down in the 16. Chapter of the same
book: or else you may have such a quadrant as is spoken of in the first part
of my Art of Geodetia, as in the 26. Chapter. These things had, you may fall to
work.

CHAP. XLVII. To take any Horizontall distance by the Plain Table.
To take any distance by the Plain Table.
IT were vain to make many demonstrations of this work, since a few may as
well suffice, for this Instrument is but only fit to take longitudes and
latitudes, as for altitudes I hold him very troublesome and unapt to perform
the same, though M. Lucar have taken pains to illustrate him in that point;
howbeit finding by experience the cumbersome and uncertain working thereby, I
think it better omitted then remembered.

You shall then understand, that you may perform any distance upon this Table
in the same order as you do with my Staff, only here you must draw lines
upon the paper, and measure the same by your scale, whereas the legs of the
Staff represent the lines, and the divisions your scale.

Therefore at the place whence the distance is required to any mark proposed*
place your Table, which place call your first station: then your Table lying
parallel with your Compasses, make a point in the paper to represent that first
station, whereunto bring the fiduciall edge of your rule, keeping the one end
of ye said ruler upon the point, moving the other until through the grove or
sights you espy the mark whose distance is required: the rule so resting,
draw a line by ye fiduciall edge thereof: the Table resting, espy out a
second station, and let it make, as near as you may, a right angle with the
mark whose distance is required. This mark so appointed out for your second
station, keep the fidutiall edge of the rule upon the foresaid point, and so
draw a line to point to your second station, then let one measure the distance
betwixt your first and second station (which were best to be 1/10 part of the
distance required.

So have you finished all at your first station, with this Prouiso, that you
have regard to the degrees cut by the South end of the Needle in the Card in
the bottom of the box before you any wise alter the table, and that you lay
down your stationary line by your scale and compasses, limiting the same
according to the line measured, and at the end thereof mark another prick,
which call the prick of your second station.

Then take up your Table, leaving a mark at your first station, under the
prick made upon the table representing the same.

Now must you bear your instrument to your second station, where having placed
the same in such sort that the prick of your second station may directly stand
over the mark representing your second station: lay then the edge of your
ruler upon the stationary line keeping the prick of your second station next
to your body, turning about the table, the ruler resting, as before, til
through the sight you espy the mark left at your first station: which done
make fast the table with your screw.

A proof of the work.
Now for proof of the exactness of your work, and to know if you have truly
taken your back sight, have respect to the south end of the needle, for if it
cut the like dgrees at this second station a^ at the first, you have done well.

Having so done, place again the fiduciall edge of the rule upon this point of
your second station, the one end being there fixed, move the other end, until
through the sights you see the mark, whose distance is required: then draw a
line by the fiduciall edge of the rule, which will intercept with the line
drawn from your first station thereunto, therefore note the point of
intersection, and by your scale measure the distance from any one point to the
other, (I mean by the same scale you laid down your stationary line) so have
you your desire.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

The distance a b is required, first thererfore I plant my Table at b, then
working as before, I find c my second station, and so draw a line to point
from b to a, and another from b to c. Next, I measure the line b c, and find
it 7^. ya^d^, which I lay down upon my paper with my Scale and Compasses.
Lastly, I note the degrees cut by the South end of the needle, which let be 40.
This done, I go to c, and there again plant the Table, as before: So do I make
the stationary line protracted, point just to b, and then noting the degrees
cut a gain by the needle, I find the^ 40. as before, which argues I have well
planted my Table. To conclu^de, I place the fiduciall edge of my rule upon c,
moving ^he other end, until it intersect with the line representing a b;
therefore by my Scale I measure the line representing b a, so have I the
distance of b a 135. yards, by the same Scale might you have expressed c a.

CHAP. XLVIII. The part of the distance of any thing being, given, to find the
rest.
Understanding the last Chapter, so we may thereby avoid many words, and may
most easily be performed by the Geodeticall Staff, as may appear in the
Propositions of the 18.19 or 32. Chapters of the second book of the
Geodeticall Staff. But to proceed, a b is a distance required, the part of
that distance given is a c, woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to
description 50. pearches. Then do I plant my instrument at a, as I did in the
last chapter at my first station, drawing a line to represent a b infinitely,
then laying down my scale, upon the same line the part given. representing a c
50. pearches, the instrument unremoved, I seek a second station, as in the
last chapter, which is d, (but the stationary line shall not be measured.)

Lastly, I note the degree cut by the South end of my needle, then leaving one
at a I carry my Instrument to d, where I plant him in an respects as at a, now
must I find the point upon the paper, which represented c, and thereupon lay
the fiduciall edge of the rule, moving the other end until through the sights
you se^ c, so wilt the edge of the ruler in the line upon the paper
representing ^ d, th^^ k^^ping the ^uler upon that point d, I move the other
(...) until it p^^o^ to (...) shall the fiduciall edge of the rule intersect^
wit^ the ^^^e (...) the pap^^ represen^^ng a b, from the point of which
intersection to the point a, is b the terms of the line a b, which being
measured by your scale and compasses is found 133 pearches.

CHAP. XLIX. To take the distance of any two towns or such like.
COnsider well the premises, and this labor is already effected, therefore
plant your Instrument at a, Latitudes.
as you were directed in the 29 chapter, and let the latitude required be d c,
no^ ^raw lines from a to point to d and c, and also to b your second station,
now observing the former directions I ^emoue my instrument to b, and so draw
lines from b to point again to d and c, then do I note the concurse, or
intersection of the said lines. which I measure by the scale and compasses as
before, so will the stationary line a b be 316 perches, and the distance
required d c 131 perches.

A note for many distances,
And here note, if you had sought more distances* as the distance of f e, e d, d
c, etc. the labor is no more but to draw lines at every station, to point unto
the distances required, and then to note the intersection of matchy lines, upon
the paper, which after measure by your scale and compasses, so shall you have
your stationary woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description line
g h, 10 score, the distance f e 12 score, etc. whereby you may plat any field,
and come not within the same, as in the 8 chapter.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

CHAP. L. To find the Horizontall distance of any place from you standing by a
new way, upon the Plaine-Table.
To find any Horizontall distance after a new way.
IN the 44 chap. at twice I told you of 4 certain rulers or ribs that were
belonging unto the Plaine-Table, every one being divided into a 100 equal
parts or more: by these rulers ordered in their due place upon the
Plaine-Table) shall I teach you to seek the Horozintall distance of any place
thus.

Lay the ruler with the sights upon the very edge of one of the sides of the
Plaine-table, turning the Table about until through the sights you espy the
mark whose distance is required (but with this prouiso that the corner of the
Table, where the division take beginning, be nearest unto you:) this done take
the ruler with the sights (the Table vnmoned) and place the same upon ye right
side the Table, as before, and then looking through the sights espy your second
station, in a known distance from your first station. Next shall you bear
your Instrument to your second station, situating the Instrument (by help of
the Needle and back sights) here in all respects as it was at the first, which
being done lay the ruler over the corner or both sides of the Instrument
remoouing the same until through the sights you espy the mark whose distance
is required, lastly note the equal parts upon the ribs cut by each end of the
ruler or sight having regard to those parts that do responde to the statinary
line, and also to the distance required, for as the parts respondent to the
stationary line, are to the line it self (being measured and known) so are
the parts respondent to the distance, unto the distance required. therefore
work by the golden rule, in this work the line of distance and stationary
line alwiaes cut at right angles, this needs no example, for as it is most
exact, so it is most plain and easy.

The premises being considered, and the doctrine before well understood you
may produce infinite wates to perform many rare conclusions, but we cannot
stand to set down a demonstration to suite to every proposition that may
happen in the field, chiefly for that, let the demand stand howit will you may
resolve the same by due regarding the prescript. Now I will briefly touch the
order of taking a plat of a field, manor, etc. by the plain Table, according
as we have dealt with the Geodeticall staff and other instruments before,
aiming to perform some such propositions here that were omitted in the other
books, for it would increase the volume over much to set down every kind, in
the use of every instrument, since we understanding what is said of the one
may also be performed in the other, and that much after one kind of method, as
I have said before: but indeed I have here set down such propositions that
will best agree with the Plain Table, and are aptest to be wrought thereon,
setting aside all impertinent demonstrations.

And you shall note for diverse good respects that I shall omit one thing that
stands firm, and is ordinarily used in demonstrations of this nature; and
that is, lines to represent the Instrument and the lines also drawn thereupon:
my reason is, because I will not confound the work with multitude of lines, as
also to save the cutting of many figures whereby such that served in the
Glass, likewise serve in the Plain Table.

CHAP. LI. To draw the plat of a piece of ground at one station where all the
angles of the field may be seen from that place of standing.
At one station to get a plat.
FIrst, go round about the field, and in every angle set up some mark, then
plant your table covered with paper, in such a place as from thence you may see
all the angles of the field; that done, in a place convenient of your table
make a prick or point to represent the place of standing: from the point to
each mark draw a visuall line by the edge of your Ruler, then from your place
of standing, measure exactly with your wire line the just distance in pearches
to each several mark, and set those distances by the scale, each upon his own
line which was drawn to those marks, noting these several points where these
measures end. Lastly, from point to point by the edge of your Ruler draw lines
which shall include a figure proportional to the field to be measured, and the
lines so drawn shall represent the hedges of the field, as in this
demonstration.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

Your station is i, the lines drawn from i to point to every angle, are i a, i
b, i c, i d, i k, i e, i f, i g, and i h, which are measured as is noted upon
each line, as i a 27 pearches, i b 9 pearches, etc. then from a to b I draw a
line, and so go round: so have I made a figure proportional, which was
required.

CHAP. LII. To draw the plat of any field by the rule taught in the last
Chapter, where you cannot from one place of the field see all the angles
thereof.
To get a plat at many stations by the doctrine of the last Chapter,
FIrst, set up marks in every angle of the field, as in the last Chapter of
this Book, then place your instrument in some place of the field, and from
thence draw lines from as many angles as you can see, that are together, and
those lines measure, and set the measured distances upon the lines on the
instrument, and from point to point draw lines to represent so much of the
hedge, then appoint out some place for your second station, whereunto measure,
and then draw a station line, setting the measured distance thereon: after
this, remove your Table to that second station, and there fixing it, as it was
at the first station, which you shall observe with your needle, as in the
second proposition of the sixth book before is taught. Then from the center of
your second station draw lines to all the rest of the angles of the field,
which have not lines drawn to them before; or at least so many of them as you
can see, and measure the lines as at the first station: this done, choose a
third station (if before you could not see all the angles) as you did a second,
(still observing that your needle stand as at the first station:) and if at this
third station you cannot see all the angles yet unmeasured, you must again
choose a fourth station, and the fifth, if need require: and thus proceed till
you have taken all the angles of the field: and at last, observing the
measuring into every angle, as also the rules before taught, you shall produce
a figure proportional, and equal in angles to the plat or field presented,
which was the thing required to be done.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

The field is f g h i k l m n o p q r s, wherein I plant my Instrument at a,
whence I cause the angles s f g h i, and no more: therefore I finish all those
angles, as in the last chapter, and then find out another station, as b, where
I plant my instrument as at a in all respects, whence again I may thence see
the angles k l m n, and so proceed in the same order with those angles drawn to
the second station b, as I did at the first station a: but for that at this
second station I cannot yet see all the angles in the field, therefore I am
forced to seek a third station, as c, and there observe the angles of o p q r,
which be all the angles, which I protract and limit upon the paper, as before:
and you must note, that the line a b, and b c must be measured as well as a h
and a i, with all the rest: and note that the needle cut 40 degrees. at a, and so
must it do at b and c, and as many more stations as you should be occasioned
to make: for note general, causa breuitatis. The South end of the Needle cuts
like degrees in the card at every station, as at the first station. This
Chapter is remembered, lib. 6. Geodetia, Chap. 7. defi. 5.

CHAP. LIII. To draw the plat of a field by once placing the Instrument in an
angle of the field, and measuring round about the field, because happly you
cannot trauerse the same, by reason of waters and such like impediments.
To plat by measuring about the field, and yet but once placing the Table.
FIrst set up the marks of every angle, then plant your table in such an angle,
from whence you may see all the angles in the field, then make a point on your
table (in a convenient place) to represent the prick of your first station,
from whence draw lines into each angle, then measure first the hedges, which
are on the containing sides of that angle in which your table stands, and set
those measures by the scale, on that line which represents it, then measure
the next hodge unto it, and take so many measures on the scale, and set one of
the feet of your compass in the last made prick, and with the other foot
strike an arch through the next line to it, and note the interception thereof,
and from the prick last made thereunto draw a line which shall represent the
second hedge, and in this order measure about the field, and strike an arch
from line to line, as in the first: so shall you produce a figure proportional
to the field.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

The figure is a b c d e f g, the angle where the instrument is planted is a,
whence I draw lines into every angle, as a b, a c, a d, a e, a f, and a g,
then I measure the line a b, and lay it down, then I measure the line b c, and
note where it intersects with a c, as at c, then I measure c d, and note where
it intersects with d, and so I go round about the field, and produce a figure
proportional to the figure proposed.

CHAP. LIIII. To take the plat of a field by the rule of the last Chapter,
where all the angles cannot be seen from one angle.
FIrst angle out the field then plant your table in one angle, as in the last
Chapter, and from that angle get as great a part of the field as you can, in
order as in the last Chapter: then plant your Table again in an angle, where
your last measures ended, in like fort situated as at the first station, which
you shall do by setting the needle on the same degrees it cut at the first
station, or looking back (as has been before taught) from whence take all
the rest of the field (if you can there see all the rest of the angles) if not,
you may make a station or two more, as occasion shall serve: And so work till
you have wholly enclosed the field; so shall you make a figure on the table
proportional to the plat of the field with angles equal thereunto. This
Chapter differs little from the last, only you must perform that at many
stations that there you did at one. This agrees with the 7 Chapter, def. 4.
Geodetia.

CHAP. LV. To draw the plat of a piece of ground by 2 stations, and measuring
but one line, where all the angles of the field may be seen from both the
places.
FIrst go round about the field, and set up marks in every angle thereof, A
plat of two stations.
then choose out your 2 stations something near the middle of the field, a
good distance one from another, in such sort, yt they lie not both in a
straight line to any of the angles of the field, but so that they may make as
great angles with every angle of the field, as may be; for the greater regard
you have in the choosing out your two stations, the better will your lines
intercept one from another: Wherefore having thus made choice of your stations
the work is performed: As in the 31 Chapt. as you may gather by the
demonstration.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

C d f g h i k is the Peripher of the field, a is my first station, b my
second, and so working by the doctrine of the 31 Chapter. I obtain a line like
proportional to the field, which was required.

CHAP. LVI. To draw the plat of a field by many stations, and and yet to
measure but one line in the whole.
FIrst set up marks in every angle, then point out your first station, where
your instrument being placed, draw from the prick of your station lines, to as
many angles as you can conveniently see, then appoint out your station in such
a place, from whence you may see all those marks to which you draw lines at
your first station, to which station draw a line, and measuring the distance
betwixt those two stations, upon that line set your distance by your scale, and
then remove your Table to your second station, where plant it in his due
situation, and then from the center of that situation draw lines again to each
angle whereunto you drew lines at the first, and note the interception, each
with his match line, and then draw lines from point to point, which shall
represent so much of the hedges of the field as you have gotten by these two
stations. Now your instrument standing thus at your second station vntemoued,
from the center of your second station, again draw lines to as many new angles
as you see, (that is, from whence you have not drawn lines before) then choose
out a third station, from whence you may see all those angles, whereunto you
drew lines last before, and then draw that station line, and then again remove
your Table, and having placed it in his due form, to find the center of this
your third station do thus; lay the edge of the ruler to any point in the
paper which does represent some mark in the field, and remove your ruler to or
fro, till through the sight thereof, you see that mark in the field, which the
point on the paper does represent, by which the edge of the ruler does lie* and
then draw a line toward you, till it cut the station line, and note the
interception, for that point represents the prick of your third station. And
from the prick or center of your second station to that point, shows the
distance betwixt the second and third station, viz. that point on the paper
shows in what part of the field your instrument is placed. Now from that
center draw lines to all the angles, which you drew to your second station, and
where they intercept or cross each his match lines, make pricks or points
there, and so from point to point draw lines, which shall represent so much of
the hedges of the field, as there you could see and draw lines unto. This done,
and the Table unremoved from that point or center of your standing or third
station, draw lines to as many angles as you can see, which have not lines
drawn to them already. Then choose out a fourth station in such sort as you did
choose out your third, and to this get your distance, as there you did, and then
intercept those lines as before is taught, and in this order make so many
stations as need shall require, till you have ended your whole work, and at
last you shall produce a figure with lines proportional and equal angles to
the plat of the field.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

Example.

My first station is a, whence I observe the angles d e f k l m, my second
station is b, whence I draw lines to point to as many of the angles I observed
at my first statio^ as you can see as b d, d e, b f. and so noting the
intersection of matchy lines, draw the lines d e and e f, which is so much of
the hedges that you have observed: now the Instrument unremoved at b, I espy as
many more angles from b as I well can, as g h and i, and so draw lines to
represent b g b h and b i. Lastly, I espy some other place whence I may see all
these three former angles: but the way to find your third station c is thus,
upon some point on the paper, representing some angle in the field as e, laying
there the edge of your ruler, moving the other end until you observe through
the sights the angle e, then note where the edge of your rule and the line b c
intersecte, as at c, so shall you find the true place where your instrument
stands, your instrument resting situate at c, in all respects as at the other
stations, draw lines to point from c to g h and i, and so note the intersection
of these lines, with their matchy lines drawn from b, so have you another part
of the perimeter, by drawing lines from one intersection to another, as g h,
and h i: and for that you may see from c to all the rest of the angles k l and
m, observed at a, therefore I draw lines to point from c to k, to l and m, and
so noting the intersections as before, and drawing lines I have included a
figure proportional and like to the proposed figure.

Note, I draw no figure upon a b or c, to represent the Table, because I will
omit the multitude of lines and letters; and this kind of intersection of lines
being duly ordered, of all other is the best, because by apt choosing of your
stations you may avoid acute angles.

CHAP. LVII. To draw the plat of a piece of wood ground, where, for the
thickenesse of the wood, a man cannot place his Instrument, but only in the
angles of the perimeter.
IN this manner of work you shall use 4 men to help you, whose labor shall
he thus, two measure with the line the distance from angle, to angle, one man
to go before you into every angle: and the fourth man to be left standing in
the place where you planted your Instrument, because you must (for the more
precise planting your Instrument at every remove) look back to him. Being
thus furnished you shall begin your work as follows:

First, plant your Instrument in any angle, and appoint for your place of
standing some prick in your paper, then draw a line into the next angle, which
line measure on the ground, and set those measures by ye scale on ye line
drawn, then place your instrument in ye angle, and say ye ruler along ye line
drawn, and the^ turn ye Table about, til you see ye angle, or the man left in
the angle from whence you came last, where screw fast the Table, and for your
more assurance, you may behold your needle, The sing^lar use of the back sight.
which in this kind of platting will stand you in great steed. For look what
degree your needle did cut your first standing, the same degree must it stand
on at your other standing, wherefore it were good at the first placing of his
instrument, to write down the degrees cut by the needle, for the help of
memory in the rest of the angles, I say this done and your Table made fast from
the point of your standing, draw a line into the next angle, and measure the
distance thither, which measure set on the line drawn, and then plant your
Table again in your third angle, and in this order work till you have
compassed the whole ground, and if it fall out in the conclusion of your work,
that the line and angle of your figure agree with ye line and angle of the
field, then is your plat perfect, if not you have some error. And herein, if I
may advise you, begin your work again, to find your fault, and trust not to
any help for the closing thereof, wherein you shall but deceive your self,
and happly of a small error increase a greater, for that you know not whether
your saulte be in the lines or in the angles, wherefore if your figures miss
of closing above one pearche, never trust upon your work.

And be sure when you plant your Instrument in one angle and look to the next,
that you so direct the sights, that the visuall lines lie parallel to the hedge
measured, neither observing this paralelly, is it material how far off the
perimeter you place the Instrument, always provided that you take your measure
in the true and direct place, where the very hedge or bounds go, for if you
measure much within the hedge, your lines fall too short, if without, too long,
therefore observe the mean: for in all things, obseruare decorum, is best.

This kind of measuring is principally and commonly used for woods: for that in
them a man cannot see the angles by any other me anes, and may serve for all
kind of other grounds, and indeed commonly used of land meaters, who having but
this one Chapter, and that rawly* presume of the full knowledge of the use of
this instrument, but how they perform it, I leave to those that shall try
them, which is but had, as others before me have, reported.

CHAP. LVIII. To draw the Plat of a field by placing the Instrument in every
angle thereof, as in the last Proposition, and yet measuring but one line in
the whole Perimeter.
To draw the pl^t of any field by going round about, and yet me asuring but one
line.
FIrst place your instrument in that angle where you will begin, which let be in
such a place that the first line you go upon may he of reasenable length, then
set up a mark in the field in such a place as from thence you may see as many
angles of the field as possible may be: which mark call your principal
point, and to that mark get the distance by your first and second station,
which let be in the first and second angle in the field, in order as before is
set down: so shall you have a point in your Table to represent that principal
point in the field; This done, draw a line into ye third angle, and thereto
remove your instrument, and having there placed it, get the distance betwixt
your two stations as you got your distance in the like case before, which you
shall perform thus: Having first placed your Instrument by looking back, or
by the needle, at his due situation, lay your ruler either by the prick on the
paper, that represents the principal point in the field or by any point on
the paper that you know represents some mark in the field: then turn your
ruler about till you see that mark in the field which the prick by which your
ruler lies does represent, and draw a line till it cut your stationary line,
and that point of interception shows the point on the paper, where you stand
in the field. So in this order by placing your instrument in every angle you
may get the length of every hedge severally with measuring but one in the
whole, and the conclusion will be, that in the end you shall make a figure
with equal angles and lines proportional to the plat of the field.

The premises b^^ig well understood, and all things else well considered, I
will ^raue pardon, and so cease further prosecution hereof, presuming that
there is sufficient said to open ye whose scope of this chapter: neither would
I go about to fill the book with many curious demonstrations, and difficult
questions, to beguile the aspiring wit of the young practitioner, but only set
down some such few things that were most requisite to be known, lest
otherwise I should be held rather tedious then compendious, and therefore I
will have to an end.

CHAP. LIX. To take the plat of any Champion Field containing 2000. or 3000.
Acres of ground, by the plain Table, and yet never be forced to change your
paper.
YEt again before I conclude, I will give you another way to seek the plat of
great Champion fields, that contain 3000. or 2000. Acres, by the Plain Table,
which is not much differing from your work by the Geodeticall Staff.

You shall therefere place your Instrument in every angle, and so get every
angle and his sides, To use the plain Table, and never change the paper.
not regarding the length of the containing sides, as you be wont, then must
you measure every hedge, and as you were wont to lay the same down by your
scale and compass, here you shall but write the length of every hedge upon
the lines drawn upon your paper, and responding thereunto, so have you
finished, and you shall never be forced to shift your paper, nor have the lines
to run off the same, for that you may draw them as long or as short as you
please.

Now when you come home, upon some sheet of paper protract all the angles one
after another, See the 3. chap. pro. 5.
as you found them in the field, allowing by your Scale and Compass every line
his due length, according as you find the same, note those figures upon the
said respondent lines, and your conclusion will be to produce a figure like and
proportional to the field proposed. This chapter is most excellent for the
purpose before said, and therefore worthy of note, as they shall find it that
work by the Plain Table, in countries that consist of great Champion fields.

CHAP. LX. What Chapter is most fit to use in platting of ground, as well such
whose superficies is subject to sight, as others that be rough and full of
wood, as also to make choice of the best instrument to perform the same, as
also to make a new kind of particular,
YOu be taught before to measure and plat any piece of ground whatsoever, it
rests then for you to make choice of such Propositions that are best, as well
in respect of the fashion of the field, as in respect of the aptness of the
Proposition.

Therefore for all grounds, whose bounds and angles may all be seen from one
place, use the 51. Chapter, and if you cannot trauers the same to measure it
with your chain, by reason of pooles, marshes, or such like, then is the 53.
Chapter excellent: as for the 55. Chapter, I utterly dislike thereof, because
the section of some angles fall out so acute, that the conclusion cannot be
without error, therefore such works that be required by the help of two
stations, are best to be wrought by the 12. or 14. Chapter.

Now for woodland, and rough grounds, or great Champion fielden grounds, use
the 57. or 58. Chapter, jointly by themselves, or severally, according as the
aptness of the ground occasions you: you may also well use the 9. and 29.
chapter to the like purpose: but have a special care in all your dimensions
and platting* that you truly observe the angles and corners of the fields, and
so consequently precisely mete the hedges and limits, remembering ever when you
work with the Plain Table or Circumferentor, to keep your Instrument parallel.

Touching the best Instrument for this purpose. I leave that to the discretion
of the Reader: for my best council is, that every good practitioner make
proof of every instrument, as I have done, and afterward to apply such to use
that he finds to work with the producement of fewest errors: for I will
nominate none, least it be censured but my peculiar affectation. For every one
does commend that instrument whereon he does practice, or in which he is
seen, and therefore some affect the Plain Table, some the Theodelitus, etc.
which are all in some respects sufficient for ordinary measurers of land, so
they be used according to Art.

Here shall follow another kind of engrossing of particulars, then that in the
Staff, together with the pleasant and apt placing of the four winds, and
their collaterals in any plat taken, which being drawn in red lines, and
artificially done will much beautify the same; neither need you to extend them
all over the body of the plat, unless you please: but in that your own
discretion shall be your best guide.

THE DESCRIPTION AND use of an Instrument called the Circumferentor, used by
some only to measure Land, whose use was first practiced by I. G. and now
published, and annexed hereunto in a brief method of teaching, and in some
parts altered, by Arthur Hopton.
CHAP. LXI. A description of the Circumferentor, and the parts thereof.
YOU must first prepare some piece of wood well seasoned, The Circumferentor.
and bearing a smooth grain, which let be fire inches, or there about long,
four inches broad, and about an inch thick: then must you stope down the
left side thereof, and divide the same into equal parts, according to 12. in
an inch, numbering the same by 5.10.15. etc.

The Needle and Card.
In this piece of wood must there be a round hole cut or turned, of three
inches diameter, and three quarters of an inch deene, in the bottom whereof is
placed a card, as in the 4. Chapter, at 3. This round hole has a needle
therein, and a glass to cover the same, as in the fourth Chapter of the
Topographicall Glass, at 10. Then upon this square piece of wood is placed a
Table, called Tabula Sinuum, and this is such a Table that is calculated out of
a quadrant, whose arch is divided into 30. degrees, and the semidiameter
thereof into 1000. equal parts and according unto the total sum, are
numbers placed in the said Table, answering unto every degree, and half
degree. And these numbers serve to express the length of every right sign, or
of every perpendicular let fall from the several degrees, and half degree in
the limb upon the semidiameter.

Tabula Sinuum.
1 52 6 309 11 544 16 743 21 891 26 978 / 78 / 333 / 566 / 760 / 902 / 983 2
104 7 358 12 588 17 777 22 913 ^7 987 / 130 / 382 / 608 / 793 / 923 / 991 3 159
8 407 13 ^29 18 809 23 933 28 994 / 182 / 430 / 649 / 824 / 942 / 996 4 208 9
454 1^ 669 19 838 24 954 29 998 / 233 / 477 / 688 / 852 / 958 / 999 5 259 10
500 15 707 20 866 25 966 30 1000 / 248 / 522 / 725 / 878 / 972 /

Of the Sights.

Upon the plain of this square piece of wood, near unto either end thereof is
placed two sights, and the one of them is but half the length of the other
standing perpendicular.

Of the shorter Sight.

The shorter of the two sights bears no divisions at all, The shorter sight.
in the top whereof is placed a pins head, and upon the side is set a piece of
small wire, end in the midst is hanged a plumbe. The distance from the wire
in this sight to the plain, is taken and divided into 60. equal parts,
according unto which divisions is the right edge divided, beginning from the
perpendicular point under the wire, numbered by 10. as 5.10.15. etc.

The short sight, and the wire therein represent the semidiameter of a
quadrant, and the wire the center thereof.

Now from the perpendicular point be the degrees of a quadrant, perfected upon
the upper side of the right edge, numbered from 90. to 25. by 10.

Of the longer Sight.

This sight is twice so long as the other, The longer sight.
whereupon are placed three kind of divisions

1 First, the distance from the pinnes head (in the shorter sight) unto the
plain of the instrument, is taken, and according unto that distance is a line
stroke ouerthwarte this sight, which must be called the line of leuel, the
distance from which unto the pins head is taken, and divided into 100 equal
parts: the distance bewixt the pins head and the line of level is equal in
length, therefore divide the longer sight into 100 equal parts, according unto
which place them in the said longer fight, to 50 upwards and downwards,
numbering them by 10, as 5, 10, 15, etc.

Hypothenusall divisions.
The second division is the graduation of the Hypothenusall lines, according as
they increase by units, they be numbered by units as 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to 12,
which represent 100, 102, 103, 104 etc. and these divisions are set from the
line of level upwards and downwards, take the square of 100 from 102, etc.
from 102 103, etc.

Degree of a Quadrant.
The third sort of divisions is the degree of a quadrant, proiected upon the
said longer sight from the line of level upwards and downwards to 25.

Of the slit in the sight.

Slit in the sight.
In the midst of this sight there is a slit made from the upper and of the sight
straight down unto the lower end.

Upon this sight there is a vane of brass, made to run equally up and down,
and in the same there is a sight hole answering to the slit, and the edge of
the vane.

Of the Index.

The Index.
Unto this Instrument there also belongs an Index, wherein must be a center
hole, to put upon the wire in the shorter sight, in the other end of this Index
there is a sight placed, with a hole therein answering unto the fiduciall edge
of the Index, the edge of this rule is divided into such equal parts, as the
right edge of the Instrument.

Of the Staff.

The Staff.
Lastly, unto this Instrument there belongs a Staff 4 foot long, with a good
steel pike in the foot thereof: this Staff serves to plant your Instrument
upon, for which purpose in the top thereof is placed a round pin of wood or
brass, and through the midst of the Instrument is bored a hole to fit the said
pin: so when the Instrument is placed upon the said pin, he will move round
about, but the best staff is that which is made with three staves joined
together like to a 3 footed pair of compasses.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Circumferentor, his appellation, and such things as are to
be considered generally therein, and of the protractor.
The definition of the Circumferentor.
WHat the intention of the first composer of this Instrument was in calling it a
Circumferentor, I know not, but this I affirm, the name was not unaptly given,
for if we well consider hereof, it will be apparent that the working thereby
gives or afoords the name it self, for when we work in platting of fields
etc. we be instructed to move or bear the Instrument about, until he point
unto the proposed angle, whereby you see we bear him about, upon the top of
the Staff whereon he is planted, so that he is properly called a
Circumferentor, of the Lattin word Circum, which signifies about or round
about, and fero the verb, signifying to bear or carry, so Circumfero is to
bear about, whereupon the Circumferentor takes his name, which you may take
in moving him about the Staff, or bearing him about the field, in working
whereby you must always have a special care unto the paralelty thereof, so
that it is not lawful for him to lean one way or another, but the plain
thereof must always lie parallel to the Horizon, which the plumet in the
shorter fight will help you to do one way.

Then must you provide a Protractor, The Protractor, see the Chap. 26.
which is a half circle divided upon the vpside in the line into 60, such
equal parts as the Card in the first Chapter was, the diameter whereof must
agree with the diameter of the Card: the lower side of this protractor is
divided into 60 such equal parts, proceeding from 60 unto 120, so that,

All the divisions to 60, be upon the vpside, and that is called the East side.

Then all the divisions unto 120 above 60, be upon the lower side, and that is
called the West side.

The diameter of this Protractor represents a Meridian.

Upon the utter side of this diameter is room left for to make a scale, which
is divided according unto 12 in the inch, make not your protractor, as the
common order is, See the 6 book Chap. 53, of the Geod: Staff.
if the scale had 12 parts in the inch upon the one side, and 11 on the other
it would do you pleasure.

CHAP. LXIII. To take the Almicanter and Azimuth of the Sun, or Star, by the
old Circumferentor.
To take the altitude and Azimuth of the Sun or Star.
PLant your Instrument so that he may lie parallel unto the Horizon, then turn
him about, until through the sight hole, and slit in the longer sight, and by
the pins hend in the shorter sight you see the Sun or Star bringing down
the vane, until through the hole therein, and by the foresaid pinnes head you
see the said Sun or Star, then the degree cut by the si^e of the ^ane,
shows the Almicanter or altitude of the Sun, and the degree in the Card cut
by the South end of the needle, shows the Azimuth or the distance of ye Sun
from the Meridian.

But if the Sun or Star be higher then 25 degrees, so that you cannot bring
down the vane to work upon the longer sight, then put the Index upon the
center pin, looking through the sight in the Index, until through the same
hole, and by the center pin you see the Sun or Star: for the degr. then cut
upon ye edge of the Instrument by the edge of the Index is the altitude.

And by this Proposition may you observe all the Stars in the Globe together
with their motions in the heavens.

Example.

The 6 of October in the Morning, I made observation according unto the first
difference, where having planted my Instrument parallel, and spied the Sun
through the hole in the vane, and by the pins head, I found the vane to out 12
degrees upon the sight, and the South end of the needle to cut 19 ^/60 degrees,
which showed me that the Sun was 1: degrees high, and that he wanreth 58
degrees of the Meridian, for the South point cutting 29 degrees, and 20
minutes, I multiply the same by 3 there comes 58, which shows me there is
so many degrees included betwixt the Sun and the Meridian, and so of the rest.

CHAP. LXIIII. To find in what point of the Horizon any thing seen lies, by
the old Cirferentor.
To know in what point of the compass any thing lies.
HEre it is requisite first to understand that 120 degrees represent the South,
and that the degrees are numbered into the East, so that to find what point of
the Horizon any thing lies from you, do thus:

Let the Instrument be placed parallel upon the staff, then cease not to move
the same, With more ease see the 28 Chapter.
until through the hole in the vane, and by the pins head you see the thing
desired, note the degree then cut by the South end of ye needle, with which
resort unto this Table, so have you your demand.

15 30 45 60 Sou:East East Nor:East North 75 90 105 120 Nor:West West Sou:West
North

Example

I find the South point cut 45 degrees, I conclude the thing seen is
North-east.

CHAP. LXV. To find the hour of the day by sight of the Sun.
To know the hour of the day
Work the instrument lying parallel until ye shadow of the pins head point or
fall just in the slit in ye longer sight, and the intersection of the needle, I
mean ye South part with the parallel of the month, or sign take whether you
please, is ye hour, which you shall know by the hour line passing thereby.

And you must understand that those circles I call paralels be such as are
described about the center of the Card, and those I call hour circles be
those that pass as it were from the center to the limb crossing the paralels.

CHAP. LXVI. To find the hour of Sun rising and setting at any time
proposed, and the length of the day and night.
HEre you must note, that this Card is made but for one latitude, and therefore
his work in that behalf cannot be general, but it may serve without any
notable error over the most part of England.

You shall observe where the parallel of the month cutteth the Horizon, for the
hour circle passing thereby, or the nearest thereunto shows your demand;
remembering to seek the setting upon the West side, and the rising upon the
East side of the Card.

So shall you find the 11 day of May the Sun to rise near 4, and set near
8: then if you would know the length of the day and night, you may repair
unto the second Book, Chap. 10. of the Geodeticall Staff.

CHAP. LXVII. To find the amplitude of the rising of the Sun and Stars.
To find the amplitude of the Sun or stars.
IT is not unknown to any man, tho meanly traueld in Astronomy, that every
Horizon has four principal points, viz. East, West, North, and South; then
you must understand, that there is no star, nor the sun, that rises just
East, or sets just West, unless they be in the Equinoctial, which
happens unto the sun but twice in the whole year: but for stars, if they
rise once East, or set West, so do they always, whereof there be but a few:
the star in the pinion of the left wing of the Virgin, the star in Antinous
left arm, etc. come near thereunto: but as the amplitude of a star observed
one day, is certain and all one in any other day for that latitude; so in the
sun does it differ every day, and is called Amplitudo ortus. This had,

Observe the sun or star when they seem (as it were) to touch the earth,
as being at point of rising or setting, whereunto turn the Instrument, until
through the slit in the longer sight, and by the pinnes head you see the sun
or star, then note the degr. cut.

If you sought the setting, multiply the degr. cut by the West end in 3, which
take from 90, so have you your desire, so the degr. were under 30; but if the
degr. cut be above 30, multiply the degr. cut by the East end in 3, then from
the total take 90, so have you your desire, and the setting shall be North
from the Equinoctial.

But if you seek a rising, you must consider whether the degrees cut by the
East end be under 30, or above: if they be under 30, multiply them by 3, so
have you your demand, and it is North: if they be above 30, see what degrees
the South end cuts, which multiply by 3, substract from 90, to have you your
desire, and the rising is South from the Equinoctial. Or thus with more ease:
having made your observation, see how many degrees are contained betwixt the
West point of the Card, and the South end of the Needle, for arising; but for a
setting, see how many degrees be included betwixt the East point of the Card,
and the South end of the Needle, which treble; so have you your desire.

But this Chapter is performed with far more ease and truth by my
Topographicall Glass.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the opposite degrees, and how to find them.
Opposite degrees.
BY an opposite degree is meant the opposite point of a Diameter, or the point
opposite unto the degr. cut by the South end of the Needle, that is the degr.
which the North end should fall upon, which is always the half of a circle
distant from the South end in this instrument 60 degrees; so that if the
degrees be less then 60, add 60 thereunto; but if more then 60, substract 60
from it, and the total of the ^ne, or the remainder of the other is your
desire. This needs no example.

CHAP. LXIX. To find the quantity of an Angle.
To find the quantity of an angle.
THe quantity of an angle is the portion of a circle included betwixt the 2
sides of any angle, which is found upon this instrument, by the cutting of the
Needle at two observations in one place, the lesser of which must be taken from
the greater and the degrees which remain after substraction is the quantity
thereof.

But if the remainder after substraction exceed 60, then must the said
remainder be taken from 120, so have you the quantity: if your degrees be not
direct, then must you work by the opposite degrees, as in the 9 Chapter,
taking the lesser of those degrees from the greater.

And you must here note, that all degrees cut at diverse observations in one or
more places, be called direct.

And such degrees as be opposite unto direct degrees, be called indirect: and
here note the tediousness of taking an angle by this instrument, inrespect of
my Staff.

CHAP. LXX. To take the distance of any mark by the old Circumferentor.
To take a distance.
AS I have often times said in the 2 Book of the Geodeticall staff, that there
must be 3 things given, as 2 lines and one angle, or 2 angles and one line, by
which all dimensions are performed; so in this kind of working you must always
have two angles and one line given, by help of which you may seek any
distance proposed thus:

Plant your instrument at the place appointed, whence you desire the distance,
and there looking toward the said mark, note the degrees. cut by the South end of
the Needle; then appoint another place for your second station to which bring
the sight, as before, noting the degr. cut: that done, measure the distance
betwixt the place you then stand at, and the place appointed for your second
station, there again plant your instrument, looking through the fights unto
the mark whose distance is required; then note the degr. cut, and so get the
quantity of both the angles as in the last Chapter.

When you have gotten these two angles, add them both together, which take
from 60; so have you the quantity of the angle at your mark: then must you
resort unto the table of signs placed in the Instrument, and there ^ind the
sign of every angle, and note it down, and if the quantity of the angle
exceed 30, substract the excess or overplus from 30, and take the sign of the
remainder.

These signs had and noted down, work by the golden rule, wherein the sign
of the angle at the mark must be the first number, the measure betwixt the two
stations the second number, and the sign of the other angles severally the
third number, according to the side which is sought, and this work is grounded
upon this Chapter.

In all right-lined Triangles the proportion of the one side unto the other, is
such as the sign representing the angles be. Or more brief.

See the 7 Book Axioma 2. of the Geo. St.
The sides of opposite angles be direct proportional to their signs.

CHAP. LXXI. To perform the last Chap. by protracting with the old or new
Circumferentor.
To take a distance.
Having made your observations at each station, note down the degr. cut by the
South end of the needle, and then protract thus:

Take a fair sheet of paper, and fasten the same upon a Plain Table, or such
like, with mouth glewe, then shall you make a point upon your paper to
represent your first station, there keep the side of your instrument, turning
him until the needle cut the degree first noted, then draw a line from that
point along the edge of the instrument, then keeping the edge still at that
point, move the instrument until the South end of the needle cut the degrees
noted at your second observation: then draw another line by the edge of your
instrument, whereupon lay the line measured betwixt both your stations counted,
from the point first made toward the end of the said line, and where that
number ends, there make a point, which let represent your second station, where
place the edge of your instrument, turning him about until the south end of
the needle cut the degrees you noted at the second station: then by the
fiduciall edge of the instrument draw a line, and note where it intersecteth
with the first line, for that is the place of ye mark whose distance is
required, the distance of which from either of your stations may you measure by
the Scale that you expressed the length of your stationary line by.

CHAP. LXXI. To take an altitude only by the old Circumferentor.
To take an altitude.
YOu must first get the horizontall distance unto the thing whose length is
required: then plant your instrument perpendicular, and move the vane until
through the hole therein, you see the top or the summitie of the altitude, note
then the equal parts cut by the side of the vane, for such proportion as they
bear unto 100. the like does the altitude unto the distance: multiply
therefore the distance by the parts cut, and divide by 100. the quotient she
weth ye height which is correspondent to the level of your eye.

The ground of this work is borrowed from the Jacobs Staff, as may appear in
the ninth Chapter of the fifth book of the Geodeticall Staff.

An inconvenience like to that in the Theodelitus.
But in taking of altitudes you shall have it oftentimes so fall out, that the
altitude will be so high, that you cannot bring the vane so low as to see the
top of the altitude by the hole and pins head.

When it so happens, you must place the center of the Index upon the wire in
the shorter sight, looking through the sight hole in the Index, until by the
wire, and through the said sight you see the summitie of the altitude: then
note the equal parts cut by the fiduciall edge of the Index upon the right
edge of the instrument: for as those parts are in proportion to 60. the like
proportion has the distance unto the height.

And so that proportion as those parts cut have to the parts cut in the Index,
the very proportion has the distance to the visuall line.

Therefore multiply the horizontall distance by 60. and divide by the parts cut
on the right edge of the instrument, the quotient will show the height.

Again, multiply the horizontall distance by the parts cut in the Index, and
divide the same by the parts cut in the edge of the instrument, ye quotient
shows the visual or hipothenusall line.

As you seek altitudes, so must you sinde profundities, as I have said often
in the Geodeticall Staff, but the error is great if the instrument be not
exact parallel.

CHAP. LXXIII. To take the plat of a piece of ground by the old or new
Circumferentor.
Diverse ways may be set down to fetch the plat of a piece of ground by this
instrument: To measure woodland, or any other ground.
but I hold that most easy which is to be protracted by the Instrument it
self, because you shall not be troubled to seek the quantity of angles,
which in this Instrument is over tedious.

Having therefore a piece of ground given, you shall begin at some one corner,
and there plant your Instrument, looking unto the next corner, and note what
degree the south end of your needle cuts, then with a chain measure from the
first corner to the second, and note down the degrees cut by the south end of
the needle, and the length of the line measured.

Next go to the second angle, and there convey your sight to the third angle
parallel to the hedge: then measure the distance from the second corner unto
the third, noting down ye degrees cut by the south end of the needle, and the
length of the line at your second observation.

Then go unto the third angle, and note the degrees cut, and the length of
them, and so proceed from angle to angle, noting the degrees cut, and the
length of every line answering thereunto, until you have gone round about. And
if you being at any one angle, and from thence can see two or three angles
more, you shall not need to remove your instrument to any of them, but only
from that angle observe all the rest, only measuring the hedges.

With these notes you shall resort unto a fair sheet of paper, and there
protract it down thus:

In some place of the paper make a point, and there place the fiduciall edge of
your Instrument, turning it about until the south end of the needle cut like
degrees, as he did at your first observation: then draw a line by the
fiduciall edge of the instrument, whereupon from the said point to wards the
other end, lay down the length of the first measured line, which you must take
with your compass from your scale, and where that number ends, in the said
line, there make a point, where place the edge of your instrument, moving him
about until the South end of your needle cut like degrees he did at your
second observation: then draw a line by the fiduciall edge thereof, whereupon
lay the length of your second line, and where that number ends, make a point,
where (as before) place the edge of your instrument, moving him until the
South end of the needle cut like parts he did at the third observation: then
draw a line by the edge thereof, whereupon lay the third line, and where that
number ends make a point as before, placing there the edge of your Instrument,
turning him until the South end of the needle cut like parts as at the fourth
observation, and so proceed, laying down the parts cut, and the length of the
lines, until you have gone round about, by which means you shall lay down
the plat of the piece of ground in true form, then for the casting up thereof,
resort unto my book of the art of measuring ground.

CHAP. LXXIIII. To take a plat at one station, from whence you you may see all
the angles in the field, by the old or new Circumferentor.
To take a plat at one station.
THis kind of working is performed with as much ease as the former. You shall
therefore repair into the field, and find some such place from whence you may
behold all the corners in the said field, where plant your instrument, and then
begin at some one angle, whereunto direct your sight, noting the degrees cut by
the South end of the needle: then direct your sight unto the second corner upon
the right hand, and there again note the degrees cut by the South end of the
needle, which note down, and so proceed rightwards from angle to angle noting
the degrees cut by the South end, You are taught this chapter with a
demonstration lib. 6. cap. 3. of the Geodeticall staff.
until you have gone round about the field, of which degrees cut you shall
make a little Table, to the end you may remember how many degrees were cut at
the first, second, third, etc. corner.

Next shall you cause one to mete with a chain the true distance of the first
corner from your staff, which note down against ye ye first degree cut in
your Table: then mete ye distance of the second corner from your instrument,
which note down in your Table against the number of degrees cut at the second
corner, and thus proceed until you have gone round about the field, laying
down the distance of every angle from your instrument against his proper
degree cut, which done, fall to protracting, thus:

Having prepared a fair sheet of paper, as you be taught before, about the
midst thereof make a point, which call your station: then apply the edge of
your instrument thereunto, moving him about until the South end of the needle
cut the degrees you noted at the first corner, which done, draw a line by ye
edge of the instrument, from the point made in the paper out at length, then
move him rightwards until the South end of the needle cut the degrees noted at
the second corner, and then by the edge of the instrument, draw another line,
as before, and so go forward until you have finished all the degrees cut by
the south end of your needle, noted in your Table: then with your compass take
from your scale ye distance of the first angle from your instrument, which lay
in the line first drawn from the point made in the paper toward the other end
of the line: then take the distance of the second corner from your instrument,
which apply to the second line drawn in the paper, and so proceed from line to
line according as you be taught in the third chapter of the Art of measuring
ground. The length of every line laid down in such order as is said, then must
you draw lines from point to point in each line; so shall you draw the limits
and proportion of the ground, according as in the foresaid third chapter of the
art of measuring ground by the Staff.

And by this means may you measure ground at two stations measuring but one
line in the whole plat, in such order as I set down in the fourth chapter of
the sixth book of the Geodetical Staff. And since, what is said before may
give sufficient light to perform both this way, and many other, I will omit
further speech, least I rather seem tedious to the wise, then facile to the
unlearned.

And you shall here note, that by taking perfect notes in the field, where one
closse boundeth upon another, you may take the plat of many flelds lying
together, and so save a great labor.

CHAP. LXXIIII. The degrees of a field being taken, to find whether the plat
will close, the lines being truly taken.
To know if your plat will close.
NOte down the quantity of every angle at each several station, as well as you
do the degrees cut, then add up all the quantities together, then multiply
60. by a number less by 2 then the number of the angles, and if your work be
right, the product thereof shall be equal to the total of the quantities.

Example.

Let the number of angles be 8. from which take 6. which is a less, then
multiply 60. by 6. and the product will be 360. which agr^^ing with the total
of all your quantities of angles added together, is one argument that the plat
will close.

CHAP. LXXV. To reduce Hipothenusall lines unto Horizontall, after another way,
then in the 6 book 8 Chapter of the Geodeticall Staff, only by the sights in
the old Circumferentor.
To reduce Hypothenusall lines to Horizontal lines.
PRepare a mark to be carried before you the just height of your line of leuel
from the ground when the iustrument is planted upon his rest, this mark must
be placed in the angle whereunto you look, he must stand perpendicular, and
when you take the degree look your instrument stand perpendicular, and then
move the vane upon the sight, until you see the top of the mark before
planted through the hole, in the vane and by the pins head, then in the
Hypothenusall divisions cut by the vane upon the sight, for they will show you
how much that line you shall measure, will differ upon the 100: from that line
you should measure, if the ground were leuel: therefore when you have measured
that line, proportion him according to the parts cut.

Example.

Suppose the parts of the Hipothenusall divisions cut, to be 4 and the line
measured to be 30 pearches, now you are to find a number to bear like
proportion to 30, as 100 bears to 104 which you shall find to be 28 1/5 1/1,
so that the line measured by the cheine to be 30 pearches, must be laid down
28 1/1 1/3 pearches in your protracting.

But for as much as these calculations be tedious in the field, your best way is
to note the Hipothenusall parts cut, and then reduce them when you come home.

CHAP. LXXVII. To perform the same by a Quadrant made of purpose.
A new Quadrant to proportion lines.
YOu shall prepare a Quadrant, and then divide the limb thereof in 30 equal
degrees, setting number thereupon as the common order is, then shall you divide
the lower side of the Quadrant ye is betwixt the first degree and the center,
into 30 equal parts, raising perpendicular lines upon each division, which
will be parallel unto the other side: this done prepare an Index of the length
of the semidiameter of the Quadrant with a center hole therein, this Index is
to be fastened to ye center of the Quadrant with a brass pin or such like,
which also must be divided into 30 such equal parts, as the semidiameter was:
the Quadrant thus prepared you shall fore shorten the lines thus:

First for the taking of your notes in the field, you must work as in the last
Chapter, only here you must note the degree of a circle cut by the vane in
steed of the Hypothenusall divisions, and then proceed thus:

Put the Index to the different angles in the limb, then number the line
measured upon the Index, and note the perpendicular there cut by the edge of
the Index, for that shall show you the length of the Horizontall line which
must be protracted.

Example.

Let the different angles from the Horizon be taken 18 degr. and the line
measured 20 perches, first count 18 degrees in the limb, then thereunto bring
the edge of the Index, next count the line measured viz. 20. pearches upon the
Index fromwards the center, so shall you there see the 19 perpendicular counted
from the center intersect, which shows that the line measured 20 perches,
must be protracted 19.

And if the length of the line measured exceed 30 pearches, and be less then
60, then take half the number upon the Index, and the perpendicular will
answer to half the length of the Horizontall line, but if the line exceed 60,
take then etc.and the perpendicular will answer proportionally.

CHAP. LXXVIII. To seek any altitude by this Quadrant.
To seek an altitude.
TAke the angle of altitude, whereunto bring the Index, the same being counted
in the lymb, then number the Horizontal distance in the semidiameter, and the
portion of the perpendicular to the Index shows the height.

CHAP. LXXIX. To take the declination of any wall, by the old or new
Circumferentor.
To get the declination of any wall.
BY the declination of any wall, is meant the bending or leaning of the surface
from the Meridian.

If a wall be not direct, he is then declining if the wall point just East,
West, North, or South, he is direct, otherwise declining.

All walls decline either South or North, ye quantity whereof is thus had:

Set the North end of the Instrument, unto the wall, now if ye needle cut 30,
60, 90, or 120, it is an East, a North, a West, or a South wall.

1 But if the needle cut betwixt 120 and 30, the wall is South East declining
to the East.

2 If the Needle cut betwixt 120 and 90, that wall is South West declining.

3 If the Needle cut betwixt 30 and 60, that wall is North, declining to the
East.

4 It betwixt 60 and 90, the wall is North, declining to the West.

1 If the wall decline South East, multiply the degr. cut by 3.

2 If West, take the degr. cut from 120 and the remainder multiply by 3, which
produces your desire.

3 If North East, take the degree cut from 60, and the remainder multiply by 3.

4 If North West take 60, from the degree cut and multiply by 3, so have you
your desire.

Com. Heref.
Manerium de Sale
In Superuis. manerij praed. ibid. fact. xiij. and xiiij. diebus Septembris
anno regni Dom. nost. Iacobi Dei gra^ Ang. Scotiae, Fra^. and Hibern. Reg.
fidei defensor. etc. viz. Angl. Franc. and Hibern. sexto, and Scotiae xlij. Per
B. G. gent. virtute commissionis dicti Domin. Reg. extra Scaccar. suu^ sibi
direct. continetur inter alia, vt sequitur. viz.

R. G. gent. tenet per copiam dat. xxviij. die Septembris, anno Regni Regis
nunc Angl. etc. Quinto, cert. terr. and tenement. Custumar. infra manner. praed.
nuper I.G. armig. ante A. Hos. gent. ante B.D. armig. patris sui. viz. Dom.
mansional.viij. spac. vnum horr. vij, vnam coquina^ iij. spac. vnum stabulum
ij. spac. vnum bouile v. spac. vnum columbar. vnum gardinum, tria pomar, vnde 2
voc. le North Orchard, and long Orchard cont. per estimac. iiij. acr Terr. ar.
iacen. in quodam claus. inter al. voc. the West enclosure, cont. per estimat.
l. acr. Parcel. vnius Claus. prat. voc. le Heald, per estimation. xx. acr.
Parcel. vnius claus. pastur. voc. le White field, cont. per estimat. xiij. ac.


Habend. sibi and suis secund. consuetud. Manner. per Redd. per Annum xij. s.
ij. d.

An. val. dimit. x. l.
In like manner must you deal with all the other tenements of the said Manor,
noting the quantity of every particular, then the rent paid, and at the lower
end a reasonable improouement.

And if there be any other commodities in the said Manor accrewing to the Lord
thereof, they may be noted as follows.

Manerium de Sale valet in Redd. vxx.l.xij. s. viz.
Nundinum tentum annuatim ibidem die Iouis proxim. post festum beatae Mariae
iij. l. Nundinum tentum annuatim die Veneris proxim. post festum. etc. l. s.
Markets. 3. l. x. s. Market. hebdomadatim ibidem tenent. dimiss. G. I. per
annum 4. l. Shamellorum and scal. tam. carnium quam piscium ibid. per annum 30.
s.
Milles. vij. l. Vnius molendini aquatici iiij. l. Vnius molendini ventricij
iij. l.
Fish-pooles. xlij. s. Vna piscaria vocat. le White poole xx. s. Piscar.
communis aquae ibidem vocat. le Black Moore xxij. s.
Pawnage. xxx. s. Pannagio porcorum tenent. ibidem quam aliorum infra communem
boscum, etc. x. s. Pannag. porcorum tenent. ibidem in parco vocat. etc. at. 3.
d. the piece per annum xx. s.
Swannes. Cignorum in aqua Domini vocat. le Broad Poole, etc.
Quarreyes. ix.l. Quarreum lapidum vocat. le Free stone, per annum iij. l.
Quarreum lapidum vocat. le Slate vj. l.
Perquisites of Courts. Amerciaments, etc. iij. l.



If there be any reprises wherewith the Manor is charged, as money for the
yearly repairing of some bridge, high way, or any other annual pension
whatsoever, let it be noted as the former: and in the conclusion say, Ei
remanet clare per annum vltra repris. 306. l. 14. s. 8. d.

And you must further note, that the first thing you have to deal with, is the
sight of the Manor house, the buildings and demesne, then the park,
parsonage, etc. if any be, and then proceed to the Tenements, as before.

woodcut,mathematical topographical figure

To make a plat or map, and place a Sea-Card therein.

Upon the midst of your plat describe a circle, as upon a which divide into
32 parts, and then about the map describe another circle, which will likewise be
divided into 30 parts, by drawing lines from the center a by each of the 32
equal parts in the first circle: now if upon every of those intersections as a
center you describe a circle dividing every of their circumferences into 32
equal parts, extending from them right lines through the body of the map, you
have finished the Sea-Card, and will beautify your map, and serve to express
many pretty conclusions, which at this time I mind not to repeat: provided
that you draw the lines there of in some color, as red, or such like, that
they may be readily distinguished from the lines of the map or plat.

You may distinguish all the winds in your Card otherwise, if you please by
placing a circle, containing the same in some void place in your plat, as you
may see in the 7 Chapter of the Topographicall Glass, and draw them forth
only to touch the circumference of the plat, as in the 6 Book, and Chapter 49
of Geodetia.

woodcut,radiated circular compass with Roman and Arabic numbering and
astrological signs

CHAP. LXXX. The order how to discover the true plat of any park, forest, or
such like, standing upon the top of some hill, not approaching unto the same.
THis Chapter is easily performed, if you do but call to mind how to seek the
true proportion of any field, Island, or such like, even as you be taught in
the Chapter: but indeed I hold this Chapter (for that it is to be performed
only by two stations) best to be wrought sinically, so shall you place and
situate the angles more truly then you can by the intersection of lines, for
because thereby you be taught to find out the true distance of every angle from
your station; in so much that if you do but observe the quantity of every
angle, and again protract the same truly, you cannot err any thing at all:
and for that it may be desired of many, I will not leave for their sakes to
prosecute the same with an Example.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

Let there be a certain park c d e f g, propose the proportion and quantity
whereof you are required to deliver at your standing a or b, which are certain
hills from whence you may well view all the angles and corners of the said
park. In performance whereof I first go unto b, making b a the one side of an
angle, I observe accordingly all the angles in the said park, as a b g, a b f,
a b c, a b c, and a b d, all which I note down thus:

Degrees A B G 74 A B F 77 Angles observed at the first station. A B E 104 A B
C 121 A B D 128

Next do I find me another station, a known distance from b, as a, 65.
pearches, and so repairing unto a, making a b the one fide of every angle, I
again observe all the angles in the said park at a, as b a c, b a d, b a e, b
ag, and b a f, and the quantity of every of which angles, I note down as
before, thus:

Degrees. B A C 40 B A D 44 Angles observed at the second station. B A E 65 B A G
84 2/4 B A F 87

Now, according to the doctrine of seeking dimensions at two stations with
these two Tables of degrees collected, you should go and protract, even as you
be taught, Lib. 6. cap. 5. of the Geodecicail Staff. But your see the angles
at d and f be so acute, that you shall hardly find the true interfection,
therefore having the quantity of every angle at b and a, as before, your best
way is to supputate the true distance of every angle in the park, from one of
your stations, as from a, and so protract as hereafter: for having the two
angles in any triangle, the third is easily found by adding the quantity of
those 2. angles together, and taking the total from 180. which is the quantity
of the three angles by the first chapter, Deffinition 31. lib. 7. of the
Geodetical Staff. And having the three angles, with the one side of any
woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description triangle, you may
easily find any of the other two fides remaining, by the said seventh book
called Trigonometria, and that diverse ways, but the easiest way for all oblike
triangles is in the said book, page 287. As for the purpose, after this easy
manner I would find the length of a e, first I add the angle h a c 40
degrees, and a b c 121. degrees together, so have I 161 degrees, which taken
from 180, there remains 18 degrees. These 3. angles, and the side a b known,
I say, as a b the radius is to b h the sign of the angle a b h (which by the
first chapter, Lib. 7. deffinition 26. of my Staff is) 59. degrees. So is a b
65. pearches to a h, therefore multiply 85716. the sign of a b h, by 65. so
have you 5571540. which parted by 100000. the quotient is 55 71540/100000
pearches, the side a h, then say, as a h the total sign is to a c the secant
of the angle h a c, so is the side a h to a c, therefore I take the angle a c h
from 90. viz. 18. from 90. so is the remainer 71, whose secant is 315154.
therefore multiply 315154 by 55 pearches, so have you 17486047. which parted by
the radius, the quotient is, 174 86042/100000 pearches, the l^ngth of the line
a c. In like manner get the line a d, a e, a f, and a g, or get the length
thereof, according to the second Axioma in Trigonometria, that is, by right
signs thus:

The angle a b d is 128. degrees, b a d 44. degrees, which added together, and
the total taken from 180. leaves 8. degrees, the angle b d a. Now I say by
the said second Axioma, as the sign of the angle a d b 13917* is to the sign
of the angle a b d 78801. so is the side a b to the side a d, or as the sign
of a d b is to the line a b, so is the sign a b d to the line a d.

Therefore multiply 78801. the sign of b, by 65. so is the product 5122065.
which part by 13917. the sign of the angle d, so is the quotient 368 609/13917
pearches, the line a d, which is one mile, one quarter of a mile, 8. pearches
and odd.

In like manner must you get the lines a e, a f, and a g, as you may perceive
by the ensuing example, where I have set down as well the quantity of each
angle, as also the respondent sign and side that do answer or subtend the
said angle.

Triangle. Quantity of each angle. Signs. The subtending sides. b e a 10 degrees.
17364 a b 65 pearches. A B E b a e 65 degrees. 90630 b e 65 pearches. a b e 104.
degrees 97029 a e 363 4353/17364 pearches. b g a 21 degrees. 35836 a b 65 pearches. A B
G b a g 84 degrees. 99496 b g 65 pearches. a b g 74 degrees. 96126 a g 174 12726/35836
pearches. a f b 15 degrees. 29723 a b 65. pearches. A B F b a f 87 degrees. 99904 b f
65. pearches. a b f 78 degrees. 97814 a f 239 1113/26723 pearches.

All these angles and sides thus gained, you shall lay down the plat, and
find the contents thus:

First I draw a line i k at all adventures, whereon by my scale, I appoint 65.
pearches, then making k i the one side of an angle, according to my
observations at my second station, I protract an angle k i l of 40 degrees,
equal to b a c in the last figure, then I protract an angle of 44 degrees, as
k i m, drawing i m infinitely, and so I proceed until I have finished all the
angles taken at my second station, as 65, 84 87 and thereby protract the angles
k i n, k i p, and k i o, still producing those sides infinitely.

And now, whereas you shall go unto k, and there likewise protract all the
angles observed at the first station, and so note woodcut, mathematical figure
corresponding to description the intersection of the lines, here we will
avoid that kind of uncertain working.

You shall therefore note the distance of a c in the first figure obtained
before, viz. 174 86047/100000 pearches, the which with your scale and compass,
lay down upon the line i l, from i toward l so have you the line i l, then
take the distance of a d in the first figure 368 609/13917 pearches, which lay
down as before from i toward m, so have you the line i m, in like manner
deal with i n, i p and i o, even as the precedent Table does instruct you, so
is i n 363 4753/17967 perches, i o 174 12726/35836 pearches, and i o 239
1113/26823 pearches, these lines so limited you must draw lines from l to m,
from m to n, from n to o, from o to p, and from p again to l, so have you made
a figure like and proportional to the Park proposed, as l m n o p.

Certainly most exact and perfect is this kind of working, and albeit it may
seem strange and difficult at the first, to young practitioners, especially
because the devise is new, as for that we have not heretofore any English
Treatise showing the use of right lined Tryangles, by these Signs, Secants,
and Tangents, yet let none be skarred at first, for do but join the use of my
7 book of the Staff called Trigonometria herewith, and then all things will
soon become easy and familiar.

CHAP. LXXXI. The plat of a Park being taken, as in the last Chapter, how to
cast up the contents thereof, after two manner of ways.
THe first way is to resolve the plat into regular figures, such as it is most
aptest for, and so find the bases, perpendiculars, sides, and diagonals, and
thereby get the superficial content, as in the second part of the 6 book of
the Geodeticall Staff, even as you see this figure, l m n o p resolved into
three tryangles l m n, l n o, and l o p, with their bases l o, and l n, and
their perpendiculars p q, o r and m r, made ready to be measured according unto
the same 2 part of the 6 book, chap. 25.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

As for the other kind of finding of the superficial capacity of this or any
such other kind of figure, you shall not need the use of the first book, in
performance whereof you must seek the tue length of the sides of the said
Park, as g c which is woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to
description 130 pearches, the which you be often taught before to perform, and
hereafter shall be again otherwise.

Then having protracted your plat in plano (or reduced the same into regular
figures, with your eye) divide that side whose length you found, into a
certain number of small and equal divisions, then having divided the plat
into such regular figures, as to you shall seem best, for the atteining of the
area, you shall measure the contents superficial by those equal divisions, I
mean the contents of every particular figure, adding them altogether and
noting the total, then must you take the number of pearches in the side of the
Park, formerly measured, and also the number of equal divisions in the side of
your plat, responding unto the said side of the Park measured, squaring both
those two numbers. For as the square of the small divisions upon the one side,
is to the square of the number of pearches, responding to the same side, so is
the superficial content in the former small divisions, unto the true
superficial content in pearches. Therefore increase the said superficial
content by the number of pearches squared, and divide the total by the square
number of small divisions, so is the quotient the number of square pearches
which divided by 160 etc. leaves the number of acres, etc. as in the Art of
Geodetia, chap. 24.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

The figure protracted in plano, is l m n o p, Now viewing into what regular
figures it may best be resolved, into which (as you may perceive by the pricked
lines) it is readily converted into three Tryangles, by two right lines issuing
from l to n and o, next I divide some one side as l p into 60 equal parts, and
so by that divided line, as by a scale I measure how many of those divisions is
in the base l o, and l m, so do I find the one to contain 88 and the other 92
of those parts, next upon those bases I let fall perpendiculars, which in like
manner I measure, as p q 25, o r 59, and m r 53, now do I multiply 25 in half
88, so have I 1100, then 59 in half 92, and there is made 2714, and lastly 53
in half 92, so is the product 2438 (or since l n was a diagonal, or a base
common to both the Tryangles, you might have multiplied o r and m r in l n and
all had been one) the which three aggregated sums add together, so have you
6252 produced, the whole content of l m n o p, by the which multiply 16900 (the
square of 130 perches the length of the hedge in the Park c g) and the product
is 105658000, the which parted by 3600 the square of 60, leaves the number of
perches viz. 29340 24/6 perches, the just content of the plat which you may
reduce into acres by the 24 Chap. of the Art of Geodetia, or if you please, you
need not to protract this figure at all, but measure all the diagonals and
perpendiculars by the 3 Axiom of Trigonometria, as if you would measure the
diagonall l n, here have you two sides known i l and i n comprehending an
angle known, therefore work by the said third. Axiom: the like might you do
to l m, m n or l o, etc. and then the area is easily found by the 20 Chapter of
Geodetia, without regard of perpendiculars. Having the 3 sides of every
tryangle, you may lay them down severally upon some smoth boords or such like,
and so by your scale and compass, after the common order, find the
perpendiculars, without regard to the quantity of the angles, for the 3 sides
being known, the true intersection lymits the right proportion.

CHAP. LXXXII. To take the plat of any field or such like by the intersection
of lines, with more truth then has been published heretofore by any.
I have told you often, that I did not much affect working at two stations, and
so to get the plat of any field by the intersection of lines, for that the
angle made at the section often times proves to be so acute, that you cannot
precisely discover where the true point of the section was made, wherefore I
have devised a way by help of three stations, (and yet measuring but one
line), truly for to find the right point of intersection, which is thus
performed.

Look how you be taught to seek any plat at two stations, and so do here,
then from your first station, beyond the second, or from the second beyond the
first, observe some mark, tree, or such like, inclining toward the proposed
field (which let make rather a right then obtuse angle with your stationary
line,) and so get the angles, it makes with both your stations, making the
stationary line ye one side of the said angles, then go to the mark newly
espied for a third station, and there observe some such corners that you
thought would fall out acute by the section of lines issuing from the two first
stations, and thereby get the angles, they make with your first or second
station, for by help thereof shall you correct the acute section of the former
lines, as you may best perceive by the example.

Example.

woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description

The proposed field is c d e f g h, which I observed at two statitions a and b
and so when I come to protract, note the intersection of matchy or like lines
as in such a case I am wont, but for that I perceive the section at g and h
falls out very acute, therefore (as is said) I espy a third station, I noting
the angle i b a and b a i, whereby is gotten the distance of i my second
station, then do I go unto i, and there again observe the angle b i f and b i
g and b i h, or any other angle that by the section of lines issuing from the
two first stations would prove acute, so shall the lines issuing from i and b
make a more perfect intersection, so that when you come to protract, you shall
find all the acute sections corrected, for whereas the lines a h, and b h made
an acute intersection at h, the section of i h and b h do correct and reform
the same, finding out the true point of intersection, and so of any other: and
in your observations in the field you may well know which angles in protracting
will prove acute, for if you add the gles g b a, and g a b, or h b a and b a h
together, the total taken from 180 leaves the angle g or h, of whose acuity
you may judge.

Thus by means of 3 or 4 stations, or more, if occasion be, may you find the
true plat of any proposed plain, by the intersection of lines, never measuring
but only one line in the whole work, certainly no proposition performed by
the intersection of lines is better then this, if your stations be respondently
taken and the observations truly made.

CHAP. LXXXIII. To seek the distance or length of any Turret, tree, town, or
such like, from you, without the help of Instruments.
THis conclusion, or the like unto it, is performed by Gem. Frisius, and indeed
is most exact and excellent, where you may have liberty of ground at command,
craving the help of no Instrument, but only some such a one that will direct
you readily to set out a right angle, which the Topographicall Glass or
Geodeticall Staff will soon perform; or for want of them, any ordinary
Carpenters square, or such like, may as well serve.

Go therefore unto some such place, whence you may see the proposed Tower,
where set up some Staff, whence depart a certain distance orthogonally or
Squire-wise, at the end of which distance set up a second staff: now repair
unto the first staff, whence go back or forward at pleasure, and there set up
a third staff in a right line (by the judgment of your eye) with your first
staff and the desired distance: now again from this third staff depart as
before, sidewise, in a right angle and right line, until the second staff and
your eye agree also in aright line with the desired longitude, where set up a
fourth staff: woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description these
4 staves so placed, get the distance betwixt the first staff and the second,
which call the first number, the like do betwixt the first and third staff,
which call the second number, and the distance betwixt the third and fourth
staff call the third number; then must you take the first number from the
third, and that which remains call your Divisor: lastly, increase the third
number by the second, making partition of the product by your Divisor; so does
the quotient acquaint you with the true longitude required.

Example.

A is a certain Turret, whose distance is required from b, where I plant my
first staff, departing thence a certain distance Orthogonally, as to c 163
yards, placing my second staff at c, d is my third staff placed backewards
from b 158 yardes in a right line with a b: e is the fourth staff placed
Orthogonally from d, and in a right line with a c, which is measured 200 yards,
so that you must depart squire-wise from d toward e, until you be in a right
line with c a, as is said: these staves so set, and their distances measured,
deduct b c 163 the first number, from de 200, the third number, so have you 37
your Divisor, then multiply the third number 200 by 158 the second number, and
there is produced 31600, which parted by your dividend 37 leaves 854 2/37
yards, the distance betwixt d and a, whence take d b 158, so have you the
distance of a b 696 2/37 yards, making ^96 yards and a little better then 2
inches.

CHAP. LXXXIIII. How to find the length of any Hypothenusall line, or the
length of any scaling ladder.
THis Chapter is so easy, and so well illustrated by Euclide in his first
Book, Chap. 47 of his Elements, that it needs no Example; for there the
square of the two containing sides are proved equal unto the square of the
Hypothenusall, in so much that the two including sides being added together,
the square root thereof produces the Hypothenusall, as is proved by the
prealeaged Chap of Euclide, and else where, saying. In triangulo plano
rectangulo latera includentia rectum aequa possunt Hypotenusae, penult. primi
Euclid.

Therefore when you are desired to deliver the distance of the top of any
tower, castle, or such like, from your foot to the end, you may find what
length a Scaling ladder to reach the same should be; you most first get the
distance of the turret from you, and also ye altitude, both which distances
square, adding the products together, the square root whereof is the length of
the Scaling ladder.

After this order when you come near to any town of war may you tell the
just length of the Scaling ladder that must reach from the brim of the
counterface or ditch that incloseth the same, to the top of the curtain or
wall, by adding the square of the distance of the wall unto the square of the
curtains altitude above your feet, for the square root thereof (as before)
yields you the longitude of your Scaling ladder.

Example.

Let the distance of the base of the wall i g be 23. paces, whose square is
529. the altitude of the wall above your feet g h be 10. paces, the square
whereof is 100. which added to 529. makes 629. the square root whereof is 25
4/60 pearches and better, the woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to
description length of the scaling ladder i h, or you may work as in my seventh
book of the Geodetical Staff, called Altimetria, problem 5. or
Trygonometria, Axioma 1.

CHAP. LXXXV. To find the distance betwixt any two Towers, Castles, or such
like, though you can approach to neither, and that without the help of
Instrument.
THis Chapter is very exact, so the observations be well made; and indeed is
but wrested from the 41. chapter of my 6. book of the Geodetical Staff,
howbeit it is set down much after the same method I shall deliver now, by
Master Digges our countriman, and others.

In performance whereof you must have any kind of triangle prepared: which
had, set up a staff, whereunto apply your angle in such sort that the one of
the containing sides point directly unto the mark or Castle upon the left
hand: the triangle so resting, look by the containing side upon the right
hand, causing one to set up a second and third staff in a right line
therewith, and the further ye second staff is distant from the first, the
better it is: the triangle yet remaining, as before, at your first staff, make
a mark in the side subtending the angle at your staff, in such sort that it
may be in a right line with the said angle, and the second mark upon your
right hand; so have you performed all your observations at your first staff,
only as you come thence measure ye distance from your first staff to the
third staff.

Next repair unto your second staff, where situate your triangle, in all
respects as he was before at the first staff: then must you depart toward the
desired distance in a right line, until such time that you come direct between
the Tower or mark that was upon your left hand and your third staff, and
there set up your fourth staff.

Next go unto your second staff, where your triangle yet remains, and looking
from the angle at your staff by the mark made before, in the side subtending
the said angle, your eye will direct you in a right line, which you must
continue on, until you be also in a right line with the second and third
staff, and there set up your first staff. This so ordered, measure the
distance betwixt the second and third staff, the quantity of which measure
reserve for your divisor.

Lastly increase the distance between your first and third staff in the
distance betwixt the fourth and fifth staff, the product whereof part by your
reserved divisor, so does the quotient yield you the desired distance, as
Geometrically might be proved.

For as the distance of the second and third staff is to the fourth and fifth
staff, so is the distance of the first and third staff unto the distance
required. Or as the distance of the second and third staff is to the first and
third, so is the distance of the fourth and fifth to the latitude, or proposed
distance.

Example.

Ab, is a distance required, k a triangle prepared, e my first staff where my
triangle is placed, the one of the containing sides pointing to the castle a
upon my left hand, c e the way directed by the other containing side of the
triangle, d my second, and e my third staff, placed in a right line with c, by
the direction of the said containing side, h is a mark in the subtendiding
side, found out by the visuall line running from c to b the mark upon my right
hand: this done, I measure the distance from c to e, which I here found 300.
pearches, and so take up my triangle, situating him at d my second staff in
all respects as he was at c my first staff, the respondent containing side
lying in a right line with the first, second, and third staff: so I standing
at d, and looking thence by the other containing side, the visuall line will
inform you what direct course to take toward the distance until you come in
a right line betwixt a and your third staff e, where set up your fourth staff
f. Again, looking from d by h, the subtle mark made in the subtended side,
the visull line will direct you what course to hold until you come in a right
line betwixt the 3. staff e, and the other mark b: this done, measure the
distance d e, which there is 100. keep that for your divisor.

Next measure the distance betwixt g and f, which is 170. pearches. Finally,
according unto the prescript, multiply the c e 300. by f g 170. so have you
51000. which parted by d e, 100, leaves 510. perch, the distance a b.

Here note for your more ease, it were best (if so conveniently you may) to
make the distance d e 100. (as here it is) or 1000. paces, or pearches, etc.
and no other number, so may you avoid division, woodcut, mathematical figure
corresponding to description as you may perceive in the 7. book of my Staff,
called Trigonometria, in the end of the 7. Problem. And this Chapter may be
wrought by the Geodeticall Staff most exact without any triangle, for that he
gets you the angles a c b, and b c e at your station c, and delivers them
again at d, as f d g, equal to a c b, and g d e equal to b g e.

CHAP. LXXXVI. To seek the distance of any thing from you, howsoever situate,
and that after a new way, newly devised without the help of Instrument.
I Do not remember any Proposition performed without Instrument more easy,
speedy, and true to seek the distance of any thing from you then this is, the
82. chapter is as true in demonstration, but not so easy and speedy in
working: for here you be not tied to right angles, and such like, but only
are allowed to make the observation according to the aptness of the ground,
neither need you to fear whether you be situate upon hills or in valleys,
more then if you were on the plain ground.

In performance whereof you shall make a triangle of what sides and angles you
please, the which triangle you shall situate at the place whence the distance
is desired, in such sort that one of the sides containing the angle that is
toward you may look direct unto the mark whose distance is sought: the
triangle remaining, look by the other containing side, causing one to set up a
second and third staff in a right line with the said containing sides, where
sticking a staff, carry your triangle unto the staff nearest your first
station, where you set your first staff, and there situate the said triangle
in all respects as at the said first station he was, so will the one
containing side lie in a right line with your first staff, and also with your
second and third staff: then placing your eye at the contained angle, the
other containing side will direct you what course to hold until you come in a
right line directly betwixt the desired distance and your third staff, and
there set up your fourth staff. Now must you measure the distance betwixt your
first and third staff, then betwixt your second and third staff, which
reserve for a divisor, then betwixt your second and fourth staff. Finally,
multiply the distance of the first and third staff, in the distance of the
second and fourth staff, which parted by the distance betwixt the second and
third staff, the quotient is your desire.

It would be something long for me to stand to demonstrate the same
Geometrically, for that I want time, but because the work is new, I will
acquaint you with the proposition whence it was gathered.

Triangular aequiangula habent latera circa aequales angulos proportionalia,
and contra, Eucl. 4. p. 6.

Or you may prove it by Ramus. lib. 7. page 9. so that it is needless to
infer a demonstration.

Therefore as b c is to a b, so is c d to e a, or as c d is to a e, so is b d
to b e.

Example.

Suppose e were a ship lying at rode in the sea, and I standing upon a high
rock at a, were required to deliver the distance thereof, f is my triangle,
which being situate at a the one containing side directing unto e, and looking
by the other containing side in the right visual line, I cause two staves to be
set up, as a second and third staff at c and b, then leaving my first staff
at a, I take the triangle, situating him at c my second staff, in all respects
as woodcut, mathematical figure corresponding to description at a, so will the
one containing side lie in a direct line with a b my first and third staff:
then looking by the edge of the other containing side, the visuall line directs
me what course to hold toward the ship until such time that I come just
betwixt e (the wall of the hill next the sea where I formerly took my aim)
and b my third staff: this done, I measure the distance betwixt my first and
third staff, finding 47. yards, then betwixt c and b, 10. yards, which is my
divisor. Next I measure the distance betwixt c and d my second and third
staff, which is 36 yards. Now multiplying 47. by 36. I have 1592. which parted
by 10. leaves 152 2/10 yards, the distance of the said ship.

And as in this chapter, so likewise in most other like conclusions may you so
order your observations that you may avoid division, according as in the end
of the 84. Chapter.

If you desire the distance b e, multiply the distance of a e, by the distance
of your third and fourth staff, parting the product by the second and fourth
staff, as by the distance of c d, so does the quotient yield the distance b e.

And for that your Geodeticall Staff will take or deliver any angle, or
represent any tryangle, he may aptly perform this Chapter according unto this
kind of method.

CHAP. LXXXVII. A Navy, or one Ship seen upon the seas, to know if they make
toward you or not.
BY the last chapter or some other get the true distance of the Ship from you,
now rest for a certain space, and then observe diligently the distance thereof
from you again, now if the first distance and this agree the Ship stands
still, if the first observed distance be greater, the Ship makes toward you,
but if it be the lesser, he departs from you.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Two Ships seen one in pursuit of the other, to know whether
the Ship pursued, loose way, and how long it will be before he be overtaken.
BY the 84 chapter get the distance betwixt the two Ships, then stay half an
hour or a quarter, observing then again the true distance, if the two
distances agree the pursued Ship loses nothing, but if the first distance
exceed take the lesser distance out of the greater, multiplying the space of
time betwixt your observations in the distance betwixt the two ships, the
product whereof divide by the difference of the distances, so is the quotient
your desire.

Example.

Let us suppose we saw two Ships, the one in chase with the other, and we were
required to know whether the Ship in pursuit did win any thing of the Ship
pursued, and if he did, when the Ship chased should be overtaken, first
therefore I take their distance, which I will suppose 400 yards, so resting a
quarter of an hour (which is 15 minutes) I observe their distance again which
I find 300 yards, lastly I subtract 300 from 400, the remainder is 100,
therefore I multiply 400 by 15, the product is 6000 which parted by 100 leaves
60 minutes, the time how long it will be before the Ship pursued shall
beouertaken by the Ship pursuing, which is one hour.

In the like manner may you deal with Ships or Nauies approaching toward any
port, haven or such like.

CHAP. LXXXIX. How to take the platform of any house, Castle or such like.
YOu are sufficiently instructed both in this book, as also in the Geodeticall
Staff to seek the true perimeter of any figure proposed, where you be also
taught to seek the breadth, height and distance of any object howsoever
situate, insomuch that nothing remains (those rules well understood) but to
seek the true ground plat of the buildings, for the which you have diverse
peculiar Chapters, which had you may find the distances of Fronts, Turrets,
gabel ends, returns, or such like, the breadth of windows, quadrants, and
such like the heights of Iutteis, Storreys, and Ascents, lengths in heigths
with such like: and thus may you proceed, taking as well the ground plat as
other erearements with their proportional distance, noting the same to your
self in some book, whereby you may stand in any place far off and take the
plat of any house, castle, forte, or city, the situation whereof (to your
great praise) you may discover, or if you please cause the like to be made.

woodcut, castle with stick figure people

Certainly most excellent is this book for martial discipline touching
fortification, as in the delineation of royal frontiers, skonces and
reinforcing old walled towns, and right necessary for battles, masters of
Ordinance, etc.

CHAP. XC. The order to discover how mines or trenches run under the earth
being most fit for pyoners, masters of Coal, Iron, Stone mines, etc.
THis Chapter is performed in best and easiest sort with any such Instrument
that has alarge Needle, wherefore the Topographicall Glass or Circumferentor
is best, in performance whereof you shall do as follows.

Suppose there were a mine of coal in the borders of a certain Manor. which
continuing, the Lord of the next Manor was in doubt least the vein of coal
did run toward his adjoining Manor, and that they were common under his
ground whereby the coals were his. To resolve this doubt descend into the pit,
and then by the 72 chapter, get the true way that the myners have made even as
it were a hedge, still noting the degree cut by the Needle, at every angle
where the mine runs one way or another, out of the course of a right line,
and also measuring the side of every angle then ascending out of the pit, by
your Instrument and cheine (beginning perpendicular above the place where you
began to make observations in the bottom of the pit) lay down the like angles
and sides so observed: which having so done, you shall soon see if the mine or
any part thereof have run out of the one Manor into the other, for if it do,
you shall be forced to measure out of ye one into the other.

And as you note these angles of deuiation being in the dark bowels of the
earth, you were best to have a candle fixed upon the end of a staff, of equal
hieght with your eye, and the same to be fixed in the foot of the mine at
every angle, that thereby you may the better direct your sight thereunto.

CHAP. XCI. To plant barrels of powder, direct under Castles, Forts or such
like, and to know how far you be under the same.
IN performing this Chapter by some Proposition formerly published, you must
get the Horizontall and Hypothenusall distance of the Forte from you, and
thereby the height thereof above the Horizontal line, which done, you are also
by help of your Needle placed in ye glass to find out the angle of position,
which is the number of degrees from any principal quarter of the world that
the journey lies, which done you must by the same Instrument ever direct the
mine, direct upon that line or part of the world, and keeping your Instrument
parallel, the sight upon the diameter of the demicircle, thereby always carry
the floor of your mine level with a candle fixed upon the end of a staff of
equal height with your eye (as before) will help you to do: Now when you have
gone so far under the ground as you found the length of the Horizontall line
to contain, you may assure your self that you be direct under the Forte, and
that you are so many pases under or below the said Forte, as you found the
Forte to be about the Horizontall line.

CHAP. XCII A Mine running upon some certain point, yet ascending or
descending, to know at any time how much you are above or under the Horizotall
line.
COncerning your journey under the earth, you must observe the doctrine of the
last Chapter, and when the mine happens to fall or rise, according to the
doctrine of Altitudes and profundities, duly note at every several station
the quantity of the ascent and descent, that is, how much you rise above or fall
under the true Horizontall line, and so keep two several tables, the one of
the ascents and the other of the descents. Now when you desire to know how you
are situate, add all the ascents together, and note the product: do so to the
descents, then must you take the lesser out of the greater, so does the
remainder acquaint you how you then differ from the Horizontall line, for if
the ascents exceed, you may be assured that you be above the Horizontall line,
if the descents exceed, you be under the said Horizontal line, according to ye
difference of ye said ascents and descents, neither need you fear any
collateral declining of ye way of your mine, for that nothing at al alters
the ascent or descent, for that is only altered by the directing line, or line
that you measure, insomuch that if you well observe the premises, you may
precisely know at any time or place how much you are under or above the true
Horizontal line, and thereby come into him again upon any occasion.

CHAP. XCIII. A Mine or trench collaterally declyning, how to know when you
come again into the right line of position, and also how far you be from
being just under any Forte proposed.
TO carry a mine direct forward upon any point of the Horizon, you be
sufficiently taught in the 90 Chapter, and if the Mine must ascend or descend
above or below the line of leuel, you be taught in the last Chapter at all
times to know how much you be above or under the said line of level. But say
you were enforced by rocks, waters, or other such obstacles that you meet
with under the earth, contrary to the 90 Chapter, to carry your Mine side wise
from the direct line of position, in such a case you are first upon a fair
large sheet of paper to extend a right live over the same, which call the line
of position, being the direct way yt the Mine should go, next note the angle
of deuiation from that line, that is to say how many degrees the Mine does
decline from the true line of position that leads on directly, and
accordingly plat it down upon the paper, as you be often instructed in the use
of each several Instrument, proceeding so far as your Mine continues in a right
line, and if you be occasioned again to direct either further of, or nearer
unto the line of position, always protract if down upon your paper exactly;
as well in measure as angle, until such time that you can come to make your
protracted collateral lines, or lines of deuiation to intersect with the right
line of position, first extended over the paper, and then by the scale with
which you protracted your lines of deuiation, examine how many pases or yards
that point of intersection is distant from the point where your work began,
which represents the point of your first entery into the Mine, for that
compared with the fundamental distance or length of the Horizontall line
informs you if you be past, or not yet come under the proposed Forte.

Therefore in these cases you were best first of all to limit upon your paper
with your scale and compass the direct length of ye fundamental or Horizontal
line, and so in your protracting may you call them back, if they seem to run
beyond the Forte.

Then in the former Chapters be you taught to know how far under the Forte you
be, whereby you may ascend nearer or descend further from the superficies of
the earth as the cause shall require. Certainly most exact and excellent is
this kind of working, for conueying of mines, and of no small importance, for
the due placing of Fornaces of powder, to blow up Forts, Castles, Towns or
such like, whether they be situate high hpon an hill, or low in a valey, which
for all purposes in these and such like cases under ground, you shall find the
Topographicall Glass to be most requisite.

CHAP. XCIIII. Of the building of a City, and of the situation thereof.
IN our discourse of Topography, the building and situation of Cities, houses
and such like, is right necessary to be remembered: but for Cities of defense
they require a long discourse for their situation, as well in respect of their
walls, etc. to defend, as of Turrets, Mounts, etc. to plant ordinauce in and
upon to offend; only therefore touching health, let your city be planted by
a fair and portable river, far from marshes and fenny places, for the
vapors rising thence be unwholesome, and in as barren and fruitless a place
(yet dry and firm) as you may, for in short time the compost and scauengers
dirt will soon make the conterminating soil batfull and fertile, as may be
seen by London, which of it self, according to the nature of the soil,
stands but in a dry and barren place, though it be forced rank by the
abundance of compost. Sandy ground is right necessary for ye plantation of a
city, and for the plat ground hereof, let it not be altogether very level
and plain, but have pleasant ascents, and rising banks, which will cause the
city to be more pleasant to the eye, healthful to the body, and fitter for
warlike defense, as it may be seen by old Rome. (which now lies ruinate)
there were seven such hills, in the head of the city stood mount Saturnall,
toward the midst of the city were two other mounts, called Palatine and
Quirinal, upon the left hand of the city was the mount Esquiline, upon the
right hand Caelian, and toward the end of the city were two other mounts
called Viminall and Auentine, all which mounts much beautified the city, and
thereon were many sports acted, where also was (and would be in other cities)
fit places to erect pyramides, or other such city ornaments.

Touching the streets there should be four maine streets lying into the 4.
Cardinals of the world, that is, one running North and South, the other East and
West, crossing each other, about which crossing should the Forum, or common
market place stand. So was the city Alexandria builded, and these streets
would be spacious and broad, so shall the mind blowing from any quarter come
in and pass through the whole body of the said city, and thereby purge the
same of all corrupt and ill vapors, and such like, that commonly occupy
cities. For the cities be ^^^y unwholesome, and apt to breed infections, where
the streets be close, shutting out the open and pure air, which sure is an
imperfection much to be lamented in London, and would heedfully be regarded in
ye new plantation in Ireland. And as you have divided the city unto 4.
quarters, so may you appoint other collateral streets which will also receive
the collateral winds, whereby any air stirring, the City shall have
benefit thereof. Certainly most excellent, right pleasant and necessary would
it be to see a City thus builded: for our cities at first commonly were
villages, or such like, and so increased and augmented, as the people
multiplied, whereby there be a confused number of houses ranged and thrust
together without form or regular fashion, and now not to be reformed unless
it were all built anew,

CHAP. XCV. Of the situation and building of a Manor house in the country.
HE that will build himself a house in the country, should have a special
regard that it the pleasant, delightful, and necessary in all respects,
because he commonly spends a third part of his life therein: yet this
Prouiso would be had, that he proportion his house according to the quantity
of the ground that he has to lay thereunto, insomuch that there would be such
a proportion betwixt the house and the ground, or the ground and the house,
that a wise man building, and a wise man also viewing the edifices, might judge
of the quantity of his land, or viewing the land, might conjecture of the
proportion of the house: for a fair house without land (such city follies
that are often built out of London) are neither commendable nor necessary, and
therefore they have begot themselves a nickname, or by-name, as Mocke-begger.
And in this point (as Pliny reports in his 6. Chapter, book 18. of his
natural Histories, there were two men living at one time, who much halted
herein, to wit, Lord Lucullus and Q. Scaeuola, for Scaeuola had fair lands,
without a competent house and Lucullus had a competent house without lands, in
which regard he was checked by ye Censors (as many Londoners may) for sweeping
more flowers then he plowed lands.

Touching the situation of your house, the best opinion now is, upon a hill, or
hill side, having before the same a plain Champion country, for such grounds
be dry and wholesome, if the air be good: for men thereby are made of a lively
spirit. Pliny would not have a house situate near unto a fenny and dormant
water, or over against the course or stream of a running water. Homer says,
the air and mists rising from great rivers before the the Sun rise, are
unwholesome: howbeit you shall find it pleasant and necessary, to have a clear
river fluant and running at a reasonable distance from your house: for besides
the pleasure, you shall find it necessary for vaults, and such like, that
carry filth from your house to empt themselves into. In any case situate your
house distant from marshes, fennes, plashy and foggy grounds, which are utter
enemies to health. And in the politic situation of an house diverse wise and
honest men have much labored to be sarre from wrangling and turbulent
neighbors, which they hold as great an inconvenience as want of wholesome air,
and for that part of the heaven that the face and open side of your house
should behold, you must have regard unto the nature of the country, and quality
of the wind issuing from that part of the heavens. Pliny would have you
sittuate your house in a hot country, into ye North and in a cold country to
affront the South, but in temperate regions to lie open into the East. With us
in England the principal coast for a house to lie open into, is Eastwards, as
well for health, as in Summer for the avoiding of the extremity of heat of the
midday, and afternoons Sun, which indeed is troublesome and uncomfortable,
according unto Aristotle 2. Meteor, cap. 6. and also according unto Magirus, l.
6. c. 9 d. 13. The east wind with his collaterals is moderately warm and dry,
and the holsomest of all, much exhilarating the mind, and making the body apt
for any action, whereas the South wind does diminish the strength of the body
and mind, filling the head with rheumes, cathars and such like, destroying the
stomach, and by the frequent blowing thereof it does not only putrify the
bodies of living creatures, but also it corrupts and putrifieth the fruits,
whereby also quotidian fevers, pestilences, and other contagious sickness rise.

Now in building a house much art is required Pliny reports builded a house
in Cape Misenum, as he had fortified a Camp that C. Martius (who had been
seven times Consul of Rome) right skilfully, that when Sylla, surnamed Foelix,
saw it, said, that the rest in comparison of him were blind beetles, knowing
neither how to build, or incampe.

When therefore you mind to build a house, with your Scale and compass lay
down the ground plat according unto your proportion, ordering your sellerage,
larder, and all houses of office in as necessary form as to you shall seem
most convenient, appointing places for great stairs, private stairs, houses
of office, chimnies, etc. that shall be most requisite for use, and least
annoying, or defacing the house, or any of ye principal lights chambers, or
rooms: then according to your ground plat, draw the forefront, or face side,
backe-side, ends, and gabell ends* with all returns, iutteyes, soil pieces,
windows, etc. even as you determine to have it made, but draw it not as
commonly these Painters do proportions of houses by the eye, but lay it down
by your Scale and compass, that by the application thereof at any time you may
know how many foot or inches any return, any gable end, any story, or window
is in length or breadth, which you shall be taught to do happily in some other
place: thus upon several papers set out every several part of your house,
whereby your self, or the architector may inform the mechanical Carpenter of
the length of every several piece of timber, and all things else required
about the house, as the number of boords for flooring and dooring, the quantity
of glass and tile, with the quantity of seeling, rough casting, pauing, and
other such like; whereby you may give order to the Glasier for the breadth and
length of your glass, to the Tiler for tile, to the Plaisterer for lime, to
the Sawyer for boords, proceeding, no one thing staying for the finishing of
another, thereby proportion your house according to your purse.

Now for the addition of more delight unto your house, upon the South side
thereof set out a fair square garden, beautified with bowers, walks and such
like, as your gardener can best devise; adjoining unto which, let there be a
fine orchard planted with trees: but if your clymate be hot, as Spain, etc.
plant your garden in the North; but for England the South is best, unless for
some trees that naturally desire the shade: let there be no oxestall, dormant
and filthy water, stable, or other thing that may breed noisome smelles near
unto your ga^den, make the alleys dry, for which I could teach you diverse
devises which here is no place for, and plant the trees in your orchard after a
Chequer form, that standing at any tree, all the rest be in right line with
you, which form is called a Quinqunx: within your house make your stairs
large, not with these monnell posts, but with four steps and a half pace, a
fair light answering to every half pace. Let the chambers be of a convenient
height over head, and sufficient light, albeit the chamber you lodge in would
not be over light, not yet a ground chamber, inclining rather to cold then
heat; for by means of heat in sleep we may procure a swoune, because the
heat of the body being become internal, and cold external, this enclosing
heat and that cold will strive: let the place therefore be temperate, and free
from noise, for sleep is a a cessation of the common senses, which being
occupied and troubled with noise hinders sleep: moreover keep the beams of
the moon from your bed, for it is hurtful to the sight to have the moon
shine upon your eyes sleeping.

Touching the plats and forms of houses, some affect the quadrant building,
with a square court enclosed in the midst, like to the Colleges, or as the
Royal Exchange, which indeed in respect of the columns and arches making the
under walks, is more stately: again, some affect the Roman H. some other
forms; but that must be partly referred unto the pleasure of him that
bestows the cost; and for my part, I intend not at this time to lay forth the
diversity of plats, and how they should be taken or laid down by scale and
compass, for that happily I shall open the same in another piece of work more
proper.

CHAP. XCVI. Of the sinking of a Well, and of the conueying of water in pipes.
IF you desire to find a place where digging a pit you may also find water fit
to maintain a well or pumpe, you must (ss Iean Liebault writes) early in the
morning, your face into the East, look close by the ground, if then you espy
any vapor like to a little cloud rise out of the ground, there if you dig is
water to be found, or if such vapo^rs rise in a dry and fair season, also if
you dig trenches four or five foot deep throwing therein wool, that is
clean and dry, covering the same with leaves, herbs, or such like, if then
this wool having lain for a certain space still remain dry, there is no water
thereabouts to be found, but if it be little wet, or greatly wet, there is
little or great store of water to be found, according as the wool was in
wetnesse.

Also water is to be found under these ensuing herbs) Yarrow or Nose bleed,
Veruaine, wild peniroyall, Venus hair, Cammomill, Dogs tooth, foxtaile,
trifoly, Cinkefoile, Millefoile, Coliander, or as some say where abundance of
green Fern does plentifully grow, or as L. says where any other green
herbs naturally flourish and abound without setting. Your springs thus found,
they of longest continuance be which are in a gray or red grauelly rock, or
ground, in a blackish, sandy, clayie or red stony ground, especially being
mixed with stones and gravel.

Now for the pipes for the conueyance of water, lead is good, earth is better,
but wood of fir, Alder, or pine, or such other wood that has rosen in it is
best: such they use now in conueying of waters to houses from the new water mil
in Westminster, they must be bored through with long agores, first with a less
one, the^ with a bigger: any boughs or knotty pieces will serve, so they be
large, and when the poles so bored, have not ground to lie straight upon, but
lie uneven rising and falling, there be crooked pieces of wood like elbowes
provided of purpose, which are also bored through, being let a foot at either
end into the other two poles it joins together, and so are all the poles that
be joined one to another made to go into the end of one another a foot or
more, in manner as they piece bag-pipes, or such like, the hole in the end of
the one pole receiving the hollow end of the other pole into the same, being
always for a foot deep wider then the rest of the bore, which you must join
together with good cement, as you be taught before to do.

CHAP. XCVII. A brief discourse how to draw the platform of any kind of
building, or any other thing seen, though you cannot approach unto the same,
and that according to true proportion, according as it appears or offers it
self to the sight.
IF you desire to project the due form of any object upon a plain superficies
according as it shall offer it self to ye eye at any appointed place and
distance, as to describe any town, or city, any house, any flower, or any
other body whatsoever, you must do thus.

Take a fair piece of smooth glass, and fix the same upon a perpendicular at
the end of a ruler, the which ruler let be divided into a number of equal
parts, next upon this ruler must be another short perpendicular agreeing to the
height of the midst of the Glass, and in the upper part of this short
perpendicular must be a small and round sight hole, which done let ye
perpendicular be made to move equally fromwards or toward the Glass, or to
stand fixed at any division upon the ruler as occasion shall be offered: this
so ordered, when you desire the plat of any object as house or such like, plant
the glass opposite to the proportion required, the ruler lying parallel, then
move the shorter perpendicular near to or far from the Glass, even as you
desire the proiectment to be great or less: this done place your eye in the
small sight hole noting well through the same how every particular object does
appear upon the Glass, your eye so resting, with your pencel or dyamond, draw
upon ye said Glass whatsoever you shall apprehend (or at the least whatsoever
shall be required in your proiectment, and the work is finished.

Now if you desire to make a scale for this proiectment, note the equal parts
betwixt both the perpendiculars, which call your first number, then let the
distance from your eye to the object be your second number, lastly draw a
perpendicular upon the Glass from the summity of the object to the center of
the Glass, or rather to that part of the Glass that is of the same height
from your ruler as the sight hole is where you place your eye, and this shall
be your third number, which number is found by applying he length of that line
to the equal parts upon your ruler, these 3 numbers had, multiply the second
and third and divide by the first, so is the quotient the number of feet or
inches, that the said perpendicular contains according as the distance of the
object was expressed in feet or inches, of which make a scale and measure all
the rest.

And you must note in all proiectments prospectiuely that you can lay no more
down but what you see, as in a 4 square house. you cannot possibly set down
more then any of the two sides and so much of the roof as you see and so of
cities etc. and therefore you may lay down so much of any city as your eye can
apprehend, from any place where you plant your Glass.

CHAP. XCVIII. The making of a most excellent Ruler whereby you may speedily
reduce any plat proportionally, from a lesser to a greater, or from a greater
to a lesser form, newly devised.
YOu must first prepare a ruler of brass or metal of such a length that may
answer the Semidiameter of your plat (but make him long and he will be
general) upon this ruler there is a socket of brass 4 square and hollow made
to move equally along the ruler, and the length of the said ruler, but the
lower side of the said socket is clean taken away, so that he has but
three-sides, and therefore he ought to be the stronger, and let the ruler be
the lesser, for it is not material how small he be: in the end of a ruler
there is a small center hole, and in the end of the socket that shall be
toward the perimeter of your plat is a place made to hold a small pencell,
this socket you must divide into certain equal parts as 100, a 1000 or more
numbering the same with figures as the order is: upon this socket there is
another moveable piece of brass which must hold a second pencell and that at
any division required, he must have a screw pin to keep him steddyat that
place he shall be appointed to stand, this done, your ruler is ready to work
as thus:

Fasten your plat that you intend shall be reduced, upon some plain table
board, and about the midst of the said plat drive in a pin equal to fill the
hole in your ruler, whereupon place the said hole, but let not the pin come
above the ruler, next put your long socket upon this ruler, and let the end
where the equal divisions do begin stand at the hole in the ruler, the which
resting move the ruler and socket to any one of the next angles in the plat,
noting how many of the equal parts cut the said angle, which let be 20, then
say I would, have the plat one fourth part less, 4 in 20 is five times,
therefore I place the second pencell 5 equal parts from the other in the end
of the socket, where I fasten him immovable with the screw pin, which done and
the pencels being both of one length, do no more but draw the pencel in ye end
of ye said-long socket round about ye true perimeter of the plat, so will the
second pensell describe you a figure lesser and proportional to the proposed
figure.

And if you please, you may cover the figure to be reduced with white paper or
such like, and so draw the figure that is so reduced thereupon.

And if you would reduce the plat from a lesser to a greater then the pencel
next the center must always keep the perimeter of the plat, and the other
pencell shall describe a greater figure proportional to the lesser, according
to the quantity assigned.

And in the reducing of mappes by this means may you give pricks for the
situation of all towns, villages, etc. in the said map, and thereby place them
in your reduced map in their true place, for when your pencels be once placed
at their true proportion you must never alter them until you have finished.
Out of doubt this is a most exact and excellent kind of ruler, and most easy
for every simple man to work withal, and if the hollownesse in the socket be
made like the channel in one of the legs of the Geodeticall Staff, and the
ruler answerable thereunto, the socket will never come of the ruler: which is
better, and the pin that goes through the hole in the end of the ruler were
best to be but short and have a he ad thereon, and a hole made in ye end of the
said ruler, to bury the pins said head in: when he is once knocked down to the
end the socket may run over the same so will this pins head keep the ruler
from starting off the same. Let this brief description at this time suffice,
which if I have said sufficient to satisfy your understanding. I doubt not but
you will soon acknowledge the excellency thereof.

CHAP. XCIX. To burn any thing a far of with the Sun beams.
BY such a conclusion as this we read that Archimedes fiered the Roman navy
at Syracusa in the Island of Sicilia, which to do, you must take a number of
steel glasses, made of purpose, and well polished: and then the Sun shining,
place them in such sort that they may al reflect, or cast back the beams of
the Sun upon the combustible matter, or subject that is to be fiered: and the
nearer together that ye reflections fall upon, and in one point, the sooner is
fire kindled. But indeed there be certain parabolicall glasses placed by the
aid of Geometry, more excellent for this purpose, having concaues and conuexes,
of which I cannot stand here to treat, neither is this conclusion so necessary
in England, unless it be in Summer in the extremest of heat.

CHAP. C. To make a Glass whereby to discern any small thing, as to read a
written letter a quarter or half a mile off.
WE have an imitation of such glasses as these about London commonly to be
sold, but they be so small that they stand one in small steed, but amongst the
writers of perspectiue, I have read that if you take a glass of the same
metal that burning glasses be, and 16. or 17. inches broad, whose center
place directly against ye object you look upon, and let it not incline, or
hang sidewise by any means, behind this glass set a fair looking glass,
the polished side beholding the said burning glass, to ye intent to receive
the beams that come through the same: which done, look in the looking glass,
so shall you have your desire, if the burning glass were truly placed: for
you must note whatsoever thing you see through the burning glass, that the
further you stand from the glass, the bigger it seems, until you come to a
certain distance, and then the object seen through the glass does seem
lesser and lesser, therefore care must be had in placing the glasses, so may
you view a Town or Castle, or any window in the same, 6. or 7. miles, or see a
man 4. or 5. miles, read a letter in written hand a quarter of a mile from
you, etc.

CHAP. CI. How you shall buy annueties, or sums of money to pay at a day yet
to come.
I Had thought to have concluded this Book wc the diverse nature of grounds,
with the artificial mending of them, and the killing of Gorse that abounds
upon cold clayie ground, and Fern in a sandy and hot soil, or broom
flourishing in barren ground, hot and dry, or moss spreding in a cold
ground, all these, and more I thought once to have handled, but my mind
altering, and withal bethinking my self of a Gentleman of worship, and my
kinsman, one Master Whorde, that had bestowed great cost and travel in
dreyning of grounds, having now (as he told me) brought (to his great cost) the
dreyning of grounds to such a perfect head, and easy method that he was able
to trebble the rankness of his ground only by waters, with the one quarter of
the charges it was in the beginning: and indeed as the invention is new and
excellent, though it has been stumbled at by many, so no doubt but in time
he will be persuaded to publish to the world (for the good of his country,
and credit of himself) the form and method of the work, to which it would
do well to add what I intended to have spoken of in this place which made me
the rather refer it to a Gentleman, so honest, and well experienced. But to
the matter.

Whereas there be many annueties which some desire to buy, and some to sell,
behold ye ensuing Table, which tells you what 10. pound anuety is worth for
any time under 21. years, according to 10. pound in the hundred, and if you
would apply the same unto any other sum more then 10. pound, use the rule of
proportion, as I taught you in the 6. book of my Geodeticall Staff, chap. 51.
which made me repeat it here again, because the Table is wanting there.

Years. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 pou^ds. 9 17 24
31 37 43 48 53 57 61 64 68 71 73 76 78 80 81 83 85 86 shiling 1 7 17 14 18 11
13 7 11 8 19 2 0 13 1 4 4 0 13 2 9 pence. 10 1 4 0 2 1 0 0 ^0 11 0 9 8 4 2 9 3
3 0 9 9

Example.

I have annuetie of 10. pound for 11. years, and now would know what I were
worthy to have in hand for the same, by the former Table I find 10. pound for
11. years is worth 64. pound and 19. shillings, therefore by the common rule
of three, if 10. give 64. pound and 19. shillings, what shall 100. pound be
worth? therefore multiply 100. pound by 64. pound 19. shillings, parting the
product by 10 pound, so have you 640. pound, and so much was your annuety of
100. for eleven years worth to be paid now in hand for the same.

The like may you do by the ensuing Table, if a man owe you 100. pound to be
paid at any time under 21. years hence, and you are to buy the same of him now
with present money, reckoning the sum of money that you give according to
compound interest, that is, interest upon interest, as if one should owe you
100. pound, due to be paid 7. years hence, and you would know what you were
worthy to give in hand for the same, according us is said, so shall you find
51. pound, 6. shillings, 13. pence. in the table under 7. years.

Years. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 pou^ds. 90 82 75
68 62 56 51 46 42 38 35 31 28 26 23 21 19 17 16 14 13 shiling 18 12 2 6 1 8 6
13 8 11 1 17 19 6 18 15 15 19 7 17 10 pence. 2 11 8 0 10 11 13 0 2 1 0 9 4 8 10
3 8 8 0 3 3

And if the sum or number of years exceed your Table, work as in the last
Table before, and so proceed, taking the sums according to the demand out of
the Table, and if other sums are required, work, as I have said, by the rule
of proportion, as before, making the sums in the Tables your Radix.

Thus much (good Reader) have I said of the use of my Topographicall Glass,
not doubting, joining this book and the Geodeticall Staff together, but that
you have the ample use of all Geometrical, Geodeticall, and Topographicall
Instruments, now extant, whereby you shall not be to seek further
instructions, I mean such instruments that are now in most request, and by the
better opinions most commended, and therefore for this time, I will conclude my
Book, wishing my self present ever to explain any thing that to the young
Practitioner shall seem obscure.

SENECA. Nullum est tam magnum beneficium, quod non vilificare malignitas
possit: nullum tam angustum, quod non bonus interpres extendat.

The end of the Topographicall Glass.

THE ORDER HOW TO MEASVRE ALL KIND OF TIMBER, as well such trees as be growing,
as such as be fallen and squared, as also al kind of Globes, Pyramides,
Cylinders, etc. as well solid as excauated, with all Superficies, be they
stones, pauements, boards, glasses, or such like, partly by the Geodeticall
Staff, in such sort, and in such an easy method, as has not before been
published.
CHAP. I. Of the falling of Timber, and the best time for the same, with the
seasoning of boards, and the preserving thereof.
TO tell you what wood is best for timber, in brief, the oak is principal of
all trees growing, both for magnitude and duration, although in some countries,
by reason of the scarcity thereof, they be forced to use other wood.
Concerning the falling of timber, you are best before the retyring of the sap
to cut the timber tree round about, until you come near unto the end of the
sap, and so leave the tree growing until you see that the sap has all run
down, and ceased dropping, whereby you have purified the tree, and left no
moisture within to corrupt or putrify the same: and that your timber may be
the more sound, void of worms, and without rifts and chaunes, let the same be
fallen any time after Midsommer until the end of January, especially in the
full moon, but not in wet and windy days, leaving such for no use but snell
that were wind falls as well for that the timber is not permanent, as also for
that Masters in Astrology say houses built therewith be more subject to danger
in time of tempest.

Now if you convert any of this timber to boards, many use to throw them into
water, and there let them remain 14 or 15 days, so shall they be the sooner
seasoned and better exempt from worms.

And if you desire to make columns or great turned pillars of whole trees or
sapplins, to the end they shall not rent or chaune, with great long agors bore
out the heart thereof; but of these and such like happly I shall be occasioned
to say more in another treatise.

And in conclusion, of falling of great timber trees, one principal thing I
would have you to observe when you fall your trees, that is to crop of all the
great arms and master boughs of the tree before you fall the same, because
most commonly they be the occasion of the spoiling of much timber in the tree,
and many times of most or all of the body of the tree, because the great top of
the tree falling with such a weight, and pulling the rest down with such a
violence, much of the tree is shattered and rent, as many may see daily to
their loss.

CHAP. II. Of measuring of all kind of Solid timber.
MEasuring of solid timber is performed after two manner of ways, the first
takes respect unto all kind of timber growing or fallen of what form or
fashion soever it be, and so tells you the true square of it, and
consequently how many inches or feet are required to make a square foot of
timber; the other takes no notice of the quantity of the square that the tree
or timber will bear; but be it round, square, triangulate, or multiangulate,
it tells you how many solid feet or inches is in the same: both which ways
shall you be taught to perform hereafter. And for finding of the true square
of any piece of timber, M. Digges has taken pains to calculate tables; but
here you shall be taught to find the same without any kind of table or
calculation, which is right fit for all masters of works, carpenters, and
masons to know; for the finding of the square of a tree, is not to gird the
same about, and take the fourth part thereof, as they think, therefore the 35
Chapter of my sixth Book erres in that point, being set down hastily
according unto vulgar tradition.

CHAP. III. To find the true square of any growing tree by the Geodeticall
Staff.
YOu shall in performance hereof take some packthreed gut string or such like,
and with the same gird the tree about 4 or 5 feet above the ground at the
least, but toward the midst of the tree were best; then shall you take the
length of the string that girded the tree, and divide the same 3 into four
equal parts, taking one of those equal parts, and place the same truly over
in 110 and 110 equal parts, upon the legs of the Geodeticall Staff; the
legs so resting, take the distance over in 70 and 70, and note that line,
which you must fit over in 60 and 60 amongst the coard divisions upon the lower
side the legs, and so that angle not stirred, take the distance from 90 ^o
90, and apply that distance to your rule, so have you the true square of the
timber tree.

Example.

A b is a growing tree, whose square is required, that is, how much square that
tree will bear on every side when he is squared: first therefore I gird the
tree about with a gut-string as far from the ground as I can reach, as at r,
then do I note the length of the line that girded the tree, as c d, which I
divide into 4 equal parts, reserving one of the said 4 parts, as c e, then do
I take the legs of my staff, and fit the length of c e over in 110 and 1^0
parts amongst the equal divisions: the legs resting there, I take the
distance over from 70 to 70; the length of which line I keep, as l m, and
turning the other side of the legs upward I place l m over in 60 and 60, and
so taking the distance over from 90 to 90 (the legs being not stirred) you
have the line n o the one side of the square that the tree will bear, which
applying to your ruler divided into feet and inches, you shall find 2 ^/5 foot
the just square, which is equal to f h i g the 4 side of the tree being
squared.



By this means may you find the true square and consequently the quantity of
any growing tree, and so buy the same according unto your desire, by which ye
Carpe^ters may see ye error they run into by taking a fourth part of the
compass of the tree for ye square.

CHAP. IIII. Any tree or round piece of timber vnsquared and match tapering, to
find the square thereof as it lies upon the ground.
YOu are not ignorant but you may gird the same about, and so work as in the
last Chapter; but this may be performed otherwise: let the Semidiameter of
both the ends of the tree be a b and d e, both which join together in one
right line, as f g, so is f h equal to a b, and h g to d e, then divide f g
into two equal parts at i, then the labor is no more but to fit f i or i g
over in 60 and 60 amongst the coard divisions, and so keeping the legs at that
angle, take the distance over from 90 to 90, noting that line down, as l m; so
may you conclude that l m is just the true square of the said tree.

Or as is said, you might have girded the tree about in the midst at k, and
so worked as in the last chapter.

Note if you please, having a pair of Calleper compasses, you may omit to gird
the tree about, whether it be standing or fallen, only by taking the true
diameter or thickness of the said tree, and placing half the same over in 60
and 60, and so work as before in this Chapter.

CHAP. V. To find the true square of a squared piece of timber consisting of
two unequal sides, and 4 right angles the one side being only known.
YOu must take the length of the broader of the two sides, the which fit over
in 60 and 60 amongst the coard divisions; the legs of the Staff so resting,
the distance taken from 36 to 36 yields the true square of a piece of timber
that being of equal longitude is also of equal quantity.

But if both the sides c d and d b be known, then work by the next Chapter,
for this takes no notice of the thickness.

CHAP. VI. To find the square of any broad or flat piece of timber that
consists of 4 right angles and two equal sides.
SVch a piece of timber as this, the end thereof does represent the just form
of an Oblong, and is thus squared; take the longer and shorter side, and join
them together in one right line, the which right line made of the length of
both these lines so joined, make the diameter of a circle: lastly, upon the
point where the two lines were joined, raise a perpendicular, forth length of
that perpendicular to the circumference is the true side of the square.

Example.



A b c d is the end of a piece of timber, c d the longer side, d b the shorter,
therefore I take the length of c d and d b and joint them together in v, making
one right line thereof, as r s: next I part r s into two equal parts at w,
then placing the one foot of my compass in w, extending the other to s or r
t, describe the semicircle r t s: lastly, upon v where the two lines were
joined together raise a perpendicular v t, which is equal unto p q, I conclude
the square made of the line t v is equal to c d b a, and thus of any such
other.

Or get the square thus, multiply the breadth in the thickenesse, so is the
square root of the product the true square, which you may easily find in the
Geodeticall Staff, fol. 142.

CHAP. VII. To find the true square of any piece of timber, whose ends are
formed like a Diamond.
THe end of such a piece of timber as this, does represent the just form of a
Rombus, and therefore does consist of equal sides and Oblique angles, the
square whereof find thus; Draw a right line betwixt any of the two opposite
angles, noting the length of that line, upon which line let fall a plumb line
from one of the subtended angles; so having those two lines, find the square,
as in the last Chapter.

Example.

The end of the piece of timber is a b c d, the line drawn from one opposite
angle unto the other is a c, the line falling perpendicular upon a c from the
angle b, subtended by a c, is b c: therefore according unto the last Chapter, I
join a c, and b e together in one right line, and then describing a demicircle
upon that diameter, and noting the length of the perpendicular, I find it to be
i k, which is the just side of a true square that will be equal to a b c d.

Or the length of the perpendicular b m is the square falling upon b c at right
angles.

CHAP. VIII. To find the square of any piece of timber consisting of three
sides.
THe true square of all kind of Triangles whatsoever are found out by the 44
Chap. Metamorphosis 7. of the 6. Book of the Geodeticall Staff, and therefore
it were vain to repeat it here again.

Or else take the perpendicular in any triangle and half the base, which two
lines join together, continuing the same forth in one right line, as you do
the 2 sides of an Oblong in the 6 Chapter, and thereby find the square
accordingly.

As if you join the perpendicular b d and half the base a c in one right
line, according to the 6 Chap. you shall find the square of the triangle a b c
to be h i.

CHAP. IX. To find the square of any piece of timber containing 5, 6, 7, or 8
sides, etc.
YOu must imagine in this Chapter, as also in all the other, saving for round
timber, that I go not about to tell you how much square that piece of timber
would bear, if it were reduced into a 4 square: but I do deliver you the side
of a piece of timber being just four square, and of equal height with the
piece proposed shall also be of equal quantity, which is right necessary for
the attaining of the number of square feet or solid content of any piece of
timber.

Having therefore a piece of timber of 5, 6, 7, or 8 sides, etc. as b c d e f
g, add all the sides together b c, c d, d e, e f, f g, and g b, so have you
78, half which is the line n o 39, to which join the perpendicular h a, which
you be taught to find: so have you o p, next upon o rear a perpendicular o q,
lastly divide n p into two equal parts at r, placing the one foot of your
compass in r, extending the other to p or n, and upon r strike the arch s q t,
which shall cut the perpendicular q o at q, I conclude q o is the true square

Thus are you taught to find the square of any piece of timber, of what fashion
soever: and if it bear none of these regular forms, or that there be wood
wanting, take from one place, adding the same unto another, thereby making it
perfect regular, and in such cases you must always so do.



CHAP. X. The square of any piece of timber being found to tell how much of the
same in length, will make a square foot of timber, and consequently how many
foot is in the whole piece.
A Solid or Cubicall foot of timber does contain 1728 cubicall inches, for so
many four square inches may be taken out of one cubicall foot, I mean such
Inches that are square every way like unto a dye, now having the square of any
piece of timber given, square the same, dividing 1728 by the product, so does
the quotient show you how much of the length of the timber must be taken to
make a square foot, by the which divide the whole length or altitude of the
timber, so does the quotient acquaint you how many foot of timber is in the
piece.

Example.

The square of the tree a b is found by the third Chapter to be 27 inches,
whose square is 719 by which divide 1728 so have you 2 2/7 9/2 0/8 inches which
is 2 inches, or two inches a quarter and half a quarter, whereby I conclude,
that as often as I can find 2 inches in the length or height of the tree or
timber, so many square foot of timber is in the same: the tree a b is 8 foot
high, which divide by 2 inches, or lay so much of your rule out measuring one
from a toward b, calling every 2 inches a foot, so by either of the ways
shall you find 40 foot of timber in the said tree being squared, some small
quantity being over more then the same.

In the like manner must you deal with all other pieces of timber of what
fashion soever, first finding their square as before, and next the solid
capacity, even as you be taught in this chapter.

By this Chapter may you measure out as many foot of timber, stone, or such
like, as you please, and thereby cut off any number of feet from any piece of
timber as you shall be occasioned.

CHAP. XI. To measure all kind of Timber, etc. after another sort, without
regard of the square.
THis kind of measure takes no regard to the square feet in the timber, but
unto the solid capacity thereof, but for that it is not much pertinent to the
Geodeticall Staff, requiring rather numerall then isntrumental operation I
will be the more brief.

When you have any piece of timber, stone, pillar or such like, whose solid
content is required by the rules taught in the sixth book, part 2 of my
Geodeticall Staff, seek the superficial contents of the end of the timber,
the which augment in the altitude or length of the same, so is the product your
desire.

Example.

Let the piece of timber be proposed, whose end a b c d superficially by the 22
Chap. Prop. 3. of the foresaid book, is found to contain 225 inches, now the
length or altitude of the timber b g or a f is 33 inches, 33 inches mutiplyed
in 225 produces 7425, the number of solid inches in the piece, which if you
part by 1728, you have 4 5/1 1/7 3/2 ^/8 foot, which is 4 foot 513 inches the
solid content of the said piece of timber.

The like must you do with any other piece of timber of what fashion soever,
but if the timber trapeze much, use the midst or difference of the ends as in
the 4 Chapter, which at this time shall suffice.

And if your timber be excauate or hollow, first measure the whole as it were
firm, then the excauate part by it self, lastly, the lesser taken from the
greater leaves your desire.

CHAP. XII. A discourse of surfaces and solid figures, not so apt for the
understanding of mechanical artificers
LIke as the term of a line is a point, so is the term of a surface a line,
every surface is plain or bowed, a bowed surface is either sphericall or
varied, a sphericall surface is equally distant from the center made by the
revolution of a semicircumference upon the fixed diameter, a varied surface is
either conicall or cylindricall, a conicall surface runs narrower and
narrower from the circular base unto a certain point in the top, a
cylindricall surface is that which is equally raised from the circumference in
the bottom to an equal and parallel circumference in the top made by the
conuolution of the side about two equal and parallel circumferences.

Now from surfaces we proceed to bodies.

Even as points are the terms of lines, and lines the terms of surfaces, so
surfaces are the terms of bodies: a body is a lineate, broad and high,
consisting of 4 dimensions, which being contained under homogeneall surfaces
equal both in multitude and magnitude be also equal, and if the axe be
perpendicular to the center of the base, they be called upright solids: of
solids some are plain, others bowed: the plain solids are contained under
plain surfaces, and is either a piramis or a piramidate: a pyramid is a plain
solid rising equally from his right lined base and vniformedly contracting it
self until it finish in a point in ye top: now a piramidate is a plain
solid, composed of piramides, being either a prisme or a mixed polyedron, a
prisme is a figure piramidate whereof two opposite plains be like equal and
parallel, the rest being paralellograms, and is a pentaedron, or made of
pentaedrons, and being so made, is either an hexaedron, or a poliedron, the
hexaedron being a parallel pipedon, or a trapezium, the parallel pipedon, is an
hexaedron whose opposite plains are paralellograms, now every right angled
parallel pipedon, is either a cube or an oblong, so that a cube is a right
angle parallel pipedon consisting of 6 equal surfaces.

As for your mixed ordinate polyedrons, they be but pyramidats composed of
pyramides lying open in the base, and concurring with their tops in one center,
and from these mixed ordinate polyedrons are derived your regular bodies, as you
may perceive by Euclide 27 D. 11, and 29, D. 11, etc. so that bodies be regular
or irregular, the regular bodies contained under surfaces the one folded
toward the other be only 5, as tetraedrons, hexaedrons, or cubes, Octaedrons,
Dodecaedrons, and Icosaedrons, the first being a Geometrical body encompassed
with 4 equal equiangled tryangles, the second with 6 equal squares, the third
with 8 equal equiangled tryangles, the 4 contained under 20 equal equiangled
tryangles, and the last being comprehended of 12 equal equiangled pentagonall
superficies, about every of these 5 regular or platonicall bodies, a
comprehending or circumscribing sphere or globe may be described that shall
with his concaue periphery exactly touch every of their solid angles, whereby
they be made bodies inscribed or contained of that sphere: also these inscribed
bodies may be termed circumscribed solids of a sphere, and then the sphere is
called inscribed or contained, which happening the conuer superficies of the
said inscribed sphere shall precisely touch all the centers of those equiangled
figures wherewith the bodies are environed: touching irregular bodies they be
such that be limited and described by inequall surfaces, which are twofold. to
wit in respect of circular conuolution and in respect of folding one toward
another, ye circular conuolution is made two ways, as by the section of
circles, or by inequall right lined figures, the section of circles are either
greater or lesser then a semicircle, by the conuolution of the greater
lenticulare bodies are made, and by the lesser Duals are created, now by the
conversion of equal right lined figures diverse kinds of irregular bodies are
made, and thereby diverse kind of vessels: as for the irregular solids made of
inequall surfaces folded one toward another, the difference that may rise
therein is infinite.

Like as a surface, so a solid is plain or bowed, and being bowed it is either
a sphere or varied, a sphere is a round bowed solid contained under a bowed
surface, made by the revolution of a semicircle upon a fixed diameter, as for
the varied solids, they be contained under a varied surface and a base, and are
twofold, as a cone and a cylinder, the cone is contained under a conicall
surface and a Glass, and the cylinder under a cylindrical surface, and
opposite bases, and as for this cone and cylinder the one is made by the
conversion of a right angled tryangle (the one foot remaining fixed which if
it be equal with yt which moves ye cone is right angled, if less
obtuse-angled, if greater acute angled) ye other by the conversion of a right
angled paralellogram ye one side remaining fixed: further in cones the fixed
side of the tryangle is caled the Aris, the containing side turning about the
base, and the hypothenusall the side of the cone: furthermore amongst these
solids the perpendiculars, falling from the highest point of any figure upon
the plain whereupon the solid rests is called the altitude of the solid*
neither is it material if the same perpendicular fall within or without the
body, as the one always does in direct solids within, and the other in
declining solids without: now as plain angles are made upon superficies by the
section of two lines in a point, so solid angles are made in bodies by ye
concurse of many supeficies in a like point, and so a right line passing from
one of these solid angles unto another is called a diagonall, but passing
betwixt opposite angles it is a diameter.

CHAP. XIII. To measure the Contents both superficial and solid of Cones,
Cylinders, Pyramides, Prismes, Cubes, Polyedrons, Spheres, Globes, and such
like.
I Would say nothing of these matters in this place, were it not for that it
may happily be expected, since somewhat already has been said of solides: yet
since you be taught to find the superficial content of any figure in my art of
Geodetia, as also for that I intend to conclude, I will draw some propositions
from Euclid and Ramus for the measuring of them, and so refer the further
discourse unto the understanding Reader.

PROP. I. To measure Cones.
1 INcrease the side in half the bases Periphere, so have you the content of
the Conicall surface.

2 Likewise the altitude of the Cone augmented in the third part of the
circular base is the solid content.

3 Cones of equal height are as their bases. E. l. 12. p. 11.

By this Proposition you may measure Steeples and such like round or conicall
figures.

PROP. II. To measure Cylinders.
1 THe circular base and the altitude increased one in the other yields the
content of the Cylindricall surface.

2 Also the plain number made of the base and the altitude is the solid
content of the Cylinder: I mean the superficial content of the bases area
augmented by the altitude yeeldes the capacity.

3 Cylinders of equal height are as their bases. E. l. 12. p. 11. and are
treble to the Cone, equal in base and altitude. R. l. vlt. pa. 7.

By this Proposition may you measure all kind, of columns, pillars, or any
sort of Cylindricall bodies.

PROP. III. To measure a Pyramid.
1 BY the art of Geodetia measure the contents of every inuironing triangle (of
which the Pyramid consists) which add together, adding the product unto the
superficial content of the base, so have you the contents of the Pyramidall
surface.

2 Also increase the third part of the bases area in the Pyramid altitude, so
have you the solid content, be the body direct or inclinate.

3 Pyramides of equal height, are as their bases. E. l. 12. p. 5. and 6.

Hereby you may measure 6, 8, etc. square spire steeples, and all such
Pyramidall figures.

PROP. IIII. To measure a Prisme.
1 GEt the area of all the paralelsgrams and bases, adding the same together,
so have you the contents of the Prismaticall surface.

2 Also the area of the base increased by the altitude produces the solid
content.

3 A Prisme is treble unto a Pyramid, equal in base and altitude. E. l. 12. p.
7. and Homogeneal Prismes being of equal height are as their bases. E. l. 1. p.
29, 30, and 31.

PROP. V. To measure a Cube.
1 GEt the superficial content of one of the equal surfaces, which multiplied
by 6 produces the content of the Cubicall surface.

2 Also square one of the 12 equal sides, then does the product multiplied by
the same side produce the solid capacity of the Cube, and after this manner
any number is cubed; as 3 times 3 is 9 the square, and 3 times 9 is 27 the
Cube, 3 being ye square root of 9, and the cubicall root of 27.

PROP. VI. To measure a Sphere.
1 RAmus l. 20. p. 5. has proved that the plain number made of the greatest
circumference, and the diameter, is the content of the Sphericall surface: 2 or
get the plain number made of the greatest circle, which increase by 4: 3 or
multiply the square of the diameter by 22, parting the product by 7: by either
of which ways you have the Sphericall surface.

2 Furthermore the plain number made of the diameter and the 6 part of the
Sphericall surface is the Sphere. R. l. 26. p. 5.2. or as 21 is to 11, so is
the cube of the diameter unto the sphere, ibid. therefore cube the diameter by
the 5 Prop. 2, which multiply by 11, the product then parted by 21 produces a
quotient that shall contain the solid content of the Sphere.

3 Spheres have treble proportion unto their diameters. E. li. 12. p. 18.
Hereby may you measure Globes or such other round bodies.

PROP. VII. To measure part of circles.
FOr the superficial or solid content of parts of circles, look what I have
said of the whole, and proportionally understand the same of the part; as the
plain number made of the circumference, and the Radius is the content of the
semisphericall surface; so the plain number made of the Radius and 6 part of
the sphericall surface is the solid content of the Hemisphere: so of other
parts of circles, which here were tedious to recite.

CHAP. XIIII. To measure the air or superficial capacity of any plain
surface, as boards, glass, floores, pauements, etc.
IF you would know how many foot or inches in length you must have to make a
foot of board or glass, the breadth thereof being given, or how you shall cut
off any number of feet proposed from any assigned board or such like, repair
unto the 34 Chapter of my Art of Geodetia.

But otherwise, if you have the length and breadth of any board, floor,
glass, or such like, and are desirous to know the quantity of feet or yards
therein, you must multiply the length in the breadth, so is the product your
demand: after this sort do Painters and Ioyners measure the quantity of
painted clothes, or wainescot for chambers: and no otherwise do Sielers mete
their sieling: also in the same order may Tilers (especially those that use
burnt tiles, which commonly be of one bigness) tell how many stones will cover
any roof, or how many thousand be upon any covered roof, only by multiplying
the number of stones that go along the eaues of the house, by the number that
go up the side from the eaues to the top of the roof or first pole.

SENECA. Plus caeteris dedit, quia sine spe recipiendi dedit.


A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS CONTAINED in this Book.
WHat Topography is: and how it differs from Cosmography and Geographie.
chap. 1. page 1. A demonstration of Topographie. ibid. p. 2 A demonstration of
Geography. ib. p. 3 Geometrical definitions of lines, angles, and figures.
chap. 2. p. 5 How right figures are created. c. 3. p. 9 To create a right line,
or rear a perpendicular. Pro. 1. p. ib. To rear a perpendicular upon
extremes of a line assigned. Prop. 2. p. 10 To draw a perpendicular from one
point assigned to another. prop. 3. ib. To make a right angle readily. pro. 4.
p. 11 To make an angle like to an angle assigned. pro. 5. p. 12 To draw a line
parallel to any assigned line. pro. 6. p. 13 To divide a line into two equal
parts. pro. 7. p. ib. Three points given to find the center of a circle that
shall cut all the three points. prop. 8.14 The making of the Topographicall
Glass. chapter 4. p. 15 To set together the parts of the Topographicall Glass.
chapter 5. p. 26 A description of the Theodelitus. chapter 6. p. 27 To search the
proportion and symmetry of countries, fields, etc. chapter 7. p. 29 To take the
true plat of a small Isle compassed with a River, or of Fennes not accessible
to. chapter 8. p. 32 To take a plat at one station by the Theodelite. chapter 9. p. 34
To take a plat of wood-grou^d by going about it. c. 10. p. 35 To draw the plat
or map of any country, with each towns and villages situation. chapter 11. p. 36
To draw the plat of any region, finding the distance of towns by sinicall
supputation. c. 12. p. 41 The ground and reason of the Geometrical Quadrant,
and hypsometrical scale. c. 13.46 To get the distance of a place far off. c.
14. p. 48 To seek the distance of any mark seen, by the Geometrical
Quadrant. c. 15.50 To find the distance betwixt 2 forts far off. c. 16. p. 52
To take the height of any accessible tower, castle, etc. c. 17. p. 55 To search
out heights inaccessible. c. 18. p. 57 To know what part of any altitude is
level with your eye. c. 19. p. 58 To search out lengths in heights. c. 20. p.
59 To reduce parts of the right side the Geometrical quadrant into parts
proportional of the left side. c. 21.61 To find lengths in heights by the
Geometrical quadrant in the Glass. c. 22. ibid. To know how much one hill is
higher then another. 23.64 To know if water will run to the appointed place. c.
24.67 To take the quantity of any stationary angle. c. 25.70 To make a
protractor and scale. c. 26. ibid. To protract an angle and lay down the ends.
c. 27. p. 71 To observe an angle of position and protract it, etc. 28.73 To
take the plat of a great cha^pion, etc. c. 29. p. 74 To plat meadows, plain
fields, pastures, etc. c. 30.75 To reduce lines hypothenusall into lines
horizontal. 31.76 Co^pendious forms of working by the Geod. staff. 32.77. To
square lands, and to reduce irregular forms to regular. c. 33.80 To search the
perpendicular in any triangle, etc. 34.81 To reduce many plats or observations
into one map. 35.82 To divide an Empire, kingdom or contine^t into Prou. 36.85
Reasons why the suns altitude has bin hitherto falsely observed. 37.87
Paralaxes of the sun. ib. 88. A table of the suns paralaxe. ib. 90
Correcting the taking of the stars altitude. 38.91 To take the altitude or
Almicanther of the sun or any star, and to find their Azimuth. 39.92 To
take the amplitude of sun or star. 40.93 To get the hour of the day, the
hour of sun rising or setting, by the Topographical Glass. 41. ib. To find
the hour of the night, and likewise hie water. 42.64 Additions to the
planisphere in the Glass. ib. 95 To use the Topographicall Glass as the
Plain table. 43.97 A description of the plain table. 44.98 Absurdities used
of many who affect the plain table. 45.102 Things belonging to the use of the
plain table. c. 46.104 To take any horizontall distance by the plain table.
c. 47. ib. Part of the distance of any thing given to find the rest. chapter 48. p.
107 To take the distances of two towns, etc. c. 49. p. 108 To find the
horizontall distance from you by a new way. c. 50. p. 110 To draw the plat of
a piece of ground at one station, where all the angles of the field may be
seen. 51.112 To draw the plat of any field, where you can not see all the
angles. c. 52. p. 113 To draw the plat of a field by once placing the
instrument in an angle of the field, and measuring the field round about. c.
53. p. 115 To take the plat of a field by the rule of the foregoing Chapter,
where all the angles cannot be seen from one angle. c. 54.116 To draw the plat
of a piece of ground by two stations, and measuring but one line. c. 55.117 To
draw the plat of a field by many stations, and yet measure but one line in all.
c. 56. p. 118 To draw the plat of a piece of wood-ground, which for thickness
one cannot set an instrument in. c. 57.120 To draw the plat of a field by
setting his instrument in every angle, yet measuring but one line. c. 58. p.
122 To take the plat of any champion field by the plain table, yet never
change paper. c. 59. p. 123 What chapter is fittest to use in platting of
ground, and what instrument to use. c. 60.124 A description of the
circumferentor and the parts thereof. c. 61. p. 126 Of the Sights longer and
shorter c. ib. p. 127 The Circumfere^tor, his appellation, and things generally
to be considered therein. c. 62. p. 129. To take the Almincanther and Azimuth
of the sun. 63.130 To know in what part of the horizon any thing seen lies.
c. 64. p. 131 To find the hour of the day by sight of the sun. c. 65. p. ib.
To find the hour of sun rising and setting. c. 66. p. 132 To find the
amplitude of rising sun or stars. c. 67. p. ib. Of the opposite degrees, and
how to find them. c. 68.133 To find the quantity of an angle. c. 69. p. 134 To
take the distance of any mark by the old Circumferentor. c. 70. ib. To
perform the last Chapter by protracting the Circumferentor. chapter 71. p. 135 To
take an Altitude only by the Circumferentor. 72.136 To take the plat of a
piece of ground by the old or new Circumferentor. c. 73. p. 137 To take a plat
at one station by the circumferentor, 74.139 Degrees of a field being taken, to
find the closing of the plat. chapter 75. p. Ibid. To reduce hypothenusall lines
into horizontall. c. 76. p. 141 To perform the same by a Quadrant. chapter 77. p.
142 To take Altitudes by such a Quadrant, chapter 78. p. 143 To take the
declination of a wall. chap. 79. p. ib. Survey of a Manor. ib. p. 144 To make
a Map and sea Card. ibid. p. 146. To discover the true plat of a park,
forest, etc. c. 80. p. 148 To cast the contents of a park chap. 81.153 To
plat any field by intersectio^ of lines. c. 82. p. 159 To seek the distance of
a Turret. c. 83. p. 158 To find the length of any hypothenusal. c. 84. p. 160
To find the distance of two Towers. c. 85. p. 162. To find the distance of
any thing from you. 86. p. 165 To know whether a ship come to you, or go from
you. chap. 87. p. 167 A ship pursuing another, when it will overtake the
former. chap. 88. p. Ibid. How to take the platform of a house, Castle, etc.
89. p. 168 To discover how Mines and Trenches run. chapter 90. p. 169 To place
barrels of powder under Castles, etc. chapter 91. p. 170 Whether a mine be above
or under the Horizon. chap. 92 p. 171 To know which way it declineth. chapter 93.
ibid. To build and situate a City. chapter 94. p. 173 To build and situate a
Manor. chap. 95. p. 174 To sink a well, and convey water pipes. c. 96. p. 177
To draw the plat of a building, or other thing not seen. chapter 97. p. 179 To
make an excellent ruler for reducing plats. chap. 98. p. 180 To burn any thing
far off with the Sun beams, chapter 99. p. 182 To make a Glass to discern
any small thing half a mile off, as to read a letter, etc. c. 100. p. ibid.
How to buy annueties, or money due afterward, chapter 101 p. 183
The measuring of Solids and Plains.
THe best time to fell Timber, and to season boords. chap. 1.186. To measure
solid timber. 2.187 To find the square of any tree growing. 3.188 To find the
square of a tree vnsquared. 4.189 To find the square of a squared piece. 5.190
To find the square of any flat piece. 6.191 To find the square of a piece like
a diamond. 7.192 To find the square of pieces of 3, 5, 6, 7, or 8 sides, look
the 8 and 9 chap. p. 193 To find how much timber will make a foot square.
10.195 To measure all sort of timber. 11.196 Of surfaces and solid figures.
12.197 Measuring contents superficial and solid. 13.200 To measure the air
or any plain surface. 14.202
FINIS.
woodcut,radiated circular compass with Roman and Arabic numbering and
astrological signs

You may have any of the Instruments in this book made of wood, in Hosier
lane, near Smithfield in London, by John Tomson.

The Glass is made in brass, in black Horse-ally, near Flecetebridge, by
Elias Allin.


