CERTAIN comfortable Expositions of the constant Martyr of Christ, M. John
Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester, written in the time of his
tribulation and imprisonment, upon the XXIII. LXII. LXXIII. and LXXVII. Psalms
of the Prophet David. Newly recognized, and never before published.

MATTHEW. 24. 13. Who so continues to the end shall be saved. AT LONDON, Printed
by Henry Middleton ANNO 1580.

TO ALL THE Faithful flock of Christ, grace and peace from God the Creator,
Christ the Redeemer, and the holy Ghost the comforter.
Many are the monuments (beloved in the bowels of Christ Jesus) and volumes of
the faithful left as legacies to the Church of Christ: which as they are ye
true riches (for they are spiritual:) so ought they to be reverenced, not
only with outward service of body, but also with inward submission of soul.
Among which monumentes, being the treasure of the Church, and such jewels in
deed as the price of them is inualuable: this excellent work, (though wanting
bigness, yet full of brightness) of that most learned, godly, faithful,
zealous, constant, and in all points praise worthy Protestant, Master John
Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester and worcester, challenges no small title of
dignity. For, if the words of our Savior be true, (which to improve what
incestuous mouth, without horrible blasphemy, a trespass unpardonable, dare
presume, seeing he is the very substance of truth it self?) Constancy and
continuance required in the professors of the truth.
that he is a true disciple of Christ, which continues to the end: then is it
the duty of us all, except we hide our profession under the hiue of
hypocrisy: not only by looking at the life of such a loadesman, to reform
our deformities: but also, by tracing over and through the testimonies of the
truth (such godly books I mean as are left in writing to the world, as
undoubted assurances of an unspotted conscience) to thank God for so singular
an instrument of his Gospel: and to beseech him to work in us the like love
his law, that we may be partakers of such glory, as (no doubt) this notable
Martyr of God does immortally enjoy. Of whom breefly to insert and say somewhat
(because the brightness of such a glittering star, cannot be ouercast with
the clouds of obscurity and darkness) shall be a means to make the work
more commendable, although (in very deed) precious things have their proper
price, and therefore consequently will have their deserved praise. An abridgment
of Bishop Hoopers life, and death, truly gathered in circumstances.
And first to touch his blessed beginning, blessed (I say) even from above with
the dew of Gods grace, his education in Oxford, his prosperous proceeding in
the knowledge of Divinity, his forsaking not only of the University, but
also his common Country, his flight into Germany, his return into England,
his painfulness in preaching, his fame and credit among the people, his
obtained favor with the Kings majesty, Bishop Hooper in estimation with King
Edward ye sixth.
his aduaunceme^t to more tha^ a Bishoplike dignity, his dispensatio^ for his
ceremonious consecration, his secret enemies the supporters of papistrie, his
supplantation by their privy co^spiraces, his faithful continuance
notwithstanding in sowing sincere doctrine, his painfulnesse in hearing public
controversies, his visiting of schools and founteines of learning, his
maintaining of godly discipline, his want of parcialitie in judgment betwixt
person and person, his Bishoplike behavior abroad in his Dioces, his fatherly
affection at home toward his house and family, etc. do warrant him the name
of a Saint upon earth: and surely God has registered him in the Calendar of his
chosen servants in heaven. Again the falling away of his favorers when
religion languished, the malicious practices of his adversaries threatening his
destruction, the bloudthirstie broching of his persecution, his appearing
before the Queen and her Council, the tyrannical co^tumelies of his
Archenimie, Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Bishop Hoopers professed
enemy.
his spiteful accusation, his mild purgation, his undeserved deprivation, his
cruel imprisonment, his hard intertainment, his lamentable lodging, his
succourles sickness, his pitiful complaints, his restless tribulations, his
straight examinations, his apologeticall aduouchments, the committing of him to
the Fleet, the tossing of him from the Fleet to the Counter in Southwarke,
from the Counter in Southwarke to the Clinke, from the Clinke to Newgate, his
unjust degradation, his cruel condemnation, and his lamentable execution, etc.
all these pageantes considered, as they were done, would make a flintie heart
to mealt, and stony eyes to sweat, not only water, but also blood: and to
be short, the whole body, though all the lims thereof were as strong as
steel, even for pities sake to tremble. This coming within the compass of my
poor consideration, If Christ the head have been persecuted even to the
death, the members must needs be subject to affliction.
I remembered that Christ Jesus, the only begotten son of the almighty and
eternal God, had passed the like yea and worse perilles: as by the history of
his death and passion may appear: that the Protomartyr, S. Steeuen had his
tormenters, S. Paul the Apostle his persecuters, and other of Christ's
disciples their afflicters: then thought I, that these sanctified vessels made
their vocation honorable, even by their deaths, which were opprobrious: and
therefore, how can it be, but that this our Martyr, worthy Bishop Hooper,
offering up his body a burnt sacrifice, lively, reasonable, and acceptable unto
God, should give good credit to his doctrine, assure his profession, affirm
his vocation, and live in everlasting memory, by the dispersion of his books,
though his favor be forgotten, and his body consumed? Of such a soldier, so
valiantly fighting under the ensign of his Captain, I cannot say sufficient.
Of this I am resolved, that although his earthly tabernacle be destroyed: 2.
Cor. 5.
yet has he a building given him of God, even an house not made with hands,
but eternal in the heavens, where God grant us all to reign, The laying down
of his life for the Gospels sake, deserves be liefe and reverence.
as joint heirs with Christ his anointed. To proceed and approach nearer to
our purpose (for the premises are effectual enough, to breed belief, and to
kindle reverence, in the heart of any true Christian, toward this our
excellent Martyr, replenished with the abundance of Gods holy spirit) I
commend unto thy mind (good reader,) a good work of this so good a man:
namely, Certain expositions upon the 23. 62. 72. and 77. Psalms of the
Prophet David, of the which the three last (being gathered together by a godly
professor of the truth M. Henry Bull) were never before printed. Their
beginnings are usually read in this manner. 23. The Lord feeds me, and I shall
lack nothing 62. My soul truly waits upon God. 72. Truly God is loving unto
Israel, even unto such as are of a clean heart. 77. I will cry unto God with my
voice, eue^ to God will I cry with my voice, and he shall hearken unto me. The
expositions of which psalms to be pithie, and profitable, this may be a
substantial proof: because they were written in the time of his trouble, when
(no doubt) he was talking in spirit with God: and being so occupied, his
exercises could not but be heavenly, and therefore effectual, fruitful, and
comfortable. Come therefore you sorrowing soul, which gronest for relief to
this spring. Come hither, and hear what a good man wrote ex carcere and
vinculis, out of bonds and imprisonment, for thy consolation. Hear him once,
hear him twice, hear him often, for thou for thou can not hear him enough.
He gives thee a pleasant Pomander, vouchsafe it the smelling: he sounds
sweet music, it deserves good dansing: he bidds thee to a sumptuous banquet,
be not deintie in feeding: he presents unto thee a precious diamond, it is
worth the taking: Oh give God thanks for all, and glorify the Lords name,
whom it has pleased to plant in his vineyard so fruitful a vine, which
bears grapes Gods plenty, of whose juice o Christ vouchsafe us to taste, that
our vessels being seasoned with true sanctification, they may be made sweet
to receive and preserve the water of the river of life, flowing from the lively
rock Christ Jesus: to whom, with the Father, and the Holy ghost, one Trinity
in Unity, be all laud and praise everlasting, Amen.

Thine in Christ, A. F.

CERTAIN EXPOsitions of the constant Martyr of Christ, Master JOHN HOOPER,
sometime Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester, upon the 23. the 62. the 72. and
the 77. Psalms of the Prophet DAVID.
upon the xxiij. Psalm.
THE ARGUMENT OR MATTER, which the Prophet chiefly entreats of in this
Psalm.
IT should seem, by the meruellous and wonderful description and setting
forth of almighty God, by the Prophet and King DAVID in this Psalm, that he
was inflamed with the holy Ghost, being delivered from all his enemies, to
declare unto all the world how faithful and mighty a defender and keeper God
is, of as many as put their trust in him. He was in great danger, and
specially in the wars that he made against the AMMONITES, the event and
success whereof it seems by the 20. Psalm his subjects greatly feared:
wherefore they commended their king (as true subjects always use) with
earnest prayer unto God. And that battle and many other dangers more ended
(wherein the godly king found always the protection and defense of the
heavenly father ready and at hand) now being at rest, he would have this
merciful defense of GOD known to all others, that as he, in all his
adversities, put his trust in the Lord, and had the ouerhand of all his
enemies: even so by his example, all other men should learn to do the same,
and assure them selves to find (as he found) the Lord of heaven to be the
succor and defense of the troubled, and their keeper from all evil.

And because the hearers and readers of this most divine and godly Hymn,
should the better understand the same, and the sooner take credit thereof in
the heart, he calls the heavenly father (the God of all consolation) in this
Psalm, a shepherd or heardman feeding his flock: and the people (with him
self) he calls sheep pastured and fed by the shepherd. And by these two
means, as by a most convenient Allegory or Translation meet for the purpose,
from the office of a shepherd, and the nature of sheep, he sets out
meruellously the safeguard of man by Gods providence, and goodwill toward man.
And in the same Allegory or Translation, he occupies the four first verses
in this Psalm. In the first verse, and so to the end of the Psalm, he
declares still one matter and argument of Gods defense toward man, and how
man is preserved. But yet it seems, that he expresses the same by other
words and by an other translation, showing the nature of God almighty, in
feding and nourishing of man under the name of a Lord or King, that has
prepared a table and plenty of meats to feed the hungry and needy: and
sets forth man poor and destitute of consolation and necessary help,
under the name of guestes and bidden folks to a Kings table, where is plenty
of all things necessary, not only to satisfy hunger, and to quench thirst,
but also to expel and remove them, that the poor man shall never hunger nor
thirst again: and only that, but also for ever world without end, this poor
man shall dwell and inherit, by the mercy of his heavenly king, the joys
everlasting. And this last Translation or Allegory is in manner not only a
repetition of the first in other words, but also a declaration, and more
plain opening of the Prophets mind, what he means in this celestial Hymn.

The parts of the Psalm. The text of the Psalm. 1 Who it is that has the
cure and charge of man's life and salvation. The Lord feeds me. etc. 2 Wherein
the life and salvation of man consists. In pleasant pastures, etc. 3 How
man is brought to the knowledge of life and salvation. He shall convert my
soul. etc. 4 Wherefore man is brought to life and salvation. For his names
sake. etc. 5 What trouble may happen to such as have life and salvation.
Although I walk through the vallie etc. 6 Whereby the trouble of Gods people
is overcome. For thou art with me. etc. 7 What the end of Gods troubled and
afflicted people shall be. I will dwell in the house of the Lord. etc.

The first part of the Psalm.
1 Who it is that has the cure and charge of man's life and salvation.

THE FIRST VERSE.
The Lord feeds me, and I shall want nothing.
KIng David says, Or, The Lord is my shepherd: as says the common, and the
Geneua translation.
the Lord feeds him: wherefore he can lack nothing to live a virtuous and
godly life. In this first part some things are to be considered. First, of God
that feeds: and next of man that is fed. GOD that feeds, David calls by
the name of a shepherd, and his people he calls by the name of sheep. By this
name of a shepherd, the Prophet opens and discloseth the nature of God to al
his miserable and lost creatures, that he is content, not only to wish and
desire man that is lost, to be found and restored again: but also does seek
and travel to restore and bring him home again: as it is written in Esaie the
Prophet, Esaie. 40. 11.
He shall gather together his lambs in his arm. Ezech. 34.
And in Ezechiel the Prophet, the Lord says, Behold, I will require my flock
of the shepherds, etc. And I will deliver my flock from their mouth, and they
shall be no more their meat: for thus says the Lord: Behold, I will search
out my sheep, and will visit them as a shepherd does visit his sheep, when
he is in the midst of his scattered sheep, so will I visit my sheep, and
deliver them from all places whereas they have been scattered, etc. And Jeremy
the Prophet in the same sort, Iere. 31.
declares the nature of God toward the lost flock, saying: He that dispersed
Israel shall gather him together again, and keep him as the shepherd keeps
his flock. Christ our Savior names him self a good shepherd, John. 10.
and says, that He was sent to call such as were not sheep of the utter mark
and sign in the world, to be his sheep. This nature of the heavenly father
saw king David, when he said at the beginning of this heavenly Hymn: The
Lord feeds me, etc.

When he is assured of Gods merciful nature, that seeks the lost sheep, he
opens further the nature of God, what he will do with the sheep, which he
finds: feed him (says the Prophet David,) and puts him self for an
example. Here is the mercy of the great shepherd further declared, that he
kills not his sheep, robs them not, but feeds and nourishes them.
Ezech. 34.
Of this speaks the Prophet Ezechiel, in the person of almighty God: I my
self will feed my sheep, and make that they shall rest quietly, says the
Lord God. That which is lost I will seek, such as go astray I will bring
again, such as be wounded I will bind up, such as be weak I will make
strong, but such as be fat and strong those will I root out, and I will feed
my sheep in reason and judgment. John. 10.
And the great shepherd Christ says, whether his sheep go in or out, they
shall find pasture.

After that this king has opened in this Hymn, that Gods nature is not only
to seek the lost sheep, but also when he has found him to feed him, then he
adds in his Hymn, after what sort he feeds him: So that I shall lack
nothing, says the Prophet. Here is the declaring of the great shepherds
pasture, wherewith he feeds the flock of his pasture. Christ expresses the
same wonderfully, in the opening of his office and doctrine unto the world in
S. John saying: Ioh. 10. 4. 6
I came that they might have life, and have it most abundantly. And talking
with the poor woman of Samaria, he told her yt the drink he would give her
should be water of life. And to the Capernaites he said, that meat which he
would give them should work eternal salvation. As these properties be in God
the shepherd, (as the Prophet has marked,) even in the like sort be the
contrary conditions in man, the sheep he speaks of: for as the nature of
God is to seek, so is the nature of man to go astray. Psalm. 119.
As the Prophet says: I have strayed like a wandering sheep. Esaie. 53.
And even so does Esaie write of all mankind: All we have erred (says he) as
sheep going astray. Matthew. 9.
Christ our Savior also in S. Matthewe does bewail the people of the world,
that stray as sheep that had no shepherd. S. Peter likewise says unto his
countrymen that he writes unto, Ye were as sheep that went astray, 1. Pet. 2.
but ye converted now unto the shepherd and pastoure of your souls. 2. 3. Reg
22.
And as the nature of man is to stray from GOD, so is it likewise to feed upon
all unwholesome and infected pastures: to believe every false Prophet that can
do nothing but lie. In the Prophet Esaie the Lord says, Esaie. 28.
The nature of sheep is to be deceived, and their pastors to be drunk, that
neither know nor see the pastures of the word of God. And in the same
Prophet, there is a most horrible plague upon man for sin, Esaie. 29
for, The pastors shall be unable to feed, and all the food of life shall be
as a book fast clasped and shut. This going astray and feeding upon evil
pasture, is wonderfully set forth by Saint Paul: 2. These. 2.
for when men will not feed upon the truth, it is Gods just judgment they
should feed upon falshoode. And as Gods nature is not only to feed, but fully
to satisfy and to replenishe with all goodness, so that nothing may lack for
a godly and virtuous life: John. 4. 6. 3.
in like manner, the nature of man is not only to feed, but also to replenish
it self with all infected and contagious doctrine, Romans 1.
until such time yt he despise and contemn God and al his wholesome laws. This
we may see in the holy Prophet Esaie: Esaie. 30.
The people (says the Lord) provoke me unto anger, a lying nation that will
not hear the law of GOD, they say to their Prophets, Prophecy not, look not
out for us things that be right, speak pleasant things unto us, etc. And this
replenishing of man with corrupt pasture, John. 7.
is horribly set forth in Saint John, when the wicked priests and Phariseis
would not believe the shepheardes voice Christ, no not their own servant
that told them the truth, nor yet Nichodemus one of their own court and
profession. Thus in the first part of this celestial Hymn, is the nature of
God and man described, under the name of a shepherd and of sheep.

Of this part of the Psalm, What is to be noted out of this part of the
psalm Romans 19.
what the Prophet has said of God and of man, we must for our own doctrine
and learning, gather some things to be the better by. For S. Paul says, What
so ever is written, is written for our learning. Two things we learn of this
first place: The one, a certeintie that God has the cure and charge of us: and
the other, a consolation and comfort, that we and all ours be under his
protection and governance. The first doctrine to be certain and sure of Gods
defense, and care over us, makes us constant and strong to suffer and bear
all adversities and troubles that God shall send us. And the second doctrine
shall cause us patiently and thankfully to bear our cross, and to follow
Christ. Both these doctrines the Prophet David expresses in the third and
fourth verse of this Psalm: If I should (says he) travel and pass through
places contagious and infected, where appears nothing but the image and
shadow of death, or be compelled to pass through the hands and tyranny of
mine enemies, I will not fear, for thou art with me (O GOD) and defendest me.
Psalm. 91.
In the 91. Psalm, he sets forth the assurance and felicity of all them
that put their whole trust in the mercy of God, and therein also the Prophet
reckons up a wonderful sort of dangers, and lays them before the eyes of
the faithful, that he may by the sight and knowledge of the dangers, fix and
place the more constantly his faith and trust in God, that has the charge and
cure of him: He shall (says he) defend us from pestilence most infectiue: from
fleeing arrows in the day, etc. By the which the Prophet understands all
kind of evils, that may come unto us, by the means of the devil, or of
wicked men. And these things the faithful shall escape (says the Prophet)
because they say from their hearts unto GOD, The assurance of Gods defense and
comfort in troubles; must be learned out of Gods word.
Quoniam tu es spes mea, that is to say, For thou art my hope: even as he said
in the beginning of this Psalm, The Lord feeds me, and I shall want
nothing. Such certeintie and assurance of Gods defense, and such consolation in
troubles of this life, we must learn and pray to have out of Gods word, or
else it were as good never to hear nor to read it.

And from this first part of the Psalm, every estate of the world may learn
wisdom and consolation. If the Lord feed and govern him, he shall have God
to his master and teacher, that shall give him wholesome and commodious
doctrine, meet for the state of the life he has chosen to live in this world.
For all that shall be saved in time to come, follow not one kind of life,
Some be Magistrates and Rulers, and appointed to see both the laws of the
realm, and the goods and commodities thereof, to be used and applied to the
use and profit of such as be under them. Some give them selves to study and
contemplation of heavenly and divine things, not busying them selves with
travels of the body, but to know them selves the way of life, and to be
teachers of the same to others. Some be given to apply the laws of the Common
wealth: some to exercise the trade and course of merchandise: some one kind of
living, and some an other. But of what art, faculty, science or kind of
living so ever he be, that is not contrary to Gods honor or honesty, he may
use therein to serve God, to observe justice, to exercise truth, keep
temperance, and be acceptable to God, who has given laws meet and convenient
to Publicans and Soldiers, servants and masters, parents and children,
husbands and wives, and so to all other: but all these sorts of people must
assuredly know, that in every of these vocations be more dangers, then he
that must live in them is able to bear. Therefore from the bottom of his
heart, he must be assured of this beginning of king David's Hymn: The Lord
feeds me, and I shall lack nothing. And in deed the Lord has not only
said, He will feed and defend him from all dangers, but also says, He will
teach him how to live virtuously and reverently toward God, and honestly and
quietly toward man, what state or vocation so ever he choose to live in, so
it be not against Gods laws, and the law of nature. So says king David:
Psalm. 25.
God has appointed a law to rule and teach the man that fears him, what
soever kind of living he appoints him self to live in. What treasure is
there to be compared unto this, that man is not only fed and maintained by
God, but also taught and instructed in every craft and science that he
appoints him self to live in? Blessed therefore is the man, that in the
entrails and deep cogitations of his heart, can say, believe, and feel this
to be true, that David says: The Lord rules me, and cares for me, and I
shall lack nothing. But yet there is almost nothing spoken, that this king
would have chiefly known. Howbeit doubtless, they be wonderful things, that
preserve and teach all persons both men and women, in what so ever kind of
living honestly they appoint themselves to live in. He him self knew this to
be true right well, as it appears when he says: Psalm. 144.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, that taught my hands to battle. For if the
Lord had not taught and ruled him, he had been overthrown many times, because
there was not only more strength then he had of him self against him: but
also more wit, more policy, more experience. But what things can ouercom that
man, that is covered with this shield, Dominus regit me, The Lord rules me?
Doubtless nothing at all, whether it be in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath, or in hell under the earth. Notwithstanding, this is not all that this
doctrine, The Lord rules me, does for the poor sheep that is ruled. But here
must the reader and hearer of this Psalm follow king David, and desire to
have the eye of his mind purged and made clean: for if the scales of
infidelity, and the love and delight to sin remain, or else the mind be
otherwise occupied then upon the understanding of the Hymn: he shall hear it,
or sing it, as the ungodly Colleges of Priests do, that daily bo-o and rore
the holy Scriptures out of their mouths, and understand no more the meaning
thereof, then the walls which they sing and speak unto. We must therefore do
as king David did, lift up the eyes of our minds into heaven, and fire our
faith (as he says) fast in the Lord: Psalm. 25. 128.
and then shall we see the unspeakable treasures and wisdom, that lies hid
in this meruellous and comfortable head and beginning of this Psalm: The Lord
feeds me, etc.

Our Savior Christ opens plainly in Saint John, what it is to be the sheep
of God, and to be fed by him, and says, They will hear the shepherds voice,
but no strangers voice: and because they hear the shepherds voice, the
shepherd will give them everlasting life, and no man shall take them out of
the shepherds hands. The inward and spiritual comfort, treasury, and
riches, which this doctrine brings.
There is the greatest treasure and most necessary riches for the sheep of
God uttered, which is not the knowledge of God alone to be preserved in this
life, and to lack nothing that is expedient and necessary for the
preservation thereof: but also to understand, which ways the heavenly father
teaches and leads us to the mansion and dwelling place of life everlasting.
And if man were wise, he might soon perceive, how much the life to come is
better then the life present: yea, be it never so favorably fed and preserved
by the heavenly father our shepherd and governor. For his tuition here of us,
although it be sure, and so strong, that none can take us out of his hands:
yet is our safeguard and life troubled and mingled with adversities, subject to
persecution and also unto death: but in the life to come, Gods tuition is all
joy, all mirth, all solace, with all perpetuity, and endless felicity. And
of this treasure David chiefly meant in the forefront of the Psalm, when he
said: And I shall lack nothing. 1. Peter. 4.
For as we see (until this life be taken from us) most troubles and most care
begins and tarrieth in the house of GOD amongst his sheep, which be as
lambs among woolues. Matthew. 10.
Wherefore, the voice and teaching of the shepherd, does heal the minds of
the sheep, Gods dear elect, and pulls from them all unprofitable fear and
carfulness: it quenches all flames of lust and concupiscence: it makes and
gives a man a noble and valiant mind, to contemn al worldly things: it
brings a man in love with Gods true honor, makes him joyful in trouble,
quiet in adversity, and sure that the end of Gods people shall be glorious and
joyful: and also that this favor of the shephearde shall be his guide into
the place of bliss, whereas be crowns of everlasting glory, for such as have
been led by the Lord, and there they shall lack nothing. For there is neither
eye can see, nor tongue can speak, nor mind can comprehend these joys and
glory. And therefore the Prophet both constantly and chearefully said: The
Lord feeds me, and I shall lack nothing: for all things of this world be
but trifles, in comparison of things to come. Although it be a singular favor
of God, to understand his goodness and mercy toward us, in things belonging
to this life: yet is it not to be compared to the other, as David wonderfully
declares in the 25. Psalm. When he has numbered a great many of Gods benefits,
which he does bestow upon his poor servants in this life, he in ye end makes
mention of one specially that passes them all, in these words, Arcanum
Domini timentibus illum, and testamentum suum manifestabit illis: That is to
say, The Lord opens to such as fear him his secrets, and his testament,
The Lord opens to his faithful servant the mysteries and secrets of his
pleasure, and the knowledge of his laws. And these treasures, the knowledge
and right understanding of Gods most holy word, he says, was more sweet
unto him, then honey or the honey comb, and more he essteemed the virtue of
it, then he did precious stones. Of all gifts this was the principal, that
God gave unto him a right and true knowledge of him self: Wherefore, it shall
be most expedient and necessary, for every Christian man, to labor, study,
and pray, that he may earnestly, and with a faithful heart know him self to
be no better, then a seely poor sheep, that has nothing of him self, nor
of any other, to save his body and soul: but only the mercy of his
sheepehearde, the heavenly father, and to be assured also, that his only mercy
and goodness alone in Christ, and none other besides him, is able to feed
him, so that he shall lack nothing necessary in this life, nor in the life to
come.

The second part of the Psalm.
Wherein the life and salvation of man consists.

THE SECOND VERSE.
He shall feed me in pleasant pastures, and he shall lead me by the rivers
side.
HE shall set me in the pastures most pleasant and rich of his doctrine, and in
the contemplation of heavenly things, wherewithal the minds of godly men are
nourished, and fed with vnspeakeble joy, and near unto the plentious floods of
the holy Ghost, and the sweet waters of the holy Scriptures he will feed me:
in the which places the sheep of the Lord are nourished to eternal life,
abounding with milk, and bringing forth most blessed fruit. John. 20.
The Scripture of God uses this word ( feed) in many significations. Sometime
to teach and instruct, Acts. 20.
some time to rule and govern, Ieremi. 3.
as magistrates rule their people as well by law, Ezech. 34.
as by strength. 2. Reg. 57.
Sometime to punish and correct, Mich. 5.
etc. But in this place, the Prophet uses ( feeding) as well for instruction by
Gods word, as also for defense and safeguard of Gods people, by Gods most
mighty power. John. 10.
He uses this word ( pasture) for the word of God it self, Psalm. 74. 79. 95.
as a thing which is the only food of a man's soul to live upon, Ieremi. 3.
^^.
as the meat and drink is for the body. Ezech. 34.
He uses this word ( lead) for conducting, that the man which is ledd, Joel.
1.
at no time go out of the way, Matthew. 4.
but always may know where he is, and whither he is going: as in many other of
his Psalms, he uses the same manner of speaking. The ( rivers of refection)
he uses, for the plentiful gifts of the holy Ghost, wherewithal the
faithful man is replenished. His saying therefore is as much, Psalm. 60. 73.
7.
as if he had spoken without Allegory or Translation thus, He instructs me
with his word, Apoc. 7.
and conducteth me with his holy spirit, Esaie. 55.
that I cannot err nor perish. Joan. 4.


In this part of the Psalm be many things worthy to be noted. First, it is
declared, that the life of man consists in the food of Gods word: then, that
there is none that gives the same to be eaten, but God our heavenly shepherd:
the next, that none can eat of this meat of Gods word, but such as the holy
Ghost feeds with the word. Matthew. 4.
Our savior Christ declares, that Man lives not by bread alone, but of every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. We can no more live in GOD
without GODS word, then in the world without worldly food. John 6.
Whereby he teaches us, that as the body lives by external meats, so does
the soul by the word of God. And no more possible is it for a man to live in
God without the word of God, then in the world without the meat of the world.
And S. Peter confesses the same. For when the Capernaites, and many of
Christ's own disciples had satisfied their bodies with external meats, they
cared not for their souls, neither could they abide to be fed nor to hear the
meat of the soul spoken of, although Christ did dress it most holsomely
with many godly and sweet words: they would not tarry until Christ had made
that meat ready for them: they could be contented to feed their bellies with
his meats, but their souls they would not commit to his diet, but departed as
hungry as they came, thorough their own folly. Christ was leading them from
the five barlie loaves and two fishes, wherewith they had filled their bellies,
unto the pleasant pastures of the heavenly word, that showed neither barlie
loaves nor fish, but his own precious blood and painful passion to be the
meat of their souls: how be it, they could not come in to this pasture, nor
taste in any case of the sweet herbs and nourishment of their souls. When
Christ perceived they would not be ledd into this pleasant pasture, he let
them go whither they would, and to feed upon what pasture they would, And
then he asked of his twelve that tarried, saying: Will ye depart also? Peter,
as one that had fedd both body and soul, as his fellows had, perceived that
the body was but half the man, and that being fed, there was but half a man
fedd, and also that such meats as went into the mouth, satisfied no more then
the body, that the mouth was made for: he felt moreover, that his soul was
fedd by Christ's doctrine, and that the hunger of sin, the ire of God, the
accusation of the law, and the demand and claim of the devil, were quenched
and taken away: he perceived likewise, that the meat which brought this
nourishment, was the heavenly doctrine that Christ spoke of, touching his
death and passion: and he understood also, that this meat passed not into the
body by the mouth, but into the soul by faith, and by the presence of Gods
spirit with his spirit, that the body also should be partaker as well of the
grace that was in it, as of the life. So that he felt himself not only to
have a body and a soul alive, but also that they were graciously replenished
with the pastures and food of Gods favor. Wherefore he said unto Christ, To
whom shall we go? thou have the words of everlasting life. Which words in
effect sound no other thing then this Psalm does, where David says: The
Lord feeds me and I shall want nothing, for he leads me into his pleasant
pastures, and pastureth me by the rivers side. Wherein it appears
manifestly, that the word of God is the life of the soul.

The Prophet David does meruellously open this thing, in the repeating so
many times the word of God, in a Psalm worthy much reading, and more marking
of the things contained therein. For he entreats all the Psalm thorough,
that a godly life does consist in the observation of Gods laws, and therefore
does he so many times in the Psalm, Psalm 119.
pray God to illuminate and indue his spirit and heart with these two
virtues, Knowledge and Love of his word, wherewith he may both know how to
serve God, and at all times to be acceptable unto him. And our savior Christ
himself in Saint Luke says unto a woman, Luke 11.
Blessed be they that hear the word of God and keep it. And in S. John, John.
5.
Christ exhorts all men to the reading and exercising of the Scripture. And
yet our blind guids say, that ignorance is the mother of godliness. Amos. 8.
For the ignorance of Gods word brings with it a murren and rott of the
soul: yet for the sins of the people, God said, He would send a hunger and
famine amongst men, not a hunger of bread nor water, but of hearing Gods word.
King David therefore, as one assured both of the Author of life, and also of
the food wherewith the life is mainteyned, stays himself with Gods
benediction and favor, that he is assured God feeds him with his word. And
he shows also that none is the author of this word, neither can any give it,
but God alone. For when the first fall of Adam and Eve by eating forbidden
meats, had poisoned and infected both body and soul with sin and Gods
displeasure, so that he was destitute both of Gods favor and wisdom: none
but God could tell him where remedy and help lay, nor yet could any deliver
him the help but God. For till God made promise that the seed of a woman should
make whole, and save that which the devil and man had made sick and lost, by
reason of sin, and also made open the remedy unto Adam, and inclined his
heart to believe the remedy: Adam was dead in sin and utterly cast away.
Then the pity of the heavenly shepherd said, He should notwithstanding in
time be brought into the same pasture again, John. 10.
and none should deceive him, nor bring him any more out of the pastures of
life.

But only God gave this meat, which was his holy word and promise, Ephesians. 2.
and also the mouth of faith to eat these promises of Gods only gift. And the
same appears throughout the whole Bible, that only God, by sending of his
word and preachers, brought knowledge of everlasting life, to the people that
were in ignorance. As Saint Paul says: Heb. 1.
God before time spoke unto our fathers by the Prophets, and in these latter
days unto us, by his son, and after the ascension of his son, by his
Apostles and Evangelists, Matthew. 28.
in so much that none of the Prophetes-euer spoke of Gods word, that
maintained the life of the soul, otherwise then they received it of the high
shepherd, almighty God, as Saint Peter says: 2. Pet. 1.
Prophecy came not by the will of man, but the holy men of God spoke as they
were taught by the holy Ghost. So that God is the only author and founteine
of his true word, James. 1.
the food of all men's souls. In like manner, he is the only giver of the
same: as he is the giver of it, and none but him self: so none can eat it,
but such as have the same delivered unto them by the holy Ghost. So our Savior
Christ likewise in the Gospel of Saint John tells Nichodemus, John. 5.
that it was not possible to understand and to know the grace of redemption,
except he were borne from above. And when Saint Paul preached the word of God
at Philippos, amongst the women by the water side, the Lord opened the heart
of Lidia, to understand the things spoken of by Paul. Acts. 16.
And when Christ preached among the Jews, and wrought wonderful miracles,
yet they understood nothing, neither were they anything the better. And
Christ shows the cause, Propterea vos non auditis, John. 8.
quia ex Deo non estis, that is to say, Therefore ye hear not, because ye be
not of GOD. But the fault was not in God, but in the obstinacy and
frowardness of their own hearts, as ye may see in Saint Matthewe. Matthew. 23.
Christ offered him self, but yet the malice of man rebelled at all times.
Saint Paul to the Corinthians wonderfully sets forth man's unableness, 1.
Cor. 2.
and says: The natural man is not able to comprehend the things that be of
God. John. 6.
And in Saint John, Christ says, No man can come unto him, except the heavenly
father draw him, for they must be all taught of God. Now as the Prophet saw
these things for him self and his salvation in Gods word: even so must every
Christian man take heed, that he learn the same doctrine, or else it were no
commodity to have the scripture of God delivered and taught unto us. And every
reader and hearer must learn of this Psalm, that there is none other food nor
meat for the soul, but Gods word, And who so ever do refuse it, when it is
offered or preached: or when they know the truth thereof, do yet of malice,
fear, lucre and gain of the world, or any other way repugne it, they be
unworthy of al mercy and forgiveness. Let every man and woman therefore
examine their own conscience, without flattering of them selves, and they shall
find that the most part of this realm of England in the time of our holy and
blessed king Edward the sixth, were fed with this holy food of Gods word, or
else might have been fed with it. For it was offered and sent unto them, as
well by most godly statutes and laws of Parleament, as by many Noble men, and
virtuous learned Preachers. If they fed not upon it accordingly, or now their
teeth stand on edge, and their stomachs be cloyed with it, to their peril be
it. Thus Christ says: John. 15.
They have nothing whereby justly to excuse them selves of their sin. And
likewise he faith, that Whosoever hates him, hates also his father. By which
words it appears manifestly, that no man can hate Christ's doctrine, but he
must hate Christ him self: and no man can hate Christ, but he must also hate
the father of heaven. Wherefore, it is expedient for every man to mark such
places. For it was not Christ's name, nor Christ's person, that the Jews hated
so mortally Christ for: but they hated him to death for his doctrine sake, and
it was Christ's doctrine that condemned the world, and showed the life and
learning of the world to be evil, John. 3.
and could not abide the light of Gods word, and therefore in no case they
could abide to hear of it: as ye see the like in his poor Preachers. Mark
whithe preachers of God are contemned of the world.
For his words sake they be less passed of, then dogs or brute beasts: for
they be hated to death, and more favor does Barrabas the murderer find,
then Peter the preacher of Christ, that would lead the flock redeemed with
Christ's precious blood, into the pastures of Gods word with the Prophet
David: and yet in this hatred of Gods word the food of Gods sheep, they
would be seen, and none but they, to love and honor God, but it is not so in
their hearts: for they have a contempt of God, as their fruits well declare.
And Christ says, They hate both him and his father, yea, and that without
cause.

But thou (Christian reader) see thou feed thy Psalm. 35.
soul with no other meat, John. 15.
then with the wholesome pastures of Gods word, what so ever the world shall say
or do. John. 15.
Look upon this text of Saint John: When the comforter shall come, whom I
shall send from my father, even the spirit of truth, which does proceed from
the father, he shall testify and bear record of me. Weigh that place, and
think, wherefore the son of man referred him self to the witness of the
holy Ghost, and ye shall know, that it was for no untruth that was in the
author being Christ, or in the doctrine that he preached: but only to make
the disciples to be of good comfort, and that they should not esteem the
Gospel he preached unto them any thing the less, although it had many
adversaries and enemies, and was spoken against in manner every where: for
against the fury and false judgment of the world that contemned the Gospel,
they should have the testimony of the holy Ghost, to allow and warrant the
Gospel. Let us therefore pray to the heavenly shepherd, that he will give us
his holy spirit, to testify for the word of God the only food of our souls,
that it is true that God says, and only good that he appoints to feed us.
And this we may be assured of, that in this heavy and sorrowful time, there
is nothing can testify for the truth of Gods word, and keep us in the
pleasant pasture thereof, but the very spirit of God, which we must set
against all the tumults and dangers of the world. For if we make this verity
of GOD subject to the judgment of the world, our faith shall quail and faint
every hour as men's judgments vary. Wherefore, let us pray to have always in
us the spirit of adoption, whereby when our faith shall be assaulted, we may
cry, Father, father, and the same help for the maintenance of truth, God
promised by his holy Prophet Esaie, saying: Esaie. 59.
This is my covenant with them (says the Lord,) my spirit which is in thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart from thy mouth,
nor from the mouth of thy seed, nor from the mouth of the seed of thy seed,
from henceforth until the world end.

Here does the almighty God set forth, what a treasure and singular gift his
word is, and that it shall not depart from his people, until the worlds end.
And in these words is this part of David's Psalm meruellously opened and set
forth. It is the Lord alone that feeds and instructs (says Esaie the
Prophet.) It was not man's own imagination and intention, nor the wisdom and
religion of his fathers (what so ever they were:) but it was the Lord that
spoke, and made the covenant with man, and put his spirit in man, to
understand the covenant, and by his word, and none other word, he
instructed man and said, that by this means all men should till the worlds
end, What things we receive by feeding upon Gods promises in this life.
feed and eat of Gods blessed promises. For in his word he has expressed and
opened to every man what he shall have, even the remission of sin, the
acceptance into his fatherly favor, grace to live well in this life, and at
the end to be received into the everlasting life. Of these things the reader
may know what mainteineth life, even the word of God, Matthew. 4.
as Christ says: Psalm. 19. 119
If ye abide in me and my words abide in you, 2. Tim. 3.
ask what ye will, and ye shall have it. Heb. 1.
He shall learn also, that it is not General counsel, Provincial counsel,
1. Pet. 1.
the determination and agreement of men, that can be the author of this food,
but only God. Gala. 1.
And as God is the only author of this food: even so is his holy spirit, he
that feeds the poor simple soul of the Christian man with his blessed
pasture, John. 6.
and not the wisdom of man, Esaie. 54.
men's sacrifices, or men's doings. But as touching the food of man's soul,
John. 15.
to be the only word of God, I will (if it be Gods blessed pleasure, to whom in
the bitter and painful passion of Christ, I commit my will, with my life and
death) open unto the sheep and lambs of God at large in an other book.

The third part of the Psalm.
How man is brought to the knowledge of life and salvation: which part shows
what man is of him self, and how he is brought into this life, and to feed
in the pleasant pastures of Gods word.

THE THIRD VERSE.
He shall convert my soul, and bring me into the paths of righteousness, for
his names sake.
MY soul erred and went astray from the right way of godly living, but the
Lord converted me from mine errors and faults of living, and brought me to the
observation of his holy laws, wherein is contained all justice, truth, and
godliness. Here is to be noted, what degrees and orders the Lord and heavenly
shepherd does use, in bringing his sheep unto the pasture of life. First, he
conuerteth the man that is gone astray, by his wicked ways and sinful manner
of living. If he were an Infidel, he brings him first to know, feel, and
hate his infidelity, and afterward to a true faith. If he be a persecuter,
he shows him first his tyranny, and afterward how to use him self meekely.
If he be a sinful man that lives contrary to his knowledge and profession, he
brings him first to the knowledge and hatred of his sin, and afterward to
the forgiveness of the same. As Christ our savior wonderfully teaches in Saint
John, John. 16.
where he says: The holy Ghost, when he comes, shall rebuke the world of
sin, justice, and judgment. By the which words he declares, that the
faithful of God, can not profit in the Gospel of Christ, neither love nor
exercise justice and virtue, except they be taught, and made to feel the
burden and danger of sin, and be brought to humble them selves, as men that
be of them selves nothing but sin. And therefore the law and threatenings of
God be very wholesome, whose nature and property is to cite and call men's
conscience unto the judgment of God, and to wound the spirit of man with
terror and fear. Wherefore, Christ uses a wonderful way, and teaches the
same unto his Apostles, that neither him self for that present time, nor they
in time to come, could preach profitably the Gospel, wherewith men are led
into the sweet and pleasant fields of Gods promises by his word, except they
use this order: to lead them from sin to justice, and from death to life.
And as justice and life comes by Christ, showed unto us in his bitter
passion, The conscience that feels the sting of death by sin, thirsts for
life.
death, and glorious resurrection: so does sin and death both appear and be
felt by the spirit of God, showed unto us in the law. This order also fawe
the holy Prophet, when he said: The Lord conuerteth my soul, and leads me
into the paths of righteousness. This is a wonderful sentence, and much and
deeply to be considered and weighed of the Christian man. The Lord conuerteth
my foul, says David. He feels in him self, that as long as the devil and
sin have the rule and kingdom in man, the soul of man being Gods creature,
is deformed, foul, horrible, and so troubled, that it is like unto all things,
more then unto God and virtue, whereunto it was created: but when the wicked
devil and deformed sin, be by the victory of Christ overcome and expelled,
the soul waxes fair, amiable, sweet, loving, pleasant, and like unto God
again, and comes into order and obeisance unto his creator, and so brought
into ye paths of righteousness, feeds with the rest of Gods well ordered
flock upon she pastures and food of his holy word, to do his blessed will.

Oh that we would, in the glass of Gods word, look upon our own souls,
when they be in the tyranny of the devil, under the kingdom of sin, as
this king did: we should more loathe and detest our own soul, and the
company that our soul is accompanied withal, then if we should for all our
life time, be put into sties with hogs, and always be bound during our life,
to live with them, feed as they feed, sleep and wake as they do, and be as
they be in all things. Luke. 15.
Look in the Gospel of Saint Luke, and there shall ye see a man by sin, so
foul, so disordered, so accompanied with swine, so hungerbaned, so rent and
torn, so beggarly, so wretched, so vile, so loathsome, and so stinking, that
the very swine were better for their condition, then he was. But see how the
heavenly shepherd beheld from his heavenly throne, the place of the
everlasting joys, this poor strayed sheep, feeding not amongst sheep, but
amongst swine, and yet could not be satisfied therewith. And no meruell, for
swine feed not upon the meat of sheep, nor yet do sheep fill them selves
with hogs draffe and swillinges: but this shephearde used his old wonted
clemency, and struck the heart of his sheep, making him to weep and bewail
his condition, a man to come to such dishonor to be coupled and matched with
swine, to feed like swine, eat like swine such meat as swine eat,
remembering that the worst in his fathers house was a Prince and noble King, in
comparison and respect of him: then also being persuaded of his fathers mercy,
he returned, and his father brought him into his pleasant and sweet pastures,
and gave him his old favor and accustomed apparel again, as a man to keep
company with men, and no more with adulterous men, and unclean swine:
howbeit, he came not to his old honor again, till the Lord had practiced in
him, that he practiced in this Prophet king David, Ammam meam conuertit, He
converted and turned my soul.

It is but a folly for a man to flatter himself, as though he were a
Christian man, when his heart and soul is not turned unto the Lord. He shall
never feed in the pastures of life, but be an hypocrite all the days of his
life, as the most part of the world be that profess Christ's name at this
present day. They say they be converted from the world to God, when there is
nothing within the pastures of Gods word, but that they will contemn rather,
then to have as much as an evil look of the world for it. They say they be
converted to God, when they be contented with the world to honor that for God,
that is but bread and wine in the matter and substance, as the scripture of
God, and the holy Church of Christ have taught and believed, these thousand and
five hundredth years and more. Oh Lord, be these men turned to thee? Be these
the men that shall dwell with thee, in thy holy mount of Sion, Psalm. 24.
and stand in thy holy place? Nay doubtless, for they be not turned to thee,
but from thee, and be not with thee, but against thee. They speak with thee,
and yet their deeds dishonor thee, they talk of truth and practice lies.
What (good Lord) shall thy simple and poor unlearned sheep do? Where shall
they seek thy truth? For the sheepeheards say and sing this Psalm every
week, and at every dirige for the dead, and yet they be not converted in their
spirits to thee, that thou might lead them into the paths of righteousness.
But (Lord) there is no man now (in manner) that dare accuse them: they destroy
themselves and thy sheep, and no man can be suffered with Gods word to remedy
it. Notwithstanding, (good Lord) although in this world none may accuse them,
yet they in the world to come shall have king David (whose Psalms they daily
read, and in whom they most glory,) to accuse them, both of heresy and
blasphemy: as Moses shall accuse the wicked Jews, whom they most glory of.
For as the Jews read the scripture of Moses, and yet were never the better: so
these priests of Antichrist read the holy scripture, and yet neither the
people, nor they themselves, are any thing the better. And in this they pass
ye abomination of the Jews and Turks: for they were, and yet be content,
that their books of religion shall be used in their churches in the vulgar and
common tongue: but these enemies of God and man, would not have the word that
God has appointed for all men's salvation, to be used in any tongue but in the
Latin.

The God therefore of peace, that brought again from death to life, the great
shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the everlasting testament, our Lord
Jesus Christ, convert the souls and hearts of all those, that cause the
sheep of God thus to eat and feed upon the carrine and infected pastures of
men's traditions. Amen.

Now, as king David in this text has wonderfully set forth ye miserable
nature of al Gods sheep, and put himself for an example, that the nature and
condition of all men is corrupt, wicked, and damnable, so that it cannot be
partaker of Gods benediction and everlasting grace, except it be borne a new,
amended, restored, and instructed: so likewise he shows, that none conuerteth
the soul of man, but the heavenly father the great sheepeheard, that both
sees the lost state of his sheep, and wills of his mercy the salvation
and calling of the sheep home again: and then he proceeds further, and
shows what the heavenly sheepeheard will do with his sheep. He says, He
will lead them into the paths of justice. Wherein the Prophet declares, that
it is not only God that conuerteth the man from evil, but also he alone that
keeps him in goodness and virtue. And therein is showed a wonderful misery
and wretchedness in the soul and body of man, that can neither begin nor
yet continue in a life acceptable unto God, except that GOD wholly works the
same himself.

And as it declares the wonderful wretchedness of man, so does it manifest
and set forth a wonderful and unspeakable mercy and compassion of God
toward man, that so meruellously and graciously he can be content to help
and save his enemy and very adversary. But herein is required of as many as
the Lord conuerseth from iniquity and sinful living, that they walk in
the same law, and use their conversation in equity and justice, as it
beecommeth obedient men and women redeemed with the sheepeheardes most precious
blood.

For the Lord does not teach his sheep the truth, that they should live in
falsehood: neither gives he them the remission of their sins, that they
should return to the same again: but because they should studiously apply
and diligently exercise themselves in virtuous woorks, Psalm. 1.
to the honor of almighty God. Matthew. 5.
There be two sorts of people that the Lord will judge and punish in the
latter day, with extreme ire and justice.

The one sort be called upon to learn the knowledge of God and of Gods honor,
as Gods word commands: but they will not hear, nor obey the calling, but
know God and learn God, as the custom and manner of the world is to know him
and learn him, though it be never so far from the truth. And the other sort
be contented to hear and learn to know God, and to serve him as he teaches
in his holy and most pure word, but in their hearts consent not to their
knowledge: but contrary to it they do outward service to a false God, and frame
their conversation, both in religion toward God, Woeful are these days when
in so clear light of the truth, the professors thereof are so faithless and
fruitless. Esaie 65.
and their manners toward men, as men of the world do. So that God has no more
reverence of him that knows the truth, then of him that is ignorant of the
truth.

Esaie the Prophet speaks against the first sort of men, that will not hear
when they be called, nor learn when they be taught, and says: When other men
shall laughe, they shall weep: when other be merry, they shall be sorry:
when other be whole, they shall be sick: when other men shall live, they shall
die: and when other men rejoice in mirthe, they shall lament in sorrow. And
good cause why says S. Paul: For, Romans 10.
the Lord has stretched forth his hand always to a rebellious and obstinate
people, that will not learn nor know his holy will. Again, the other sort
that know and have learned the Lords will and pleasure, and yet prepare not
themselves to do his will, Luke 12.
shall be beaten with many stripes (says our savior Christ.) And the Lord in
S. Matthewe does wonderfully charge both such as ignorantly do offend, and
those that do with knowledge offend, those also that be called upon to
amendment in faith and charity, and those that be not called upon by
preaching of the truth, and says: The greater damnanation is upon such as
know or might know, or else when they do know, they be nothing the better for
their knowledge. He puts forth there four cities, Chorozaim and Bethsaida,
Tire and Sidon: two of them many times admonished by Christ to amend: the other
two not so called upon, nevertheless both of them the Lord will judge, but
most severely such as neglect the word of God when it is offered. Therefore, it
is not enough for a man to hearken or hear, read or learn Gods word, but he
must be ruled by Gods word, frame his whole life after Gods word, and before
all things avoid idolatry by Gods word: as king David says in this Psalm,
that The Lord did not only convert his soul, but brought him into the paths
of justice.

Let every man and woman therefore think with themselves, what knowledge they
have received of God: for he that has received most, shall make account for
most: and the more he knows, and abuses his knowledge, the more shall be his
damnation: and in case they know nothing at all, and be never the better for
all the preaching of the Lords word, let them take heed what persons they be,
and in what place they have dwelled. In case their poverty was such, that they
could not hear, and their dwelling where as was no preaching at all: yet be
they under the judgment and damnation of God, because they know not, as Tire
and Sidon were. If they were of such state, as they might have come if they
would, and had preachers to tell them the truth, in case they would have heard
the truth, such men and women shall be the more in danger of Gods severe and
just judgment. GOD requires not only a count of that has been received, but
of that might have been received.
For God does not only take an account of that which men have received, if
they use not Gods gifts well: but also straightly requires of them, that
might have learned the thing, that either willingly or obstinately they refused
to learn: as ye may see by Choroazim and Bethsaida. God will as well take an
account of him that refused to receive the gift of Gods word, as he requires
an account of him that has received it, and abused it. Matthew. 11.
Whereby we learn, Luke. 12
that not only the man that abuses Gods word shall be damned, but also he that
will not learn Gods word. King David had the word offered, he received it, and
was carried thereby into the paths of justice, and lived godly thereafter.
Now he goes forth, and shows, wherefore man is brought to life and
salvation.

The fourth part of the Psalm.
Wherefore man is brought to life and salvation.

THE THIRD VERSE continued.
For his names sake.
HE brought not me to life and salvation (says the Prophet,) for any merits or
deseruinges of mine, but for his own infinite goodness sake. And whatsoever
evil has been done, and sin committed, all these things I ascribe to my
corrupt nature, and accuse my self to be the doer of them: but if any thing
have been thought, said, or done, that is virtuous and godly, that I wholly
ascribe and attribute unto the mercy of God, that gave me a good mind to wish
to do well, and also strength to do the things, that he gave me will to wish.

Of this part of the Psalm we learn, that man can neither wish, nor speak,
nor do any thing, nor yet understand any thing that good is, but only
through the mercy of God, who makes of an ignorant man a man of knowledge,
of an unwilling man a willing man, of an evil speaker a good speaker, and of
an evil doer a good doer. Therefore S. Paul, when he sees that the nature of
man will take upon her to be the author of any good thing, he accuses and
condemns her of arrogancy and pride, saying, What have thou that thou have
not received? 1. Cor 4.
If thou have received, why do thou glory as though thou receiuedst not?
And in the same Epistle he says, that He preached Christ crucified, 1. Cor. 1.
which was a slander to the Jews, and a foolishness to the Gentiles: Yet,
(says he,) The foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of
God is stronger then men. And that had king David good experience of, when he
said, The Lord rules me, and I lack nothing, he puts me in a sweet
pasture and leads me by the rivers side, he turns my soul, and
conducteth me into the way and pathe of justice for his names sake, and for
his mercies sake. He saw the devil, the world, his flesh, and sin, all
conquered by the power of God, and for his names sake brought both to live, and
also virtuously to live, to his honor that gave the life, and to his own
salvation that received the life.

All our teaching a great many of years, and also your whole labors, have
been chiefly to know the misery of man, and the mercy of Almighty God.
Wherefore, it shall not need long to tarry in opening of this place of the
Psalm: for ye be rich in God in these 2. points, God give you grace well to
use them. Yet in any case we must remember, that our souls be turned from
sin, and we accepted as the people of everlasting life, only for Gods mercies
sake. So does king David wonderfully open unto us in the 32. Psalm, where he
says, Blessed be they whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32.
and whose transgressions be covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not his sin. Of the which words we learn, that the godly king
called those happy and blessed, not that be clean and pure without sin,
(for there is no such man in this life:) but those be blessed, whose sins the
mercy of God forgiueth: and they be only such, as unfeignedly acknowledge
their sin, and steadfastly from their hearts believe, that the death and
passion of Jesus Christ is the only expiation and purging thereof: as S. Paul
wonderfully expounds David's words in his Epistle to the Romans. As the
Prophet by these words, ( For his names sake,) Romans 4.
declares, that there is nothing in him, nor in any other man, wherefore God
should turn the soul of man from death to life, from error to truth, from
the hatred of God to Gods love, from wandering a stray to a stablished
continuance in the verity of Gods word, but only Gods mercy: so does he in
other of his Psalms always, when he entreats of Gods mercy and of man's
sin, set forth man so naked and vile, as a thing most destitute of all
health and salvation, and shows that none of these gifts, remission of
sin, acceptance into Gods love and favor, pasturing of them with his most
blessed word, can happen unto any other, saving unto such as do know, and
earnestly confess, that they be sinners and infected with many contagious and
dangerous infirmities, And therefore he says in the 2. verse of ye psalm
above mentioned, Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin, Psalm. 32.
and in whose spirit there is no guile. For there is no greater guile, nor
more danger in man, then to think himself to be somewhat, when he is nothing in
deed: or else to think him self to be of such purity of mind, as though he
needed not this free remission and favor of God. And as there is nothing more
proud and arrogant, then such a mind: so there is nothing in man more
detestable and miserable. Of the contrary part, they be blessed that hunger
and thirst for justice: Matthew. 5.
for, God fills the hungry with good things, Luke. 1.
but the proud he sends away empty. And that knew this holy Prophet right
well, that it was humility and the casting down of him self that was most
acceptable unto God, and the seeking of health and salvation only for his
names sake, that is to say, for his mercy promised in the death and passion of
his only son our Savior Christ. In the end of the.xxxij. psalm, king
David that had thus humbled himself, Psalm. 32.
brings in God that speaks unto him, whiles he is thus making his complaint
of his corrupt nature and sinful life, saying in this manner, Intellectum
tibi dabo, etc. that is to say, I will give thee understanding, and instruct
thee in the way thou shall go, and will have mine eyes ever upon thee.
Wherein he declares, that such humbled men and lowly persons, as know their
iniquity, shall have understanding of God, and shall not swerve from the right
ways: not for their deeds and their deseruinges, but for his mercy that
vouchsafes to instruct and teach them. And so likewise does this godly king
show in this Psalm: The Lord rules me and I lack nothing, he feeds me in
sweet pastures and leads me by the rivers side, he turns my soul, and
brings me into the paths of righteousness, and all for his names sake. When
he has opened the salvation of man, and also the cause thereof, and wherein it
consists: he proceeds to the fifte part of his oration and holy Hymn.

The fifte part of the Psalm.
What trouble may happen to such as God gives life and salvation unto.

THE FOVRTH VERSE.
Although I walk thorough the vallie and shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me.
Seeing I have such a guide and defender, there is no difficulty of peril,
nor fear of death, that I will pass of. For what harm can death do to him,
that has God the author of all life with him? Or what can the tyranny of man
do, where as God is the defender?

In this fifte part, King David shows, how the Lord God does exercise his
sheep, whom he feeds with his blessed word, in dangers and troubles: and
also how he will defend them in the midst of their troubles, what so ever
they be. In the first words of the fifth part of this sacred and holy Hymn,
the prophet declares that the life of Gods sheep and people in this world,
can not be without dangers and troubles. Therefore Christ says, that He came
to put fire in the world, and that the same fire should burn, meaning that he
came to preach such a doctrine, as should move dissension and discord
between friend and friend, The wicked make the Gospel of peace an occasion of
discord.
the father and the son, and set them at debate. Not that his word is a
learning or doctrine of dissension and discord of it self, but that by the
malice of men, that can not abide to be rebuked by the word of God, they will
be always at discord and variaunce with the word of God, Luke 12.
and with any friend or foe that teaches it. And the same does Christ our
heavenly sheepeheard show us, John. 7. 8. 9. 10. 16.
both in his doctrine and in his life, who was hated and troubled more then any
man before or since his time, The cross is the sure badge of Gods children.
and assures all his to have troubles in this world, yea and death also. But
it forces not, for he says, I have overcome the world. And whatsoever the
dangers be, and how horrible soever they seem, John. 16.
Christ being with us, we need not to fear. Therefore in this point the
prophet corrects the foolish opinion of man, that would live as one of the
sheep of God in this world without troubles. It is contrary both to the
person that professes God, and also to the religion that he is professed unto,
for in ye world both shall be (as Christ says) hated:) of which hatred
comes persecution and troubles, so that the people of God shall, whether they
will or will not, pass through many dangers, and no less perilous then the
shadows, and very image of death, as here King David shows in this
wholesome and blessed Hymn.

And as he sees right well, that the state and condition of Gods people and
sheep, is to be troubled for Christ and his word: Zachar. 11.
even so did Zachary the prophet speak of Christ and his people, Matthew. 16.
how that not only the sheep should be troubled and scattered abroad, but
also the sheepehearde should be stricken with the sword, that both sheep and
sheepehearde should be condemned in this world. But now, as David and
Zachary declare, that the life and condition of Christ and his sheep be
troublous in the world: so do they both declare, that whatsoever the troubles
be, they be both known and appointed upon whom they shall fall, and in what
time they shall trouble the sheep of God: so that they can come no sooner then
God appoints, nor do any more harm then the heavenly sheepeheard shall
appoint them to do. And this we may see and learn as well in Christ, as in his
sheep. How many times did the Priests and Phariseis conspire Christ's death?
Yet because his time was not come, they had not their purpose: but when the
time of God was come, Christ said to his sheep: Ye shall be all troubled this
night for my cause, John 18.
for the sheepeheard shall be stricken, and the sheep shall be scattered
abroad. Then, as God had appointed the time, it could be no longer deferred.
And because they should not miss of him, whose death they sought, he came and
met them and offered himself unto them, and said, that He was the same man
Jesus of Nazareth, whom they sought. And when they had taken him, and used as
much cruelty toward him, as their wicked malice and diuellishe hatred could
devise, they killed him, and made him to pass not only the shadow and image
of death, but also death it self. Matthew. 27
They thought then they had him where as they would, Mark. 15
and said, He has saved other, let him now save himself, Luke 23.
if he can.

When he was laid in the grave with his fathers, John 19.
they thought to execute their plagues and tyranny toward him being dead,
purposing that as they had brought him to death and killed him: so likewise
they would keep him down still, that he should never see life again, but
rotte in the earth like a wretch, until worms had eaten him. And for the
performance of this purpose, to do all their whole wills to the uttermost,
they came to Pilate and said, that The deceiuer of the people that lay in the
grave, made his bost whiles he was alive, that the third day after his death he
would rise again, but if it should be so, it would be worse with them after,
then it was before. Appoint therefore soldiers (said they) and watchmen to
keep the Sepulcher till the third day be past. Matthew. 27.
Whiles they yet minded to lay as much evil and contempt upon Christ our
shepherd, as they meant unto him, came the heavenly father, that suffers no
more ignominy to fall upon his, nor will suffer them to continue any longer
then him pleases, with this inhibition and stay of further proceedings in
dishonouring and persecuting his only son, and said: I am redijt lux tertia,
surge sepulte meus, That is as much to say, Now is come the third day, arise
mine own dear son buried. And then was the sorrow and contempt of this our
persecuted sheepeheard not only ended, but also turned into endless and
unspeakable joys: he passed with his forefather David most bitter pains and
also most vile death, but he feared not because God was with him. A doctrine of
Gods providence most comfortable to all his afflicted. Psalm 2.
The same appointment also has the heavenly father made with all dangers and
troubles that shall happen unto us his poor and afflicted sheep, taken daily
(as it were to the shambles) to suffer what Gods enemies can devise. But the
heavenly sheepeheard does see all their doings out of heaven, and mocketh them
to scorn: for they shall never do as much as they would, against Christ and
his people, but as much as God will suffer them. David afterward in his 37.
Psalm, teaches us the same with meruellous words and divine sentences:
Commite Domino viam tuam, and spera in eum etc. Lay (says he) thy care upon
the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall help thee.

It is most necessary therefore for every troubled man, to know in his mind,
and feel in his heart, that there are no troubles that happen unto man,
whatsoever they be, come they by chance or Fortune, as many men say and
think, but that they come by the providence of God: yea, the very winds of the
air, tempests in the clouds, trembling of the earth, rages in the sea, or
any other that come, how soudaine or how unlooked for soever they appear: as
ye may read in the 29. Psalm of this Prophet, wherein be wonderful
tempests, Psalm. 29
and troublesome things spoken of, as well done in the wators, as upon the
dry land.

But here (alas) is our nature and knowledge much to be lamented and complained
upon: for as the knowledge we have of Gods favor and gentleness toward us
in Christ, (for the most part) consists in the understanding of the mind,
and talk with the mouth, but the virtue, strength and operation of the same
favor of God is not sealed in our hearts and consciences: even so be the
troubles and adversities, The cause why there be so few sincere and true
professors of the Gospel.
which God threateneth for sin, spoken and talked of with the tongue, and
known in the mind, but they be not earnestly nor feelingly sealed in our
conscience and heart. And of this comes it, that we neither love God, nor
rejoice in his promises as we ought to do, when we hear or read them, neither
yet hate sin, nor be sorrowful for Gods displeasure, as sin and Gods
displeasure should be sorrowed and mourned for of Christian men. Hereof also
comes it, (dearly beloved) that we love no further, then in knowledge and
tongue, nor hate vice but in knowledge and tongue. But (alas) how miserable is
this our state and condition, that knows neither life nor death, virtue nor
vice, truth nor falsehood, God nor the devil, heaven nor hell, but half as
much as they ought of Christian men to be known? Read you therefore and mark
the 37. Psalm, Psalm. 37.
and you shall know, that it is not enough for Christian men, to understand
and speak of virtue and vice, but that the virtue must be sealed in the
conscience and loved, and the vice kept out of the conscience and hated, as
David says: Leave doing of evil and do good. So like wise he speaks of a
feeling Christian man, whose conscience has tasted how sweet and amiable God
is. Taste and feel (says the Prophet) how sweet the Lord is. And this
assure your selves, that when ye feel your sins, and bewail the danger and
damnation of them, the spirit of God has wrought that feeling, Psalm. 53.
And that troubled and broken heart God will not despise. And there is no doubt
nor mistrust of a sensible and feeling sinner: Here is thy comfort thou broken
hearted and afflicted of the Lord.
but in case he can find in himself no love to the obedience of God, nor
desire to do his will by hearing of his word, nor any feeling at all of sin,
nor desire to be rid from it by hearing of the law: he has knowledge in the
mind, and speech in the mouth: but no consent and feeling in his heart and
conscience. And this knowledge lives with sin, and speaks with virtue:
whereas the heart and conscience consents to good, and abhors evil, if the
virtue and nature of Gods word by Gods spirit be sealed in the conscience.
And this does S. Paul teach wonderfully, as well by faith, that comes by
hearing of Gods word, as also of his precious Supper, the Sacrament of his
body and blood and passion. Romans 10.
He says, that The heart beleeue^th to righteousness, What it is to believe
unto righteousness.
that is to say, The conscience and heart of him that is sealed, and assured of
the virtue and grace of Gods premises in Christ, believes to righteousness,
or is ascerteined and knows it self to be righteous and just and before God,
because it has consented, and received the mercy of God offered in the Gospel
thorough the merits of Christ: and then the same faith, Faith sealed once in
the heart with the assurance of Gods mercy, can be no more with out the fruit
of well doing, then fire without heat.
which God has sealed in the heart, breaks forth by confession, which
confession is a very fruit of faith to salvation, as it is written by S. Paul
in the same place. And where this faith is so kindled in the heart, there can
be none other but such a fruit following it. And as possible it is to have
fire without heat or flame, as this virtue, Faith, without the fruit of well
doing. And that is it that S. Paul says to the Corinthians: As often as ye
eat of this bread and drink of this cupp, show ye the Lords death until he
come. Wherein Saint Paul requires a knowledge of Christ in the receiver, not
only in his mind that he know Christ died for his sin, and the sin of
the world, and to speak and declare the same death with his tongue unto
others: but this is the chiefest and most principal commodity of Christ's
holy Supper, (which men now ungodly call the Mass,) that the virtue and
benefit of Christ's death, as it is appointed for the remission of his sins,
1. Cor. 11.
be sealed and fully consented unto in his conscience. And this knowledge of
Christ's death, When right knowledge and assured sense of Gods mercy are joined
together, note what they work.
with the assurance of the virtue, strength and power thereof in the heart,
will and ought to inflame us to thanksgiving, and to preach and teach unto
others those commodities of Christ's death, that we know and feel first in our
selves within our own spirit and heart.

Thus I have tarried longer then I thought in this matter, because I would
bring my self and all others (as much as lies in me) to feel that knowledge
and talk of virtue and vice, of Gods favor and of Gods punishment, is not
sufficient: and to bring my self and all men from knowledge and talk,
Knowledge and talk without the feling of Gods fruitful working spirit is not
of God.
to feeling, consenting, and a full surrendering of our selves, unto the profit
and vauntage of the things which we speak and know, or else knowledge and
speaking please not God, nor profit our selves, as Christ says: Not every
man that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Therefore
did David both know, speak, and feel signed in his heart, Matthew. 7.
the favor, help, and assistaunce of God, to be with him into what troubles
so ever he should fall, and in that feeling (did say) He would not fear. But
it may fortune I have so written of virtue and vice to be known of in the
mind, spoke of with the mouth, and felt in the heart: that ye may judge and
feel in your selves, never to have come to this perfection. For this is out of
doubt, he that has Gods love and fear thus sealed in his heart, lives in
this life rather an Angelical life, then the life of a mortal man: and yet it
is evident by king David in this Psalm, Psalm. 121.
and by his 121. Psalm, and in many more, that he was so sure, and so well
ascertained of Gods present help in his troubles, that he cared nothing for
death, or any other adversities that could happen. And doubtless, we perceive
by his Psalms in many places, yt his faith was as strong as steel, and he
trembled not nor doubted any thing, but was in manner without all kind of
mistrust, and nothing troubled what so ever he saw contrary to Gods promises,
and he passed over them, as things that could not once withdraw his cogitations
from the truth and verity of Gods promises, which he believed. Gene. 22.
As Abraham likewise did, he staggered not, but with constancy of faith would
have killed his own son, so strong was his faith. But as the gift of faith
is a treasure incomparable, thus to know and feel faith to overcome all
dangers: so makes it the heart of him that is sealed with such a faith, to
feel the joys and mirth unspeakable. But as this faith is the gift of God,
and comes only from him: so is it in him only to appoint the time when it
shall come, and how much and how strongly it shall be given at al times, which
is not at all times like, but sometimes so strong, that nothing can make the
faithful man afraid, no not death it self, and sometimes it is so strong,
that it makes the man afflicted to be contented to suffer: yea, death it
self, rather then to offend God. But yet it is with much conflict, great
troubles, many heavy and marvelous cogitations, and sometime with such a fear,
as the man has much ado to see, and feel, in the latter end of his heavy
conflict, the victory and upper hand of the temptation. And at an other time
the Christian man shall find such heaviness, oppression of sin, and
troubles, that he shall not feel as much (in manner) as one spark of faith to
comfort him self in the trouble of his mind, The state of Gods children
beaten downwith the sense and horror of sin and dread of gods judgments.
(as he thinks:) but that all the floudes and dreadful assaults of
desperation have their course through his conscience. Nothing feels he, but
his own mind and poor conscience, one so to eat the other, that the
conflict is more pain to him then death it self: he understands that GOD is
able to do all things, he confesses with the knowledge of his mind, and
with his tongue in his head, that God is true and merciful, he would have his
conscience and heart to agree thereunto and be quiet: but the conscience is
pricked and oppressed so much with fear and doubtfulnesse of Gods ire for
sin, that he thinks God can be merciful unto other, but not unto him. And
thus does his knowledge for the time of temptation, rather trouble him, then
ease him, because his heart does not, or rather can not consent unto the
knowledge: yet would he rather then his life, he could consent unto God, love
God, hate sin, and be Gods altogether, although he suffered for it al ye
pains of the world. I have known in many good men, and many good women, this
trouble and heaviness of the spirit for the time, as though God had clean hid
him self from the afflicted person, and had clean forsaken him: yet at length,
the day of light from above, and the comfort of the holy spirit has appeared,
that lay covered under the veil and covert of bitter cogitations of Gods just
judgments against sin. The comfort of the afflicted even when God seems to
have forsaken them.
Therefore, seeing that faith at al times has not like strength in man, I do
not speak to discomfort such as at all times find not their faith as strong
as David did in this Psalm: for I know in the holy Saints them selves, it was
not always like, but even in them as in others. And although we can not
compare with them in all things in the perfection of their faith, yet may they
compare them selves with us in the weakness of our faith, as ye may see by
the scriptures.

In this Psalm and in many other, ye shall perceive, that David by the
constancy and surety he felt in the promises of God, was so strong, so
joyful, and comfortable in the midst of all dangers and troubles of death:
that he did not only contemn troubles and death, but also desired death, and
to be dissolved out of this world, as Saint Paul and others did. At an other
time ye shall perceive him to be strong in faith, but not so joyful, nor yet
the troubles so easy unto him, but that he suffered great battle and conflict
with his troubles, and of the cause of all troubles, sin, and transgression
of Gods laws, Psalm. 6.
as ye may see in the sixth Psalm, whereas he cried out and said: Lord chasten
me not in thy fury, nor punish me in thy wrath: my soul is sore troubled,
but how long Lord will thou defer help? And of such troubled consciences with
conflictes, ye shall find oftentimes in the book of Psalms, and in the rest
of Gods scriptures: yet shall ye find the end of the temptation to be joyful
and comfortable to the weak man that was so sore troubled. For, although God
suffer a long fight between his poor soldier and the devil: yet he gives
the victory to his servant, as ye may see in king David. When he cried out,
that both his body and soul was wearied with the cross of Gods punishment:
yet he said at the last, Discedite a me operarij iniquitatis, quoniam
exaudiuit Dominus vocem fletus mei, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity,
Psalm. 6.
for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. And in other of his Psalms,
ye shall perceive his faith more weak, and his soul troubled with such
anguish and sorrow, that it shall seem there is no consolation in his soul,
nor any show of Gods carfulness toward him. In this state ye may see him
in the 13. Psalm, where as a man in manner destitute of all consolation, he
makes his complaint saying, How long will thou forget me? The same may ye read
also in the 43. Psalm. where he shows that he, his most just cause, and the
doctrine that he professed, was like altogether to have been overcome, so that
his spirit was in manner all comfortless. Psalm. 42. 43
Then he said to his own soul, Quare tristis es anima mea, and quare
conturbas me? Why art thou so heavy my soul, and why do thou trouble me?
Trust in the Lord, etc. And in the 42. Psalm he sets forth wonderfully the
bitter fight, and sorrowful conflicte, between hope and desperation. Wherein
he complayneth also of his own soul, that was so much discomforted, and
bids it trust in the lord. Of the which two places ye may learn, that no
man had ever faith at all times like, but sometimes more strong, sometimes more
weak, as it pleased God to give it. Let no man therefore despair, although he
find weakness of faith: for it shall make him to humble him self the more,
and to be the more diligent to pray to have help, when he perceives his own
weakness: and doubtless at length, the weak man by the strong GOD shall be
brought to this point, that he shall in all troubles and adversities say with the
Prophet, If I should go through the shadow and dangers of death, I would not
fear what troubles soever happen. And he shows his good assurance in the
text that follows, which is the sixth part of this holy and blessed Hymn.

The sixth part of the Psalm.
Whereby the troubles of Gods elect be-ouercome.

The fourth verse continued: and the fifth verse expounded.
For thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

Thou shall prepare a table before me, against the^ that trouble me, thou have
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.


SEeing thou art with me, at whose power and will all troubles go and come, I
doubt not but to have the victory and ouerhand of them, how many and
dangerous so ever they be, for thy rod chasteneth me when I go astray, and
thy staff stays me when I should fall. Two things most necessary for me
(good Lord) the one to call me from my fault and error, and the other to keep
me in thy truth and verity. What can be more blessed, then to be sustained
and kept from falling by the staff and strength of the most highest? And what
can be more profitable, then to be beaten with his merciful rod, when we go
astray? For, He chasteneth as many as he loves, and beats as many as he
receives into his holy profession. Notwithstanding, whilst we be here in this
life, he feeds us with the sweet pastures of wholesome herbs of his holy
word, until we come to eternal life, and when we put off these bodies, and
come into heaven, and know the blessed fruition and riches of his kingdom,
then shall we not only be his sheep, but also the guestes of his everlasting
banquet. The which (Lord) thou set before all them that love thee in this
world, and do so annoint and make glad our minds with thine holy spirit,
that no adversities nor troubles can make us sorry.

In this sixth part the prophet declares the old saying amongst wise men, Non
minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri, that is to say, It is no less
maistrie to keep the thing that is won, then it was to win it. King David
perceives right well the same, and therefore as before in the Psalm he said,
The Lord turned his soul, and lead him into the pleasant pastures, whereas
virtue and justice reigned, for his names sake, and not for any righteousness
of his own: so says he now, That being brought into the pastures of truth,
and into the favor of the almighty, and accounted and taken for one of his
sheep, it is only GOD that keeps and mainteineth him in the same state,
condition, and grace. For he could not pass through the troubles and shadow
of death (as he and al Gods elect people must do:) but only by the assistance
of God, and therefore he says, he passed through al peril, because he was with
him. Of this part of the Psalm we learn, that all the strength of man is
unable to resist the troubles and persecutions of Gods people, and that the
grace and presence of God is able to defend his people, and nothing but it.
Therefore does Saint Paul bid the Ephesians be strong through the Lord, and
through the might of his strength, Ephesians. 6.
for he says, that Great and many be our adversaries, strong and mighty,
which go about not only to weaken us, but also to overcome us, and we of our
selves have no power to withstand. Wherefore he wills us to depend and stay
only upon Gods strength. 1. Pet. 5.
And Saint Peter also, when he has declared the force and malice of the
devil, he wills us to resist him strongly in faith. And Saint John says, 1.
John. 5.
that This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. And our
savior Christ, when the time was come that he should depart out of the world
corporally, and perceived how maliciously and strongly the devil and the
world were bent against his disciples, that he should leave in the world as
sheep amongst woolues, and how little strength his poor flock had against
such marvelous troubles: he made his most holy and effectual prayer for them
present, and them in trouble, and likewise for us that be now, and also in
trouble in this sort: Matthew. 10.
Pater sancte serua eos, per nomen tuum, quos dedisti mihi, etc. That is to
say, Holy father, keep them for thy names sake, whom thou have given me.

Here has every one of Gods people such learning, Psalm. 120.
as teaches that our help is only in the name of the Lord, who made heaven
and earth. And in this learning we shall understand two necessary lessons. The
first, that none can defend us, but God alone, who is our protector and none
but he. And by this learning, he will beware to ask or seek help any other
where, saving of God, as we be instructed by his holy word. And herein we
honor him, to know and confess, that there is none that can preserve nor
save us, but he alone. The other lesson is, that our conscience understanding
that God can and will help us, shall cause us in all trouble to commend our
selves unto him, and so more strongly and patiently bear and suffer all
troubles and adversities, being assured that we shall overcome them through
him, or else be taken by them from this world, into a world whereas is no
trouble at all. So said this holy Prophet and King David, If I walk in the
shadow of death, I will not fear, for thou art with me. Now in that he says
(he will not fear) he means not that a man may see and suffer these perils
without all perils: (for then were a man rather a perfect spirit, then a
mortal creature:) but he means that fear shall not overcome him. For
Christ him self feared death, Matthew. 26.
neither is there any man that shall suffer imprisonment for Christ's sake, but
that he shall feel the pains: nevertheless, Gods spirit shall give strength
to bear them, and also in Christ to overcome them. There is no man that can
have faith, but sometimes, and upon some occasion, it may be troubled and
assaulted with mistrust: no man such charity, but that it may be, yea and is
troubled with hatred: no man such patience, but yt it may at times feel
impatience: no man such verity, but that it may be troubled with falshoode:
howbeit, in the people of God, by Gods help, the best overcomes the worst,
and the virtue the sin. But in case the worst prevail and overcome, the man
of God is never quiet, until he be restored unto God again, and unto the same
virtues, that he lost by sin: as ye may see in this king by many of his
Psalms, that he believed, and found God to defend him, how so ever his state
was, and therefore attributes unto him the whole victory and praise of his
deliverance, saying: Thou art with me, and do overcome.

But now the Prophet declares, how and by what means God is with him, and
does deliver him from all troubles. And this means of Gods presence and
defense, he opens by diverse Allegories and Translations, wonderful meet and
apt to express the thing that he would show to the world. The first
Translation or Allegory, he takes of the nature of a rod: the second, of a
staff, and says, They did comfort him and defend him: the third, he takes of
a table, which he says the great shepherd prepared before his face, against
as many as troubled him: the fourth, he takes from the nature of oil, and of
a cup that was always full, wherewith he was not only satisfied, but also
joyfully replenished in all times, and all troubles whatsoever they were. By
the rod, is many times in the scripture understood the punishment and
correction that God uses, to call home again, and to amend his elect and
beloved people, when they offend him: He punishes them, and yet kills them
not, he beats them, until they know their faults, but casts them not away:
as he said to king David, 2. Reg. 7.
that when he dyed, his kingdom should come unto one of his own children: and
in case he went astray from his law, he would correct him with the rod of
other Princes, and with the plagues of the sons of men, but my mercy (says
God) I will not take from him, as I did from Saul. This same manner of speech
may ye read also in his. 89. Psalm, and in the Proverbs of his son king
Solomon ye have the same doctrine: Prou. 10.
He that wants a heart, must have his back beaten with a rod. And in the
same book he says, He that spares the rod, hates the child. So does king
David here confess, that it is a very necessary and requisite way, to keep
the sheep of God from perishing, to be chastened and corrected when they wax
wanton, and will not hear the voice of their shephearde. And it is the part of
every wise godly man, to love this correction and chastisement of the Lord, as
Solomon says: Prou. 12.
He that loves discipline and correction, loves knowledge: he that hates to
be rebuked, is a fool. And king David says, It is to my great good
commodity, Psalm. 119.
that the Lord chasteneth me. This rod of correction, David says, is one of
the instruments and means, wherewithal God preserves his sheep from
straying. Now in the scripture sometimes the rod is taken, not for a correction
that amendeth a man: but for the punishment and utter destruction of man, Psalm.
2.
as David says of Christ: Thou shall break them with an iron rod: Apoc. 12.
and in the Apocalypse ye may see the same. But I will speak of the Metaphors
and Translations none otherwise, then David does use them in this place, for
his purpose.

The staff which he speaks of in the scripture, is taken for strength,
power, and dominion: which staff is spoken of, as ye may see, in the books of
the Kings, how the Ambassadors and men of war sent from the king of the
Assyrians to Ezechias at Jerusalem, 4. Reg. 18.
called the strength and power of the Egyptians, and also of the almighty
God, a staff of reed, Esai. 10. 14 28. 39
and a broken weapon, not able to withstand the king of the Assyrians: Ezech.
29.
and of such manner of speech ye may read many times in the Prophets. But in
this place David confesses, that the staff of the Lord, that is to say, Gods
power, is so strong, that nothing is able to overcome it: his wisdom is such,
that no man can make it foolishness: his truth is so true, that no man can
make it false: his promise is so certain and sure, that no man can cause him
to break or alter it: his love is so constant, that no man can withdraw it:
his providence is so wise, that no man can beguile him: his care is so great
for his flock, that they can want nothing: his fold is so strong, that no
beast can break it: he lets his sheep so in and out, that no man can
deceive him: he has such a care of all, as he neglects not one: he so
loves the one, that he hates not the other: he so teaches all, as none is
left ignorant: he so calls one, as all should be advertised: he so
chasteneth one, as all should beware: he so receives one, as all should take
hope and consolation: he so preserves one, as all the rest may be assured,
that he uses his staff and force to comfort one king David (as he says, Thy
rod and thy staff, they comfort me,) as all other should assure them selves to
be safe under his protection.

In this Metaphore and Translation, under the name of a staff, king David has
declared the power of God to be such, that in case he should pass by and
through thousands of perilles, he would not care, for GOD is with him with his
rod and staff.

Then he sets forth the third Allegory, and expresses an other means,
which God uses for the defense and consolation of his poor sheep, and says,
that GOD has prepared a table in his sight, against all those that trouble
him. By the name of a table, he sets forth the familiar, and (in manner)
fellowlike love, that the God omnipotent has toward his sheep, with whom
he uses not only friendship, but also familiarity, and disdaineth not (being
the King of Kings) to admit and receive unto his table, vile and beggarly
sinners, scabbed and rotten sheep. The friendship and familiarity of God the
heavenly shepherd toward his sheep.
That friendship and familiarity is meruellously set forth in this, that he
made a table for David: as though David had said, Who is he that can hurt me,
when the Lord of Lords does not only love me, but admits me to be
always familiarly in his company? The same manner of speech is used of king
David, toward Miphiboseth Ionathas son, 2. Reg. 9.
when he said he should not only have the fields again of Saul his
grandfather, but also be enterteined at his own table, that is to say, used
friendly, honorably, and familiarly. This word ( Table) is diversely
otherwise taken many times in the Scripture, but in this place it is nearest
to the mind of king David, to take it in this signification that I have noted.
And our Savior Christ takes it in the same signification, in Saint Lukes
Gospel where he says, his disciples shall eat with him at his table in the
kingdom of God.

The fourth means that the heavenly shepherd uses in keeping of his sheep,
the Prophet sets forth under the name of oil, and a full cup. In the
word of God these words have also comfortable significations and meanings
extending to David's purpose. Isaac, when he had given the blessing from Esau to
Jacob, said to Jacob, God shall give thee of the deaw from heaven, Genesis 27.
and from the fruitful ground thou shall have abundance of corn, of wine,
and oil, etc. By the which blessing, he means that Jacob should lack
nothing to serve his needs, and to make him merry. And if we take David that
he means by (Oil) as Isaac did, that at the Lords table was all plenty,
mirth and solace, we take him not amiss: for so many times oil is taken for
consolation and joy in the Scriptures. When Christ had purged the hurt man's
wounds, first with smarting wine, he afterward put into them sweet oil, to
ease the smarte and sharpness of the wine. And so likewise says our savior
Christ to Simon the Pharisee, Luke. 10
that gave him meat enough to his dinner, but gave him no mirth: Since I came
into thy house, thou gave me no water for my feet, nor oil for my head,
this poor woman never ceased to wash my feet with the tears of her eyes,
Luke. 7.
and to annoint them with oil. But in many Psalms king David uses this word
( Oil) to signify the holy Ghost, as when he speaks of our Savior
Christ: Psalm. 45.
Thou have loved justice and hated iniquity, therefore has God anointed thee
with the oil of joy above thy fellows. And this oil is not the material
oil that kings and priests were anointed withal in the old time of the law,
of whose confection we read in the book of the Levites: but this is the oil
by whose efficacy, strength and power, all things were made, that is to say,
the holy Ghost. Psalm. 89.
And in his 89. Psalm, he speaks of the oil in the same signification.
Therefore I take king David here, when he says, God has anointed his head
with oil, that God has illuminated his spirit with the holy Ghost. And so is
this place taken of godly men, The work of the holy Ghost in the hearts of the
says full.
his head taken for his mind, and oil for the holy Ghost. And as oil
nourishes light, mitigateth labors and pains, and exhilerateth the
countenance: so does the holy Ghost nourish the light and knowledge of the
mind, replenisheth it with Gods gifts, and rejoices the heart: therefore the
holy Ghost is called the oil of mirth and consolation. And this consolation
comes unto king David, and to all Gods lively members, by the means of
Christ, 1. Pet. 2.
as Saint Peter says: We be people chosen, and a princely priesthood, etc. By
the word ( Cup) in this verse he means, that he is fully instructed in all
godly knowledge, to live virtuously and godly for the time of this mortal
life, and so is the cup in the scripture taken for any thing that can happen
unto us, whether it be adversity or prosperity, for they be called cups: as
Christ said of his death, Matthew. 26.
Father, if it be possible, take this cup from me. Psalm. 16.
And David in the 16. Psalm uses it for man's prosperity in God: The Lord
(says he) is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup. And therein he
speaks in the name of Christ, whose inheritance is the whole number of the
faithful, and says, that His inheritance which is the Church, by Gods
appointment is blessed and happy, for no adversity can destroy it. This is
meant by David's words ( The rod, the staff, the table, the oil, and the cup:)
and he uses all these words, to declare the carfulness, love, and defense
of God toward miserable man. And he could the better speak thereof unto
others, because he had so many times felt, and had experience that God was both
strong and faithful toward him in all time of danger and adversity.

And here is to be noted, that the dangers that man is subject unto in this
life, be not alone such as heretofore king David has made mention of, as
sickness, treason, sedition, war, poverty, banishment, and the death of the
body: but he felt also (as every man of God shall feel and perceive) that
there be greater perils and dangers that man stands in ieopardie of, then
these be, by occasion of sin, the mother of all man's adversity. What sin
brings a man unto.
Sin brings a man into the displeasure and indignation of God, the
indignation of God brings a man into the hatred of God, the hatred of God
brings a man into despair and doutfulnesse of Gods forgiveness, despair
brings a man into everlasting pain, and everlasting pain continues and
punishes the damned creature with fire never to be quenched, with Gods anger
and displeasure which can not be reconciled nor pacified. These be the troubles
of al troubles, and sorrows of al sorrows, as our savior Christ declares in
his most heavenly prayer in S. John, John. 17.
Non rogo vt tollas eos e mundo, sed vt serves eos a malo. That is to say, I do
not (says Christ to his heavenly father) pray, that thou should take those
that I pray for out of the world, but that thou preserve them from evil. And
in this prayer he has wonderfully taught us, that a Christian man is subject
to two troubles, one of the body, and an other of the soul, one of the world,
and another of the devil. As for the troubles of the world he says, It is not
expedient that we be without troubles, least we seek our selves and forget god
It is not so expedient, that Christian men be delivered from them, least in
idleness we should seek our selves, and not God, as ye children of Israel
did: but this he knew was most necessa^^e, that the father should preserve us
in the midst of these troubles with his help, from al sin, and transgression
of his holy laws: and this he assured his disciples of, and al other that put
their trust in him: not that they should in this life be preserved and kept
from troubles and adversities: but that the heavenly father should always give
unto his, such strength and virtue against all the enemies of GOD, and man's
salvation, that they should not be over come with troubles, that put their
trust in him.

For God suffers and appoints his to fight and make war with sin, and
with all troubles and sorrows that sin brings with it: but God will never
permit his, to be deadly and mortally wounded. It is therefore expedient that
man know who he his greatest foes, and do work him most danger.

There be diverse Psalms, wherein he sets forth the peril that he was in,
as well in his body as in his soul: as when he complains of his banishment,
amongst not only cruel people, but also ungodly, that sought to take both his
mortal life from him, and also his religion and trust that he had in Gods
word. Wherefore he compares them to the Tartarians and Arabians, Psalm. 120.
men without pity or religion. And the like does he afterward in another
Psalm, where as giving thanks for his delivery, he says, that, sinners
froad upon his back, and many times warred against him, and he should have
been overthrown, Psalm. 129.
if GOD had not helped him. Where in he speaks, not only of battle with the
sword against the body but also of heresy and false doctrine against the
soul. As ye may see how Senacherib and Julius the Apostata, two Emperors,
fought against the people of God, not only to take from them their lives: but
also their religion and true honoring of GOD. And of all battles that is the
cruellest, and of all enemies the principal, that would take the soul of man
from Gods word, and bring it to the word of man. And that persecution and
trouble openly against Gods word continued many years, until Christ was
preached abroad, and princes made Christians. Then thought the devil his
kingdom to have been overthrown, and Christian men might live in Christ's
religion, without any trouble or war for religion: howbeit at length for
sin, the devil entered by subtle means, not only to corrupt true religion,
but also persecuted the true professors thereof under the name of true
religion, and therein used a meruellous policy and craft, by men that walked
inordinately amongst the Christians themselves. 2. These. 3.
From whose companies, sects, and conversation, S. Paul willed us to refrain
by these words: We command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye refrain from every one that is accounted a brother, that uses
himself inordinately, and not according to the institution he received of us.
And because ye have not taken heed of his holy commandment, and kept your
selves from danger and peril of heresy, sin, idolatry, and superstition, by
the rod and staff of God, nor have not eaten your meat of religion at Gods
table, nor your minds have been anointed with the holy Ghost, (as David in
this Psalm says that he was against all troubles, by these means, defended
and mainteyned, that no peril of the body by the sword, nor peril of ye
soul by false doctrine could hurt him:) therefore mark a little, and see the
dangers that have hurted both you and your conscience also, not like to be
healed (as far as I can see) but more hurt hereafter. For the way to heal a
man is to expel and put away sickness, and not to increase and continue the
sickness. From whom think ye that S. Paul commanded you to restrain in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ? He says, From him that behaueth himself
inordinately. Who is that think ye? S. Paul says, He that rules not himself
after the rule and institution that he himself had taught the Thessalonians.
So ye we must refrain then from all such, Gala. 1.
as conform not them selves to ye institution of S. Paul: yea, although he be
an angel from heaven.

This departure from such as have ruled and put forth errors and lies, is not
new, but has been used in England of English men, more then twenty years
since we departed from the sea of Rome, for the ambition of the Romish bishops
that transgressed both this ordinance of S. Paul and also of Christ. Of the
which deadly and pestilent ambition, the prophet Ezechiel prophesied, Ezech. 34.
and so did also S. Paul, if prophesies by God, Acts. 20.
and commandments by his holy Apostles had any thing prevailed in our dull
and naughty hearts. Read the places, and see your selves, what is spoken of
such a wicked sheepeheard. I do put you in mind of this wicked sea, because I
do see, that contrary to the word of God, contrary to the laws of the realm
most godly against the Popes supremacy, against all our oaths that be
Englishmen, and against all the old godly writers: this Antichrist and member
of the devil, is not unlike to have the regiment of your souls again, which
God forbid. I do exhort all men (therefore) to beware of him, as of one that
came naughtily to such usurped authority, and whose authority is not only
the trouble of all Christian realms and princes, but also of all Christian
souls. And as he has been always a trouble unto the one, so has he been a
destruction to the other: as I will a little declare unto you, that ye may know
him the better, and so by the rod and staff of Gods word, defend your
selves from him.

The Greek Church for this ambition of the Romish bishop, separated her self
from the Church of Rome, and would not have to do with her. For after that the
Greeks knew, that the bishops of Rome meant to take from them their liberties,
they would not endure it: yet did the Romish bishops always, to come to the
supremacy, pick quarrels and matters to fall out upon, first with the Clergy
and then with the Laity. Platina writes how Pius bishop of Rome, being
deceived by one Hermes a very evil man, began a new order about the keeping of
Easter day, and altered the time that the Apostles and their disciples used,
until Pius days, which was to celebrate and keep the day of the resurrection
of our Savior Christ the fourteenth moon of ye first month, which is with
the Jews our March. And although it be well done to keep it upon the Sunday,
yet was this an horrible presumption upon so light a cause, to excommunicate
the Greek Church, and to make division where before was union. It came to
pass in Victors time the first, which was about the year of our Lord two
hundred, and in the time of Iraeneus, the bishop of Lugdune the disciple of
John the Evangelist, this Victor would have condemned the Greek Church, and
proceeded with excommunication against it, had not Iraeneus let it: yet was
it the elder Church, and had continued in the doctrine of the Apostles from
Christ's time, and had John the Evangelist amongst them for the space of
threescore and eight years after Christ's ascension. And notwithstanding the
Greek Church was the elder Church: yet the Roman Church to be equal with
them, according to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and also according
to the decree that was made in the general Counsel at Nice. And the Greek
Church never contented with the Romish Church for the Supremacy, until a
proud and arrogant Moncke that feigned humility, was preferred to be bishop of
Constantinople, which came to such arrogancy of spirit, that he would have
been taken for the universal head of ye Church: which was a very mark to
know that he was of Antichrist, and not of Christ, as Gregory the great
writes to Constantia the Empress, Antoninus histor. tit. 13. 3. 23. 13.
and at length this proud Monk at a Synod kept at Constantinople, created
himself the universal head of the Church. Although before his time one Menna,
and other archbishops of Constantinople, for the dignity of the imperial state
being there, were called universal Patriarchs: yet that was by name alone, and
without execution of authority in any foreigne bishopric or Church. But such
was the ambition of these bishops, that walked (as S. Paul says)
inordinately, that they would have the head and principality of religion and
of the Church, at Constantinople, because there was the head and principality
of the worldly kingdom, and so they began betime to confound the civil
policy, with the policy of the Church, until they brought themselves not
only to be heads of the Church, but also Lords of all Emperors and kings, and
at the last of God and Gods word: as ruthfully it appears in men's conscience
at this present day. Which abomination and pride Pelagius the second bishop of
Rome, Distinct. 99. nullus.
both spoke and wrote against, and would that he nor any man else should have
the name of a general bishop. Antoninus tit. 12. cap. 3.
And S. Gregory does confirm the same godly sentence of his predecessor
Pelagius, and would not, when he was commanded by the Emperor, whom John the
bishop had abused, take the Archbishop of Constantinople for the universal
head, nor condescend unto the Emperors commandment, and wrote to the
Empress that it was contrary to the ordinance of Christ and his Apostles, and
contrary to the Counsel of Nice. He said also, that such new arrogancy was a
very token, that the time of Antichrist drew nigh. And Gregory did not only
write and speak against this arrogancy and pride, but suffered also great
danger (as Platina writes,) and so did al Rome by the Lombards that Mauricius
the Emperor made to besiege Rome, because Gregory refused to obey the
Archbishop of Constantinople as the head of the Church.

But although Pelagius, Gregory, and other godly men, detested and abhorred
this wicked arrogancy to be the universal head of the Church: yet the bishop
of Rauenna, began amongst the Latins to prepare the way to Antichrist, De
gestis Longobard. lib. 3. cap. 12.
as Paulus Diaconus says, and separated himself from the society of other
Churches, to the intent he might come to be a head himself. But what at
length came of it, Platina writes. And within a short time after, Boniface the
third being the bishop of Rome, In Leon. 2.
about the year of our Lord six hundred and seven, Phocas the Emperor judged
him to be head of the Church, against both the bishop of Constantinople, and
also of Rauenna, and such a sentence was meet for such an arbitrour. Phocas was
a wicked man, a covetous man, an adulterer, and a traitorous murderer of his
Lord and master Mauricius: Platina in Bonifac. 3.
and this man to make God and the Romans amends, gave sentence that the bishop
of Rome should be the universal head of the Church. Paulus Diaconus de gestis
Long. lib. 4. cap. 11.
But here was contemned the sentence and doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
and also the decrees of the holy Counsel of Nice. And no meruell: for they
condemned both parts of arrogancy and usurpation, and not only these
Counsels, but all other for many years, which decreed, that although one seat
was named before the other, yet the bishop of the principal seat should not
be the chiefest priest, or head of the rest, but only he should be called, The
bishop of the chiefest seat. And how much it is against S. Cyprian, they may
see that will read works, De simplicitate clericorum.
and also against S. Hierome. But what law can rule wickedness?

This wicked sea contended still after Phocas had given sentence with it for the
supremacy, yet were the bishops of Rome always subject to the Emperors, as
well of Constantinople as of France, for the time of their reign: yea, four
hundred years and odd, after the judgment of Phocas, they were in this
obedience, and were made by the Emperors, until the time of Gregory the
seventh, who in the time of great sedition, translated the Empire into
Germany, and never used jurisdiction in Emperors and kings, nor yet in the
citizens of Rome: but only desired to have all bishops causes to be
discerned by the sea of Rome, yet could not obtain so much at those days: as
appears by the Counsel of Africa, whereas Boniface the first, could not
obtain with craft, nor with his lies, that he made of the Cannons decreed in
the Counsel of Nice, to have causes deferred to the sea of Rome. And as for
this name (Pope,) To be called Pope, was at the first general to all bishops.
was a general name to all bishopps, as it appears in the Epistles of
Cyprian, Hierome, Augustine, and of other old bishops and doctors, which
were more holy and better learned, then these latter ambitious and glorious
enemies of Christ and Christ's church. Read the text. Distinct. 50. C. De eo
tamen, Histor. lib.
etc. Absit. And there shall ye see, that the Clergy of Rome, 2. cap. 27.
in their letters, called Cyprian Pope, and Clodoueus the king of France named
the bishop of Rome, as he did other bishops, A bishop.

This was the state of the primative Church, which was both near unto Christ
in time, and like unto him in doctrine, Gal. 2.
and kept S. Paul's equality, where as he says, He was appointed amongst the
Gentiles, as Peter was amongst the Jews. And although the bishops in the time
of Constantine the great, obtained that, amongst bishops, there should be some
that should be called Archbishops and Metropolitanes: yet, Con. Nicen. cap. 6.
all they were not instituted to be heads generally of the Church, but to the
end they should take more pains, to see the Church well ordered and
instructed: and yet this preeminence was at the liberty and discretion of
princes, and not always bound unto one place and one sort of prelates, as the
wickedness of our time believes: as ye may see in the Counsels of Calcedon and
Africa. So that it is manifest, this superior preeminence is not of Gods
laws, but of man's, instituted for a civil policy: and so was the church of
Constantinople equal with the Church of Rome. And in our days Erasmus
Roterodame writes and says, this name (To be high bishop of the world) was
not known to the old Church: but this was used, that bishops were all called
High priests: and that name gave Urban the first unto all bishops, as it is
written in Distinct. 59. cap. Si officia. Anno Dom. 226. But as for one to be
head of all, it was not admitted. And the Greek Church did never agree to this
wicked supremacy, nor obeyed it, until the year of our Lord one thousand two
hundred and two, compelled thereunto by one Baldwine, that brought the
Frenchmen by the help of the Venetians unto Constantinople, to restore one
Alexius unto the Empire, upon this condition, that he should subdue the Greek
Church to the Church of Rome. But this came to pass, that the Pope, never
after he had gotten by alms and help of princes to be over them, passed one
jot for the Emperor of Constantinople, further then he served his turn. So
that ye may see both his beginning and proceedinges to be of the devil, which
if ye kill not with the staff of Gods word, and beat him from your
conscience, he will double kill your souls.

Now within one hundred and fifty years after Phocas had made the bishop of
Rome head of the Church, the bishop of Rome contemned the Emperor of
Constantinople, and devised to bring the empire into France, and to give the
king of France the same authority over ye bishop of Rome, that before the
Emperor had, as it appears in Charles the great, and his successors a long
time: and yet was the bishop of Rome under the princes, and not (as he is now)
an idol exempt from all order and obedience. For princes made the bishops of
Rome, and all other bishops within their realms, and so continued the making
of the Pope in the Emperors authority, until it was about the year of our
Lord one thousand one hundred and ten. After that Henry the fifth being sore
molested by sedition moved against him by the Pope Paschalis the second, He
means here authority to elect bishops, and to have power of both swords.
was constreined at length to surrender his authority unto him, who turned the
face of his bishopric into manifest wars. What followed when ye Pope was
thus free, and lived without obedience to the Christian Magistrates, I will not
in this treatise make mention, but put you in remembrance that for certeintie
there followed such trouble amongst Christian princes, as never was before, as
it is to be seen by the doing of the wicked man Gregory the seventh, who took
then upon him to have authority to use two swords, the spiritual and the
temporal, in so much that Henry the fourth was compelled threescore and two
times to make war in his life, Alberus Crantzius ecclesiast. histor. li. 6.
by the means of the bishop of Rome. And as it is written, this wicked bishop
stirred up the Emperors own brother in law Radulphus the Duke of Sueuia to
war against him, and sent him a crown of Gold with this verse graven in it,
Petradedit Petro, Petrus diadema Radulpho. That is to say, Christ gave the
Empire to Peter, Peter gives it to Radulphe. Meaning that Christ had given
the Empire worldly to the bishop of Rome, and he gave it to Radulphe. Ye may
see what a rod the Emperors made for their own tail. For, after they had
made the bishop of Rome head of the Church, the bishops made themselves shortly
after the heads of Emperors and kings. A just plague of God for all them that
will exalt such to rule, as God said should be ruled.

These bishops be not only proud, but also unthankful. For whereas all the
world knows the bishops authority to come from the Emperor in worldly
things, Abbas Vspergensis in suo chronico.
and not from God, but against God: this monster Gregory the seventh said,
that Christ gave him the Empire of Rome, and he gives it to the Duke of Sueuia
Radulphe, to kill his good brother Henry the fourth. He that will know more of
this wicked man, and of his brethren bishops of Rome, let him read Benno the
Cardinal that writes in his history of the Popes, that he saw of John the
twentieth, Benedict the ninth, Siluester the third, Gregory the sixte, Platina
in Alex. 3.
Leo the ninth, Alexander the second. But in his old days he saw and
writes horrible and execrable things of Gregory the seventh. Yet was
England free from this beast of Rome then, in respect of that it was before
the idol was expelled in king Henry the 8. time. But Alexander the third,
never rested to move men to sedition, until such time as king Henry the
seventh was content to be under him as other were: And all this suffered
England for Thomas Becket the Popes Martyr.

When they were crept up into this high authority, all their own creatures
bishops of their sect, Cardinals, priests, monks, and friars, could never be
contented to be under the obedience of the princes: and to say the truth,
princes durst not (in manner) require it, for they were in danger of goods and
life. And ye Emperor Henry the seventh, was poisoned by a monk, that
poisoned the idol of the Mass, both a god and minister meet to poison men,
and both of the Popes making. And what conscience did they make of this think
ye? Doubtless none at all, for the Pope says, and so do al his children, that
he can dispense, and absolve themselves, and al men, from what oaths soever
they have made to God or man. This enemy, with his false doctrine, is to be
resisted and overcome by the word of God, or else he will destroy both body and
soul. Therefore, against all his crafts and abominations, we must have the
Rodd, the Staff, the Table, the Oil, the Cup that David speaks of, in a
readiness to defend our selves with all. Now follows the last part of this
holy Hymn.

The seventh part of the Psalm.
What the end of Gods troubled people shall be.

THE SIXTH VERSE.
The loving kindness shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
I Will in the midst of all troubles be strong and of good cheer, for I am
assured, that thy mercy and goodness will never forsake me, but will
continually preserve me in all dangers of this life: and when I shall depart
from this bodily life, thy mercy will bring me into that house of thine eternal
joys, whereas I shall live with thee in everlasting felicity.

Of this part we learn, that the dangers of this life, be no more then God can
and will put from us, or preserve us in them, when they come unto us without
danger: also that the troubles of this world be not perpetual nor damnable for
ever, but that they be for a time only sent from God, to exercise and prove
our faith and patience. At the last we learn, that the troubles being ended,
we begin and shall continue for ever in endless pleasure and consolation, as
David shows at the end of his Psalm. So does Christ make an end with his
disciples, when he has committed them, for the time of this life, to the
tuition of the heavenly father, whiles he is bodily absent: he says at length
they shall be where he is himself in heaven for ever. For in this life, all be
it the faithful of God, have consolation in Gods promises, yet is their joy
very dark and obscure, by reason of troubles both without and within:
outwardly by persequution: inwardly by temptation. Therefore, Christ desires
his father, to lead and conduct his Church in truth and verity, whiles it is
here in fight and persequution with the devil, until it come to a perfect and
absolute consolation, where as no trouble may molest it. For then, and not
before (to what perfection soever we come) shall we be satisfied, as David
says: Psalm. 16.
The plentifulnesse of pleasure and joy is in the sight and contemplation of
thee, o Lord. For, Then shall the mind of man fully be satisfied, when he being
present, may presently behold the glorious majesty of God: 2 Cor. 13.
for God has then al joys present to him that is present with him, and then
man knows God, as he is known of God, These joys in the end of troubles,
should give the troubled man the more courage to bear troubles patiently, Romans
8.
and be persuaded (as S. Paul teaches,) that The troubles of this present
life, be not worthy of the joys to come, which shall be revealed to us, when
Christ comes to judge the quick and the dead. To whom with the father and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and praise, world without end. Amen.

AN EXPOSITION upon the 62. Psalm, made by the constant Martyr of Christ,
Master JOHN HOOPER, Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Prophet in this Psalm does declare (by his own experience,) how the
truth of Gods word, and such as favor and follow the same, be esteemed and
used in the world, of worldly men: the truth it self rejected: and the
lovers thereof slaundered and persequuted. And seeing truth and true men
before the Prophets time, in his time, and after his time, were thus miserably
afflicted: in this psalm he writes his own condition and miseries, with
certain and most comfortable remedies, which ways the afflicted person may
best comfort him self, and pass over the bitterness and dangers of his
troubles, and suffer them, as long as God lays them upon him, patiently. So
that whosoever from the feeling of his heart can say this Psalm, and use the
remedies prescribed therein, by the spirit of God: doubtless he shall be able
to bear the troubles both of the devil and man patiently, and contemn them
strongly.

The parts of the Psalm be in number generally two.
1 In the first is contained: how that the favor of God, and his help, is
able to remedy all adversities. 2 In the second is contained: how that the
favor of man, and his help, is able to redress no adversities. The first
part comprehends eight verses of the Psalm. The second part conteyneth the
other four verses that next follow to the end of the Psalm.
These two general parts do contain more particular parts in them, in
number six.
1 First what is to be done, by the Christian man, that is afflicted. 2 The
second part shows, why the troubled man in trouble, looks for help of
God. 3 The third part declares, how soudenly God can destroy the persquuters
of the truth. 4 The fourth part conteyneth the repetition of the first and the
second part, with more causes showed: why patiently trouble is to be borne, and
faithfully to be believed, that God can and will remedy it. 5 The fifte part
declares, that man's power is not to be feared, nor his friendship to be
trusted unto: for no man is able to damn or save. 6 The sixte part sets
forth, how that God has promised to help the afflicted: and will assuredly
perform it.
The Psalm with the parts before named, where they begin: and where they
end.
1 My soul truly wayteth still upon God. The first part teaches a man to
fly unto God in the time of oppression and trouble. 2 For of him comes my
salvation. He verily is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so
shall I not greatly fall. The second part of the Psalm that declares, why the
troubled man trusts in God. 3 How long will ye imagine mischief against
every man? Ye shall be slain all the sort of you: yea as a tottering wall
shall ye be, and like a broken hedge. 4 Their devise is only how to put him
out, whom God will exalte: their delight is in lies: they giu^ good words with
their mouth, but curse with their heart. Selah. The third part of the Psalm:
wherein is showed, the soudenly thy persequuters of the innocent shall peris^ 5
Nevertheless, my soul wayt thou still upon Go^ for my hope is in him. 6 He
truly is my strength, and my salvation, he ^ my defense, so that I shall not
fall. 7 In God is my health, and my glory, the rock ^^ might: and in God is
my trust. 8 O put your trust in him always (ye people) pow^ out your hearts
before him, for God is our hope. Sela^ In these four verses is contained the
fourth part: when in is mentioned the repetition of the two first verse^ 9 As
for the children of men, they are but vain, the children of men are
deceiptfull upon the weightes* they are altogether lighter then vanity it
self. 10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not you^ selves to vanity:
if riches increase, set not you^ hearts upon them. Here is the fifte part,
that teaches no trust to be put (...) man: for he is not able to damn nor
save. 11 God spoke once, and twice, I have also heard t^^ same: that power
belongs unto God. 12 And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou r^^ wardest
every man according to his work. In these two verses is comprehended the sixth
part, whi^^ is, that God has promised to be merciful in helpi^^ the
afflicted: and that he will perform his promises.
A brief explanation of the Psalm generally.
MY soul doubtless wayteth still upon God, etc. Be my troubles never so great
and dangerous: yet my soul shall trust continually and constantly in the
Lord, that can and will remedy them. For he is my strength, and my salvation:
and he is my defense.

So shall I not greatly fall. Although good Lord by reason of mine infirmity
and sin, which is in all men, my soul is weak and feeble, that it will be
oppressed with the lightest of all thy troubles, which thou layest upon man
for his sin: yet, when it takes hold of thy mercy, it waxes strong. And
although it be weak and trembling by reason of infirmity: yet does it not
clean fall from the trust of constancy and hope.

And let the wicked imagine their wicked imaginations against thy poor
servants, O God: yet at length shall they come to shame and destruction: as
the tottering wall does fall, and the rotten hedge is consumed with fire. For
that they go about, they shall never bring to pass: because they devise to put
him to shame, that God has purposed to exalt and magnify. And what so ever
doubleness they use, to speak fair with their mouth, and yet have false and
hollow hearts: it shall not bring their intent to their purposed end. Sela.
God be thanked, of whom depends all the hope of my salvation. And he is my
strength, my salvation, and my defense: so that I shall not fall.

Wherefore, all Christian and afflicted persons (says the Prophet) follow mine
example, and put al your hope and trust in the mercy of God: who only save us
from evil, and bless us with all goodness.

Power out therefore before him all your cares and heaviness: and look
assuredly for help from him: for doubtless the help of man is nothing worth.
For, If man and vanity were both weighed in a pair of balance: vanity it
self would be weightier then man. How then can so light a thing as man is,
help in the time of trouble? And as a man is but vanity, or else rather more
vain then vanity: so be al worldly riches that man possesses, and as little,
or less able to help an afflicted, as man is unable to help himself.

And this I know (says the Prophet) not by man's wisdom, but by the mouth
of God, that what so ever help man looks for, besides God: he may be assured
at all times, to be both helpelesse and comfortless: and trusting to God, he
shall be at all times both helped and comforted. For so says the Lord: whose
sayings no power is able to falsify, nor to resist.

What things are to be noted out of every particular part of this Psalm, for
the edifying and comfort of him, that shall use to say, sing, or meditate this
Psalm.
THE FIRST PART.
My soul truly wayteth upon God.
OVt of the first part (wherein is contained, what the Christian should do in
the time of trouble) is to be noted, what it is for a man to have his soul
waiting still upon God: or else to have silence always in his soul toward
God, in the days of adversity. As this Psalm speaks.

When the Christian man or woman in the time of sorrow and heaviness, When
does the soul of man wait upon the Lord in the days of trouble or else has
silence?
without grudge or impatience looks for the help of God, and gives not
himself to quarelling or complaining of God, as though he did him wrong and
punished him too much: then does the soul wait upon the Lord, or else has
silence toward God. As we may see by Job: where his soul attended still
upon the Lord. When his goods, cattle, house, and children, were taken from
him, he said after this sort: Job. 1.
The Lord gave them, the Lord has taken them away: as the Lord is pleased,
so is it done: The name of the Lord be blessed, All this while he bore the
cross of God without murmur or grudge: and had his soul still waiting upon
God, as this Prophet here says. But when he was burdened further, and from the
sole of the foot to the top of the head, was stricken with sores and botches:
he cursed the day that he was borne in, Job. 3.
and the night wherein he was conceived, with many more unquiet and lamentable
words, as it appears in his Book.

The like example we have before of king David in the Book of the Psalms,
Psalm. 31.
Job. 13. 17.
Psalm. 23.
where be these words. In trouble and adversity, I said: I was cast away from
the sight of thine eyes, o God. And as Job sometime said, If he should die,
yet he would trust in the Lord. So said David a little before, If he should go
in the midst of the shadow of death he would not fear. In the which Psalm
ye may see, how constantly his soul waited upon the Lord: yet in the 31
Psalm his troubles were so great, that in them he said, I am cast from the
sight of thee, o God. So that these testimonies and examples of the Scriptures
do declare, that to have the soul to wait upon the Lord, What it is to have
the soul to wait upon the Lord in the time of trouble?
is to be assured that God will help in trouble, and patiently to bear the
trouble without grudge, until God send remedy and help for it.

The second thing to be gathered of the first part, is to mark and see, that
in the very electes of God, and most excellent personages amongst holy men:
there is sometime, quiet, patient, and thankful sufferance of adversity
strongly, that it seems in the soul of him that is troubled, there is so
constant and strong faith, that it makes all sorrows and troubles rather
pleasant and sweet, then heavy, burdenous, or painful. At another time
troubles seem unto them so heinous and grievous, that the burden of them is as
great a pain, as death: not only vnquieting the body, but also very sore
vexing of the spirit, with these and like cogitations, Psalm. 31. 42. 43. 77.
Increase and decrease of faith in the faithful. Wisdom to be learned of the
premises.
God has cast me out of his sight, God will have mercy upon me no more, My
soul is heavy and troubled. And this diversity of increase and decrease of
faith and hope of holy men and women before our time, teaches us great
wisdom and consolation: wisdom, in that we see, faith and hope be not
natural qualities in man, although he be never so virtuous, or never so
graciously elected by God, to eternal salvation: but they be the merciful
gifts of God, given unto man for Christ's sake: and wrought by the holy
Ghost, above man's deseruings.

We learn also that the gifts of God, faith, hope charity, etc. be not at al
times of like strength.
faith, hope, and charity, patience, and sufferance, with such like virtues:
be not at all times of like condition and strength in man: but at sometime so
strong, that nothing can fear us: and at another time so weak, that all
things do make us dismayed, and fearful. Now and then it is so doubtful,
that we cannot tell whether it were best to suffer for the truth: or else to
be released consenting unto falshoode. Thus God uses his gifts in us, not
always after one sort, partly for our sins: and partly, to prove us, and
to bring us to a certain knowledge of our infirmity and weakness. From
Saul, Judas, and Caine, he took his spirit clean: to punish their
iniquity, and wickedness. And from Job to attempt his patience, and to make
his feel, that of him self, he could bear nothing.

We learn consolation out of this text, Consolation.
in this, that in our troubles the Lord forsakes us not, but comfort us.
The Lord forsakes not his people in trouble. Psalm. 44.
And the more our troubles and adversities be: the more is his grace and favor
toward us. As the Prophet says in another of his Psalms, As adversities
oppressed my heart: so thy consolations, Lord, rejoiced me. In the which
Psalm ye may see, what consolation the afflicted conscience takes in
adversities.

The Psalm is made against the wicked oppressoures, and persequutors of the
poor. Wherein they say, As the tyranny of the wicked troubles us: so thy
consolations (good Lord) do rejoice and comfort us. and the same says Saint
Paul to the Corinthians, 2. Corin. 1.
As the afflictions of Christ do abound in us: even so by Christ abounds
our consolation.

There is also to be noted, in that the prophet says: (His soul wayteth
upon the Lord.)

Many men can dissemble injuries, Mat. 10. 26
wrongs, and oppressions outwardely. John. 11. 18
Some times, when they be not able to revenge: Luke. 19
and some tunes, when they dare not revenge, for lack of opportunity and
occasion, lest more harm might ensue of that their enterprise. As the Jews
durst not kill Christ a great while, for fear of the people: yet were they
murderers in their hearts before God, the fact outwardly not then being don.
Some again revenge not, because they think, dissembled patience will gain
worldly commodites and riches. Howbeit, this quietness and refraining from
revenging: is nothing worth before God. But when the heart and soul waits upon
God, Note.
and is contented to be as God makes it: yt waiting and service of the soul,
the Lord delights in, and is pleased withal. This is a godly doctrine and
much to be desired, to have the mind contented with such things, as be
troublesome and painful to the body outwardly. And where the mind wayteth
not patiently upon the Lord in trouble: it will appear diverse ways.
Sometime, many years after the displeasure is done, the man that suffered the
displeasure, reuengeth it wrongfully, The impatience of the mind, is many ways
known.
and cruelly: as the Phariseis and the high priests, deferred the bloody
fact in the killing of Christ, until they had gotten time and opportunity for
their purpose. Sometime the impatience and unquietness of the mind, appears
with checkes and taunting aunsweres unto God: Caine. Gene 4.
as when God asked Caine, Where his brother Abel was? he asked God again,
Whether he were his brothers keeper, or no? The same ways appeared Pharaoes
unquietness. Pharao. Exodus 5.
When God would have had him to dismiss his people: he asked, What God he was,
unto whom he should do such homage and service? Sometime it appears, by
desperate weighing the greatenesse of trouble: not considering the mercy of
God that is greater then sin. Gene. 4. Abel.
As Caines unquieted soul for the killing of Abel, brought his tongue to
blaspheme the mercy of God, saying: that His iniquity was greater then the
mercy of God could forgive. Judas. Matthew. 27.
So did the wicked soul of Judas that betrayed Christ, make his tongue
confess before the Pharisees his treason and wickedness: and never to call
upon Christ for remission thereof.

Sometime the impatience of the mind, is known outwardly: by finding fault
with Gods works. As when Adams mind was unquieted for the eating of the
apple, Adam. Gene. 3.
he said unto God: that his wife the woman that he gave unto him, deceived him.
Achab the wicked king being impatient, Achab. 3. Reg. 18.
with the scourges that God sent upon his Realm, for his own sins and the
peoples: picked a quarrel with the good prophet Elias, and said: that he
troubled all his Realm. So said the Jews against Paul: Jews. Act. 21. 23.
This is he that troubles all the world.

This is daily seen, when so ever the mind and the soul is unquieted: the
fault is laid upon Gods work. As if the higher powers hang a true man, and
save a thief: deliver Barabbas, and hang Christ: straight way the tongue
walks, that He is set in authority by God. In deed so he is, but yet to
punish the evil, and to maintain the good: and not to molest the good, and
maintain the evil, as commonly now a days is seen. Simon Magus.
Simon Magus shall be at liberty: and Simon Peter in chains. Annas and Caiphas
shall rule like Lords: Christ and Saint Paul shall be ruled, and suffer death:
although not personally in their own bodies, yet in their members and
disciples.

Let the mind of the thief be touched for theft: Thief.
streightway poverty, the work of GOD, bears the blame. Whoremongers.
Let whoredom vex the whoremongers mind: immediately the tongue complayneth
upon Gods work, Covetous men.
youth, strength, and such other. Let the mind be troubled with covetousness:
by and by Gods work, wife, children be alleged for excuse. For they must be
provided for, says the covetous man: when he has enoughe for himself and
ten times as many more children, as God has sent him, if it were thankfully
used toward God, and liberally toward the world. So that if any man be
touched with anguish or heaviness for sin: immediately the tongue says, He
was borne under an evil Planet, Gene. 1.
or in an evil hour, and so finds fault with the work of God, which God
made excellent good. Thus may ye see, where as the soul of man wayteth not
upon God: the impatient man accuses God, and all his works, both in heaven
and in earth. Prou. 18. The godly feeling the rod of God, do accuse
themselves: acknowledging their offenses to have merited the same. Mich. 7.
But the godly feeling the rod of God for sin and iniquity (as GOD never
punishes without just cause,) he first accuses him self, and
acknowledges his own offenses: and then says with the Prophet Micheas, I
will suffer the indignation of God, for I have deserved it.

To this waiting upon the Lord without quarelling and desperate lamenting,
exhorted Jeremy the prophet the children of Israel, for the time of their
being in servitude and captivity of Babylon: bidding them to plant and grafte
trees, and so to provide for themselves until the time were expired, of their
affliction and captivity.

Men may mourn and lament their sins and troubles, that they suffer for
sin: as we may see how the Psalm of the Prophet, Psalm. 137.
contains the bewailing and weeping of the people, that sat heavily and
lamentably by the river side in Babylon. And the like may ye read in the
Lamentations of Jeremy. But this mourning was without desperation and
quarelling, as the letters and books do record. Besides these things, the
cause of their bewailing and lamenting, whiles their souls waited upon the
Lord, differs from the most forte of mourners and bewaylers now a days.
For we may see now a days, if the wife bewail the death of her husband: it
is most commonly, because she has taken from her a loving head and governor.
Note.
If the husband lament the departure of his wife: it is because he is bereaved
of a faithful healper. If the son mourn for the death of his father: it is
because there is taken from him, not only his father, but also his patron and
defender. If the parents be sorry for the taking away of their children: it
is because they want their daliaunce, sport and pastime with them, or such
other worldly affections. If the prince take grievously, the calling away of
his subject from this world: it is because he lacks a trusty soldier, a
faithful captain, a wise counselor, or profitable officer. If the subject
lamente the death of his prince: it is because he has lost his advantage,
authority, or estimation. If the servant weep for his master: it is because
with his master is departed his commodity, and trust of wordly riches and
friendship. If the master mourn for his servant: it is because there is
taken from him, a skillful, a diligente, or a faithful doer of his business.
And such like causes, as men grievously of every sort feel and lament. If the
Parson lament his parishioner: it is most commonly because he sees the breach
of an honest household decays his tenthes and profit. And if the parishioner
mourn for his pastor: most commonly it is, because he loss a good companion
or profitable friend. If the Bishop bewail the death of such as die in his
diocese: it is most commonly because he is destitute of such a one, as
favored much affection, to set fourth and do such things as he worldly
desired should go forewardes: or else perchance such manner of one as could
excuse him, what negligence or fault so ever he should perpetrate or commit
for the time he were in office. If the diocese be sorry for the death of the
Bishop: it is because the one part (which is the Clergy) does fear, least
there shall come another, that will be more diligent and quick in doing his
office, and see that they shall do the same. The other party (called the
Temporaltie) lamente, because they have lost such a one, as peradventure fedd
well their belies with bread and beef, or else was so remiss, that he would
suffer all sin unpunished, and rather be a bearer of the evil, then a
mainteiner of the good. Now this is such beewayling and mourning, as
Ethnickes, Publicanes, and Infidels may have. But wherefore the Christian soul
that wayteth upon the Lord (without quarrel or desperation) does weep and
lament: read you the Psalm before named, and the lamentations of Jeremy: and
there shall you find in the Psalm these words: We sat by the rivers of
Babylon and wept, when we remembered thee (o Sion).

The chiefest cause of their weeping was, because the word of God was not
preached, the sacraments ministered, Why sat the people by the river side of
Babylon
nor the Almighty God lauded and praised in the temple of Jerusalem: as God
had commanded by his word. This is a most just, and also a most worthy
cause to weep for, whiles God punishes us: that for our sins, not only our
quietness and wealth, but also the word of God (which is greater) is taken
away, and his due honor given unto idols. A just cause of lamentation.
For the children of Israel perceiving, that Gods honor was defaced for their
sins, they wept as often as they remembered it: as God give us grace to do
the same. The like did Saint Peter. Peter.
He lamented not, because he leafte all his goods for Christ's sake: but wept
that by his denial of Christ, Matthew. 27.
he felt him self not constant in the faith and love of his Master. Marie
Magdalen. Luke. 7.
So did Marie Magdalene bewail that she had offended Christ: and not because
the world knew her to be a sinner. Io. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans c 1. 2.
Psalm. 73.


Saint John Chrysostom has a notable saying, He that fears more hell, then
Christ: is worthy of hell. And that meant the prophet when he cried out, What
is there in heaven or in earth, that I prefer before thee, O Lord. As though
he had said: There is nothing can make me as glad as thy love toward me,
nor any thing so sorry, as thy displeasure, (good Lord.)

Thus does the soul of the very Christian, wait upon the Lord in all
troubles and adversities: and patiently does bear the punishments of sin:
and not only bear patiently the pain, but also considers, what is the
greatest loss that may happen unto him, by reason of troubles. Not the loss
of worldly richesse, lands, and promotions, nor the loss of health of body
by sickness, neither the less of the body it self by death, What is the
gretest loss that a Christian co^sidereth.
ne yet the loss of the soul into eternal pains. But the greatest loss
that he weighs, is the loss of the good will of him that made him, and of
great mercy redeemed him, and with much kindness always nourished him. The
prodigal son. Luke. 15.


That is to be seen in the prodigal son, which when he had spent all his
goods lecherously, and brought him self to most miserable poverty, and to
such extreme famine, that he would have been glad to have eaten the meat
prepared for the pigs, besides the great heaviness of heart, that weighed the
time of prosperity, and conferred it with his estate of so extreme misery:
yet nothing made him so sorry and pensive, as the calling to his remembrance,
how irreverently he had used his most gentle, loving, and benign father, who
was not only liberal and free to his children, but also to his hirelings that
lacked nothing.

This consideration of his offense toward his father, made him a great deal
more sorry: then all the pains he otherwise sustained. And thus must every
Christian wait upon the Lord, and then doubtless consolation shall follow:
as it appears by the same prodigal son, and by this Psalm of the Prophet.

Moreover, if we mark, with what dangers and troubles the soul seeks her
Lord and spouse Jesus Christ, in the mystical book of Solomon's Ballads: we
shall see, with what attendaunce, diligence, and patience the soul waits
upon Christ. Canti. 5.
I sought him (says the soul,) but I found him not. I called him, and he
would not answer me. The watchmen of the city found me, and beatte me, and
wounded me. They took my robe from me that kept the walls. I require you ye
daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my spouse, tell him that I am sick with
love.

Note these words, Note.
I sought him, (says the soul) and found him not. I called him, and he
answered not. Was not this enough to have clean discomforted the heavy,
sick, and troubled soul, that ran and cried to her love and husband Jesus
Christ, and yet for the time, never the near? Further, in running and calling
for him: the soul fell into the hands of her enemies, that robbed her of her
mantell. And yet notwithstanding these dangers, she cried out unto all that
she met: that incase they found her spouse, Note diligently. What dangers a
christian shall fall in, and his duty in seeking Christ prescribed. A notable
example. The soul that has a fervent love to Christ, the troubles she
susteineth in seking him greeueth her not: but the not finding of her spouse,
is the only cause of her sorrow. The woman of Canaan. Matthew. 15. Patient
expectation of redress takes all scourges and troubles in good part.
they would tell him that she was sick with his love.

Ponder these things altogether, first to travel and cry, and not to profit.
Next, in traveling and crying to lose all her goods, yea the mantell that she
went in. Thirdly, to put her life in danger with confessing Christ to be
her spouse, before such as hated him mortally. And yet how did this Christian
creature? Doubtless waited upon the Lord, without murmur or grudge. And in
all these troubles, note there is no complaint nor quarrel made of her prayers
that were not heard, of the pains that for the time profited not, of ye loss
of her goods and apparel, nor yet of the danger that she was in, of her and
Christ her spouses enemies. But here was the weeping, lamentation, and
sorrow, that Christ her spouse could not be found. In whose love she burned so
ardently, that all adversities grieved her not, neither did she any thing at
all esteem them: but only the want of Christ was her grief and sorrow. Yet
was she patient, and trusted still in the Lord.

The like may ye see by the woman of Canaan, how she called upon the Lord for
her daughter: unto whom Christ made no word of answer. Further, his
disciples were troubled and wearied, by her importunate suite. Also Christ
called her in manner no better then a dog: yet was there neither the
bitterness of his words, nor the inhumanitie of his Apostles, that she passed
for, but she waited still upon the Lord, and was nothing sorrowful for all
the sharp words she suffered: but only, because the help of the Lord was not
extended and bestowed upon her daughter, as she desired. But what insueth of
such a patient expectation, and sorrowfulness of Gods absence? Mark what the
Prophet says.

The second part of the Psalm.
1 For of him comes my salvation.

2 He verily is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so shall I not
greatly fall.


The second part declares: why the troubled person, seeks health of God.

Here first be three doctrines to be noted. Three doctrines to be noted.


First to know by Gods word, that God can help. The second, that God will
help. And the third, that the afflicted is bound, boldly to require help
of God. Whereof the troubled person must be assured by the scripture, or else
he shall never find consolation.

Now to the first part, that God can help: this scripture is to be marked,
God is omnipotent.
that says, God is omnipotent, that is to wit, able to do all things. So
said he to Abraham, when he eftsoons promised him the land of Canaan: Gene. 17.
I am the God omnipotent, walk before me and be perfect. The same said Jacob,
when Benjamin his young son, was so instantly desired by his brethren, to go
into Egypt, when they lacked corn: My God omnipotent (said Jacob) can make
the prince of Egypt favorable unto you. Gene. 43.
So did God tell Moses, that he was the Lord that appeared unto Abraham, Exodus
6.
Isahac, and Jacob, even the almighty God. The like is in the same book, when
God had drowned Pharao and his hoaff: Pharao.
Moses gave thanks, Exodus 15.
and said, His name was almighty. Thus in the word of God we may learn every
where, as well by his name, as by his most meruellous works: that he is
omnipotent, and there is nothing impossible unto him.

As God is able: so is he willing to save.
Even so does the word of God declare, that as he is omnipotent and can save: in
like manner is he willing and will save. King David says, Psalm. 26.
that He saves both man and beast. In another Psalm he says, Psalm. 34.
God saked him from all adversities. And again he says, Psalm. 36
He will save all that trust in him. And not only save: but also save for
nothing. Psalm. 56.
So God says by the prophet Esaie: I will save thy children. And in the same
book it is declared, that Gods hand is not weakened: but that he can save and
will save. Esaie. 49. and 59.


This willing nature of God to save, is manifestly opened unto us in all the
Prophets. Iere. 15. 23. Ezech. 34. Daniel. 12. Ose. 1. Sophon. 3. Zachar. 8. 9.
10.
And in Saint Matthewe Christ says: Matthew. 18.
He came to save such as were lost. The same is to be seen in S. Luke, Luke 9.
how that The son of man came not to damn, but to save. S. John the
Evangelist says: John 3.
His coming was to save the world. And S. Paul says, 1. Tim 2.
He would all men to be saved.

As God can and will help: so does he command us to call unto him for help.
Now as the word of God and the examples contained in the same, declare that God
can and will help in the time of trouble and adversity: so does it declare
that men be bound, to call and seek for help in the time of adversity. As we
read in Esaie the Prophet, where God cries out, in this sort: Esaie. 55.
Ye that be a thirst, come to the waters, etc. In S. Matthewe Christ
commands all men that be troubled, to come unto him. Matthew. 11.
Also in the Psalms, He bids all men call upon him in the days of their
heaviness: and he will hear them, and deliver them. Psalm. 50.
Again, He wills us to ask and it shall be given unto us. Matt. 7. 18. Mark.
11. Luke. 11. Joan. 14. 15 16. 1. Ioh. 5.


Now, as these three doctrines are to be marked in the almighty God, so must
they be grounded in the heart of the troubled person. God alone is able to
save: and none but he.
And first he must give this honor unto God: that he alone is able to save, and
none but he: as the Prophet Esaias says of him.

Then being thus persuaded, the afflicted person will not seek help at dead
Saints, Esaie. 45.
nor at any other creatures hand: No help to be soght at dead saints, etc.
but only of God. God is inclined of himself to have mercy.
but at Gods only. And as none gives God the strength able to help, but is
of it self in God and with God: so is there none that can give God a will to
help: but he of himself is inclined to have mercy upon the afflicted, and
his mercy is most prone and ready to help the poor and miserable.

Hereof learneth the afflicted Christian, that none inclines God to be
merciful, but his own gentle and pitiful nature. So that the sinners may
boldly in Christ resort unto him first, because he is mercy it self: and
not to go astray to seek first mercy at dead Saints hands, and by their
means at last find God merciful and ready to help him.

The afflicted, by the commandment of God: takes and acitie to approach to his
mercy.
And when the afflicted perceives, by the word of God, that he commands him
to call upon him and upon none other: he may take a courage and audacitie to
be bold to come unto him, be his sins never so many, horrible, or filthy:
yea, if in number they exceeded the gravel of the sea, yet be they fewer
always then his mercy. If they be as red as scarlet: yet shall they be made
as white as snow. Esaie. 1.
The book of wisdom says even so, Sapient. 15.
Although we have sinned, Lord we be thine: knowing thy greatness.

And whereas these doctrines be grounded: see what follows. In all the depth
of anguishe and sorrow this follows, (as this Psalm says,) Psalm. 62.
Of him comes my salvation. He is my strength, my salvation, and my defense,
etc. The same may we see also in the Dialogue between the Christian soul, or
Christ's Church and Christ, in the book of Solomon's Ballads: were she never
so black and burned with the sun, were she never so troubled with the
vanities of the world, she cried out and said boldly unto Christ, Cantic. 1.
Draw me, we will run after thee.

And although the poor wretched soul be environed and compassed about with
sin, troubles and adversities, as the fair Lilly is hedged about with
thorns: yet she trusts in her husband, that he will help her. Consolation.
And in deed most comfortably her spouse Christ comfort her, with these
marvelous words. Arise, haste thee my spouse, my fair one, and come. Now
Winter is past, the rain is gone and ceased.

That Book of Solomon is to be read, Read the book of Solomon's Ballads.
to see how mercifully God comfort a troubled and deformed soul by sin:
and yet God lays it not to the souls charge, that has Christ to her
husband. Also there is to be seen, that the soul is bold to seek and call
for help of God her husband, and goes to no strange God for aid or succor,
although she be burned with the sun, and a miserable sinner.

The like is to be seen in the Prodigal son. Although he was never so
beggarly, Prodigal son.
miserable, sinful, wretched, Luke. 15.
and unkind to his father: yet he said, Even as I am with my miseries, Let us
not be ashamed to go to our heavenly father and confess our sins, be they
never so horrible: for when soever we return from our wickedness, he reme^breth
no more our transgressions, but embraces us as his dear children.
I will go to my father and tell him, that I have offended against him and
against Heaven.

The father, when he saw him, spatte not at him, reviled him not, asked no
accomptes of the goods he had viciously spent, laid not to his charge his
filthy conversation with whores and harlots, neither did he cast into his
teethe, how he had dishonored him and his family: but when he saw him a
far off, he was moved with compassion toward him, ran to meet him,
took him about the neck, and kissed him. The son confessed his fault: and
the father minding more the comfort of his lousy and beggarly son, then the
repetition of his transgressions: commanded his servants speedily to fetch
him robes and to clothe him, gave him a ring upon his finger, and shoes to his
feet, killed his fat calfe, and made merry and rejoiced with his lost son,
that he was found again. Here is the state and condition of a soul, that
wayteth (as Asaph says) for a time upon the Lord in trouble and heaviness,
meruellously set forth.

See this wretched man spoiled of al his goods, destitute of all friends,
shut out of all honest co^mpanie, of a Gentleman become a swineheard, of one
that had once men to wait upon him, become now a waiter upon pigges: once he
gave others meat, and now all men refuse to feed him: erst a man that scarce
delicate dishes could content his appetite, now his stomache yrketh till it
be filled with swines food: yet more over then that, he saw nothing behind
him, nor before him: but misery and wretchedness. Behind him he left al his
goods spent riottously, his estimation, parentage, such friends as he had: when
money was plenty, lost and also (as far as reason could see) his fathers
utter displeasure and the reproach and ignominy of his alliance and kinsefolke
purchased for ever. Before him he saw hunger and scarsitie, a sort of filthy
swine, and the best meat, draffe and chafe for the sustenance and
maintenance of his piggishe life, in case he might have been so mainteyned:
yet in the midst of these sorrows, attending in his spirit upon the mercy
of his father: meruelously in the filthe of a pigges sly, and in the pains
and anguishe of misery: hark what a wonderful doctrine he blows out: Oh
what abundance of bred is there in my fathers house, and I starve here for
hunger? I will arise and get me to him, and confess my fault, etc. He says
not, Oh what abundaunce of bread has my brother and my kinsefolke: but, What
abundance of bread is there in my fathers house. He said not, I will make my
complaint to my brother: but said, To my father.

Whereof is learned, The heavenly father is to be resorted unto in the days of
necessity and hunger: for he only has the bread of mercy to seed his
children.
that all penitent Christian sinners do know, that the heavenly father has
the bread of mercy, to satisfy their hungry desire: and that he is to be
resorted unto in such sinful and troublesome state, and not any other in
heaven, but he alone through Jesus Christ, who was killed to redeem and save
the penitent faithful sinners of the world.

See now how this Prodigal and outrageous son knew, why he should seek
help of his father, in the time of his vile misery and wretchedness.

First he knew his fathers power, and therefore said: What caused the
prodigal son to resort unto his father in the time of misery.
Oh, how great plenty of bread is there in my fathers house? believing that
his father was able to give him meat sufficient. Next he was assured that his
father was merciful, and would give him such things as he lacked: and being
thus persuaded, boldly he returned unto his father, and to him he uttered al
his grief: who was a great deal more pressed and ready to help, then his
son was ready to ask help.

Of the same mind, The woman of Canaan.
was the woman of Canaan. For although she found little comfort at the first:
yet she argued so from the nature of man to the nature of Christ, that Christ
cried out upon her, and said: They that come unto christ must debase the^
selves with humility.
Oh woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee, as thou desire. For when she
said the dogs did eat of the crumbes that fell from their masters table:
she knew that she her self, and all men in respect of God, were no more, nor
yet so much as dogs in the respect of man. And when she perceived, that man
could be contented, to spare his crumbes to the dogs: she knew right well,
that man was not so merciful and liberal unto dogs, as God unto sinners.
Wherefore she stood still with Christ constantly, and least not calling, until
Christ gave her to wit, that she was in deed a very well persuaded woman,
both of his power able to help, and of his good will ready to help. For in
deed, although she was a Cananite, she knew, that if a man shut not out
dogs from his table, Christ would not shut from his mercy a sinful
Cananite.

The same persuasion made Marie Magdalene creep under the boorde to his feet
with tears: Marie Magdelen.
there to receive and eat of his mercy, to quench the hunger and smarte of
her sins.

These examples do declare, why the troubled may put their trust in God. God is
both omnipotent and merciful.
Because he is omnipotent, and can do all things: and he is merciful, and
will help all penitent and faithful sinners. And so said this Prophet Asaph,
Of him comes my salvation. And he shows the cause why: For he is my rock,
my salvation, and my defense.

These three words declare meruellousty, the nature of God, that alone
helps: and also the faith of him that calls for help.

As for God, whom the Prophet calls first his ( Rock:) by this word, Rock.
he opens meruellously, how strong, firm, and sure, and how invincible he
is against all troubles, adversities, and tempests, as well of the body as of
the soul. Matthew. 7. He that builds upon the rock is wise.
In Saint Matthewe, the man that builds his house upon the rock or stone,
is called wise: and the cause is, that what winds soever blow, and what
tempests so ever arise: they cannot cast down the house, nor overthrow the
building: for it is grounded upon the stone. What is the rock.
The stone is God and his word, the builder is the Christian man, and the
building is the religion that he has learned of God by his word. And although
we see God our rock and sure stone, is not assaulted with stormy and
tempestuous shoures and rain: yet the builder and the building, that is to
say, If the rock were not sure: the builder and building would come to ruin.
the Christian man and his religion, be blown at, and such shoures of trouble
fall upon them, that were not the rock firm and sure, all the building and
the builder also, (for man's part) would surely fall, and come to utter ruin.

The experience of the same winds and floudes, we may see in the Acts of the
Apostles. For when Peter and the rest builded the house of God, To build the
house of God: is to teach salvation in Christ.
that is to say, taught men their salvation by the merits and passion of
Christ: there arose such winds and floods, that the builders were put into
prison, and the building in great danger. When S. Steeuen builded the
congregation with Gods word in Christ, Act. 5.
whiles he was building, Act. 7.
such winds and floudes of malice assaulted him, yt his brains were knocked
out. When Ananias and the rest planted and builded the house of God, yt is to
say, converted the infidels unto the faith of Christ at Damascus: Act. 9.
there arose such winds and tempests at Jerusalem, that Saul came from thence
toward Damascus, with commission from the high priests, to kill the builders,
and to overthrow all they had builded. Let us leave off the examples of holy
men, and see what happened to the head and chief captain al Saints and good
builders, If Christ had not been the rock of strength it self: he had been
cast down.
our savior Jesus Christ. When he called the world from ignorance to
knowledge, from death to life, and from damnation to salvation: there arose
such winds and storms, that, had he not been the rock it self of strength
and invincible power, he had been overthrown clean, and his buildings turned
vpside down. For before he was of age to be borne, Christ was slandered before
he was borne Matthew. 1. 2 Christ per sequuted as soon as he was borne.
in his mothers belly, ye devil went about to slander him as a bastard: and
would have persuaded the same to the godly man Joseph, spoused in marriage to
the blessed virgin Marie. He had no sooner put his head out of his mothers
belly: but straight way Herodes sword was whette and bent to kill him. Within
a little while after, the devil stirred up his own kinse-folke and
countriemen, Christ's own kinse folk were raised against him Luke. 4.
to cast him down from a hill top, and to break his neck: and at length
killed him indeed. But what was the outgoing of this builder? Forsoothe,
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. And what was the assurance of his
building, Christ slain.
that is to say, in what surety stood his disciples and folowers in the
midst of these winds and great storms? Luke. 23.
Doubtless, Christ commended his disciples to the protection of his Father,
John. 17.
Christ commended them to the custody and protection of his heavenly father
the rock and sure stone of all salvation: from whom winds, floudes,
temptations, persequution, death, sin, nor the devil himself, with all his
company of wicked spirits, be able to remove the simplest of all Christ's
flock. In the Revelations of Saint John, Math. 16.
there is a meruellous doctrine, what winds and floudes shall blow and
ouerflowe this rock in the bulding, Apoc. 12.
and builders, for the time of this life. There is a woman that had brought
forth a man child, and by and by there was a foul great red dragon with
seven heads and seven horns, that would have devoured this child, before he
had come to his inheritance and kingdom appointed unto him. And when he saw
he could not prevail against the child, he cast out of his mouth water, as
it had been a great stream, after the Mother: but there was given her wings
to escape. For the rock that she was builded upon, was sure: that what soever
winds or waters (that is to say, what troubles soever) should happen, He that
has God for his rock, is assured of a savior.
nothing could overthrow her. And so says Asaph here, God being my rock and
sure fortress, my soul nor my body shall never be confounded. As he declares
more openly by the two words that follow, He is my strength and my salvation
also, says the Prophet. As though he had said, Application of gods strength by
faith, to his own defense.
I do not only know God to be sure, strong, and invincible: but also I know
this his might, strength and surenesse, is my wealth and my salvation.

For many men know, that GOD is the rock and strength of all powers: but none
does know that this power and strength, is salvation for him self, but such
as be Gods in deed.

Therefore, Faith is the gift of God.
seeing this faith that believes God particularly to save a private person is
only Gods gift, and comes not of man: let us pray, that when we see how
God has been the rock of salvation to others, that he will be so unto us
likewise. For it is a singular gift of God, to say boldly, steadfastly, and
merrily from the bottom of the heart unto him: He that feels in himself
God to be his salvation, has the greatest treasure of all.
Thou Lord art my rock, my salvation, and my comfort. And he that feels in
him self for him self, GOD to be his salvation, has such a treasure, that
all treasures besides it, are nothing to be esteemed: and he will not pass of
goods, lands, nor life, for this faithes sake.

But faith, as long as it comes no nearer the heart then the ear, the lips,
the teeth, or the tongue: it is but an easy matter to believe. As we see these
rumblers up of the Psalms, and the rest of Gods word, at this time in the
church, where they that say them, nor they yt hear them, understand any thing
at all, or be any deal y^ more edified for that which is done or said in the
church. The abuse of Gods word provoke this vengeance.
And I am assured, if the priests felt in their hearts, the vengeance of God
to come, for this abusing the word of God, and the people knew what an
incomparable treasure they have lost, by ye taking away of ye word of God in
the vulgar tongue: the priest would weep water of his eyes as often as he said
his service, Gods word in an unknown tongue amongst the people to be lamented.
and the people would sigh full heavily as often as they hard it, and understood
not what it meant. Wherefore let every man pray to God, that he may know him, as
the Prophet Asaph does, that he is the rock and salvation, to him that so
calls upon him.

The third word is ( Defense.) By the which the Prophet notes two meruellous
doctrines. The one touching God: and the other touching man. The thing touching
God is this. Defense. Two doctrines.
Look as in himself God is omnipotent: so is he of power both in body and
soul, to do all things for his creatures in general. And as generally he can
do all things for his creatures: so particularly he is salvation, to all that
by faith believe in him. And as he is also salvation, particularly to such as
believe in him: even so particularly is he a defense, Note.
buckler and protection of such as shall be saved: that neither sin, the
devil, or any troubles of the body: Nothing can hurt him that is in Christ Jesus.
nor troubles, doubtfulnesse, anguish, perplexity, or heaviness of mind,
shall hurt or danme him. The doctrine touching man by this word ( Defense) is
this. Look as the faithful man has in him self this general knowledge with
all men, that God is Almighty to do all things, as he lust, with his
creatures generally: so particularly he believes, that he is able, and will
save such as particularly believe their salvation in him. The faith full
believes, that as God is able to save generally: so is he to save particularly.
And as the faithful particularly believes his salvation to be only in God:
so does he also believe and challenge particularly with the rest of his
brethren in Christ, maintenance, perfection, and defense from all
misseaduentures, ieopardies and dangers, that may happen in this life, before
he come to everlasting joys. God (therefore) give us grace with the Prophet
Asaph to say faithfully unto him, Thou art my strength, my salvation, and my
defense: then doubtless we shall be assured of that, which follows, So shall
I not greatly fall.

Of these words, ( So shall I not greatly fall, we be also taught and
instructed very necessary lessons, and doctrines. First, what difference
there is between the defense of God toward his people in this life, and in
the life to come.

As touching the defense of God toward his people in this life: Defense of God
toward his people in this life.
it is meruellously set forth by Christ in his prayer, a little before his
death: where he prayed unto his father, not to take his Apostles out of this
world: John. 17.
but to preserve them in this world from sin. They that will live in Christ
must suffer persequution John. 16.
So that he would his friends with Gods defense, should abide for a time in
the world. And what they should have in the world for all Gods defense, Christ
told them: In the world (says he) ye shall suffer affliction: and ye shall
weep, and the world shall laugh. Again, Matthew. 10.
he said unto them, that He sent them forth as sheep amongst woolues.
Whereby we may see, that Gods favor and Gods defense saves not his very
elects in this life from troubles and afflictions. For (Saint Paul says,) As
many as will live godly, shall suffer persequution. Therefore the holy Ghost
places the faithful congregation, the spouse of Christ (whom God loves and
defends) amongst thorns, and brambles: Cant. 2. Matt. 13. 7, The faithful
congregation is likened to a shipp, a house, and a woman traveling with child,
etc.
and sometime likeneth the faithful congregation unto a ship, tossed upon the
sea with danger of drowning: sometime unto a house, whereupon blows all
winds and weather: and sometime to a woman traveling with child, before whom
stands a foul dragon ready to devour both child and mother. So that by
this prophet Asaphes words that says, Apoc. 12.
He shall not greatly fall, and by these other places, we learn, that in this
life, such as God loves and defends from the eternal fire of hell, he
(notwithstanding for this life) under great crosses, and wonderful troubles:
yet Christ wills us to be of good comfort, for He has overcome the world.
And ye prophet says, John. 17.
God is my rock and my salvation: I shall not greatly fall. Who do suffer in
this world greatest troubles. Proverb. 3. Hebr. 12. Apocal. 3. 1. Peter. 4.
Romans 8.
And to consider the truth, such as God most strongly defends, and best
loves in this world, suffer many times, greatest troubles. Yea, and God
begins with his friends sometimes first, and most sharply: as S. Peter says.
And S. Paul says, We be praedestinate to be made like unto Christ in
troubles, whiles we be in this troublesome world: But the defense of God and
his love in the world to come, is void from al bitterness and pain, and from
all troubles and adversities. Consolation.
As it is most comfortably and joyfully written in the Balads of Solomon:
Cantic. 2.
where (for a time) the Lord defended his spouse that stood in the midst of
sharp and pricking briers and thorns: at length he calls her to perpetual
rest and consolation, assuring her that the winter is gone, and ye tempestuous
shoures past. The sweet flowers do appear, and the pleasant voice of the
Turtle is heard. Meaning, that such as be loved and kept by God in the world of
bliss to come: They who^ God calls of mercy out of this life, be void of
all troubles.
be sequestered, and departed from all troubles and adversities.

Apoc. 21. The description of the heavenly joys.
The like may you see in the Revelations of S. John, wherein he mystically to
set forth the pleasantnes and unspeakable joys of heaven, says: It is paued
with precious stones, and the gates thereof be also of pearls. And moreover,
There is a light more lighter then the Sun or Moon, for the claritie of God
lighteneth it, and the brightness is the lamb of God. There shall the electes
dwell for ever, and the gates shall never be shutt, neither shall there be any
night there to trouble it.

The defense of God toward his in the life to come. Esaie. 66.
The same is to be seen also in Esaie the prophet, how in that life Gods
defense is in such as be saved, without all kinds of troubles and adversities.

The favor of God toward his in this world, is annexed with troubles.
Now here is to be noted, that as Gods favor and defense in ye world to come,
in such as be saved, is void of all troubles and adversities: even so Gods
favor and his defense in this world in such as shall be saved, is joined and
annexed with troubles and adversities. Let us therefore be content with trouble
and persequution in his favor here in this life: or else doubtless we shall
never have his favor and defense in the life to come, in joy and everlasting
consolation.

Trouble shall not overcome Gods children.
There is yet another learning in these words: I shall not greatly fall: That
is, that the children of God shall not perish for any kind of trouble: and yet
in this world they can lack no kind of affliction. All shall they suffer: and
yet at length overcome all, as this prophet Asaphe did. He was troubled, but
yet not overcome: he fell, but not so far that he arose not again: and he
was so troubled with the cross that God sent him, that he could speaks nothing
for the time: yet at length he said, God was his sure rock, and his
salvation. Thus God tempts his, but desperation he leaves to his enemies.
Desperation, God leaves only to his enemies.
God suffers his to feel in this world the punishment of sin: but he
reserueth the pain thereof in the world to come to his enemies, and to the
reprobates. He makes his to be sorry for sin in this world: but such as be
not his, Note the difference between Gods children, and such as be not his.
he suffers to be careless and painelesse of sin in this life, that their
damnation may be the more dolorous, in the world to come. Therefore blessed be
such as fall and fear, as the Prophet Asaphe says: but not too far unto
all wickedness and wantonness of life.

THE THIRD PART.
3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? Ye shall be slain all
the sort of you: yea as a rottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge.

4. Their devise is only how to put him out, whom God will exalt, their
delight is in lies: They give good words with their mouth, but curse with
their hearts.


The third part shows, how the persequuters of the innocent shall soudeinly
perish.

The wicked persequuters be as a tottering wall, soudeinly overthrown, in
their most prosperity.
BY the similitude and Metaphore of a tottering or quiuering wall, the Prophet
declares, how lightly and sodeinly ye Lord will destroy the persequnters of his
people. For as the wall that is tottering and quiuering, with every wind and
weather, is easily and soudeinly overthrown: even so be the wicked and
tyrannical persecuters soudeinly destroyed: yea when they be in their own
conceits, most strong and valiant. As it may be seen by the mighty host of
Zenecharib and Benedab: Zenecharib.
the army of king Pharao and such other, that persequuted the people of God:
Beuedab. 3. Reg. 20. 4. Reg. 8. 18. 19.
verily supposing their strength to have been able utterly to have oppressed
Gods people, whom they hated. The like is to be seen where Hester and Judith
two seely and poor women, Exodus 14.
were instruments to ouertumble and destroy the wicked Hester. 7.
Am^n and Proud Holofernes. Judith. 13.
So by this we learn, that the strength and persequutions of ye wicked,
Holofernes.
be not permanent nor strong, The presence of Gods favor toward his: is the
destruction of the wicked.
but transitory and feeble, destroyed and vanquished with the presence of Gods
favor toward his, as often as it pleases him to punish the malice and
mischief of the wicked.

But there is one learning particularly to be noted in this similitude of a
trembling or tottering wall: wherewithal the Prophet sets forth the fall
and confusion of the wicked, which is this: that when the wicked persequuteth
the godly, and that the least resistance of ye world is stirred up by God
against them, the Lord that stirs up the plague to punish them, strikes
also their hearts with such trembling and fear, God does so strike the
hearts of the wicked with fear, that one man in a good cause, is able to
withstand ten.
that one man in a good cause shall be able, to wtstand ten such wicked
persecuters, whose conscience God has so feared, that they are not able to
bear the countenance of a man: no, not able to overcome the terror of their
own spirit, which bears them record, that as they in time past have fought
against God and his cause: so now God justly fights against them, both with
the fear of hell fire toward their souls, and with outward adversities
toward their bodies. So God said, he would send such trembling and fear unto
such as neither loved, Note.
nor kept his laws: as it is written by the holy Prophet Moses. Deuteronomy. 28.
The example whereof ye may read also in Daniel the Prophet: that the Emperor
of the Caldees, Daniel. 5.
when he was in the midst of his strength, mirth, banquets, and iollitie, A
hand writing in the wall feared the Emperor of the Caldees in his most
iollitie.
saw no more but a poor little hand write in the wall of his palace, that
never spoke word, showed no terrible sight of men of war, nor gave any blow
in his palace: yet fell the Emperor into such a trembling and fear at the
sight thereof, that all his limbs (in manner) stood him in no steed. Christ
never gave blow, but modestly asked his murderers whom they sought for: and yet
fell they flatt and prostrate to the ground. John. 18.
So that the wicked persecuters of the godly, be aptly and properly likened and
compared to a tottering Christ asking his murderers whom they soght: they fell
upon the ground.
and trembling wall. For as soon as ever the blastes of Gods ire and judgment
be moved and kindled against them: they be so quiuering and comfortless, yt
they would take them to be most their friends that soonest would dispatch them
out of the world. As Christ said aptly of them, they should pray the mounteines
to fall upon them. Luke 23.
As long as God feigneth himself a sleep, and suffers the blessed to fall
into the hands of the wicked to be crucified and slain, as they please, Note
diligently.
they be more strong, and more cruel then Lions: but when God arises and
takes the defense of his poor people, then they be more fearful then the
Heart, or trembling Hare. As we may see, when seely harmless Jacob, Jacob.
passed homeward into his country from Mesopotamia, such as he never gave blow
nor spoke foul word unto, Genesis. 43
trembled at his coming, as though he had been in battle with thousands of
soldiers. The like may we see by the brothers of Joseph when he spoke most
gently unto them, Joseph.
yea and told them that he was their brother: there was such a terror and
fear struck their consciences for persecuting of him, The children of Israel.
that they could make no word of answer. When the children of Israel should
come into the land of Canaan, the Lord said he would send before them his
fear, Exodus 23.
to amaze and astonish the people of the country, that their strength should
do them no harm.

The fury of the wicked may seem in his own eyes to be stable, firm and
constant: but in deed there is nothing more trembling nor tottering. As we
may see at this present day. They that persequute Christ's flock at this
present, have no assurance but flesh and blood.
Such as persequute the lively and seely flock of Christ, and tyra^nously
hold the neck of the godly under the yoke of idolatry: they have no ground,
no certeintie, nor any assurance more then flesh and blood, that favor them,
by whose favor they oppress the truth, and persequute the lovers of it. So
that in case flesh and blood should fail them, then would they be in such
trembling and quiuering, that they would do whatsoever they were commanded to
do, to be delivered from fear and terror.

As we may mark and see in the bishop of Winchester Gardener, Stephen
Gardener. Edmund Boner.
and also Boner the bishop of London. When king Henry the eight suspected them
both to be favorers of the Pope, (the capital enemy of Christ and his church)
Winchester fell into such a trembling and fear, that with all have he wrote
his purgation in a book named, A book, De vera obedientia.
True obedience: and Boner set an epistle before it, both they crying our
against the Pope, as against a tyrant, and false usurper of authority in this
Realm, (although they thought nothing less.) Thus we may see how inco^stant,
trembling, and quaking these tottering wicked persequuters of Gods word be.
Read Tunstals sermon against the bishop of Rome, and the treason of Cardinal
Pole.


I could declare more of their religion to be of the same conditions: but
because these two and Tunstal the bishop of Duresme be known openly to ye
world, by their books to be such, I speak only of them. When the prophet
has declared that the persequuters of the godly shall soudenly perish, he
tells the cause why they shall perish, Why shall the persequuters of the godly
perish?
Because they devise how to put him down (says he) whom God will exalt. And
after that the Prophet has showed, that the cause of their fall and
punishment, is their conspiracy against Gods elect: he sets forth by what
means the wicked use to depose, persequute, and tumble down the people of
God: By what means do the wicked put down the people of God?
By lies (says the Prophet) and by imagining of falshod and untruth. And when
he has declared, that the wicked do purpose, to bring their case and matter
against the godly with lies: he shows after what sort and fashion lies by
wicked men be used ( To bring mischief to purpose.) This is the letter of the
Psalm concerning the third part of it. Now there is in every of these
sentences profit to be gathered by the reader or hearer of it.

First is to be noted the conspiracy and treason of the wicked against God. If
it please the Lord, to favor and advance one: the nature of the wicked is, as
much to deface that God would have honored, as may be. Caine. Abel. Genesis. 4.
As God bare favor and advanced Abel: Cain wrought treason and killed his
brother, for the love that God did bear him. The Lord appointed Samuel to
rule: 1. Reg. 8.
the wicked people misliked that, which God best approved. 1. Reg. 18.
God would exalt David: Saul, 3. Reg. 15.
Absolon, and Achitophel, would prefer themselves. Again, the Lord appointed
Noah to teach the people to beware of the universal flood: Gene. 6. 7.
the people preferred liers, unto whom God never gave his holy spirit. Ierem.
20.
God elected Jeremy the true prophet: the people advanced Passur the false
prophet. The Lord exalted his dear son, and willed the world to learn of
him: Matthew. 3. 17. 28.
the people preferred the Pharisees, and desired the Judge to hang Christ. God
commanded his word only to be taught: but the world plucketh it so down,
John. 5.
that either they clean refuse the word, or else they will have it none other
wise then it is authorized, and made true by man. God says, 1. Cor. 1.
That which is wisdom before the world, is foolishnes before him. The world
recompenseth most arrogantly God, with the like, and accompteth all his
wisdom and learning foolishnes, in respect of worldly wisdom, counsel,
and religion. What shall become of the controllers of God.
But what says the Prophet Asaphe shall become of these Nemrods and controllers
of God? They shall (says he) quickly fall, and be destroyed as a tottering wall.

Here we see how controlling, and amending of Gods works at length speedeth:
and what is the end of these persecuting Giants of Gods afflicted. They fight,
GOD laughteth the intent of the wicked to scorn. Psalm. 2.
they fare foul, they move heaven and earth to alter the purpose and mind of
God: but, He that sits in heaven laugheth them to scorn. And they
themselves that thus wickedly use Christ and his members, fall down and come
to naught, as old, rotten, and dustie walls.

And in the other part that these shameless tyrants conspire thus against Christ
and his people, So the wicked may obtain their purpose: they care not by what
means.
by lies and falshoode, is declared the filthiness of their conscience: that be
so far past shame and honesty, that they care not (so they may obtain their
wicked purpose,) how craftily or falsely they lie or calumniate any sayings or
doings of God or man. As the devil their father, when God had exalted man into
Paradise, he wished him out of it, Genesis. 3.
and began to work man's destruction, By what means the devil deceived Adam.
with calumniating and false lying upon Gods own word. When God had set up
David to reign: Absolon his own son thinking the better to pull his father
down, lied falsely upon him to the people, and said, that There was no Judge
appointed in Israel to hear causes, David. Absolon. 3. Reg. 15.
and to end them between man and man. So slaundered he his father, a man of
good justice: and advanced himself, that never knew what justice meant.
Elias. Achab.
The good Prophet Elias likewise, whom God appointed to warn the people to
beware of sin: 3. Reg. 18.
king Achab to disgrace him, lied falsely upon him, and said, that He was the
troubler of the common wealth. Christ. The wicked sort of the world.
So Christ, whom God had elected to save the world from death and damnation: the
wicked sort of the world said, He has saved others, but he cannot save
himself. Again, Matthew. 27.
God sent him to be amongst the troubled to comfort them, Matthew. 8.
but such as wanted consolation, Mark. 5.
when they saw him, Luke. 8.
prayed him to depart out of their country: because with his presence, they
lost their swine. Paul. Tertullus, etc.
God said that Paul was the chosen vessel, to bear the name of him thorough
all the Gentiles: Acts. 24.
Tertullus and the other Jews said, Whom God do exalt to say the truth: the
wicked condemn as heretics.
He was one that molested all the world. Even so at this time, there is neither
honest nor virtuous man, that God exalts to speak the truth: but the wicked
says, He is an heretic, a scismatique, and a traitor. But seeing it is none
other then always has been accustomed, falsely to be laid to such as God
loves: it must be borne patiently.

How do the wicked use their lies.
But now the Prophet shows, how these liers and envious persecuters use their
lies. They give fair words with their mouth, (says the prophet,) but they
curse with their heart. By these words we may learn, that there are three
manner of ways that lies do harm.

Three manner of wais do lies harm.
The one, when they be openly and plainly used. The other when open falshoode
outwardly, is cloked with pretended truth. And the third when they be
dissembled outwardly, and yet in the heart they lie hid, tarying for a time
when they may be put abroad, to do mischief, and to work the destruction of
the godly.

But for as much as the devil the father of all lies, John. 8.
knows that such as he inspireth with lies, can not do harm with his lies,
except they be used as the persons be qualified, amongst whom the lies must be
sown: he teaches his disciples to use them as opportunity and occasion shall
serve.

Manifest and uncovered lies he causes to be used, Manifest lies among the
ignorant.
amongst such as do not know nor love the truth. For those lies shall
stablishe and confirm the wicked in their error, and wickedness. As for
example. Example.
Absolon and Achitophel told the people, as many lies (in manner) as they did
words, 1. Reg. 15.
against king David: and when they were by Absolons fair words alienated from
king David, and bent unto his son, because he promised to use instice to
every man and lawful favor: after Absolon came to Hebron, and had of his side
Achitophel his fathers chief counseler, he lied openly, and the people more
and more were stablished in error and treason.

The like is to be seen in the book of the Numbers, Number. 14.
that when such as returned out of the land of Canaan, whither they were sent,
to view the goodness and strength of the country: ten of the twelve
espies, brought the people into such a terror and fear, that they thought it
impossible to recover the land. Thus being in an error: manifest lies against
God, Moses. Joshua. Caleb.
Moses, Joshua, and Caleb, might be used well enough and prevail.

In matters of religion is the same, Manifest lies in matters of religion.
amongst such as be deceived and in error: manifest lies do take place, and do
as much harm, as the devil requires to be wrought by them.

As amongst the Caldees, such as most commended the idol of fire: Gene. 11.
were most esteemed. Amongst the Egyptians, Exo. 6. 7. 8.
such as most blasphemously could speak in the defense of witchcraft and
sorcerie: were taken for the best men. 3. Reg. 16. 17. 18.
Such as could best defend the honor of Baal, amongst the idolatricall Jews:
Matthew. 15.
had most reverence and honor. Amongst the Phariseis, he that could most
speak for the maintenance of men's traditions: was taken for the worthiest
man. Amongst the papists defenders of idolatry be proferred.
And now amongst the Papists, he that can best defend Papisticall idolatry
and supersition, is highest preferred. But (as I said) this use of lies and
falsehood, takes place in none but in such as the devil (the God of this world)
will not suffer, 2. Cor. 4.
to have the word of truth known. And this use of lies and flashoode, does
not trame men unto error and heresy: but stablisheth men in them, that do not
know the truth.

There is an other sort of people, which be the faithful: at whom the devil
has indignation, and laboreth with all diligence to deceive: against whom the
use of manifest lies (he knows) can not prevail: for such as do know and
love the truth, do abhor falshoode. Wherefore, if the devil prevail
against them: it is by another use of lies, then he used to the other sort of
the world.

This use of lies is of two sorts: The use of lies amongst the faithfullesse.
as we see by the word of God. The one is to make an evil thing to appear
good, under the pretense of good: and a false thing to appear true, under the
pretense of truth. Gene. 3. 4.
As we may see, how the devil under the pretense of good and profit unto Eve,
Eve. Caine.
made her eat of the apple, which was forbidden. Caine under the pretense of
friendship, brought Abel into the field and killed him. 1. Reg. 17.
Saul under the pretense of amity, Saul.
bade David to feast: and so meant to have stain him. Absolon.
Absolon under the color of justice and love to the Common wealth: 3. Reg. 15.
sought his fathers death, and made his subjects traitors. With many more such
examples in the word of God. Whereby is declared, that the devil by his
disciples, uses lies many ways: The devil uses lies many ways.
sometime to stablish men in error, that be in error already: sometime to
deceive such as be in the truth: but then manifest lies be not used, but
rather lies conveyed, covered, and cloaked with the mantell of truth and
verity: as we may see by the examples before specified: howbeit, many times
this use of lies, how so ever it pretends truth, can not deceive men. Then,
rather then the devil will miss of his purpose: he teaches an other use of
lies, which is more dangerous and painful to the godly, then any yet before
mentioned of. Of the which use the Prophet Asaphe speaks in this place, A
perilous use of lies.
saying: They speak fair with their toungs, but think evil in their hearts.

This is a perilous kind and use of lies: for it does one of these two great
mischiefs, or else both of them. That is to say, either at length it
overcomes the truth: or else mortally persequuteth the truth that will not
be overcome. As we may see by Esau. Esau.
He used a great while fair speech and gentle manners with Jacob his brother:
but in his heart he said, Gene. 27.
If my father dye, I will kill my brother. Again, Absolon spoke fair to his
father, Absolon.
and asked him leave to go to Hebron, to pay there the sacrifice that he
promised (whilst he was in Gessur of Syria) unto God: 3. Reg. 15.
but in his heart he went thither to raise king David his fathers subjects
against him. Certain came to Christ and said: Matthew. 22.
Master, we know that thou art true, and that thou teach the ways of God
in truth: yet in their hearts, they came to trippe him in a case of treason,
if they could.

This use of lies is very dangerous, for it lies in the heart hid secretly,
expecting and looking for time convenient, when and how it may break forth
to serve the turn: yet is the devil the father of lies, and the temple of the
devil the wicked man's and woman's hearts, wherein they lie ashamed or afraid
to utter them: Note.
but holds outwardly with the truth, which inwardly they mortally hate,
until they may take occasion to do outwardly as they would. The amiable
countenance of the papists in King Edwards days: be turned now into fiery
faces.
And we see it in Caine, Esau, Absolon, the Phariseis and others. Yea, our own
age has too good experience of this use of lies. For, how many within this
twelve months spoke fair of God and his word, and showed them selves
outwardly as friendly as could be unto them? but what their conscience and
hearts were inwardly, now it appears. Doubtless, that they hated deadly in
their spirits, that they most extolled with their mouths: for now they be
gone from the truth outwardly, which inwardly they never loved. And by the
use of their lies, they train as many, as they may, to be partakers of their
evils: and such as they can not, (by the use of lies draw unto their sect) by
violence and tyranny they persequute and compel, with extreme punishment and
hatred, in lands, goods, and body.

Thus may we see by this Prophet Asaphe, which way the wicked persequuted the
godly, and molested the seely members of Christ, that wished al men good, and
no men harm: even with lies and falsehoode, and used many crafty and subtle
ways. Whereof we be not instructed by the Prophet only to know this poison of
the devil concerning lies, and the diverse and manifold use and practice of
the^: but also, that the Christians be most in danger of them, yet must be
contented for Christ's sake to bear them, and circumspectly to beware they be
not deceived by them.

THE FOVRTH PART.
5 Nevertheless, my soul wait thou still upon God: for my help is in him.

6 He truly is my strength, and my salvation, he is my defense: so that I
shall not fall.

7 In God is my health and my glory, the rock of might: and in God is my
trust.

8 O put your trust in him always (ye people) pour out your hearts before him:
for God is our hope. Selah.


The fourth part repeateth more at large, the declaration of the first and the
second part.

THE five and six verses be word for word, as the first and the second were:
Only there is left out in these two verses, this word ( greatly:) for before
he said, He should not ( greatly) fall. The which word may be taken two ways
very comfortable, of the reader and hearer, if it be well marked and believed.

The first way is, Prou. 24.
that the Prophet means not, that the people of God shall not fall, The people
of god do fall.
for that is against the Scripture: for, The just man falls seven times in
the day. 1 John. 1.
Again, If we say we have no sin in us, we deceive our selves: and the
truth is not in us. Now, whereas sin inseparably dwells (as it does in
all men whilst they live upon the earth) there be faults and falls before
God of the man's part, in whom this sin dwells: yet God of his mercy for
the blood and death of Christ, The sins of the faithful be not imputed unto
them for Christ's sake.
does not account these inseparable sins to be falls: but loves the
person, preserves him, and will not impute nor lay any of those falls or
faults, unto his charge, but in Christ esteem him justified and clean, as
though he were of him self so in deed. And thus the Prophet says, that of
Gods part, and by our acceptance into his favor, Romans 8.
through Christ, the faithful falls not. Justification. Note.
That is to say, his sin is not accounted damnable nor laid to his charge,
for Christ's sake: As Saint Paul writes to the Romans. Romans 8.


An other way it may be taken. That a Christian has testimony in his spirit
by the spirit of God, that he is so elected, chosen, and ordained of God to
eternal salvation: that what so ever the world, the flesh, He that stands
fast of Gods election: can not fall to damnation
the devil, or sin shall do: yet stands he assured of Gods election,
grace, strength, and fidelity, that he shall never fall to damnation, but
arise again, and be called from his falls what so ever they be. And yet this
most sure and comfortable knowledge will not give him license, nor liberty to
sin: but rather keep him in a fear and love of the strong and mighty God,
in whose hands he is, and kept from the great fall of eternal damnation, from
the which he was delivered from the beginning with God. So that ye may learn
of this place, what perseverance is, in the meditation and contemplation of
Gods most holy word and promises. Nichodemus.


At the first they seem unto the flesh, John. 3.
things impossible, as we may see by Nichodemus, who was as ignorant as could
be at the beginning, The longer a man is at school: the more sweetness in
learning does he feel.
when he came first to school to Christ. But when a man has been exercised a
while in it, he feels more sweetness in the promises of God: as we see by
this Prophet. For after he had borne the cross of affliction a little while,
and learned the nature of God, how merciful he is to sinners, he said:
Although I fall, yet it shall not be greatly. But when he had tarried in the
school of Christ, and learned in deed what he was, and how that he was able
to perform his mercy, he said plainly: Whatsoever, sin, the devil, the
world, the flesh, hell, heaven, or the earth would say against him, he should
not fall. These two interpretations are to be noted. For which so ever we use,
we may find comfort, and unspeakable consolation.

Now, when he has declared, that he shall not fall into Gods eternal ire and
displeasure: he shows how this certeintie of eternal salvation came unto
him: and why God so mercifully and strongly, has warded and fenced him against
all temptations and perilles of damnation.

It is (says he) because God is his health. Why shall not be godly fall. Health.
That is to say, One that has not only taken him from the sickness and
danger of sin, the tyranny of the devil, and damnation of the law: but
also preserves him in the same state, that he fall not again, into the
sickness and peril that he was delivered from. The mercy of God and not
manswork saves a sinner.
Whereof we learn, that it is not man's labors, nor man's works that helps a
sinner, and saves a damnable soul: but it is the free work and undeserved
mercy of almighty God. Wherefore we be taught, that There is no health, but in
God alone.

Then says the Prophet also, Glory.
that in God is his glory. Of the which word he notes two things. The one
touching God alone: Note.
and the other touching God and him self.

The glory that touches God alone, is, that this troubled Prophet pondered
in the heaviness and anguishe of his mind, the number and strength of his
enemies, the devil, the flesh, sin, the world, and the bitter accusation of
Gods laws, that truly accused and painfully grieved his conscience for sin.
Of the other side in faith he considered, how the scripture declared that God
was merciful, even unto the greatest sinners of the world. And he learned also
by the word of God, that GOD had made promise unto sinners, to be merciful. He
considered further, that god had many times used and practiced his mercy
toward sinners. And he found likewise by the scripture, that God, to
perform his mercy, would not spare his own dearly beloved son, to redeem
man from his sin with his own precious blood, and painful death.

Thus weighing the strength of the devil and sin in the one part to damn,
and the strength of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus on the other part to save, The
afflicted Christian that believes the strength of Gods mercy, to exceed the
force of his enemies: receives consolation.
and perceiving the riches, abundance, and strength of Gods mercy to be more
auaylable to save, then all the power and strength of the devil and sin to
damn, (for the great victory that God takes over such strong enemies,) the
Prophet triumphs in the glory of God, joyfully and thankefully: extolling
him for his mercy and power, that has broken the serpents head, and spoiled
him of his prisoners. So we use to do, when any man by valiantness,
defends us from our enemies: we extol and magnify him for his victory and
conquest.

This glory gave the Prophet Asaphe in this Psalm of God, Every christian
gives the glory only unto God.
when by faith he saw God conquering of hell, sin, the devil, the
accusation of the law, desperation, the flesh, and the world. And the same
glory gives every faithful creature unto God, at the end of the Lords prayer,
Matthew. 6.
when he says: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory. By the
which words we know, that how so ever the devil and wicked people, take
upon them to usurp by violence, war, and tyranny, and live never so
princely in pomp and pride: they be but usurpers, if they come to it
wrongfully: for the kingdom apperteineth unto GOD. And how so ever they
extend their power, (in Gods sight) they be no stronger then a bruised reed, or
broken staff: for the power is Gods. And what glory so ever they seigne and
flatter them selves to have: it is but withered hay and vile dust, in the
sight of God.

But now the Prophet, The Prophet by faith claims the glory of God* to be
his glory.
by the eye of faith, seeing this glorious triumph, strength, and power in
God: says, that In this glorious, almighty, and triumphant God is his glory,
and desires to have part of that victory, and of that meruellous majesty.
And as the Psalm says, He calls and names the God of glory, his glory.
Oh meruellous, and unspeakable boldness and constancy of faith. Note.
A man nothing but sin by nature, in the sight of God, nothing but earth and
ashes, replenished with all misery and wretchedness, by nature corrupt, the
very enemy of GOD, a vessel prepared unto all dishonor, ignominy, shame,
and perdition, contemned through sin, and shamed before all creatures: and
yet now with all these dishonours (by faith) says. The king of glory is his
glory: and the conqueror of all dishonor, is his shield and buckler.

Of the other part, who can think or speak any thing thankful to such a
king of glory, and most mighty conqueror, that abhors not of mercy, to be
the honor and glory of so vile, sinful, and wretched a thing, as man is?
Whose eyes abhor no filthe of sin in penitent sinners, Consolation
whose presence refuses not the company of the sick and miserable, whose
strength comfort the weak, whose mercy rejoices the comfortles, whose life
expels death: whose health banisheth sickness, whose love vanquisheth
hatred, Psalm. 103.
whose immortality gives everlasting life: and who crowns us with endless
pity and compassion in joys perpetual.

Thus the Prophet, after he had espied the almighty God in him self
gloriously, to be void of all troubles, dolours, and other adversities, and
that he had also conquered gloriously the capteines of al adversities, Oh
lively faith.
hell, death, satan, and sin: he challenged by faith, and craved by Gods
promise, to be partaker of Gods glory in this point. And doubtless, he that
can feel in his heart, that GOD is his glory: he shall take no dishonor nor
shame, by all the works of the devil, sinner, or the world. Therefore, many
times in reading or thinking of the Psalms, or other part of the holy
scripture: it is expedient to meditate and pray, that the word we speak or
pray, may be unto us as much salvation, comfort, and glory, as we perceive GOD
has appointed in it for us. And when we say with our mouth to God, Luke. 17.
Thou art my salvation, my glory, my rock, and my trust: Let us cry, Lord
increase our faith, help us for thy name sake constantly to believe thee, to
be unto us in deed in spirit as we speak of thee outwardly with our mouth. For
in case the heart understand not, Esai. 29.
nor believe the words we speak with our mouth: Matthew. 15.
we honor God in vain, as the scripture says. Let us therefore pray, as
Saint Paul teaches us, 1. Cor. 14.
saying: I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the mind also.

When the Prophet has by faith assured him self of Gods favor, Exhortation.
he exhorts all the Christian congregation to do the same, saying: O put
your trust in him always (ye people, etc.)

Here the Prophet teaches, What is the office of the pastor, when he
understands the scriptures?
what the Minister of the Church, Bishop, and others should do, when they
understand the scripture, and learn by it, fear and faith, love and hope in
GOD: they be bound to teach the congregation the same Scriptures for her
salvation. Whereby is condemned the use of the Scripture in an unknown tongue:
which is directly against Gods word. 1. Cor. 14. The office of Kings and
Magistrates, Parents and Masters.
And here be Kings and Rulers also taught, to see their subjects, tenaunts,
and servant to understand the word of God: likewise the Father and the
Mother, the Master and the Maistresse, who be bound to know for their
salvation the word of GOD, and to teach it unto others under their
governance. Therefore, in the end of the verse is put ( Selah.) As though he
had said, Happy be those that put their trust in the Lord, and teach other
to do the same. And curssed be those that trust not in the Lord, and teach
others to do the like.

THE FIFTH PART.
9 As for the children of men, they are but vain: the children of men are
deceitful upon the weights. They are altogether lighter then vanity it self.

10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves to vanity: if
riches increase, set not your heart upon them.


The fifth part shows, how man's power is not to be trusted unto.

THE Prophet by no means would have men to put their trust in flesh and
blood: No trust in flesh and blood. Note.
in case they do, they must needs perish. For when miserable man shall trust
in vain vanity, which is man: he can be no less then vanity it self, in
whom he has trusted. And this is one misery and wretchedness, a man to be
deceived of help and succor: whereas he most trusted to have been helped and
succored. Thus must it needs happen to them that trust in men. For men of
most excellency and greatest authority, riches, and power in the world, be
but vanity: As man isIf we say we have no sin in us so is his help.
as the Prophet says. Now as they be, so is their help. And as their help
is, so is the comfort and consolation of such as seek help at their hands.
Those that be trusted unto, be but flesh and blood: Note diligently.
the best of flesh and blood is but vanity: the consolation and help of
vanity, is misery and wretchedness: wherefore the Prophet exhorts all men
to beware, they seek not aid and comfort of man, The Israelites used the
Egyptians for help.
for he is but vain. The Israelites used for their help against their
enemies, the Egyptians: but the more flesh conspired together, the worsse
success had all the battles they fought. Now as we see, men that have their
trust in men, suffer much trouble and misery in the world, An inferior
medicine to the disease: can not cure the patie^t. Iere. 17. What does come of
the trust in man.
because their help they trust in, is of inferior strength and power to the
troubles and adversities, that they be combred withal. So does the word of
God declare, that such men as trust in vanity, have not only worldly
adversities against them, but also for their so doing, (trusting in flesh)
they be accurssed of God, as the scriptures say: Curssed be he that trusts in
man. So that we see marvelous and unspeakable harms come of the trust in man.
First, miseries of ye world, and next the enimitie and curse of God. For he
that puts his trust in man, with the same one fact and doing, Two evils.
does two horrible evils. The one, he deceives him self: for the vanity
that he trusts in, can not save him. And the other, he dishonors God that
only can save, in putting his trust in mortal man, that can not save: and so
makes of man God: to Gods high displeasure and dishonor.

Every Christian man therefore should forsake flesh and blood, and trust in
the Lord Almighty maker of heaven and earth, as the Prophet Asaphe did a
little before, when he said: In God was his glory, who could defend him from
all hurts present, past, and to come, what so ever they were.

The like may we see in Saint Paul, Gal. 6.
that said: God forbid that I should glory in any thing, saving in the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world: That is, because I put al my trust of salvation (says Saint Paul)
in him that was crucified, the world takes me for an heretic, and so
persequuteth me: but yet it over comes me not, A goodly explanatio^ of Paul's
words: god forbid that I should glory in, etc.
neither takes it away my glory, my consolation, and my crown of eternal
joys. For even as the world persequuteth me with fire, sword, and all other
crucifyings: so I crucify the world again, testifying by the word of God,
that their living is naught, and their faith and trust worse. So that as they
crucify me with worldly trouble: in like manner I crucify the world again
with the word of God, and speak against it, bearing testimony that it is the
enemy of God, and shall perish eternally. But this I do (says Paul) because
I glory in nothing, saving in Christ crucified.

Thus does the Prophet Asaphe teach all men to put their trust in Christ,
and not in sinful man: which is not only vanity: Man more vain then vanity.
but also, If vanity were laid in one balance, and man in the other, yet of
both man were the more vanity. Therefore man is not to be trusted unto: (says
the Prophet.)

And for a further declaration that man is more vain, then vanity: he openly
declares in the process of his Psalm, that man is given besides vanity, to
wrong and robbery, which two euilles do increase man's miseries. Why man is
more vain then vanity.
For man is not only borne vain vanity: but also by process of time in
wicked living, adds wrong and robbery unto vanity, and so makes vanity
more vain and damnable, then it was before.

Now this robbery and wrong is done two manner of ways: Who so trusts in
any thing saving in God, does dishonor God. Wrong done. unto God.
to God, and to man. He that puts his trust of salvation in any other thing,
saving in God: loses not only his salvation, but also robs God of his
glory, and does God (as much as lies in him) manifest wrong, as the wicked
people amongst the Jews did, that said, As long as they honored and trusted
unto the Queen of heaven, al things prospered with them: but when they
hearkened to the true preachers of Gods word, Ose. 2.
they said al things came into worsse state, Iere. 44.
and that with scarsitie and trouble they were over whelmed.

He that puts also his trust and confidence in any learning or doctrine
besides Gods word, What does he that be leeueth any doctrine besides gods word.
does not only fall into error, and lose the truth: but also as much as
lies in him, he robs Gods book of his sufficient truth and verity, and
ascribes it to the books of men's decrees. Which is as much wrong to God and
his book, as may be thought or done. In the which robbery (or rather
sacrilege) no man should put his trust, (as the Prophet says.)

An other way, Wrong done unto man.
wrongs be done unto man: when the rich and sturdie of the world, by abusing
of friendship, oppress, rob and spoil the poor. And by his thus doing,
first he deceives him self: for evil gotten goods can not long prosper,
neither can any family advanced by fraud, craft, or subtlety long time
endure. Then he deceives the simple and poor that trusts upon the outward
show of his port and estimation: which glittereth in the world as a vain,
glorious, and deceiuable beauty, and honor: and marketh neither how wickedly
the glory of the robber and doer of wrong sprang up, nor how miserably God
has ordained it to fall again. But seeing carnally he sees a vain man in
vanity, prosper for a time, he trusts in this vanity pampered up with
robbery and wrong, until such time as vanity vadeth, and he much lamenteth
that put in vanity, so much vain hope. But grant that honor and riches by
Gods gift and truth, abound: yet were they not given for men to trust in, Why
riches are given unto man.
but for men to give GOD more thanks, and to help the poor with them, from
injuries of oppression, and need of hunger, thirst, and poverty. Therefore
the Prophet says, Although riches do abound: yet men should not put their
hearts upon them. That is to say, men should not trust in them, nor keep the^
otherwise, then their use or keeping should serve to the glory of God: in
abundance to be liberal: and in time of need to be careful: not to keep
them for a private commodity: but as Iosephe did say, to save the multitude
from scarsitie and penury. Thus does the Prophet exhort all men to beware
they put not their trust in men: Gene. 4.
for both they and all that they have of worldly things, be transitory, vain,
and inconstant.

THE SIXTH PART.
11 God spoke once, and twice, I have also heard the same: that power belongs
unto God.

12 And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every man, according
to his work.


The sixth part contains: how that God has promised to help the afflicted,
etc.

Job has the same phrase and manner of speech: The Lord spoke once, and will
not repeat the same again. Job. 33.
That is as much to say, Note.
as that the word of God is so sure, that it can not be made frustrate, nor
changed by any means. So says this Prophet Asaphe, God spoke once, which
stands sure for ever, and cannot be altered.

This word of GOD has relation to the verses before: wherein be opened the
vanity of man, or insufficiency to help him self or others in trouble,
which can not be changed, nor ever shall be, but as flesh is vanity be it
never so holy: as Adam called his best son and holy Martyr, Genesis. 4. Abel
in Hebrew: in English in Vanity.
Abel: that is to say in the Hebrew tongue, Vanity: perfectly knowing, that all
flesh by sin, was vile and vain: and therefore not to be trusted unto.

This ( once) speaking of God, is also referred unto the text that follows:
which declares two virtues in God, Power and Mercy: Power, to punish his
enemies: How God does reward every man after his works.
and Mercy, to recompense his faithful afflicted. And this is so true, that it
shall never be made false: the wicked to feel Gods strength in damnation, and
the faithful to feel Gods mercies in salvation: not because their works
deserve it: but because God of his mercy, so contented to bless the poor
faithful workman. So he gives each man after his works, the evil hell fire
by justice, and the good heavens bliss by mercy.

Now the Prophet says, He heard it twice at Gods mouth, that is to say, He
knew God had made promise of mercy to save the faithful penitentes: and of
justice to punish the impenitent sinner. And this he heard in the time of the
Law of Nature, by reading of Moses books: and also by the holy Ghost in his
own time, when by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, he wrote this Psalm and
the rest of his prophesies. The same have we likewise heard: first, by reading
of the books of Moses: next, by reading of the Scriptures of the Prophets: and
thirdly, by reading of the new Testament. The which I pray God give us grace to
believe and follow. Amen.

AN EXPOSITION upon the 73. Psalm, made by the constant Martyr of Christ,
Master JOHN HOOPER, Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE matter and argument of this Psalm, is a consolation for them that are
wont much to be moved and afflicted, when they see the ungodly flourish, and
prosper in all wealth, and pleasure: and contrariwise, the godly and good
people oppressed with poverty, and all other calamities, and afflictions. As
ye may see the Prophet Asaphe entreat of this matter in this his first Psalm:
the same ye may see also in king David, in his 37. Psalm. Wherein he exhorts
men not to judge amiss of God, Psalm. 37.
nor to leave off godly conversation, although the best be punished, and the
worst escape quit. These two Psalms entreating of one matter, are to be read
and known of us in these perilous days, least the hatred and persequution
that happens to Gods truth, and to the lovers thereof, might unhappily make
us to judge of God, and to forsake his truth, as many have done, and daily the
number of them increase, with the decrease of Gods honor, and the increase of
their own damnation. For now Christ tries the chafe from the come, Matthew.
26.
the rust from the metal, 1. Tim. 1.
and hypocrisy from truth, If we will not, or cannot abide the hammar, 2.
Tim. 4.
or trying pot that God sets us in, to explorate and search, 1. John. 2.
whether our faith will abide the fire of trouble and persequution, 1. Cor. 3.
or not: if we suffer not, all our religion is not worth a hawe. For, Heb. 11.
it is not words that prove faith, but deeds. Matthew. 10.
If it abide the trial, it is true, and the more it is tried, the finer it
will be: and at length brought into such finenesse, James. 2.
as corruption shall never hurt nor harm it, Genesis 12. 15. 17. 22.
in the world of grace and virtue. GOD therefore grant us grace to suffer his
trial, and search strongly, Romans 4.
patiently and thankefully. Matthew. 7.
Amen.

The order of the Psalm:
1 The text and letter of the Psalm. 2 The Paraphrase, or plain explanation
of the text, and letter of the Psalm. 3 The principal parts, and most
notable doctrines contained in the Psalm.


The text and letter of the Psalm of Asaphe.
THE FIRST VERSE.
1. Truly God is loving unto Israel: even unto such as are of a clean heart.
The Paraphrase or plain explanation.

GOD loves the godly, Matthew. 5.
although they be afflicted: Luke. 6.
and hates the ungodly, Apoc. 3.
although they be in prosperity. Proverb. 3.
The Lord is loving and merciful to such as be afflicted, Heb. 11.
and specially if their hearts be pure and clean, and judge nothing of God
amiss: whether they see the good oppressed, or the evil exalted. In their
hearts they murmur nothing at Gods doings: nor in their minds they find no
fault with Gods order, and providence.

THE second and third verse.
2. Nevertheless my feet were almost gone, my treadinges had welneere slipped.

3. And why? I was grieved at the wicked, I do see also the ungodly in such
prosperity.


The plain Explanation.

Yet notwithstanding, Psalm. 37. 73.
when I saw the good afflicted, and the evil prosper, Abac. 2.
it troubled my mind: so so that in manner I was forced and compelled,
thoroughe indignation, to judge of God as other evil men did: and grievously
offended his high majesty, in thinking his doings not indifferent, in
troubling the good, and quieting of the bad.

THE fourth Verse.
4 For they are in no peril of death: but are lusty and strong.
The plain explanation.

I perceived further, (says the Prophet) that the wicked lived not only
quietly, and pleasantly: but also died (in manner) without heaviness, or any
great torments. Besides all these felicities, pleasures, and ease for their
own parts in this world: it happens when they die, they leave also pleasant
and delectable mansion houses, great riches, and large possessions to their
children.

THE fifth and sixth Verse.
5 They come into no misfortunes like other folk, neither are they plagued
like other men.

6 And this is the cause that they be so holden with pride, and overwhelmed
with cruelty.


The plain explanation.

If any miss of loss and damage in this world, it is they: if sickness
flies from any, it flies from them. So that much felicity, and little
adversity, causes them to know neither God, they neighbors, nor themselves.

THE seventh Verse.
7 Their eyes swell for fatness, and they do what them lust.


The plain explanation.

Such as flourish with riches and authority, wax proud and arrogant; for all
things come so abundantly unto them, that they have more then they look for.

THE eight Verse.
8 They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blaspheme, their talk is against
the most highest.


The plain explanation.

They afflict and cruelly persequute the good and innocent, and they are come
to this insolency and pride, that they would not only their abhemination
should be known: but also they themselves bost of it, and in most
abomination, most extol and magnify themselves.

THE ninthe Verse.
9 For they stretch forth their mouth unto the heaven: and their tongue goes
through the world.


The plain explanation.

They be so blinded and deceived with he felicity, and trouble of this world,
that they spare not God, nor godly men: but speak against both, and do their
wills and pleasures.

THE 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. and 17. Verses.
10 Therefore fall the people unto them, and there out suck they no small
advantage.

11 Tush (say they) how should God perceive it? Is there knowledge in the most
highest?

12 Lo these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world, these have riches in
possession.

13 Then have I cleansed my heart in vain (said I) and washed my hands in
innocence.

14 All the day long have I been punished, and chastened every morning.

15 Yea, I had almost said even as they: but lo, then should I have condemned
the generation of thy children.

16 Then thought I to understand this, but it was too hard for me.

17 Until I went into the Sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of
these men.


The plain explanation.

Because the wicked men prosper so well in this world: the people of God
conform, and apply them selves to do as they do, and frame their lives and
manners, unto the rule and fashion of such wicked people as prosper. And they
suck and draw into their minds, the wicked men's opinions and conuersations:
and so replenish themselves with iniquity, as the thirsty man does replenish
himself with water. And when the people see the best part turn unto the
manners of the worst, and be as evil or worse then the worst: they muse and
think whether there be any God, or knowledge in God, that suffers these
abominations. And not only the common people (says the prophet Asaphe,)
stood in a mamering whether God took any heed or cared for the world, seeing
that wicked men did so prosper, and the godlier sort so vexed: but I may self
also considering these things with my self, fell into such madness and error
of judgment, that I had done evil so to apply my self to virtuous and godly
life: seeing I was vexed and turmoyled with continual miseries, and seeing
that there was never a day, that did not bring her cross and trouble to the
servant of God, and virtuous people. These things (says the prophet,)
fondly and foolishly I spoke to my self many times: but when I weighed the
thing with more judgment, and considered the matter more deeply with my
self, I thought, If I thus judge and speak of God, do I not improve,
reprehende, and condemn the life, conversation, and labors of all godly men?
The which will not be drawn nor enticed from godly life, and the love of
virtue by no misaduentures, nor afflictions in this world: neither do they
judge that they have studied, and followed godliness in vain, whatsoever
trouble has happened to them in this world. And therefore, when I assayed to
compass the cause, and verity of these things: the greatness thereof
brought me into much fear, and carfulness. And further I perceived, that I
could not come to the knowledge of these things, except the Almighty God
would reveal, and open unto me the mysteries and secrets of his providence,
and wisdom: that I might see, and understand, what end and outgoing these
wicked men should have, that with most abomination and blasphemy in this life
had most felicity, and pleasure. And by tarrying in the thoughts, and
cogitations of this case and matter: at last I found, that these wicked men and
women, whose felicity and prosperous estate tormented me, their end was most
miserable, full of wretchedness and pain.

THE 18. and 19. Verse.
18 Namely, thou set them in slipperie places, and castest them down, and
destroyest them.

19 Oh how soudeinly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end?


The plain explanation.

Doubtless the felicities and pleasures (Lord) that thou gave to these
wicked doers, are slipperie and brittle: for so may I well call them, because
such as enjoy them (for the most part,) so abuse them in this life, that they
loose the life everlasting.

THE 20. Verse.
20 Yea even as a dream when one awaketh: so shall thou make their image to
vanish out of the city.


The plain explanation.

These wicked men's felicity vanished, as the dream of him that is awaked. For
as ye dream for a time seems to be true, and as long as he sleeps he
supposes it to be as he dreameth: but as the dream passes the sleep being
broken: so does these wicked men's felicity, when they depart out of this life.

THE 21. 22. 23. and 24. Verse.
21 Thus my heart was grieved, and it went thoroughe my raines.

22 So foolish was I and ignorant, even as it were a beast before thee.

23 Nevertheless I am always by thee: for thou have holden me by the right
hand.

24 Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and after that receive me with
glory.


The plain explanation.

Before (says Asaph) that I saw such wicked men (as flourished in all
felicity, and pleasure) cast down headlong from their places, I was
wonderfully troubled. And no meruell: for I was but a fool and an idiote, that
perceived not the judgment of the Lord, but as a beast before thee in that
respect, Oh Lord, yet did thou conduct me (such a fool as I am) to the
understanding of thy pleasure, in such difficil and hard causes. And in their
pleasures thou shewedst me their loss, and damnation: and in mine own
adversity and trouble shewedst me, my salvation and perpetual health.

THE 25. and 26. Verse.
25 Whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is none upon the earth, that I
desire in comparison of thee.

26 My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.


The plain explanation.

When the Prophet has weighed Gods judgment, toward such as with iniquity
lived in all pleasure, and perceived that their pains were for ever, and their
joys but for a time: he is now inflamed with the love of God, and breaks
forth into these godly words, and sentences: Who can delight me in heaven, but
thou? O Lord. Whom shall I love upon the earth? Whom shall I reverence and
honor, but thee? Doubtless of all things except thee, I pass nothing of,
nor set stoore by. Thee only I embrace, thee only I desire, and thee only I
covet, and wish for: for only thou art to be beloved, to be honored, and to
be wished for. So that both my soul, and my body be ravished with the love of
thee: for thou art the strength, and foundation of my soul and body. Thou art
my riches, my treasure, and my everlasting inheritance.

THE 27. and 28. Verse.
27 For lo, they that forsake thee shall perish: thou have destroyed all them
that commit fornication against thee.

28 But it is good for me, to hold me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord
God.


The plain explanation.

And good cause have I (Oh Lord) to love thee: for they shall perish, and be
destroyed, as many as love any thing besides thee, and forsake thee. Therefore
as I know it profitable only to prefer thee (O Lord) in all love and
favor: so is it meet that I being thus saved by the mercy, and receiving so
many benefits at thy hand, should continually with laud and praise, celebrate
and magnify the meruellous works of thy goodness and providence.

The end of the Paraphrase or plain explanation.
The principal parts of the Psalm 73.
Verse. 1. Truly God is loving to Israel, etc. The first part is contained in
the first verse: and it declares that God loves the good, although he
punishes them. Verse 2. My feet were almost gone, etc. The second part is
contained in the second verse: and it declares how weak and frail a thing
the nature of man is, and upon how small an occasion it is in danger to fall
from God. Verse 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. I was grieved at the wicked, etc. The third
part is contained in six verses that follow, wherein the felicity of wicked
men consists, that good men be so sore grieved Verse 9. 10. 11. Therefore
fall the people unto them, etc. The fourth part is contained in other three
verses next ensuing: And it declares how frail, brittle, and weak a thing
man is, that for every trifle turns, and withdraws himself from God. Verse
12. 13. Then have I cleansed my heart in vain, etc. The fifth part is contained
in two other verses next following: And it declares how soon men repent
their well doings. Verse 14. Yea and I had almost said even as they, etc. The
sixth part is contained in one verse next following: And it declares how great
a danger it is, temerously to judge of God, or of Gods people, without the
word of God. Verse 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. Then thought I to understand
this, but it was too hard for me, etc. The seventh part is contained in seven
verses next following: And it declares that man's reason is but ignorant and
beastly in considering of Gods works, until it be illuminated by God and his
word. And then is made open, how vain all things be that wicked men possess
in this world. Verse 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. Nevertheless I am always by thee:
for thou have holden me by my right hand, etc. The eighth part is contained in
six verses next following unto the end of the Psalm: and it declares a
wonderful and unspeakable consolation. For although we be grievously
tempted: yet we be not forsaken of God, but preserved and lift up, when else
otherwise we should fall. And in this part in setting forth the multitude and
number of Gods consolations: he draws near the end of the Psalm, and
concludes it with this text, I will set forth thy works. Wherewith he declares
that he will be thankful unto God for his great gifts and mercy.

The end of the parts and chiefest matters in the Psalm.
What things are to be marked out of these parts, and matters of the Psalm.
Out of the first part are many things to be noted.
FIrst the nature and condition of God, (for as much as he has prepared for
men a place of joy permanent and everlasting:) is not to reward such as be
his, Matthew. 6.
and ordained to the life to come with so slender, Colos. 3.
and small a recompense in the blood of his son Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 15.
as these worldy and transitory things be of this world: Matthew. 25.
but with riches and treasures that shall not corrupt, Cantic. 4.
nor be eaten with vermin, John. 17.
nor yet taken from us by thieves. As S. Paul says: Ephesians. 2.
He has made us to sit with him in the glory of heaven. Matthew. 19.
And as Christ said unto Peter, that became a beggar with the rest of the
Apostles in this world, for Christ's sake: Ye shall (says Christ) sit upon
the twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. We must therefore note
out of this place of the Prophets Psalm, That God, although he whip and
scourge us, as we have most worthily deserved: yet he loves us, and will not
take his mercy from us, but once leave beating of us, and burn the rod: and
then in Christ reward us with everlasting life. Romans 8.
In any case therefore, Luke 23.
we must well assure our selves in the days of Gods punishments, Psalm. 119.
that the end of his crosses and afflictions be the beginning of everlasting
joys. Apoc. 6. 27 22.
For, He receives none: but such as he first corrects and chasteneth. Esaie
54.


The second learning in this part, Ose. 1.
is to be persuaded, Heb. 12.
that God does not punish without just cause, Esaie. 53.
for that he delights in punishing of his people: Romans 3.
As the wicked Pharao, Exodus 14.
Nemroth, Saul, and Julian the Apostata said. Gene. 10.
When he had drowned all the world with water for sin, 1. Reg. 28.
the wicked people judged, that God had punished of a parcial and choleric
passion in his fury, Trip. Hist.
without just matter and cause. And therefore they went about in contempt of
God, to build a tower so high, that God should never have been able to wreake
his wrath upon them again. So did cursed Pharao, Exodus 5.
he asked What God that should be, that could plague him and his realm? And in
the time of his punishment railed, 1. Reg. 28.
and spoke most irreverently. Wicked Saul also, when God for his disobedience
punished him: he in despite of God, sought remedy to withstand the
punishments of God by witchcraft, Trip. Hist.
and Nekromancie. And Julian the Emperor, when Christ gave him in the wars
his deaths wound, took an handful of his own blood, and hurled it in despite
of Christ into the air, and said, Thou have overcome thou Galilean, and so in
mockery he called Christ, and Christian men Galileans. Wherefore, in any case
this beginning of the Psalm is to be marked, and used in the time of all men's
punishments: and to say with heart and mouth unto the heavenly father,
whatsoever he lays upon us, Truly God is loving unto me, etc. And so does
king David cry out, when God was most severe and busy in punishing both him
and his people, Psalm. 119.
saying: Thou art just, (Lord) and right: and just is thy judgment. So did the
Emperor Maurice say, when his wife, Carrion.
and children were killed before his face: Thou art just, Lord, and thy
judgments are righteous.

Job likewise was of the same mind, Job. 1. 2.
although his wife and kinsefolke provoked him to speak impatiently, and
irreverently of God: yet he said, that He and all his were the Lords, and that
if he had taken them of him, why should not he be contented, that God should
have them again at his pleasure? These two notes are to be marked, and used,
whatsoever happen. Ioh. 16.
First, that God purposes to bestow heavenly pleasures and treasures upon
his people: Gal. 5.
and therefore he will not reward them with the trash and wicked Mammon of this
life, Col. 1.
and transitory vale of misery. 1. These. 1.
The second, Heb. 12.
when he punishes his in this world, James. 1.
it is of love: and that the person afflicted must both take it so, 1. John. 1.
and also say so with this Prophet Asaphe, Truly God is loving unto Israel,
(that is to say,) To him that professes his religion.

The third note is, to mark that God is known and felt in the time of
punishment, and persequution to be loving: Psalm. 119.
but of such as be of a clean heart. Whereof we learn, Deuteronomy. 4.
that all men that bear the name of Israelites, 2. Reg. 22.
and of Christian religion: judge neither reverently nor yet patiently of Gods
punishments, Neh. 9.
but such Christian men as be of clean Psalm. 18. 91 118.
hearts. Romans 5. 12.
Out of this place we may learn, the cause why in this troublesome time, 1.
Cor. 4.
so many wax weary and fall from the truth of Gods word, 2. Cor. 1.
whiles God is a punishing of us that have been unthankful unto him, and did
not live according to his word, (the Lord forgive us.) Doubtless, now they
mislike, and starte back: no not starte back, but openly in the face of Gods
enemies swear and stare, as Peter did, (God send them Peter's repentance,)
that they never passed, nor cared a jot for Gods word. And all is, because
they be not, nor ever were of a clean heart: that is to say, so persuaded in
their hearts, that Gods holy word is the only truth, what punishment soever
GOD lay upon them that profess it. God give us this clean heart, that we may
unfeignedly say, Doubtless the Lord is loving unto his word, and to them that
profess it, although he lay thousands of crosses upon them in this world.

Out of this place we be admonished (dearly beloved,) to beware of the
greatest, and abominable evil (one of them) that can be done against God:
that is to say, witchcrafte, and calculation by Astronomy, and such other
like. How heinous an offense is this, when we see the heavens rain, the
clouds wholly bent to storms and tempests, the winds roaring, and in such
rage, as all should go a sunder, thunder and lighteninges as men wonder at:
and under all these plagues, tempests and soul weather, the young springing
corn, the sweet root of herbs, the little withered grass lie buried and
covered under weather and storms, frost and snow, whilst GOD suffers
winter, and makes cold to continue. Were it not now witchcraft and very
abomination, to say and divine of these stormy and winterly tempests, that
summer should not be green, parched blades of grain should not come again in
the harvest to corn: bitten, and buried roots, should not at the spring bring
forth sweet and pleasant flowers: that shaken and wind torn trees by
tempests, should not in the calm coming of the summer, bud forth their
leaves? What witch and cursed man would thus judge of earthly things, that
have their times of vading and loosing of all beauty for the sin of man? If
this be abomination for the bitterness and storms of winter, to condemn and
curse the summer to come, because summers fruits, and the springes beauty be
stained and all defiled with winters barrenness, and dim clouds: what is
this, but ten times more abomination, for the bitterness and storms of
persequution, to condemn and curse the life to come of Gods people, because
truths fruits, and the resurrections glory be stained, and all dishonored
with worldly scarsitie, and dim persequution? But as Asaph the Prophet
says, Al eyes see not these things, but such as be of a clean heart. All men
have eyes, for the most part, and all men have hearts, but they be such, as the
worms of the earth, and birds of the air can eat and devour: but he that
will live in GOD, and see these things, must have immortal eyes, and an
incorruptible heart, which comes by grace in Gods spirit, to see by faith,
and honor with reverence Gods doings, as well in the winter and cold storms
of persequution, as in the summer of felicity and pleasure: and to remember
that all men and women have this life and this world appointed unto them, for
their winter and season of storms. The summer draws near, and then shall we
be fresh, orient, sweet, amiable, pleasant, acceptable, immortal, and blessed
for ever and ever: and no man shall take us from it. We must therefore in the
mean time, learn out of this verse to say unto God: whether it be winter or
summer, pleasure or pain, liberty or imprisonment, life or death, Truly God
is loving unto Israel, even unto such as be of a clean heart.

Out of the second part are diverse things also to be noted.
2 My feet were almost gone, etc.
FIrst the Prophet notes, how wretched and miserable man is, and how soon
inclined to do evil. He says, that He was ready and pressed to have slipped from
God: even with the beholding of Gods own works, when he saw God give unto the
wicked felicity and prosperity, which things be only Gods riches to give to
whom he will. Although he bestowed none of his upon the wicked, yet was he
offended that he should bestow his own where he lusted. Matthew. 20.
The same occasion took the workmen in the vineyard, to murmur against God: as
it is in the Gospel of Saint Matthewe. So that we be naturally given to this,
that God gives always too much unto other, and too little unto us: yea,
although he would give us all the world, and yet keep any one thing for
himself, (even his very Godhed,) in case he will not give also that unto us:
Gene. 3.
we be ready to bid him farewell. And in case he will not also give us as
much, as is in him: such is our nature, that we will by some means or other
seek to have it. As we may see, when he had made Adam, and given him both
knowledge and power, above all other creatures made for his use, because he was
not made God altogether: he fell most haynously from God: and slipped not only in
his feet: but also in soul and body, to his utter ruin and destruction, and
of us all that come of him. For this is our condition. Let God give us never so
much, we think it too little, (except we have a singular grace to consider it.)
And let us surrender unto God never so little homage or service: we think it
all too much. Such is our cursed nature and first birth, to be ready to slip
from God upon the lighiest occasion of the world: yea, when GOD does other men
good, Gene. 3.
and us no harm. But this nature we have of the devil our forefather, John. 8.
to disdeine and malign at other men's profit and preferment, as he did. For
when God made Adam, and put him in Paradise: the devil never rested envying
Adams prosperity, until he had brought him to the less of altogether, and to
slip clean from the Lord. This doctrine therefore touching the brittlenesse
and frailenesse of man's nature, is to be marked: least that whereas the
Prophet said, My feet were almost gone, we slide and fall altogether from
God.

There is also to be noted, that the Prophet said, He was almost gone, and not
altogether. Here is the presence, providence, strength, safegarde, and keeping
of man by almighty God, meruellously set forth: that although we be tempted
and brought (even to the very point,) to perpetrate, and do all mischief: yet
he stays us, and keeps us that the temptation shall not clean overcome us.
And so Saint Paul says of Gods providence, and present help: that He will
not suffer us to be tempted further, then we shall be able to bear. And many
times when we be brought into the greatest danger and peril both of body and
soul: before we fall and be overcome, the Lord preserves us, and preuenteth
the evil. Gene. 20.
As when Abraham went into Egypt, and perceived that the Egyptians would put
him in danger for his wife Sara, (for she was a fair woman,) he desired her
to say, She was his sister: and by that means thought to save him self from
danger, and to win favor at the Egyptians hands. The chastity of this
godly matrone Sara and wife of Abraham, came into such extreme peril, that
neither Abraham nor she, knew how to stand fast in the state and chaste
condition of matrimony: for she was coupled to the king, as his wife. But
least the woman should have fallen, and her feet slipped: the Lord rebuked the
king, and told him, that Sara was an other man's wife, and unlawful for him:
and so, by his merciful defense and goodness, kept al parts from falling in
that respect. Judith. 13.
The like may ye see also in Judith the godly woman, that without a singular
grace of God, had fallen with Dlofernes, and abused womanhoode, and widowhoode:
had not the Lord stayed in time, the fall was imminent, and (in manner) at
hand. Judith. 7.
And ye may read the same likewise of the people that were within the city of
Bethulia, at the same time, how near they were fallen, when they appointed God
a time to help them the space of five days: in case he deferred his help any
longer, they would yealde them selves into the hands of their enemies: but God
stayed their fall, and that by the hands of a woman. And if there had not been
more mercy in GOD, then faith in them, their feet had not only slipped: but
also all the whole land, country, and city. The like ye may see also in the
notable history of Hester: Hester. 4.
whereas the very rock and chief stay of the Jews health Mardocheus, made
suite to the Queen for Asuerus pardon, for the life of the Jews, when
sentence and judgment was past against them of death. So that, if faith in the
promises of God had not stayed him, he had slipped and fallen down, to see al
things against him, and his countrymen. But before men utterly fall, the Lord
is with them, and preserves them with his mercy: Psalm. 94.
as David said, When my feet were moved, thy mercy (oh Lord) stayed me.

The third thing to be noted of these words, is the manner of the Prophets
speaking, which must be marked and understood, or else the reader or hearer of
the Psalms shall take no profit.

My feet were almost gone, and my treadings had well nigh slipped.

By the feet he understands the mind: and by the treadings well nigh slipped,
he understands the judgment and wisdom of the mind. As foul and
slipperie ways be dangerous for the feet: so be the works of God to the
mind, that is not illuminated with the light of Gods word. And as the slipping
and running away of the feet, causes all the body to fall: even so the
ignorance of the mind causes both body and soul to fall, and grievously to
misseiudge the works of God. And as the fall of the body sowceth and defiles
it self with mire and dirt: even so does the fall of the mind defile both body
and soul with impatience, and envious indignation at Gods works. So that the
Prophet says by these words, My feet were almost gone, and my treadings had
well nigh slipped: My mind was so troubled to see God suffer the evil in such
prosperity, and the good in such adversity, that my judgment almost slipped
from the right sentence of thee (O Lord:) and very scarsly I avoided most
haynons sin toward thee, in controlling of thy most wise and just doings.
If we marked the pithe and wisdom of the scripture, we should see many
things more in our selves, then we do: and doubtless grow to an excellency
in wisdom, and find out what evils we be most inclined unto. Amongst all
other, hatred and indignation of other men's prosperity is not the least, nor
the most seldomest. And in deed the father of sin, the devil, has that in
him. First, he disdained God, and his felicity: but he wan nothing thereby,
Gene. 3.
but everlasting pains. Then he enuyed man and his felicity: yet the wicked
spirit gained nothing to him self, but double damnation, and loss of us all.
And this seed of the devil descended into our nature (as we may see,) Gene.
4. 21. 27.
and made Caine to kill Abel his brother: Number. 16.
made Ismael, to persequute Isaac: Esau, Jacob: Number. 12.
Dathan and Abiron, Moses and Aaron: Aaron and Marie his sister, Gene. 38.
Moses: Jacobs children, Joseph: 1. Reg. 19.
Saul, David: Herod and the Phariseis, Christ and John the Baptist, Mat. 14.
27
the ten Apostles, John and James, Matthew. 20.
Peter, Saint John the Evangelist: and the members of the devil and
Antichriste in this our time, John. 21.
the members of Christ. So that they be not only almost fallen, John. 16.
but also (the Lord help them, and us all) altogether sliden to envy and
indignation, and likewise to violent oppression of Gods holy word. But let us
not slip ne fall into indignation, that they prosper and we are afflicted: but
say in the midst of these oppressions of the good, and prosperity of the
evil, Truly God is loving unto Israel: and let us pray also for their
amendment.

The third part.
3 And why? I was grieved at the wicked, etc.
HErein is contained what the felicity of the wicked is, and wherein it
consists, that the godly be offended with all, when they flourishe and be in
honor: and the poor members of Christ persequuted and without all honor,
and be rather worms then men: Psalm. 2^.
yea, the dogs and brute beasts of the enemies, be in more estimation, then the
poor believers in Christ.

Out of this part is to be noted. First, a great fault and oversight in the
people of God, for lack of judgment and true knowledge: wherein truth and
very felicity in deed consists: the lack of the which knowledge, makes
men both impatient, and lewd judges of Gods holy works. The Prophet
therefore herein amendeth his own, and our ignorance, and wills us to know
perfectly, wherein felicity and happiness does rest. The Christian must
understand and assure him self, that the felicity and everlasting beatitude
of man, is wrought by quietness of conscience, and innocence of life: of
which two parts and virtues, in this tract I will speak more hereafter, as
well what they be, what be the causes of them: as what is the effect of them. I
will assure you, if we know not these things well: our religion will be but a
while permanent, and true unto God. To enter therefore into the knowledge of
the matter, wherein the beatitude and felicity of man consists: it is
requisite to cast some clouds and darkness upon these worldly things that
wicked men possess, and godly men think them thereby to be happy. Look as
the Sun at the rising and passing over the earth, does hide and cover the
globe and sphere of the Moon, and darkneth also the light, and clearenesse of
the stars: even so does the tranquillity of conscience, and the brightness
of faith and charity that dwells in the heart of the faithful, darken and
hide all things that seem beautiful and voluptuous to the world, and carnal
lusts of man. And he that has a testimony at home in his own conscience,
that he is in the favor of God, will not greatly pass of other men's
judgments, whether they save or damn, laud or disprayse: nor yet greatly
pass, although he lack such notes of riches and glory, as worldly men judge
and know felicity by. For he that knows surely wherein felicity does
consist, will not take the worldly opinion of men for his record, nor for his
reward: neither will he greatly fear for any damnation or punishment, that
the world can annexe and join unto his life, for this mortal time. It is
therefore Christianity to know, that felicity and beatitude rests in the
riches of the mind, by Gods grace, wrought by the holy Ghost, for the merits
of Christ.

There was amongst the Philosophers great diversity of opinions in this
matter, wherein felicity and beatitude should consist. Some said it rested in
this, a man still and continually to be void from anguishe and sorrow. Other
said, it consisted in the knowledge of things. Some said, in pleasure and
voluptuousness. Aristotle and Theophrastus, and such other as were of the sect
of the Peripatets, did hold, that a blessed and fortunate life did consist in
honesty, and said, that The same might be accomplished with the voluptuous
pleasures of the body, and with external riches, honor, and felicity. But
both these opinions, and all the rest are confuted by our savior Christ, and
his holy word. He says, John. 17.
This is life everlasting, that men know thee (O father) the only and true
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And in an other place he says,
Matthew. 19.
Every one that forsakes house, brothers, sisters, father, mother, wife,
children, or possessions for my name, shall receive an hundred fold, and
possess life everlasting. By these places we know, that beatitude and
felicity consists in knowledge, and working of Gods will, which be the causes
of quietness of conscience, and innocence of life: wherein felicity does
consist, as I said before. The right knowledge of GOD brings faith in
Christ. Faith in Christ brings tranquillity of conscience. Tranquillity
of conscience, by faith works charity and love, to do, and work the will of
our heavenly father. This may ye see also in the book of the Psalms, that
felicity and bliss rests not in these trifling things that glitter to the
eye, wherewith the Prophet was so sore offended: but in knowledge and working
of Gods will. Psalm. 94.
Blessed is the man whom thou teach (Lord,) and whom thou instructest in thy
law. And in an other Psalm he says, Psalm. 112.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and desires to work his will. In
these Psalms, if ye read them with judgment, and prayer to God: ye shall
find both knowledge and consolation, far above the common sort of such as
read and use them in the Churches now, to the dishonor of GOD, and to the
destruction of their own souls. And in this matter of felicity and beatitude
of man and woman in this life: I would have you judge by the scripture of God,
or else ye shall be deceived, what it is, wherein it consists, and what it
works: for only the word of God teaches and shows it, and nothing but
it. The scripture of GOD plainly declares, that nothing can be profitable:
which is not honest and virtuous. And virtue is blessed and very felicity, in
what condition or state so ever it be: neither can it be increased with any
external or bodily goods or honor: neither yet can it be diminished with any
adversities or troubles. And nothing can be blessed, but that which is void
from iniquity, full of honesty, and the grace of God. As ye may see in the
book of the Psalms, whereas this matter is plainly set forth. Psalm. 1.
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the wicked, nor
stood in the way of sinners: nor sat in the chair of scorners. But his
delight was in the law of God, etc. And in an other Psalm he says: Psalm. 119.
Blessed are they that be clean of life, and walk in the law of God.

Out of these places we learn, that knowledge and innocence of life, works
felicity and beatitude. We must therefore beware, that we judge not felicity
to be in these inconstant, and uncertain riches of the world: but we must
contemn them, and also beware we fear not the trouble that may happen, for
such virtues wherein felicity does stand. And we must understand also, that
although these virtues, wherein felicity consists: and such as be friends
of God dwells, be afflicted and troubled: that neither the felicity, nor the
person in whom it dwells, is any thing the worse for troubles and
adversities before God, but rather the better. As ye may see by the word of
God that says, Matthew. 5.
Blessed be ye when men speak evil of you, and persequute you, and speak al
evil against you, lying, for justice sake. Be glad and rejoice, for your
reward is great in heaven. So did they persequute the Prophets before you.
Matthew. 10.
And in an other place it is said: Matthew. 16.
He that will come after me, let him deny him self, and take his cross and
follow me. The Psalm therefore in this part, amendeth the judgment of weak
and wavering Christian men, that be offended with the prosperity of the
wicked: because they do not know, nor mark by Gods word, wherein felicity
does consist, and that it remains in such virtues as be not diminished, nor
drowned in the adversities of this world, what so ever dangers happen. When
was Moses stronger, then when he saw of the one side the mounteines of Egypt,
Exodus 14.
and of the other side Pharao and his army, and before him the red sea, and in
the midst of these enemies, he and his people standing like sheep, ready for
the woolues to be slain: He was never more strong, nor in this life more
blessed, then at that time. Dan. 3.
Daniel was never better then amongst the Lions. We must therefore know the
virtues, wherein felicity does consist, to be nothing diminished by sorrow
and trouble: nor any thing increased by voluptuous pleasures, and brittle
honors of this world. Philip. 3.
As S. Paul most godly sets forth in his Epistle to the Philippians: The
things (says he) that I thought profit and gains, for Christ's sake, I
esteem as hurt and damage: for whose love, I esteem all things as nothing,
so that I may win Christ. Hebr. 11.
And Moses esteemed the treasures of Egypt hurtful, and preferred them not
before the reproaches and rebukes of the Lord: neither thought he him self rich
nor blessed with the riches of Egypt, ne cursed when he was in need, and
lacked them. Elias the Prophet, 3. Reg. 1
if he had considered his need and danger, he might have accounted him self
very miserable and unhappy: but because he knew it was appointed him of GOD,
he complained not of Gods doings: for he was as well contented to have bread
from God by the Raven in the morning, and water at night from the founteine: as
though he had had all the world. And he was nothing the less blessed, although
he was poor, but rather more blessed: because he was rich to God ward. Read
the Gospel of S. Matthewe, Matthew. 17.
and see the practice of this felicity. Moses that was so destritute of all
worldly help, and Helias void of all worldly consolation, do talk with
Christ in the mount of Thabor, where as Peter would have tarried with all his
heart, although he knew both Christ, and those that he talked with, in the
estimation of this world, were accounted most unhappy, and miserable of all
men: yet he saw, that transitory honors, riches, and felicity holp nothing
to the life everlasting. As Christ plainly teaches in S. Luke, Luke. 6.
Blessed are the poor: for theirs is the kingdom of God. Blessed be they that
hunger and thirst for justice: for they shall be satisfied. Blessed be ye that
now weep: for ye shall laugh. Therefore the poverty, misery, and affliction
that the Prophet was in, when he spoke this Psalm and most godly Hymn,
hindered nothing at all his felicity, and blessing of God: but rather
furthered it, if he had wist wherein truly and verily felicity had consisted:
as ye may see hereafter, how he came to the knowledge of it.

An other thing is to be noted out of these six verses, containing the third
part of the Psalm: ^. Tim. 6.
That such treasures, riches, and honors, as men set most by in this world, be
rather (unto men that have not grace) lets and impediments to everlasting
felicity, and to the atteinment of virtue in this life, then furtherers. As
the scripture says: Luke. 6.
Woe be unto you rich men: which have your consolation. Woe be unto you that
are nowefull: for ye shall hunger. And such as laugh, shall weep. 3. Reg. 25.
Achab the wicked king not contented with his kingdom, would take Naboths
vineyard from him: but it had been better for him that he had been a
swincheard: for his lands and riches abused, made him to kill an innocent man,
and his true subject. Plentifulnesse of Gods gifts abused, brings contempt
of God and man: Dan. 4.
as ye may see how Nabuchodonozer in wealth and riches, envied the living God,
and came into beastialitie. Exodus 32.
The children of Israel, when they had filled them selves with gifts, were not
thankful, but unthankful: and fell from unthankfulness to idolatry, and all
abomination. And as men contemn God in prosperity: so do they also their
neighbors. As ye may see by this part of the Psalm, whereas the Prophet
says: Their eyes swell for fatness, that is to wit: Their riches and honor
puffs them up in such pride, that they contemn and despise all men.

The third thing to be noted is, that all things that the felicity and joys
of wicked men consist in, Deuteronomy. 40.
be but worldly and transitory things, Psalm. 92.
and as uncertain as man is him self: Esai. 40.
which is to be marked. Because no man can be happy or blessed, Matthew. 6, 1.
Pet. 1,
by any such vading and inconstant things: neither can any man come to the
beatitude of joys permanent, by such things as God gives indifferently, as
well to the bad as to the good, and to the vicious as to the virtuous. Eccle.
3. 4. 5.
As Solomon in the book of the Preacher meruellously sets forth, and
matcheth equally the good with the bad, in such things as happen under the
sun. The good and the bad (says he) be rich and poor, in trouble and in
prosperity, have friends and foes, be merry and sorry, do live and dye all in
like. But neither the things that bring them to life everlasting, nor yet life
everlasting it self, be one thing. For there is nothing that leads to
everlasting life but the knowledge and fear of God, and the doing of his
blessed will: the which virtues come not by nature, 3. Reg. 8.
but by grace. As Solomon declares: when he prayed so earnestly to have
wisdom and understanding from God. And as these virtues come not from nature:
even so be they not the riches of all men, but of virtuous and godly men only.
And as they dwell and inhabit only in such as fear God: so do they only
conduct, and lead such as be godly (and none other) to eternal life. The which
differs as far, and as much from the wickeds eternal life, as joy
differs from sorrow, ease from pain, plesaunt consolation from fiery
flames, love from hatred, God from the devil, and heaven from hell. For these
riches, wherewith the ungodly are endued in this life, be not the things that
can make any man blessed or cursed before God. Therefore no more to be cared
for, then need is to have them, if GOD will: if not, to lack them: to have
them with Gods grace, well to use them: or else to pray to lack them, least
they abuse us. Better it were to have too little in the world with Gods
favor: then too much with his displeasure. If we have meat, 1. Tim. 6.
drink, and cloth, let us be contented with it, as with sufficient things to
pass this life: if any more then these come, to take heed they make us not to
swell in pride, and take from us the remembrance and service of God. Oh that
godly eyes would look upon this Psalm, and namely upon this part of it, that
declares, wherein the glory, honor, and felicity of wicked men consists:
then I know, his eyes shall hardly escape tears and weepings, to see and hear
a wicked and cursed creature of God, pampered with such a sort of vain
fleetinges, that when he would most gladly flee from sorrow, Luke. 12.
the least be able to carry him away. Mark the wicked man's riches, and ye
shall perceive, that God has given no more, then he has unto the clay,
moolde, Matthew. 6.
and stony earth: wherein lies both gold and precious stones. His beauty and
amiablenesse of vesture and apparel, is not like the Rose of the garden, nor
the Lilly of the field. His strength much inferior to brute beasts. His
wisdom less then horse or mule, that use in meats and drinks enough for
necessity, and not too much for sensuality. If lack and need oppress them,
patiently they lack until order provide for them: but if the wicked lack, he
bears not lack with patience, nor seeks enough by truth. The courageous
horse fiercely in fight co^temneth death: and the meek swanne feeling the life
to pass, That is to say, Death.
with sweet tunes welcometh Atropos: and strives not, but willingly is
contented to surrender that, which will not be kept with force. But what does
the rich wicked man? Forsooth, as the wiseman says: Eccle. 41.
Oh death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to such as have confidence
in their riches. Lord what a canell house of stinking carrion is this body and
life of wicked man puffed up with riches? Inferior, with all that ever he
has, to the birds of the air, the beasts of the fields, and unto the
barren clay that he was made of: and the soul it self within that wicked body
cursed of God, and ordained to eternal pains.

Who is he that can read or behold the state and honor of man, in whom is not
mentioned one virtue to dwell, without sorrow and heaviness? What a cursed
nature is man made of, that can see an other thus pampered up with Gods
displeasure, and can not rather bewail and mourn to see his brother by these
riches lost, and cast away, then to envy or disdeine at his person? Oh woe
befall them, that fall into this sin of ours, that thus rather with malice and
disdain, envy the miseries and curses of God upon other: then charitably do
go about to amend them, or ruthfully to bewail them? Read (my dear beloved
in the Lord) this place, and mark well the wicked men, and learn to pray for
them, as GOD give us all grace to do.

The fourth part.
10 Therefore fall the people unto them, etc.
OVt of this part is to be noted, how dangerous a thing it is, to be
continually assaulted with temptation: and that the end of it (for the most
part) is the conquest and overthrow of as many as be assaulted. As we may see
by the examples of our forefathers. Temptation not resisted at the beginning,
Gene. 3.
prevailed against the innocent fathers Adam and Eve in Paradise: against Caine
in murder: Gene. 4.
against Aaron and the people in idolatry: Number. 17.
against Nemroth in pride: against David in adultery: 2. Reg. 11.
against Judas in avarice: against Aaron and Marie his sister in envy: Matthew.
26.
against Esau in gluttony: Hebr. 11.
against Pharao in pride: against Herod in hypocrisy: Exodus 3.
against the Phariseis in blindness and obstinacy of mind: Matthew. 14.
against the Jews in the slander of Christ's death: John. 7. 8. 9
1. Cor. 1.
against the Gentiles in ignorance of Gods word: Romans 1.
against the most part of Christians now a days in cowardnesse and fear: and
against all the world, in looking more how to profit it self, then to serve
and fear God.

The Prophet said before, He was almost gone, to see the wicked so prosper: but
he says now, that The people fall utterly unto them, and learn both wicked
opinions and wicked life of the wicked.

The second is, that the people fall not into the wicked blasphemy of
iniquity one by one, but by clusters in great number. Wherein is much to be
noted, that so few so hardly turn to God, and so many so quickly to
abomination. But as Christ said, Matthew. 7.
The way to heaven is narrow and strait, and few enter: and the way to hell
is broad and plain, and many enter in it.

The fifte part.
14 Then have I cleansed my heart in vain, etc.
OUt of it we be admonished, that our nature is to be offended by and by with
troubles, for the glory of God. And even as we be unquiet with the troubles:
so be we inconstant and unstable in the knowledge and truth, that we suffer
trouble for: and begin to repent, that ever we began to favor or embrace the
truth: and wish also, that we had used our selves, as other men did: and
then, to have suffered with other men the common lot and fortune of the world,
and not thus to have been given to a singular knowledge of Gods word, which
brings with it a singular hatred and punishment in this world. Iere. 20.
Such is our nature, if we be by afflictions and troubles, but for a days
space, made like unto Christ, we think it too long: but if we be by sin,
for all our life time, made like unto the dinel, we think the time too short,
and wish longer to live: because we would longer work and delight in sin and
abomination. Great and heinous is our offense in this respect: for a little
time spent in well doing, we judge too long: and all time spent in evil doing,
we judge too short. All labors and pains be too little, if they be bestowed
in worldly things: but if they be appointed to heavenly things, (be they
never so few and slender,) we think them too much.

There is not sea nor land with all the perils within them, but men dare
adventure both their goods and their lives, to win increase of worldly
goods: but to win toward God and godliness, scarce one of a great many
without danger will labor or take pains to gain it. So does the Prophet say
in this place, that He had cleansed his heart in vain: because he saw
clenlinesse and virtue persequuted, and filth with iniquity honored and
exalted. Christ in the Gospel of S. John perceiving, that when virtue and well
doing should be troubled, men would wax weary of well doing, and virtue: he
said unto his disciples, John. 16.
Remember when they come that I spoke of them and warned you before.

The sixth part.
15 Yea, and I had almost said, even as they, etc.
OUt of it we learn, that no man should judge of Gods works, nor Gods people,
but by the word of God. In this behalf we do many times grievously offend the
Almighty God. For when the world damneth Gods word, then does the most part
of men the same. If the world say it is true, we say so to. If the world say it
is untrue, we say it is untrue. And if the world condemn it, we condemn it
also. Likewise, if the world account them cursed and damned, that be
persequuted for Gods sake, and for the testimony of his name: we do so to.
Yea, and moreover, if the world slander and lie upon poor men and poor
women, that suffer for Gods sake: we speak as they do, and sometimes
persequute also the good with them. This is an horrible thing, to reprove,
(after such a carnal and worldly sort,) God, and all his blessed people:
which will be at length (doubtless) a just condemnation of the world.

The seventh part.
16 Then thought I to understand this, but it was too hard for me, etc.
WE learn out of this part, that until reason be amended and removed from her
natural blindness, it can do none other, but condemn both God, and Gods
people. And no meruell: for the Prophet in the 83. Psalm, and also in the 31.
Psalm has these words: Psalm. 83. and 31.
Consultauerunt aduersus absconditos tuos, They have consulted against thy
hidden people. As though he had said: The merciful father of heaven, keeps
the godly people in most sure and strong defense and protection: but this kind
of protection is hid from the eyes of man's reason. So that it seems many
times, that God has the less care of the godly, and passes more of the
wicked then of them. Yet, howsoever the world judges, God sleeps not.
Further, how blessed the state and life of the godly is, and how cursed the
life and state of the wicked is, only the virtuous and godly do perceive.
Therefore the Scripture calls those that be godly and virtuous, The hidden of
God. Moreover, the godly do perceive, that all the vanity of worldly things,
which be the treasures of the wicked: and the permanent state and condition of
heavenly things, which be the treasures of the godly: be only seen of such
as enter into the holy Sanctuary and secret treasures of Gods most holy word,
without yt which worldly things seem to be riches, and heavenly things
poverty, wicked men to be blessed, and godly men cursed, falsehood to be
truth, and truth falsehood, death to be life, and life death.

The eighth part.
23 Nevertheless I am always by thee, for thou have holden me always by my
right hand.
THe Prophet out of this part declares that, which Saint Paul writes to the
Romans. Romans 8.
If God be with us, who can be against us? If he love us, what is he that can
separate us from his love? which spared not his only son for our redemption,
but gave him for us unto the death. Therefore, there is neither life nor death,
things present nor things to come, that can separate us from him.

Unto this place is referred all the diliuerance from trouble and danger that
God used from the beginning of the world, unto our time. And when we understand
and know Gods mercy, toward our selves, and others: we must give our selves
wholly to laud and praise his holy name, and be thankful. For, There is nothing
more unnatural in man, then forgetfulness of Gods great and innumerable
gifts toward us. To whom be all honor and praise, world without end. Amen.

AN EXPOSITION upon the 77. Psalm, made by the constant Martyr of Christ,
Master JOHN HOOPER, Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester.
THE ARGUMENT.
WHen this Prophet Asaph, (being a man appointed to the service and teaching of
Gods word unto the people,) perceived, that such as were under his cure and
charge, were many times troubled and brought into great heaviness, for the
fear and dread they had conceived of Gods most just ire and strait punishment
for sin, and transgression of his holy laws: and in himself felt
especially the burden of Gods displeasure against sin intolerable: he
received, from the holy ghost (the spirit of consolation,) what was the best
remedy and help for every troubled conscience, to appease and quiet the poor
spirit of man, that knows and feels not only that God is justly angry
for sin: but also will straightly punish the iniquity and abomination of the
same. And when he had learned himself by God, how a troubled and desperate
conscience might be quieted, he spoke it to such as were alive and with him,
and wrote it to all such as should come after him until the worlds end, that
troubled sinners might see their sins for given in the mercy of God, and
they themselves accepted, as Gods most dear children, into eternal
friendship, and endless joys of salvation.

The parts of the Psalm.
1 In whom a man should put his trust, and to whom he should resort in the
days of sickness, troubles, and adversity.

2 How a man should use himself toward him, in whom he puts his trust, in
the time of trouble.

3 What great and perilous dangers the man that is troubled shall suffer for
the time of his trouble.

4 How a man takes consolation in the time of his trouble.

The two first verses of the Psalm, containing the two first parts.
1 I will cry unto God with my voice: even unto God will I cry with my voice,
and he shall hearken unto me.

2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my hand I held up all night,
and it was not weary, my soul refused comfort.

The first part.
In whom a man should put his trust, and to whom he should resort in the days
of sickness, troubles, and adversity.

1 I will cry unto God with my voice: even unto God will I cry with my voice,
and he shall hearken unto me.
FIrst out of this text it is to be noted, that God only is to be trusted unto
in the days of trouble: as our Savior Christ exhorted in heaviness and anguish
of body and soul, all people to resort unto him, saying: Matthew. 11.
Come unto me all ye that be laden and burdened, and I will refreshe you. And
the same is spoken of God by Esaie the Prophet: Esaie. 55.
Ye that be a thirst come unto the waters, and ye that have no money come and
take it freely. S. John likewise John. 7.
in the midst among troubled and afflicted persons, recites the words of
Christ, Esaie. 18.
saying, If any be dry, let him come to me and drink: He that believes on
me, (as the Scripture says,) floods of water of life, shall flow out of his
belly.

Of this knowledge and surety in the soul of man, Romans 5. 14.
that God is, can, and will be an ease and remedy for the troubled conscience,
comes justice, peace, and joy of the conscience. Not that any man shall be by
and by without all fear, trembling and dread of his sins, and of Gods just
judgment against sin: but that this fear and trembling shall not come to
desperation: neither shall he be more afraid of his sins, then comforted by
Gods mercy and grace in Christ. Therefore says our savior Christ, Matthew. 5.
Blessed be they that weep, for they shall be comforted. Blessed be they that
hunger and thirst for justice, for they shall be replenished.

In this that he says, Of those that weep and mourn who be blessed.
Blessed be they that weep, He notes such as do know and feel with sorrow
and heaviness of conscience, that they be sinners, and the filthiness of their
sins makes them sorrowful and heavy hearted: yet shall they in Christ be
comforted. Again, the poor, sensible, feeling, and troubled sinner does wish
his sins away, and would gladly have virtue and justice to rule and do
altogether in him Gods holy will and pleasure. This hunger and thirst (says
Christ,) shall be quenched for the merits of his own death and passion: as it
shall not miss, if men in their thirst, hunger, persequution, and trouble, do
know and use only God for their help and consolation: as this Prophet did,
and teaches us to do the same in this Psalm.

In this first part be two sorts of people condemned. Two sons of people
condemned.
The one is such as plainly despair, and in their troubles, neither look for
consolation, nor yet believe that there is any consolation to be hoped for in
Christ. The other is such as seek consolation, but not only at Gods hand and
power, but at the Saints departed, at witches, coniurers, hypocrites, and the
works devised and done by man.

The first sort be left comfortless, because they seek no consolation: and
the second sort find no comfort, because they seek it where it is not,
contrary unto God and his holy word. Happy therefore is the troubled, that
seeks consolation at Gods hands, and no where else: Esaie. 45.
For he is (as it is written by the Prophet Esaie,) the God alone, that does
save, and none but he. Two impediments keep God from helping the troubled.
But there be two manner of impedimentes that keep the Almighty God from the
helping and comforting of people that be in trouble. 1. Ignorance.
The one is ignorance of Gods nature and property toward the afflicted: 2.
Fear of Gods justice.
and the other is fear and dread, whereas God is most justly angry for sin,
lest that in his anger and just punishment, he will not be merciful.

Of the first impediment, which is ignorance, is sprung into the world
horrible blasphemy, Of ignorance is sprung horrible blasphemy.
that neither seeks help at Gods hand, nor yet is thankful unto God for any
thing that God gives: but rendereth all things to such Gods and Saints as he
has devised out of his own imagination, or else learned (as S. Peter says)
out of the traditions of his Elders. 1. Peter. 1. The remedy against ignorance.
So that ignorance takes away the honor of God, and also the salvation of
them that be ignorant. The remedy against this great impediment is only the
reading, 2 Peter. 1.
meditating, hearing, and learning of Gods holy word, which is as a candle
light in a dark place, to keep and preserve a man from danger and peril.
Psalm. 119.
And so says king David, that, It is a candle unto his feet, and a light unto
his stepps. And in an other place of his Psalms he says: The law of God is
so perfect, that it turns souls unto the Lord. Wherefore (says he) it is
the part of every man that will be virtuous and godly, Psalm. 1.
to have his desire and cogitations in the law of God both day and right. And
to preserve the people from this horrible impediment of ignorance, God spoke by
his prophet Esaie, Esaie. 59.
these words: My spirit which is in thee, and my words which I put in thy
mouth, shall not depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy seed (says
the Lord) from henceforth for evermore. And in the same Prophecy Christ
prays the heavenly father to seal his word in his disciples, Esaie. 8.
whereby the dangerous impediment of man's salvation, which is ignorance, might
be eschewed and avoided. The same remedy against ignorance, Deuteronomy. 6.
commands Almighty God also by Moses in Deuteronomy. and by S. Paul to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.
whereas the fathers and the mothers be not bound themselves alone, to know
the law of God: but also bound to teach it to their children, that by
ignorance they offend not God.

Of the second impediment, What comes of the fear of Gods justice.
which is fear and dred of Gods justice, comes trembling and terror of the
conscience, and many times also the extremest evil of all evils, very
desperation, that never looks who can help, neither yet trusts to find any
help. But of these fruits of terror and fear, and also of their remedies how
they may be cured and helped, it shall be showed hereafter in the Psalm, as it
follows, whereas both terror of conscience and tranquillity of the same, be
meruellously and divinely set forth. Only, until I come to those points I
do note, that this fear and terror of conscience in the faithful, be the
very hunger and thirst that Christ says shall be quenched: Matthew. 5.
and they that feel them, shall be replenished with grace and consolation, as
the blessed Virgin the mother of Christ says: Luke 1.
and they that feel them not, shall depart empty without grace.

Romans 3. 5. 6. 7. 8. Gods spirit works the knowledge of sin by preaching of
the law.
And the cause of this terror and fear, is the spirit of God that works the
knowledge of our sin by preaching, reading, or thinking of Gods Law, that
opens and detecteth, how wretched and sinful we be by nature in the sight
of God. But of this matter is better occasion ministered afterward in the
Psalm, then in this place.

The second part.
How a man should use himself toward him, in whom he puts his trust in
the time of trouble.

2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my hand I held up all night,
and it was not weary: my soul refused comfort.
How we should use our selves in the time of trouble.
IN this part is taught us, both by doctrine and by example, how we should use
our selves in the time of trouble. When we know there is no help nor helper
but God alone, it is not enough for a man to know that God can help: but also
we must believe constantly, that he has as prompt a will to help, as a
sufficient power able to help: and then being assured that he both can and
will help, we must call upon him for help, according to his commandment
unto us, Call upon me in the days of trouble, etc. Psalm. 50. 15.


But of this place we may mark and learn, The fear and terror of sin is an
intolerable butthen.
what an intolerable burden and unspeakable sorrow, the terror and fear
of sin is: and how grievous a thing the sight and contemplation of Gods
displeasure and just judgment is against every sinner for his sin and
transgression of Gods most holy Law. The text says, That the Prophet, when he
felt the displeasure of God against sin, The conscience being admonished of
the filthiness of sin, brings the body into a tre^bling and fear.
cried out with a loud voice unto the Lord. Whereby we learn, that the
conscience of man admonished by the word of God, of the filthiness and
abomination of sin, brings all the body into a trembling and fear, lest
God should use rather justice, and justly punish sin: then mercy, and
mercifully forgive sin.

And thus being made afraid thoroughly of sin, the mind is occupied with
sorrowful and heavy cogitations: What ensues after the fear of conscience
for sin.
and the tongue by vehemency of the spirit, brought into clamours and cries.
As we may see commonly by examples left unto us in the word of God, that where
sin is thoroughly felt in the conscience, the feeling sinner is not only
troubled within in spirit, but also outwardly in all the members and parts of
his body: as it is to be seen most manifestly in king David.

In what a sea of heaviness was king David in his conscience, when he spoke to
his own soul: Psalm. 42.
Why art thou so heavy and sorrowful, o my soul, and why do thou thus
trouble me? Again, How long will thou forget me (o Lord?) for ever? And in
other Psalms we may see, into what trembling and fear outwardly he was
brought by the knowledge and feeling of his sin.

In one place he says, The fear of his sins did not only ouerlay his
conscience: Psalm. 38.
but also crushed and (in manner) all to broke his bones. Psalm. 6.
And in another place, His visage was all defaced with weeping tears: and so
abundantly they gushed out of his eyes, that he watered, or rather ouerflowed
his bed with them where he lay. Into what horrible cries and waylings many
times he fell for fear of sin: Psalm. 77.
this Psalm and many other do declare. The like horror and fear also of the
sight and feeling of sin we see to have been in Saint Paul, when he cried
out upon him self: Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body subject unto death? Romans 7.
And Marie Nagdalene with the sight and feeling of Gods displeasure against her
sin, made tears and weepings enowe to wash the founteine of mercies feet,
Jesus Christ. But blessed is that conscience feared by the Law, Note.
whose fear by the sweet promises of the Gospel, is turned into mirth: and
blessed be those tears and weepings, that end in consolation: Psalm. 126.
and happy is that troubled body, Matthew. 5.
whose end is immortality in the resurrection of the just. 1. Cor. 15.
Further, as we see here king David a sinner for fear of Gods judgment,
break out into loud cries for help and preservation: the same anguish and
trouble of mind and of body, for fear of Gods punishment for sin toward
man, was likewise in Christ without sin, Matthew. 26.
which said: My soul is heavy unto death: and in such an agony was his
body, that he burst out and swett both water and blood.

So that of this second part, first we learn, that such as be truly and
vnseignedly brought to a knowledge, No trouble to the trouble of conscience.
feeling, and repentance of their sins, have it with great heaviness of mind,
terror of conscience, and trouble also of the body many times: that no
sickness nor troubles, may be compared to the trouble of the conscience, for
fear of due and condign punishment for the sin perpetrated and committed
against Gods laws.

The second doctrine that we be taught out of this second part, Difference
between the penitent, desperate, and contemptuous man. The penitent man.
is to declare what difference there is between the penitent Christian in
adversity, and the desperate person that looks for no help, or else the
presumptuous person that contemns help.

The penitent afflicted calls unto the Lord, and although he find his burden
never so intolerable, do weep and lament never so sore: yet he despaireth
not, but in adversity he has hope, and is not confounded: as in prosperity
he has faith, and yet presumes not. The desperate man.
The desperate man feels all troubles and no consolation, is wholly overcome
with mistrust, full of incredulity, and clean void of hope: The contemptuous
man.
as Saul, Judas, and others. The contemner of admonition has hope in
prosperity, with all presumption: as Cain and Pharao: and in adversity,
desperation, with all mistrust, Note. The Christian afflicted.
and diffidence. The Christian afflicted, calls in faith and hope upon the
Lord, and is heard: the wicked afflicted calls not upon the Lord, but is
clean rejected and comfortless by Gods most just judgment. The Christian
afflicted, sees all his sins less then the least mercies of God: The wicked
afflicted.
the wicked afflicted sees the least of his sins, greater then the greatest
mercies of God. The one, in trouble by faith glorifieth the Lord, Note.
and by mercy finds salvation: the other, in trouble by mistrust
dishonors the Lord, and by justice finds damnation. The one, by troubles
thoroughe faith in Christ, is made like unto the son of God, and cannot be
separated from him in eternal life: the other, by troubles through desperation
of Christ, is made like unto Satan, and cannot be separated from him in
eternal death. The one, in eternal life finds everlasting joys: the other,
in everlasting death, finds endless pains. Almighty GOD (therefore) grant
us grace in all our troubles and afflictions, penitently and faithfully to call
upon him: and to find him merciful unto us his wretched creatures, Amen.

The third thing to be noted in this second part is, Gods nature and man's,
differ much.
that Gods nature and man's differ much one from the other. For man (for the
most part) is no more serviceable unto God, nor longer friendly unto man, then
Gods condition upon the earth is fortunate and quiet with the world. Man for
the most part is unstable and follows religion as the world favors.
For if stornies arise for Gods cause, and troubles happen where quietness
erst had place: the men of the world alter their love, service and reverence:
and will neither make nor meddle with God nor his cause: no, although ten
thousand idols be brought in for one God: as English men have seen in former
time. As long as Christ had a king in this realm to hold of his part, Idols
set up again in Queen Mary's time.
and that great livings, gains, friendship and love of ye world rose for Gods
sake, they dissembled toward his word, and so long as fair words could
please God, he lacked none: but now even such as God did most for, do know
neither God nor his word: but had rather hear ten times spoken of the
falsest tradition that ever man brought into the Church, then once of Christ's
most holy Gospel: so that now men's natures, for adversities sake, be clean
turned from God.

How long the love of man continues toward men, daily experience shows
within one month. How long man's love continues toward man.
If a man fall into trouble for the most just cause: he that was his friend,
will not only alter his love from him, but also all the notes and tokens of
the same: whereas in prosperity he was assured both of friendly words and
friendly works, in adversity he shall find neither words nor works, except
words and works of displeasure. In prosperity fair looks and amiable
countenances were as common as the cart way: in adversity there shall neither
look, nor countenance be showed, except it be frowning and bending of brows:
yea, and moreover, adversity takes from the dissembling friend, all knowledge
that ever he had of his friend afflicted: that if the poor afflicted,
(although he be even under the nose of his feigned friend) with courtesy and
all obeisance cannot be known.

Oh God, God loves and helps the poor afflicted.
blessed be thy name, that withdrawest neither thy knowledge, love, nor yet thy
help from the poor afflicted, but hear them, and grauntest them their
godly and honest requests: as here this Prophet most godly and comfortably
writes of thee. For he says. Psalm. 77. Consolation.
The Lord shall hearken unto me: when I seek him in the time of my trouble.
And also the Lord abhors not to be present with the afflicted, be his
troubles never so great: Psalm. 91.
For I am (says the Lord) with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and set him
in honor, etc.

Of this doctrine we learn two things. God hates not the troubled for his
trouble but for his sin. Man hates man for trouble and not for sin.
The one that God hates not the troubled man for his trouble, but for his
sins. Men do clean contrary for the most part. For they hate the man for
trouble, and not for sin. For let the wickedest man alive have prosperity,
and all wicked men will love him, for his prosperities sake. God turns not
his favor from man for trouble, but for sin. The world for troubles sake
will not know the most dear and honest friend: but let the most wicked that
lives by breath have prosperity, and wicked people will not fail to know him
with beck and du-gard, if he come into company. Yea rather then fail, the
most wickedest man alive, shall be narrowly sought out, that wicked men may
have acquaintance of him. But he that has God to his friend, is sure of a
Savior as well in adversity as in prosperity: as the Prophet here declares,
which can in troubles send ease, and in quietness continue joys for ever. To
him therefore be all laud and praise worlds without end, Amen.

The fourth thing to be noted in this second part, Continuance in prayer.
is the continuance of the faithful afflicted in prayer unto God. For the
Prophet says, that He lifted up his hands all night, and waxed not weary. Of
this continuance in prayer we learn two things. The one perseverance in
prayer, and the other patient expectation, and willing sufferance until God
send redress and ease. To the first the Scripture exhorts us, that we pray
both heartily and continually unto God: not because he is ignorant of our
troubles, but because we should thoroughly be brought to understand, that there
is none can help us out of trouble, but he: and also that by continuance in
prayer we may the better know, and more earnestly repent our sins, that be
the cause of our troubles: thirdly, that by often remembrance and diverse
rehearsalls of our iniquity unto GOD, we may the sooner bring both our souls
and bodies, into the service and homage of Almighty God, whom we have by
sin most grievously displeased.

The second virtue patient expectation in troubles, Patient expectation.
declares that we be much bound unto God, that chasteneth us in this life: and
deferreth not our punishment to the eternal pains in the world to come. Also
it makes the mind of man to understand the wisdom of GOD, and also the
foolishness of man, that many times for lack of patient expectation and
thankful sufferance, waxes weary of his cross and punishment, and also
murmureth against God, because he helps not when man's wisdom judges most
meet to be helped. But patient expectation prescribes God no time, when to
help, nor yet means how to help, but says: Matthew. 6. 8
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Also: Lord, if thou will thou
can deliver me. As the Prophet uses here in this Psalm, He called and
cried upon the Lord all the night, and attended patiently, when God would
help, leaning altogether to his blessed will and pleasure, to do, or not to
do, as him best pleased.

The third part.
What great and perilous dangers the man that is troubled shall suffer for
the time of his trouble.

2 My soul refused comfort.

3 When I am in heaviness, I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I
will complain. Sela.

4 Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so feeble I can not speak.

5 I have considered the days of old: and the years that be past.

6 In the night I called to remembrance my song, and communed with mine own
heart, and my spirit searched diligently:

7 Will the Lord absent him self for ever? and will he be no more entreated?

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever? And is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore?

9 Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure?


HEre in these verses it appareth what terrible and fearful things, a man
that is in trouble, shall suffer and be vexed withal. And the first that the
Prophet mentions, is in the end of the second verse, and it is this: My
soul refuses comfort.

Of this adversity and anguishe of the soul, As long as sin is not felt, man
is iocund and pleasant.
we may learn many things: First, that as long as sin appears not, nor is
felt, the mind of man is quiet, iocund, and pleasant: and the mirth and
pleasure of the mind rejoices the body, and makes it lusty and pleasant:
not feeling at all the breach of Gods commanundements, 2. Samu. 1.
neither passing any thing at all of sin, Romans 8.
nor evil conversation: but rather delighting in things that displease God,
Act. 9.
then in any virtue or honesty. But when trouble, sickness, or death comes,
When the horror of a man's sin is felt to desperatio^ no worldly joys ca^
comfort the afflicted person.
then most commonly, though men see not the horror of their sins to repent:
yet feel they the horror thereof to desperation: and that once felt in the
soul, all the joys of the world can not comfort the troubled person. As Adam
with all the solace of Paradise could not rejoice, when his soul felt the
abomination of his offense toward God. Caine could never pluck up merry
countenance for the cruel killing of his brother Abel. Gene. 3. 4.
Peter could not stint weeping for his denial of Christ, Note.
until Christ looked upon him. Matthew. 26.
Marie Magdalene could not put up her head from under the table, Luke. 7.
for shame of her sin, John. 8.
until Christ had forgiven her: nor the poor woman that was taken in
adultery, until her offenses were pardoned. Neither yet could this Prophets
spirit take any consolation, Psalm. 77.
as long as his sins were felt and not pardoned. Whereof follows this
saying: A small trouble of conscience puts away all joy and mirthe of the
world. Wherefore it is wisdom and also the duty of all Christian people, to
avoid sin and the enimitie of God, which only troubles the conscience: and
to put the body to all pains possible, yea, and to death it self, rather then
to put the soul in danger toward God: 1. Tim. ^.
as Saint Paul writes to Timothy his disciple: and not without cause. For as
the spirit that contemns God, and feels (for his contempt) Gods
displeasure, can not take comfort, but is full of anguish and heaviness
inward, and in the outward man full of pain and sorrow: Esai. 66.
so likewise shall the soul in the life to come inwardly feel unspeakable
grudgings and sorrows, Apoc. 14.
and outwardly the unquenchable and everlasting fire of hell. The dearest
friends of Christ be not void of trouble and anguish of mind for their sins.
Consolation.
And here is to be noted that the very elect and dearest friends of Christ,
be not free from trouble and anguish of mind for their sins, perpetrated and
committed against God. But this is a consolation, that the elect, as they find
anxietie and anguish of mind for sin in this life: so in this life is the
conscience that is troubled, by grace quieted, that it may after this life
find eternal rest. And it is a common order and ordinary way, An ordinari
way that God uses to call sinners to repentance, and from repentance to
forgiveness.
whereby GOD uses to bring the sinner to acknowledge and repent his sin, and
so from knowledge and repentance to the forgiveness of his sin: to show
and set before the conscience of the sinner, his sin: as the example of king
David and others do declare. My sin (says David) is always before me. As
though he had said: In case I could hide mine iniquity from all the world,
Psalm. 51.
yet can I not excuse it before God, nor hide it from mine own conscience. And
every man's sins thus open before God, and known and felt in his own
conscience, brings the soul into this discomfort and heaviness, that it
refuses all consolation and comfort: as this Prophet Asaph says meruellously
in this second verse of his Psalm.

There is to be noted out of this comfortless spirit of the Prophet Asaph,
Two manner of discomforts.
an other most necessary doctrine for every Christian creture, which is this:
that there is two manner of discomfortes, or two sorts of heaviness in the
word of God, that is appointed to lead us in the time of this wretched life:
as there is in it also two manner of consolations. There is two manner of
brightness and clearness, and two manner of darkness and obscurenesse in it:
as it shall appear in the treatise of this Psalm hereafter. And because the
diversity is not marked: the word of God does many times, and in many places
and persons, no good at all.

There is a discomfort inwardly, and a discomfort outwardly in the scripture.
An inward discomforte.
The discomfort inwardly is, when the sinful man or woman seeks and
suffers the same discomfort in his soul, that the law of GOD does open and
proclaim against him for his sins committed against God and his law: so
that, as the law commands after this sort: Matthew. 3.
Agite poenitentiam, Repent ye: so the man that is commanded by the law to be
sorry and heavy for his sins, Mark. 1.
is sorry and heavy in deed, by the working of Gods spirit: Gene. 3. 4.
as we may see in Adam, what inward fear and discomfort he had, 2. Samu. 11
when he heard the voice of God after the doing of his sin: Caine the like,
Matthew. 27.
David the same, Act. 9.
with Peter, Paul, and others in the word of God, This discomfort inwardly is
felt of al Gods elect, that be able to learn and know the nature of Gods
law, and the damnation and curse of God upon sin. Matthew. 3.
For this is a general commandment to all flesh borne and conceived in
sin: Mark 1.
Agite poenitentiam, Repent ye. It is also many times felt of such as dye,
Saul and Judas.
and lived wickedly. As Saul and Judas, 1. Samu. 31.
whose spirits in their discomforts refused al consolation, Matthew. 27.
and so dyed without comfort in great anguishe and perturbation of mind. Mark.
14.
But that is not general in all wicked and damned persons: for many times they
feel no discomfort, nor heaviness of spirit inwardly in this world: but God,
of his unspeakable wisdom and justice, makes them (for their sins) alive,
and in security of conscience, Pharao.
to go to hell. As Pharao, whilst he followed the Israelites in persequution
into the red sea, Exodus 14.
soudenly was drewned. Chore, Dathan and Abiron, whilst they were doing their
sacrifices, God killed them, Number. 16.
in opening the earth that swallowed them alive down into hell. Now this
inward discomfort, Romans 3. 5.
although it eude not in joy, but only in such as believe their sins to be
forgiven in the death and passion of Christ: yet we see by the examples of the
scripture, that both good and bad suffer and feel this, that their spirit
will take no comfort. Outward discomfort
But now as concerning outward and external discomfort: which is felt as well
of such as have the word of God, as such as have not the word of God, but only
the law of nature. As we may see in the time of the law of nature, how Noah
showed the discomfort of all men, and the destruction of the world for sin:
Gene. 5. 6.
but this discomfort did not enter into the spirits of the hearers. Christ
complains of the same, that the people had both discomfort and comfort
preached unto them: and yet they received none of them both. To whom (says
Christ) should I compare this generation? It is like boys that sit in the
streates and cry unto their fellows, and say: We have played upon our tymbrels
to you, and you have not daunsed: we have soung mourning songs unto you, and ye
have not wept. Matthew. 11. Luke. 7.
God by his Prophet Esaie says the same: Esai. 65.
All the day long have I extended forth my hand unto an unfaithful and
intractable people: Meaning, that what so ever he threatened, or gently offered
unto the Jews, it came no further then the outward ear. Esai. 53. 6.
Whereof both the Prophets and Christ him self grievously complain, Matthew. 13.
in this sort: John. 12.
They have ears and hear not, and they have eyes and see not. Romans 11.
Saint Paul rebukes men also, Romans 1.
that by the law of nature knew good, whereof they should have rejoiced: and
evil, whereof they should have lamented, and yet did not. And to leave off the
examples of our fathers mentioned in the scriptures: we may see the same by
daily experience amongst our selves. We read in the book of God, we hear by
preaching, we know in our own consciences the displeasure and anger of God,
against us for our sins. God outwardly shows us the same with many horrible
plagues: as by sickness, war, sedition, scarsitie, enimitie, and hatred, by
the deliverance and surrender of a whole realm (to the utter destruction
thereof) into the hands and rule of a stranger, and by the delivery and
giving over of Christian souls into the hands and rule of the Antichristian
Pope, and his wicked Clergy: and yet this discomfort comes no further, then
our outward ear. If Asaph the author of this Psalm were amongst us, he
would say, His spirit would take no consolation. And this is an horrible
plague, that weekly this Psalm is read amongst the Popish Clergy, and yet
it brings their spirits to no sorrow nor feeling of God displeasure.
Wherefore our own experience teaches, that there is an inward and an outward
discomfort in this Psalm, and in the rest of Gods most holy word. The one
penitent sinners feel, and by it amend their lives: and the other some wicked
men feel, and yet despair: but of the most part of the world, it is not felt
at all. Whereof comes the contempt of God, Sin not felt, brings the
contempt of God, etc.
the love of our selves and of the world, and the loss of our sinful souls
in the world to come. Let us therefore mark the scripture that teaches this
discomfort, and pray to God, that as we see it in the letter: so we may feel
it in the spirit. Of the two manner of consolations, it shall be said in the
next verse: and of the brightness and darkness also, in the Psalm hereafter.

Now in the trouble of the spirit is an other thing to be considered, whereof
the text also makes mention: that is, how the discomfort of the spirit had
continuance all the night. Whereof is to be gathered the greatness of
discomfort. For as the night is a very image of death, and the bed a very
similitude of the sepulcher and grave: even so is the discomfort of the spirit
in the night, that will not suffer the body to take rest, but to be unquieted
with it self. Unquietness of the spirit is a very image of eternal death.
The which unquietness of the spirit, is a very similitude and image of
eternal discomfort in the world to come, that both body and soul, which were
created first to inherit the heavenly bliss, after the fall of Adam, should
rest by night, (as king David says) and after this life, Psalm. 104.
for sin vnforgiuen, should for ever be disquieted in the unquenchable fire
of hell.

Here may we learn the circumstances and causes, The cause of al trouble is
sin.
how the trouble of the Prophet Asaphes spirit was increased. Psalm. 39.
It was trouble ingendered by sin, (the occasion only of al men's miseries,)
Romans 5. 7. 8
opened and revealed unto the conscience by the law, condemned by justice to
eternal fire, and it continued al night: yea, The night represents hell
prison. The bed represents the grave. The sheets of man's flesh is earth.
how much more, the scripture declares not. In the which night, the darkness
thereof represented unto his eyes outwardly, the horror of hell prison: and
also his bed, the grave and sepulcher, wherein al flesh is clad, after the
spirit departs. The sheets of man's flesh after this life, be nothing but
earth above and earth underneath: as whilst it lives, it is clad with such
vain things as grow upon the earth.

This whole night in discomfort of the spirit, declares two notable things.
Two things to be noted.
First, how earnestly God is angry in deed with sin, that puts man to
such long pain for it. And the next, how gracious a God he is, that will not
yet suffer the discomforted spirit to despair in his discomfort, as it
follows meruellously in the next verse.

3 When I am in heaviness I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed I will
complain. Sela.

Whilst Asaph was thus troubled in spirit, he remembered the Lord, No comfort
to the afflicted but GOD alone.
and called unto him for help. First, out of this verse it is to be
considered, that nothing can quiet the comfortless spirit, but GOD alone. But
for as much as it seems by the parts of this Psalm that follows, that
this verse came in by occasion, rather then to show a full remedy for the
Prophets trouble: I will not write what I think thereof, but defer the
remedy against trouble to such other verses as follow: because the Prophet
said before, that his spirit could take no consolation, and that a great many
of troubles follow, as the Psalm declares. It shows, that he was not able
to bear the troubles of the mind alone, without the invocation and help of
God. Wherefore, before he expresses by writing al his troubles: he writes
also, how in the midst of them, he did remember and put his trust in the
Lord.

Out of this we learn, how necessary it is in time at the beginning of
troubles and temptations, to remember the Lord, and to call unto him for mercy.
For the more temptations do grow without present assistance of Gods grace,
the greater is the damnation, and the more is the danger thereof: as we may
see in the examples of the scripture.

Adam fell into anxietie and discomfort of spirit, Gene. 3.
and God immediately told him of his fault, and by Gods grace his discomforted
spirit was quieted in the promises of God: Note.
Caine by the murder of his brother Abel, Gene. 4.
felt the discomfort of the spirit, and by neglecting of Gods calling, dyed in
the same. 2. Samu. 12
David being admonished by Gods grace, found rest for his unquieted spirit: 1.
Samu. 31
Saul in deferring the remedy of Gods grace, died comfortless. Peter, at the
beginning, through Gods grace with one look of Christ, Matthew. 27.
put away discomfort: Judas with contemning Christ's admonitions, dyed in
horrible despair.

Whereof we learn to beware, (as much as may be,) that temptations grow not
so far, that Gods admonition, or the remembrance of Gods name be forgotten:
but that we do in the midst of discomforts, (as Asaph the Prophet did,)
remember and call upon the Lord for help. There is also by this remembrance of
God, in the discomfort of the spirit, to be noted, what a vanity all the
world, and worldly things be for man in time of trouble, when God shall show and
reveal unto man his sins. What manner of man Asaph was.
This Asaph (as we read in the scripture) was a man, whom for his virtues and
good qualities, king David appointed to be a Musician for the comfort of many,
until the building of the temple of Jerusalem: 1. Paral. 6.
Yet now, (as we see) he is not able to solace him self with his Music, nor
yet with any worldly thing: but this only comfort is in the Lord. And here the
Prophet declares the truth of Christ's sentence, written in S. Luke: Luke. 9.
What does it profit a man to win all the world, and to loose his own
soul? What external riches can comfort the inward spirit, troubled with
sin and transgression of Gods law? None at all doubtless: as the scripture
shows examples every where. Note.
Al king David's kingdom was not able to appease his troubled and discomforted
spirit, when he said to his troubled soul: Psalm. 42. 43
Why art thou so heavy and sad my soul, and why do thou trouble me?

Now, this one thing more I will mark in this verse, and no more, because it
is more fully used by the Prophet for the comfort of discomforted spirits in
the verses that follow.

I said, there was two kinds of consolations in the word of God. Two kinds
of consolations in the word of God.
The one outward in the face and lesson of the letter: and the other inward, in
the understanding and feeling of the spirit. And of this division must great
heed be taken. For it is not every man that reads and hears, that Christ
dyed for the remission of sin, that shall have the consolation of the
redemption promised in Christ's blood. For we see and read, (God give us grace
to learn it,) that Adam caused his sons to hear of his own fall in
Paradise, and the redemption of his fall in the blood of Christ to come, Gene.
4.
as Abel his younger son right well perceived: yet did Caine, hearing the same
consolation, perish in his sin. There was consolation and rest promised unto
all them that came out of Egypt: but none took the benefit thereof, but Joshua
and Caleb. There was in the outward letter promised consolation unto all
Abraham's children: Who be the children of Abraham.
but none received the commodity thereof, but such as in spirit followed the
faith of Abraham. The scripture says in the letter, that GOD would all men to
be saved: yet we see such as follow not the spirit offered, Consolation
offered unto England in K. Edwardes days.
be damned. God by his word in the time of holy and blessed King Edward the
sixth, offered consolation unto all this realm: yet none shall enjoy it, but
such as in their spirits have learned, kept, and do follow the word of
consolation. So our Savior Christ in S. Matthew does say: Not every man that
calls me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of God: but he that
follows in Christ Gods commandments.

There be a great many at this day (as there were before our time,) that know
and speak of such consolation, as is contained in the letter, and utter bark
of Gods word: but in their consciences they feel not in deed the consolation
thereof. Judas.
As Judas preached abroad with the rest of his companions, consolation to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel: but he showed unto others that he felt not
him self. So did the Phariseis, Phariseis.
when the scripture was read every Saturday in their Synagogues, show that
Messiah should come to redeem the world: yet they them selves (for the most
part) felt not the consolation in deed, that the scripture did testify of
Christ. Even so at this present, many read this Psalm (and daily almost in
the letter,) whereof if it be in English, he that understands not but the
English tongue, sees great consolation in the letter, and also in the Prophet
Asaph, that used the Psalm: yet when need should be, the inward consolation
of the Psalm, of many is nothing felt. The cause is, that either they
understand it not, or else mark it not: either they think (as the Papists
do teach) that to say or sing the Psalm without understanding and feeling of
it in the spirit, is sufficient for the work it self, and that it pleseth
God Ex opere operato, as they term it.

It is too evident, and also too horrible, (if it pleased God,) that men be
contented only with the external consolation contained in the word of God. For
if they hear that Gods commandments be true, and full of consolation, they
be contented to hear of them in the letter or by speech, and never learn the^
or feel them by heart. The like is in the Articles of our Christian religion.
They be thought to be true and godly: and yet the most part that so judge,
neither learn them nor feel them in their conscience: Wherefore they do
outwardly and inwardly as much idolatry, contrary to their Creed, by the
commandment of men, as can be devised: for their consolation of faith is no
more but such an outward knowledge, as the most men hold withal, without any
proper judgment, or singular feeling of their own spirits. Prayer.
The same is likewise in prayer. For in the external letter, there is so much
consolation as may be: but in the heart of him that prays, is there no
understanding nor feeling of the consolation that outwardly is spoken and
talked of. Therefore, mark this order of the Prophet Asaph. He said, that
His spirit could take no consolation in all the night time, whilst he held
up his hands. And as there is not only discomfort and unquietness spoken of,
but also felt: not only noted and written in the letter of y^ Psalm, but also
thoroughly felt inwardly in the spirit with heaviness and anguish, without
comfort and consolation: so in this verse is there consolation in the letter,
in the voice, and in the mouth mentioned of, and inwardly the same consolation
felt in the spirit. And as outwardly Gods displeasure troubled him: so
inwardly Gods holy name and promises comforted him. And this is to be noted,
least we should hear of consolation outwardly, or read it in the book of the
holy Bible: and yet inwardly neither feel nor know any consolation at all.

Man in trouble without Gods presence is miserable.
In the end of this verse is put this word ( Sela.) And it does note unto the
Reader or Hearer, what a miserable and comfortless thing man is in trouble, if
God be not present with him to help him. It is also put as a spur and prick
for every Christian man and woman, to remember and call upon God, in the days
of their troubles. For as the Jews say, where so ever this word ( Sela) is, if
does admonish and stir up the Reader or Hearer, to mark what was said before
it: for it is a word always put after very notable sentences. Then follows
the rest of such pains and troubles, as this Prophet suffered, whilst the
Lord laid his cross upon him: after this sort.

4 Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so feeble I can not speak.

Before, he said his spirit could take no consolation, which was a grief
unspeakable. For no thought is able to comprehend the anguish of the mind, much
less is the tongue able to express it. But now he shows a further increase
of discomfort, and says: that The terror of his mind was such, that he was
not only comfortless, but the Lord also to the increase of sorrow, kept
sleep from him. And as the greatness of Gods punishment, suffered him not to
sleep: so would it not permit him to speak, Note.
but made him speachlesse: such was the great punishment of God toward him.

Here is the tyranny and violence of sin to be perceived and seen: What
sin works in man.
which is first in this verse to be noted. It takes all mirthe from the
spirit, and brings in heaviness and discomfort. It takes away sleep, and
places for it tediousness and sorrowful watch. It takes away also the
speech of the tongue, and leaves the man mute and speachlesse. If sin can do
so painful things in the body and soul, whilst they be yet conjoined
together, and there is hope of remission: what can it do, when the one is in
the earth, and the other in hell separated, or else both of them conjoined
again in the resurrection of the wicked, where there is no hope of redemption,
but assurance of everlasting pain? Besides this, it is to be noted in this
verse, A peaceable conscience, precious iuel.
containing the increase of the Prophets heaviness, what a precious jewel man
or woman has: that has a quiet heart and peaceable conscience. For where so
ever they be, there be all the members of man and woman, wholly bent unto the
service and honoring of God. The eyes shall never be turned from their
service: neither shall the tongue cease (if it be able to speak) to sound
forth always the glory of God. As David says: Psalm. 25. 121.
Mine eyes be always toward the Lord. Again: Psa. 123. 131
I lifted up mine eyes unto the Lord. As the eye of the handmaide attends
upon her Maistres: so our eyes attend upon the Lord. Again: Psalm. 132.
Mine eyes Lord be not proud. And in another Psalm he says, There should come
neither sleep ne slumber in his eyes, until he had provided a place for ye
ark of God to rest in. In case the spirit be troubled, or in a contempt of
Gods laws, not liking his holy devises: the eyes be either troubled with
overmuch watch, (as in this Psalm we see:) or else bent to see vanity, the
lusts and concupiscence of the flesh and the world. Wherefore David prayed the
Lord, Psalm. 119.
to turn his eyes that they looked not upon vanity. Prou. 17.
For the eye of him that has not a right spirit, is insatiable. And many times
the eye (whereas the spirit is without the favor of God) abhors Gods own
good gifts. As the eyes of the Israelites lothed Manna in the desert, saying:
Our eyes see nothing but Manna: Number. 11.
even so the tongue also of the godly spirited man will sound the glory of God,
Psalm. 35. 39. 71.
as king David used his tongue, and will not hinder it by naughty speech.

If the spirit be void of Gods fear, then does it speak of malice falsely to
slander the good, as king David does declare: or else for tre^bling or quaking,
Psalm. 6. 12. 14. 140.
it can speak nothing at all, as ye may perceive by ye Prophet Asaph in this
place. He that will therefore consider accordingly, the greatness of this fear
in the spirit, and how it takes away the office of every member external:
doubtless must labor to have the spirit that David prays, Psalm. 51.
in this sort: Cor mundum crea in me deus, and spiritum rectum innoua in
visceribus meis, Create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew in me a right
spirit. In the which verse the Prophet prays first, to have such an heart,
as by faith in Christ may be clean and purged from sin: and next, to have a
certain and sure spirit, that doubts nothing of Gods promises toward him.
For, such a spirit within the body of man or woman, makes the heart so
joyful, that no sorrow can molest it: and it strengthens so every member,
that they will be given to nothing so much as to the service of God. But if the
spirit be wicked, doutlesse the outward members will serve nothing but
iniquity: if it be troubled, the outward members can not be quiet. For as the
soul gives life to the body: Note.
so does the virtue of God in the soul, draw the outward parts of the body
unto the obedience of virtue. And contrariwise, Romans 7. 8. 12.
the vice of the soul draws the members of the body unto the service of
sin and iniquity. And as the ears and eyes of man were made by God, Unto
what use the eyes and ears of man were created.
to be instruments to hear and see Gods will and pleasure, Romans 10.
and by them (since man fell in Paradise) knowledge might come into the soul
and spirit of man, by hearing Gods word preached, and seeing his sacraments
ministered: so by them abused, in hearing and seeing of sin and abomination,
there enters into the soul much vile filthiness and transgression. The
Prophet Asaph (therefore) does admonish us to beware that we bring not our
spirits into discomfort, by sin and transgression of Gods laws: for if we
do, whether ye offense be done in the spirit, by the evil that naturally is
in it, by original sin, by the temptation of the devil, or by the means of
any member of the body: doubtless the trouble of the spirit shall not only take
away the office of the members, (as ye see in this place the speech of the
tongue, and the closing of the eyes, be taken away:) but at the length also, God
shall make the same body and the same members to rise again at the general
resurrection, Jacob. 19.
and they shall suffer with the wicked spirit eternal pains. 1. Cor. 15.
Let this doctrine therefore teach all men to know and feel the cruelty of
sin, that so painefully vnquieteth does body and soul, and think that if
these grudgings, discomforts, terrors and fears be so great, that death it
self is more tolerable and easy to bear: how much more intolerable and
unspeakable be the pains of hell, which God has ordained for all impenitent
sinners? Esaie. 66.
After this verse of trouble and anguish, Matthew. 25.
whereas we see sleep taken from the eyes, and speech from the tongue:
follows next, how these great sorrows were mollified and somewhat diminished.

5 I have considered the days of old: and the years that be past.

6 In the night I called to remembrance my song, and communed with mine own
heart: and my spirit searched diligently.

I did (says the Prophet) in this great discomfort and heaviness, consider
with my self the times and worlds of old, wherein the Lord had helped and
delivered my fathers before my time, from such troubles as I am in, and also
from greater. And in the night, while I was sleeplesse, I remembered that many
times I lauded and exalted the goodness of God in my Psalms and Hymns, giving
him thanks for his great mercy and goodness used toward his Church at all
times: and in remembering Gods accustomed clemency and pity, my spirit was
much given to debate things.

Out of these two verses we may note diverse doctrines for our consolation in
the days of our trouble. Consolation in trouble.
And the first (after my mind) shall be concerning the two brightness and the
two darkness in the word of God. The one brightness is in the letter
outwardly, and the other brightness is in the spirit and heart of the reader
of the Scripture. This brightness or claritie of the letter is this, when by
reading, hearing, or thinking of Gods word: men learn and know that God made
all things, and that he preserves all things, and that Jesus Christ his
only son is the mediator between God and man, and that he pacified Gods
just ire against man by his bitter death and passion. Also he knows by the
external histories of the Scripture, that GOD has delivered many times his
people from dangers and perils, in manner impossible to be helped.

This claritie and brightness of the Scripture, although it be necessary: yet
it is not sufficient: for if stands alone in bare and naked knowledge, which
before God saves no, neither illuminateth the man that has the knowledge in a
sufficient claritie and brightness of faith, and of Gods promises due in
Christ unto faith. Gene. 12. 13. 15. 16. 17
As we may see, how the children of Israel had the external claritie and
brightness of Gods promises unto Abraham, Isahac, and Jacob, that they and
their posterity should inherit ye land of Canaan, that flowed with all
plenty and abundance: yet notwithstanding such as came out of Egypt, for the
most part, Number. 14.
perished in the desert and wilderness. The Phariseis and learned men amongst
the Jews, Mich. 5.
had the clearenesse and brightness of Christ's coming, Matthew. 2.
and of the place he should be borne in, and told in that part the truth unto
Herod: yet did they for all this knowledge and claritie, abhor Christ when he
came, and put him to death most wrongfully. The people in like sort saw an
external brightness in Christ, Matthew. 27.
that by his miracles and wonders, they thought him worthy to be made a king:
Mark. 15. Luke 20. John. 19. John. 6. Luke 4.
and yet for all this, they cried out against him: Crucifige eum, crucifige
eum, Crucify him, crucify him. The devil himself said he knew who Christ
was, the son of the most highest: and yet for all this knowledge and
clearenesse shall he never be saved. Matthew 7.
And Christ himself also perceived that this external brightness was amongst
a great many that called him Lord, Lord: Yet notwithstanding he said, they
should not enter into the joys of heaven. So likewise be there very many at
this present time, that see the claritie and brightness of Christ outwardly in
the letter, and yet follow it not here in living, neither shall they have the
effect of their knowledge in the life to come: for their clearenesse is only
knowledge, without feeling or practice of the brightness inwardly: Luke 12.
which deserves more stripes then obscurity or darkness does.

There is another claritie or brightness, which is an inward understanding and
spiritual knowledge and sight of Gods truth, which no man has but he that is
possessed with the spirit of God: that whatsoever he reads in Gods word
himself, or hears preached of other men, he understands it, and consents
unto it gladly, and willingly. As for example: God spoke unto Adam, Genes. 3.
and his words made him afeard, so that he trembled for fear. Christ spoke
unto Paul, and he fell down flatt, Acts. 9.
and could not abide the peril of Christ's voice: So that as the law rebuked
sin in the voice and letter, it wrought also rebuke and discomfort in the
hearts of Adam and Paul, and made them afraid inwardly, as the voice and letter
was terrible outwardly. Wherefore they had not only an external clearenesse
of Gods hatred against sin, but also an internal sight and feeling of the
same, as the Scripture does record.

The like is also in the promises of God, when they be preached or read, that
promise remission of sin. The inward claritie and brightness of the same, is
to feel privately every man and woman in his own conscience (through faith in
Christ) that the same promises do apperteine and belong unto himself. As the
Prophet Abacuc says: Abacuc. 2.
The just man lives by his own faith. Romans 1.
Also Christ said unto the woman of Canaan, that it was not good to cast the
bread that apperteined to the children, unto dogs: Matthew. 15.
she said, Yes Lord: for the dogs do eat of the crumbes that fall from their
masters table. And so does Christ himself use the brightness of his promises
to Marie Magdalene: Luke 7.
Thy sins be forgiven thee. Applying the clearenesse of the letter, unto the
inward comfort of her soul.

The same is likewise meruellously expressed in the common creed, whereas
every man says: He believes in God the father, God the son, and God the
holy Ghost, and that he believes the remission of sins: meaning, that
whosoever says his creed, should see and feel in his soul the claritie and
brightness of his salvation, that is contained in the letter and words of the
creed. But this clearenesse is not seen of all men, nor yet of the most part
of men: As Christ declares: Matt. 20. 7.
Many be called and few chosen. Many say: Lord, Lord, and few do the Lords
will. Therefore Christ says meruellously concerning the claritie and
brightness of Gods word inwardly, in S. Luke: Blessed be they that hear the
word of God and keep it. Luke 11.
By the which words he declares, that many hear and see the outward light and
truth of Gods word: but very few there be that see the inward light and
profit thereof. Of this is learned what the cause is that Christians bear the
name of Christ, and yet be not Christ's in deed: for because a great many be
contented with the name, and few do understand what the name truly and verily
contains in it.

And as there is in the Scripture this double brightness, whereof the one
lies in the letter, and many see what it means by the external word, and
the other lies in the meaning of the letter, and is perceived only by such as
have the spirit of God: so is there two kinds and sorts of darkness and
obscurity in the Scripture: the one in the letter, and the other in the sense
and taking of the letter. The outward obscurity is to be seen in such as
contemn the word of God, and will not read it nor hear it. As the Turks and
heathen, and also the common sort that bear the name of Christ, be christened
in Christ's name, and outwardly be taken to be very Christians in deed, and
yet they know not so much as the letter of Christ's laws, that prescribes them
what they should do, and what they should not do. And this obscurity is a
brutish, beastly, and external darkness.

The other is obscurity or darkness inwardly in the text. The inward
obscurity.
For although the letter be well known, and the sound thereof seems to be
plain: yet the sense is not so common nor so manifest as the letter sounds.
Whereupon S. Paul binds all men in the understanding of the letter, unto
the Analogy and proportion of faith, that no one place be taken contrary to
many places. Whereof was gathered the abridgement of our common Creed,
accepted at all times and of all Christian men, for an infallible truth: so
that whosoever believed it, was accounted a good Christian man. And of this
obscurity of the Scripture in the sense and spirit, is risen this troublesome
contention about transubstantiation of bread and wine in the sacrament of
Christ's body and blood. For the ungodly sort would have no substance of bread
and wine to remain in the Sacrament, and yet a corporal presence of body and
blood: contrary, not only to the articles of our faith, Matthew. 26.
that tells us he is in heaven, and shall abide there until he come to judge
the quick and the dead: Mark 14.
but also contrary to many other places of the scripture. Luke. 12.
And this is no new thing, 1. Cor. 10. 11.
to have and record the text and letter of the Scripture, and yet lack the
effect and the very consolation of the Scripture in deed. Acts 3.
For here in these two verses the Prophet Asaph does record and remember Gods
doings mercifully Coloss. 3.
in time past, and yet takes no more consolation thereof: then he finds in
the bark of the letter, or in the rehearsal of the histories. And the same he
does of his own Psalms and Hymns, whereof he makes mention, and yet by the
same mean his spirit is brought into no further considerations of Gods truth
then it was before: with much heaviness and sorrow, as the verses following do
declare: So that in the affliction of the spirit he could repeat and call to
his remembrance the truth, how God had dealt mercifully with his forefathers,
but felt not at that present the like mercy of God toward himself: neither
could he see nor feel for his consolation the ease and succor of Gods
promises which he saw in others: as all the electes of God at length shall
doubtless feel: As it is said by the Prophet, Psalm. 48.
Sicut audiuimus, sic vidimus, As we have heard, so have we seen: and at
length (as the Psalm says) he felt him self. Whether he wrote the Psalm of
his own sorrows and troubles, or of the sorrows and troubles of the Israelits,
it makes no matter: let every man in that case use his own judgment, so that
he mark the doctrine of the Psalm.

There is to be noted of these verses also this doctrine, that what soever
trouble ye spirit was brought unto, whatsoever watch had taken his eyes, and
what soever vehemency of disease had taken his speech from him: yet under all
these crosses he cursed not God, nor grudged against his plagues, but as a man
contented, gave himself to record and to call to memory, how God was wont to
be unto men afflicted, and took account how in times past he had spent his
years, and found that he had made certain Psalms or Hymns to the glory of
God, and to the praise of his holy name. Of the which we learn not only
patience in the time of trouble and persequution, but also how to spend our
youth and transitory life in doing or making some things, that may be
records and remembrances when we be gonne, that we lived here to serve God,
and not to serve our selves. And it is a great help and no small consolation
for a man that is in trouble and heaviness, to think that he in his life before
sought the glory of God: and that testimony of conscience is more worth in
the time of trouble, then all other men's deeds for him. Not in that his
seeking Gods glory and setting forth of the same, can be his gage and
ransom before God: but because it is a very testimony, that God once loved
him, and gave him of his blessed spirit, to indite something to Gods praise
and honor. And as godly Psalms and virtuous Hymns, be testimonies of a
virtuous spirit: so be wanton and adulterous ballads, records of a vicious and
sinful spirit. And as the remembrance of good and virtuous works in the
time of sickness and trouble, be joyful and comfortable: so is the remembrance
of wicked doings sorrowful and painful.

We be therefore taught by this Prophet to be circumspect and wary, how we
accumulate and heap upon our souls infidelity, and the wicked works
thereof: for as they be the only cause of trouble, so do they not only work
trouble, but also increase trou- and augment the heaviness of the spirit and
pains of the body, as is declared meruellously by the grave and profound
sentences following. Wherein he declares what it was that his spirit searched
so diligently for. It was this.

7 Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he be no more entreated?

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever? And is his promise come utterly to an
end for evermore?

9 Has God forgotten to be gracious? And will he shutt up his loving kindness
in displeasure?

10 And I said, It is mine own weakness: but the right hand of God can change
these things.

These verses declare what minds and cogitations do happen to men that be in
sickness or trouble: The troubled spirit is overwhelmed with grievous
cogitations.
and how grievous they be unto the patient.

Out of these verses first we see a common rehearsal of the great terror and
fear of the feeling of Gods displeasure and anger toward the woeful spirit
for sin. The first meditation of the sinful spirit was this: Will the
Lord absent himself for ever? This may be understood two manner of ways. For
this English word ( ever) has two meanings in the Hebrew tongue. Sometime it is
taken for continuance and time everlasting: The remembrance of Gods justice for
sin: is greater pain then the death of the body.
sometime for certain years, and the life of men. If it be taken in this place
for time everlasting, the sorrows of the Prophet were the greater, when he
reuelued with his spirit, that God justly for sin might cast him into
everlasting pains: the remembrance whereof is greater pain, then the mortal
death of the body. If this word ( ever) be taken for a certain time, and the
life of man, then means the Prophet thus: Will God as long as I live absent
himself? And thus continue me in heaviness of spirit and sorrows, as long as
I live? Which sense soever be taken, there be profitable things to be learned
of it. But I suppose the latter sense to be the better for diverse causes. First
in this, that the Psalm contains the complaint and prayer of the Prophet, a
man of God, that cannot be brought to this desperation, that he should be cast
away for ever from the favor of God unto eternal pains. And the text that
says: It is mine own infirmity, and the right hand of the Lord can change
this: does bear with this latter sense and explanation. For the words be of
great weight, and of meruellous wisdom and consolation, and do declare, that
although the Prophet felt the judgment of God against sin, and was in a
meruellous terror and fear with the horror and sight of his sins: yet the
spirit of God did testify with his spirit, Romans 8.
that he was the child of God, A godly consolation.
and that it was a pain and punishment of the soul and body, and not a
desperation and thorough casting away and absenting of Gods mercy. For the
very electes of God be chosen, so ordained, John. 6. 10.
so preserved and kept, that nothing is able to take them out of Gods hand. For
the godly men in the Scripture, did rejoice, with the assurance of Gods certain
promise: and did not presume to do evil, as S. Paul in sundry places does
give testimony: Once to the Romans, where as he felt and perceived the
filthiness of sin, and the just judgment of God against the same: Romans 7.
as it appears by his woeful cry and complaint, Oh wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body subject unto death? He felt (as we may
perceive) the heavy burden and weight of Gods displeasure, and yet in the
midst of terror and fear, he stayed assuredly in the mercy of God through
Christ. 2. Cor. 15.
And the same he writes also to the Corinthians, 2. Tim. 4.
and to his disciple Timothy: that his death was at hand, and that he knew
(although his quarrel were never so good,) that he of himself was a sinner,
and by sin worthy reiection and casting away from God: yet he said that
Christ had in keeping for him a crown of justice, which he should assuredly
receive at the day of his death. God is contented that his chosen people, shall
suffer and bear the burden and heaviness of temptation and fear of
everlasting pain, Genes. 3.
as Adam did first in Paradise, David many times, Psalm. 42. 43.
Job, and others: yea Christ himself, Job 3.
that said his soul was heavy even unto death, Matthew. 26.
which made him sweat both water and blood. Nothing can hurt him that is in
Christ John. 6.
But these temptations and terrors shall never overcome and cast away the
person that has his faith in Christ: for none is able to take his sheep out
of his hand. Yet God withdraws his hand many times, and suffers his to be
tempted and to be comfortless, and as it were clean overthrown: not that in
deed their election can be altered, Note.
or they themselves left comfortless until the end of their lives, Job. 3. 42.
but for a time: as ye may see by Job, who spoke as horrible words, and as
desperately as might be. Yet see in the end of his book, and mark what a
joyful outgoing his grievous temptations had. What pitiful cries were these
of Christ our Savior upon the cross? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Yet the end was, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Matthew. 27.
Mark. 15. Luke 22. John. 19.


Psalm. 34. Acts. 14.
It is written that we must enter into heaven by many troubles. The trouble of
the mind is the greatest.
Now, of all troubles, the trouble of the mind and of the spirit is the
greatest. Who then can enter into heaven without such troubles? Doubtless no
man. For the judgment of God must begin at his house, as Saint Pater says:
That is to say, 1. Peter. 4.
None shall in this life more feel Gods displeasure for sin in the spirit,
Prouer. 12.
nor suffer more adversity in the body, Heb. 12.
then such as be of Gods own household and very electes. Wherefore we be
admonished in the troubles and sorrows that this Prophet Asaph sustained in
his soul that could not rest, and in his body that could not sleep nor
speak, that good men be not free from adversity, God hides his consolation
for a time to try us.
and that adversities (be they never so great) shall not separate men from God
for ever, but for a time he punishes sin and hides the consolation of God
from us: As the scripture says: Esaie. 54.
For a time, a little while I have forsaken thee, but I will gather thee
together in wonderful mercies. In a short time of my wrath I hidd my face a
while from thee, but I will have mercy upon thee for ever: says the Lord thy
redeemer.

All men that shall profitably know and feel the certeintie of Gods promises
in this life, and enjoy them in the life to come, shall be troubled with some
pain of doubtfulnes of them, Genes. 3.
before he come to perfection. For as by sin death entered into the flesh,
Romans 5.
and also the flesh is subject unto sickness and adversity: so is there
entered into the soul and powers thereof, Romans 7. 8.
by reason of sin, great imperfection. As the mind of all men is burdened
with ignorance, Ephesians. 2.
the heart with contumacie, Psalm. 53.
and the will with frowardness, so that as they be before regeneration and
knowledge of God in all godly matters stark blind, very obstinate, and
naturally altogether froward: even so after regeneration and the knowledge of
God, they continually resist and fight against the spirit, not only of man,
in whom these powers dwell: Romans 8.
but also against the spirit of God, John. 3.
that teaches and leads the spirit of man to eternal salvation: So that it
is not man that is able to overcome the wickedness of his own soul. Phil. 1.
2.
And therefore seeing life through grace dwelt in a body naturally full of
sin, Saint Paul said, Galath. 2.
I do live: yet not I, but Christ lives in me. So this Prophet Asaphe
seems in words to be stark dead from grace, Psalm. 77.
but it was not for ever: for he felt the spirit of God that told him, that
such heavy and ungodly thoughts of his spirit came of his own infirmity,
and that Gods right hand could alter and change them. And this is the
difference between the affliction of the godly and ungodly: as it is
wonderfully set forth in the Psalm next before this saving one, where it is
said: Psalm. 75.
There is a cup in the Lords hand full of redd wine, and he powers out of
it, but the wicked shall drink the dregs thereof, and the ungodly of the
earth shall receive the bottom of it. The cup in the Scripture is taken many
times for adversity, Matthew. 26.
whereof God fills a quantity and a certain measure unto all his elect and
chosen servants: Mark. 14.
but the wicked shall drink the bottom and all, Esaie. 66.
and never come to rest nor ease. Matthew. 25.


Out of this temptation we may learn how foolish and how impatient we be. When
God sends troubles, Proverb. 3
we think such to be best at ease that want them: Apoca. 3.
whereas the Lords book declares, that it is necessary, Heb. 12.
and also very expedient, that we should have them. Again, there is to be
noted how that the Prophet in the cogitations of his mind, The Prophet makes
no mention of the grief of the body.
makes no mention of the grief of the body, whereof he spoke before at the
beginning of his troubles. For in the second and fourth verse he declares how
he held up his hands all night, cried with his voice until he was
speachlesse, and lay waking and could not sleep. Of the which sorrows now he
makes no rehearsal, but says: his spirit was searching and inquisitiue,
Whether God would absent himself for ever, with diverse like interrogatories of
Gods nature, as follow in the Psalm. Whereof we learn the vileness of our
own nature, and also the treason and subtlety of the devil. For as long as we
sin, we have such delight and pleasure therein, as though it were but a play
to transgress and break Gods holy commandments. Note.
But when sickness and trouble have laid the wicked the body abedd. Romans 7.
and made it weak and feeble: Gal. 2. 3.
our conscience is waked by the Law of GOD, and we put in such terror and
fear, that nothing can quiet us. Also, as long as we do sin, the devil
bears us in hand that God is so merciful, (do what we will,) that he will
not be angry: but when sickness or death inuadeth, then turns the devil his
tale, and persuadeth with us, that GOD is only extreme just, and nothing at
all merciful. And this grief of the mind is so sore and vehement, that all
the pains of the body seem nothing in comparison thereof: as we see in this
place by the holy Prophet Asaph, that was very sore unquieted in his body,
yet did his spirit make no account of it, but still he stayed and staggered,
trembling and quaking at the heaviness and sorrow of the spirit, that could
not feel, for the time of his trouble, any certeintie or consolation in the
promises of God.

Of this we be admonished, that whatsoever we have, if Gods favor lack, we
have nothing able to rejoice us. And of the other side, if we lack all
things, and have assuredly Gods favor, there is nothing able to make us
heavy and sorrowful: As we see king Saul, having a noble kingdom, and
lacking the favor of God, was always unquieted: Poor David having the grace
and favor of God, was quiet and contented with all things, saying: If God
will, he may restore me: if he will not, his will be done. 1. Reg. 16. 1. Reg.
24. 2. Reg. 16. 15. 2. Tim. 4.


The assurance of Gods promises made Paul glad to die: and the mistrust and
desperation of Gods promises, Matthew. 26.
made Judas weary to live. The certeintie of Gods truth made Saint Steeuen
quietly to die in the assurance of eternal life: Acts 7.
the uncertainty and doubtfulnesse of Gods mercy caused Saul to die in the
fear of eternal death. 1. Reg. 31.
Riches of this world be treasures much esteemed and made of: friends and
lovers much sought for and warily kept, and health of body highly regarded and
preserved with much care: yet, if the soul be destitute of the assurance of
Gods grace, the rest seem to be of no valor at all. 1. Reg. 16.
As we see, Saul in his kingdom with riches, strength, and friendship: yet
his mind vexed still an evil spirit, and Gods spirit departed, his sorrows
were incomparable. So that we learn that not only the goods apperteyning to
the body be nothing worth, whereas the spirit wants the grace of God: but
also, whereas the spirit is troubled, the goods of the body be little felt
and nothing passed of: as we see by this Prophet in this Psalm.

The other part of his cogitations in the time of his sickness was this: Will
he be no more entreated? This grievous temptation, whether GOD would be
entreated to forgive sin any more, may have two understandings: The one
generally, and the other particularly. Generally in this sort, whether God once
offended, will be merciful and forgive or not? Particularly, whether God,
whose nature is merciful, will forgive the private man, that seeks by says,
mercy, as he has in time past forgiven al men that asked it with repentance
in faith? The first sense and taking of the text generally, is meruellous
wicked and blasphemous, to think that God once offended with any man, will
never for give again? Of this opinion was Caine, Genes. 4.
when he said his sins were greater then they might be forgiven: and he
thought God would be no more entreated, because he judged his fault greater
then the mercy of God that forgiueth faults. And wheresoever this judgment
of the spirit is, this sentence is verified: God will be entreated no more.

And as every man that is privately thus minded, that his own sins be greater
then can be forgiven: even so has he the like mind and judgment also of all
other men's sins that be like unto his, A wicked judgment.
thinking them to be greater then they may be forgiven. For he that despaireth
of his own faults, cannot think well that other men's faults as great as his
own, Matthew. 27. 26.
be remissible. As Judas that hanged himself for betraying of Christ, could
not think well of Peter that denied Christ: but rather judged of Peter as he
did of him self, saying: God will be entreated no more.

Of this wicked judgment of Gods mercy, Whether he will be entreated any more
of a sinner, after that he has sinned: I will speak no more. But they that
lust to read how horrible a thing it is, may have many Psalms that do declare
it: namely Psalm 10. Psalm. 10* and 73.
and 73. In the one of them it is said by the wicked, that God has forgotten
the earth, and cares neither for the godly life of the godly and virtuous, nor
the ungodly life of the ungodly and wicked. And in the other Psalm they make a
doubt, Whether there be any knowledge in God of man and of his life, or not.
But these sorts of people be too horrible and blasphemous, and not to be
rehearsed or much spoken of.

The other sense of this place that is more particular, is the better sense for
the argument and meaning of the Psalm: that is, to ask whether God will be
entreated no more, as touching the remission of his own sin: or else whether
God will be no more merciful to help him out of trouble, that specially and
particularly suffers the trouble. And this question so asked, is very common
and familiar to the Christians, and puts them to great trouble, and
heaviness. As we may see that this Prophet Asaphe considered the years before
him, and what God did to his elders, and found that they received remission of
their sins, and great benefits in this world at Gods hand. So do a great
number of men in hearing and reading the Scripture of God, see and perceive the
remission of many men's sins, and how mercifully God dealt with them: yet when
they feel their own sin, and suffer their own cross and trouble, they
have much a do, and with great difficulty do they believe that God will be
as good unto them, being private sinners and privately afflicted, as he was
unto the great number of those, of whom they read in the Scripture, that God
forgave them their sins, and preserved them in most horrible and dangerous
troubles.

A whole man can give good counsel to the sick: but being sick himself
cannot apply the same to his comfort.
Therefore, this is a common wisdom and daily experimented sentence, Omnes,
cum valemus, bonum, consilium aegrotis damus. When other men be sick, we can
give good counsel patiently to bear it. When other men be afflicted and
troubled, we can speak of many means to quiet them. When they be in any
mistrust of Gods promises, we can comfort them with many arguments of faith:
but most commonly, if we be sick our selves, troubled, or in mistrust of Gods
promises, we can ease or comfort our selves very little. And good cause why:
for God that gives of his own gist and only free liberality, wisdom,
knowledge, learning, and consolation: gives also the grace that the said
virtues may work their operation, and expel the infirmities and diseases,
wherefore these wisdoms and virtues were ordained. As it is meruellously
noted of Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 3.
I have planted, and Apollo has watered: but God gave the increase. The word
of God is a means to teach truth, Romans 1.
and to condemn falsehood: to place virtue, and to remove vice: Matthew. 10. 28.
to give consolation, and to banishe and put away diffidence and mistrust: but
God gives and works the effect thereof. Act. 16.
Meat is made to preserve the body: but if God gives not strength, it misseth
the purpose. Prou. 21.
The horse and man be means to overcome: but in battle God gives the victory.
The preacher preaches Gods word: but God opens and teaches the mystery
thereof. Man hears: but God gives the understanding. Asaph remembered Gods
works, and had in mind his own godly Psalms: but God must give the
consolation. He saw the truth, and knew that God was faithful: but the joy
and profit thereof, lay in the distribution and gift of God: as we may well
perceive by this sorrowful interrogatorie: Will he be entreated no more?

Of this part we learn how we ought, When we hear or read gods promises,
we ought to pray.
when we read or hear Gods promises for our salvation, to pray: and how
necessary a thing this prayer is that godly men made in the scripture: Lord
help my incredulity: Lord increase our faith. Mark. 9.
The poor man that heard and saw Christ's mercy and liberality Luke. 17.
in healing of others, desired also health for his own child, Christ said:
if he believed, all things were possible: the poor man said: I believe Lord,
help mine unbelief. The Apostles, when they heard Christ speak of
forgiveness of one to the other, they said: Increase our faith, good Lord. As
though they had said: Except thou give us strength to believe and credit thy
godly lessons: we shall take no commodity nor profit by them. Therefore let
the preacher of God, the reader of Gods word, the hearer of Gods word, and
the thinker upon the same, many times before, also whilst they be speaking,
thinking, reading, or hearing of Gods word, pray in their spirits, that ye word
of God may work in them the thing, wherefore the word was instituted and
appointed of God: 2. Tim. 3.
or else we shall be (as Saint Paul says) always learners, and yet never
come to the knowledge of the truth.

And I do verily think, and am truly persuaded, that for lack of earnest and
continual prayer, with lifting up of my heart unto God, whilst I preached his
most holy word unto the people, God judges me not worthy to see such fruits
of my labors as I hoped for. And for this, that the people did not heartily
pray, to understand Gods pleasure by his word preached, they be accounted
unworthy of such salvation, as GOD did offer them by his word, and the true
preaching of his mysteries. Let all men therefore pray to God in Christ, that
they may be the better for the hearing, recording, remembering, or reading of
Gods word. For notwithstanding they have amongst them the book of God: yet
shall they be troubled (without Gods singular grace) with one of these two
evils: either to mock and scorn at the scripture, caring not whether they
learn it or no: or else when they have learned it, to dout whether it be true
or no. And then follows these questions: Will God absent him self for ever?
And, Will God be no more entreated? with such other doubts as do follow in
this Psalm: with much heaviness unto the spirit where such demaundes rest
and have place. Then follows the third demand by this troubled Prophet: Is
his mercy clean gone for ever?

Here in this demand first be two things to be noted: The one declaring a
fault in the Prophets faith: and the other expressing a verity in the
Prophets knowledge. The fault in his faith, was to doubt or to stand in a
mamering of Gods mercy, which is most sure and endures for ever and ever: and
to ask this question, Whether his mercy were clean gone for ever? The verity
of his knowledge was to judge and say, that It was his mercy that forgave
sins, and not his or any other men's merits that could deserve the pardoning
of sin: As ye may see how sinful Saul for his sin, 1. Reg. 15.
thought to have appeased God with sacrifice, Luke. 18.
and the proud Pharisee with his pretenced good works. But here in this
knowledge, that the Prophet complained of the departure of Gods mercy, is set
forth, that only mercy appeaseth Gods ire in Christ, for the sin of man.
Exodus 34.
And what works so ever be done, except Gods mercy pardon the sin, Deuteronomy. 5. 7.
they all can neither please God, Psalm. 33. 51. 56. 85.
nor quiet the conscience and troubled spirit of him that does the works.
Psalm. 130. 143.
As it may be seen in the example of Saint Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles. When that Saint Peter walked upon the sea coming toward Christ,
Matthew. 14.
and felt the wind strong and tempestuous, he began to fear: and when he
began to sincke, he cried: Lord save me. And the Lord put forth his hand
and took him, and said unto him: Thou of little faith, why doubtest thou?

Here we see, if GOD did help us no more of his mercy, Note.
then our own merits deserved, or else no more then the gifts of God, faith,
hope, and charity, as they be qualities in us: we should surely perish.
Therefore this place of the Prophet Asaph, where he demands this question:
Whether Gods mercy be gone for ever? does teach us, that of all things we
should be most assured of this: that only mercy is the help of man's troubles
and damnation. But as I said before, there were two manner of clarities and
brightness in the word of God: so now I say, Two manner of mercies mentioned
in the scripture.
there is two manner of mercies of God mentioned in the scripture: The outward
mercy is in the letter which men read and sing every day, and speak and talk
of: but the other is inward.

When that men can not feel Gods mercy in their conscience, as they hear it
spoken of, and as they read it in the book, they be troubled and full of
anguish and pain: and as long as they be in this case, without Gods mercy,
they can do nothing that pleseth GOD, or content them selves. But as soon as
the spirit is assured and feels, that GOD for his mercy does forgive and
forget the iniquity that the spirit and body have committed and done against
God, it rejoices and is so glad, that it will do nothing but that, which
pleseth and is acceptable unto God, and in Christ shall content and quiet his
own conscience. As for example: Adam before he inwardly felt the mercy of God
promised in Christ, Gene. 3.
to forgive and remit his sin and offense: in what heaviness was the poor
man? He hid him self, and could not abide the voice of the living God: for he
felt that his doings pleased neither GOD nor him self. But when grace had
assured him of Gods mercy, he fell in the spirit to quietness. Romans 8.
For where the spirit of God testifies and bears record with the spirit of
man, that he is the child of God, there is joy and consolation, with this
joyful song and melody: Abba pater, Father, father: So that where so ever
this song is felt in the spirit: there are such joys as no tongue can
express: as all the book of Solomon's ballads meruellously do declare. And
whereas the mercy of God is not, there is either abomination of sin, and
continuance therein, without any fear or grudge of conscience at all: or else
such heaviness of spirit, that desperation utterly quaileth, and oppresses
the spirit for ever. Yet shall the spirit and soul of man feel this for a
time, while God hides his merciful face: Is his mercy clean gone for ever?
Which cogitations of the mind, be full bitter and sorrowful: as all men of
GOD do know that have felt them, and as the Prophet declares in the
process of his Psalm, in this sort: And is his promise come utterly to an
end for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? And will he shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure? These demaundes and questions of his own mind
and spirit that was troubled, be no more in effect, then troubles that he
named before. But in this that he calls the trouble by so many names, it
declares that his spirit was for the time so disquieted, that the pains in
manner could not well be named and expressed. As it is to be seen always when
the mind of man is brought into an excellency and profoundnesse of mirth or
sorrow: then it is so ravished with the vehemency of them both, that the
tongue is not able to express the inward joy, nor the inward sorrow, as it is
to be seen as well in profane writers, as in the holy word of God. Read ye
the 18. Psalm. 18.
Psalm of king David, which he soung to the Lord when he was quit and
delivered from all his enemies, and ye shall see what shift and copy of words
he used to name God, and to express what he thought of God in his heart, and
with what Metaphors he expresses the strength of God, that overcame al his
enemies, the Psalm is to be read and marked. Again, read ye these Psalms
42. 43. Psalm. 42. 43
where ye shall perceive the prayer of David, wherein is described a vehement
agony and most bitter battle between faith and desperation: and there mark,
what words he has found out, to express the sorrows of his heart, that was
so sore put in doubt by desperation and weakness of faith. The Heart (says
he) being wounded, was never more desirous to come to the water: then my soul
desires to come to thee o God. And at length, when he can find no more words
to utter the pensiveness of his heart, he turns his words inward to his
own soul, and asks why she is so heavy and sad. Ye may see also the very
same joyful and sorrowful spirits in the ballads of Solomon, and in the
lamentations of Jeremy the Prophet. In the one it seems, that the soul
annexed unto Christ, is in such joy as the tongue can not express it: and in the
other for sin, the soul is afflicted in such sort, that it can not tell how
to express the heaviness thereof.

There is to be considered also in these demands of the Prophet, that he made
to him self in his spirit (as the text says, he reuolued the matter with his
own spirit) this doctrine, how easy a thing it is to teach and comfort
other men, and how hard a thing it is for a man to teach and comfort him self
in the promises of God. Romans 2.
S. Paul found fault therewithal, and said to the Jew: Thou teach an
other man and teach not thy self. And Judas went forth with the eleven
other of his fellows, to teach Gods mercy in Christ unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel: Mat. 10. 27
but he neither followed his own doctrine, nor yet took any comfort of
remission of sins in the promises of God, but hanged himself desperately.
Wherefore it is very expedient for eueryman and woman that has learned, and
does know the truth of God, to pray, that they them selves may follow the
truth: and for such as know and teach others the consolations of the
scriptures of God, that they may with knowledge of them feel them in deed,
and with speaking of them to others for their learning, they may speak them to
them selves for their own edifying.

But doubtless it is an easy matter for a man to speak of comfort and
consolation to others: but a hard thing to feel it him self. Virtue is soon
spoken of to other men's instructions: but the putting thereof in practice and
ure, is very hard: yea, not only in the scholar that is taught, but also in the
master that instructs. Beware of despair, can every man say: but to eschew
despair in great conflictes of the mind, is an hard matter. Read the book
of the Psalms well, and ye shall see the experience thereof to be most
certain and true. In the 62. Psalm. 62.
Psalm, ye shall have this commandment to all men: Trust ye always in him
ye people: yet when it came to the trial in him self, ye may see with what
heaviness and great trouble of mind, he came to ye trust in the Lord. Ye may
learn by these Psalms indicted by king David, Psalm. 41. 43
that easily he taught Gods religion, and how men should put their trust in the
Lord: and yet how hard it was to do and practice the thing himself that he
taught unto others? Psalm. 73. 77
Asaph also declares the same. For in the 73. Psalm, he teaches what men
should think and judge in adversity: that God would be good unto Israel. But
in this Psalm he himself being under the rod and persequution of God, is come
to questioning and demanding: Will God absent him self for ever? Will he be
no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? with many other
demaundes, declaring unspeakable troubles and difficulties of the mind: before
it be brought to a perfect consent and full agreement unto the promises of God.
So that we see the excellent Prophets, and most virtuous organes and
instruments amongst sinful men, knew it was an easy matter to speak of
faith and virtue: and yet a very hard thing to practice true faith, and to
exercise virtuous living.

Saint Paul shows the same to the Romans to be in him self. Romans 8.
For he had more ado in Christ to get the victory of sin in him self, then
to speak of the victory unto others by mouth: and more ado to mortify and
kill the flesh, and to bring it in subjection to the spirit, then to practice
the death of the flesh in him self, 2. Cor. 12.
and to follow the spirit. He spoke and uttered with his mouth most godly
doctrine, Romans 12. 8.
to the destruction of sin: 2. Cor. 6.
but with what prayers, Gala. 5.
tears, Ephesians. 5.
and clamours to God, he did the same in him self, Matthew. 11.
read 2. Corinthians. 12.

The old saying is, To such as have wrestled with sin, and in Christ got the
upper hand, Gods precepts be easy and sweet.
Knowledge is no burden, and in deed it is a thing easy to be borne: but to
put knowledge in experience, the body and the soul shall find pain and
trouble. And yet Christ's words where he says, My yoke is light, and my,
burden easy, be most true to such as have wrestled with sin, and in Christ
got the upper hand. To them (I say) the precepts of virtuous living be easy
and sweet, as long as the spirit of God bears the over hand in them. But
when faith waxes faint, and the flesh strong, then can not the spirit of God
command nor desire any thing, Romans 7.
but both body and soul be much offended with the hearing thereof, and more
grieved with the doing of it. S. Peter likewise makes mention of the same. For
when Christ bade him follow him, (meaning that he should die also for the
testimony of his word) he liked not that: John. 21.
but asked Christ what John should do, being (doutlesse) in great perplexity,
when Christ told him that he should suffer the pains of death. But here are
to be noted two things: The one, that as long as affliction is talked of
generally, and other men's pains spoken of, so long can every man and woman
hear of affliction: yea, and commend the persons that suffered affliction, as
we see at this day. All men be contented to hear of ye death of Christ, We can
praise other men for well doing, but we be loath to put it in experience our
selves.
of ye martyrdom of his Saints, and of the affliction and imprisonment of his
godly members: but when the same or like should be experimented and practiced
by our selves, we will none of it, we refuse it, and we abhor it: yea, so
much, that where Christ, and those Saints (whose names be most common and usual
in our mouths,) suffered the vilest death that could be devised: we will not
suffer as much as the loss of a friend, or the deceivable goods of this
unstable and transitory world: so that in the generality we be very godly,
and can commend al godly martyrs and sufferers for Gods sake: but (alas) in the
particularitie we be very ungodly, and will follow no martyr, nor suffer at
al. Also, as long as we be without danger for Christ's sake, we can speak of
great dangers, and say, that we will suffer all extremity and cruelty: but
when it comes to pass, that an enemy to God and his word shall say in
deed, Forsake thy religion, or else thou shall die (as Christ said unto Peter,
John. 21.
When thou art old, an other shall girde thee, and lead thee whether thou
would not:) then a little threatening of an other man, stark quayleth this
man that said he would suffer al troubles: Matthew. 26.
as Peter said, If he should loose his life, he would not refuse his master,
but when an other, yea, a poor maid but asked him, Whether he were one of
Christ's servants, and made no mention at al of loss of life or goods: he
would not hazard him self to bear so much as the name of Christ's disciple.
Thus we see the vileness and frailty of our own nature, how weak we be to
suffer in deed, when of necessity we must bear the cross, and can by no
means avoid it. How troublesome also it is both to body and soul, this Psalm
and place of the scripture declares: and therefore in the end of these
temptations is put, Sela. A word that makes as it were, an outcry against the
corrupt nature of man for sin. As S. Paul said: Romans 7.
I know that there dwells in my flesh no good thing. To admonish therefore
man thereof in deed, and to show him his own damnation, the word is put
there to cause the reader or hearer of the place, to mark and bewail the
wretchedness thereof. As the Prophet him self does in the next verse.

The fourth part.
How a man takes consolation in the time of his trouble.

10 And I said, This is my infirmity: but these things the right hand of God
can change. HEre is life and death, and the occasions of both meruellously set
forth. He said that it was his infirmity that caused him to question and
doubt of Gods mercy. Wherein he has disburdened God, and charged him self
with sin and doubtfulnesse. And so much al men see and find in them selves,
that damnation is of our selves: Osee. 13.
and salvation only of God. There is also to be noted in thi^ infirmity, yt
it occupies not only the body: but also the soul. For he says, These
cogitations and questions (as touching the doubtfulnesse of Gods mercy) were
the devises and acts of his mind: so that both his body and soul were
comfortless. And good cause why: for in both of them were sin and
abomination against God. And of these two parts of man, the body and the
spirit, came these dubitations of God and of his promises. The which fruits of
corruption, engender (except sin be forgiven) eternal death. Romans 8.
And here is the wisdom of the flesh seen to be very enimitie unto God,
working continually the breach of Gods commandments, and the destruction of
man's salvation, as much as lies in it. But in the second part of the verse is
life, and the occasion thereof: which is a sure trust that God can remove
despair, and put in place thereof, The occasion of man's help is Gods right hand
faith, hope, and sure confidence. And the occasion of this help is not man's
merits, but the right hand of God: yt is to say, Gods power inclined to save
man by mercy. Of this doctrine be certain things to be marked of every reader
and hearer of this Psalm. First, in this verse is declared how man takes
consolation in time of his trouble, which is ye 4. part of the Psalm, and in
the same part the Psalm ends. He says, It was his infirmity, that made him
to question and demand in his spirit so doubtful things of God, and of his
promises. Whereof we learn, that consolation begins where sorrow and
heaviness is first felt: for the spirit can take no solace by Gods promises,
until such time as it feels by Gods law, how sinful it is for the
transgression thereof. Prou. 18.
Therefore Solomon says: The just man is the first accuser of him self. And so
does the Prophet Asaph in this place confess, that these cogitations and
profound thoughts against God, came of his own infirmity and sin. And the
knowledge of a man's own wickedness from the bottom of the heart, although it
be a shame to speak or remember the vileness of sin, wherewith sinner has
most grievously transgressed Gods commandments: yet is this knowledge and
confession of our sin and iniquity very necessary, and is (as it were) an
induction to the remission thereof: True confession of sin is in manner an
induction to the remission thereof.
as it is to be seen in this Prophet, and in the Prophet David. For here is
first confessed, that all sins in him came of his own infirmity: and all
consolation against sin, came of Gods right hand. And the Prophet David
says, when he was in like trouble for sin: Psalm. 74. Psalm. 32.
I determined (says he) to confess against my self, mine own iniquity: and
thou Lord forgauest the wickedness of my sin. But here is to be noted in
this, that the confession of sin is (as it were) an induction and beginning
of consolation: that confession of sin is not the beginning of consolation,
except he that makes the confession be assured in his heart of Gods promises
in Christ, that of mercy in Christ's death, his sins be forgiven: as ye may
see in these two Prophets. The one said: It is mine infirmity the works
this doutfulnes in my soul. And the other said: I determined to condemn my
self of sin.

Thus far it is death, and an increase of diffidence in Gods promises, and an
induction to desperation, to feel sin, to bewail sin, to speak of sin,
and to remember sin. But whereas knowledge and confession has a certeintie
and assurance of Gods forgiveness annexed unto it, there is confession and
knowledge of sin, partly a beginning of consolation against sin. Romans 7.
I call it partly, or as an occasion, because first of all, 1. Samu. 15.
God by his word, or by his punishments, 2. Samu. 12
through the operation of the holy Ghost, opens the soul of the sinner, to
see and know his sin: also to tremble and quake at sin, rather then to hate
and abhor sin. And from these principles and originalls, comes the humble
and lowly confession of sin, not to man, but unto God: except it be such an
open sin done against man, as man knows of that the sin is committed
against. Matt. 5. 18.
Then must the offender of man also, reconcile him self to man that is
offended, Jacob. 5.
according to the commandment of God. Luke. 7.
Therefore we must mark what confession and acknowledging of our own
infirmities is. For every confession is not acceptable before God, nor the
beginning of consolation: as these examples declare. Judas said openly in the
face of the court (where Christ our Savior Matthew. 27.
was arraigned) that he had offended in betraying innocent blood: Mark. 15.
but there followed no faith nor hope of forgiveness: So that for lack of
faith in Christ's blood, desperation and hanging of him self ensued his
confession. Whereby it is evident, that confession of sin without faith, is
nothing worth, but a testimony of a desperate man's damnation.

King Saul, 1. Samu. 15.
after long impulsion by the Prophet Samuel, was brought to confess that he
had offended in preserving alive Agag king of ye Amalekites, and the fattest of
his cattle. I have offended (says Saul:) for I have broken and transgressed
the commandment of God. Psalm. 77.
But what followed? Gods right hand can remedy my sin, Psalm. 32.
as this Prophet Asaph says? or, God has forgiven the iniquity of my sin,
Luke. 18.
as David said? er else: God be merciful unto me a sinner, as the Publicane
said? No, but this ensues: Sual would have Samuel to bear his sin.
I Pray thee (says Saul to Samuel) bear thou my sin. In this man's
confession of sin, was not the beginning of consolation, but of more sorrows:
for his heaviness from that day more and more increased, 1. Samu. 31.
with his sins: until he was slain. Matthew. 9.
And the cause thereof was this. He would that Samuel being but a man, Luke. 5.
should have pardoned his sin: Mark. 2.
whereas none can do it but God, as it is notably to be seen in king David.
For when he said, he had offended the Lord, Nathan the Prophet said: 2.
Samu. 12
And God has taken away thy sins. Wherein is declared, that the minister can
but pronounce to the sinner, that God in Christ forgiueth sin. So that we
see Judas confession of sin was nothing worth, because he found no faith nor
trust for the remission thereof: and Saules confession was of no valor,
because he trusted and desired consolation at man's hand, and not at Gods.

Yet in Saules confession was some thing good, in that he confessed (although
it were long first and in manner wrested out of his mouth by the Prophet
Samuel) his fault to God: and in that point he did as David did, Psalm 51.
who said: I have offended the Lord. 2 Samu. 12.
And this is to be noted, Esai 63.
because now adays men be taught to confess their sins to the Saints
Ecclesi 9.
departed, 3. Reg. 8.
that know not what the outward works of men be upon the earth: Papisticall
confession.
much less the inward and sinful cogitation of the heart. So that in this
part, the Papists confession is worse then Saules: and in the other part it is
like. 1. Samu. 15
For as Saul trusted to the merits of Samuel, and would have him to bear his
sin: Oh blasphemy.
so do the people trust, that the Priests hand upon their head, and the
penance enjoined them by the Priests, shall be a clean remission and full
satisfaction for all their sin: but before God, their sins be as much
forgiven them as Saules were, that is to say, nothing at all.

But whereas sin is known and confessed from the very heart, 1. John. 1.
unto God, although it be a bitter thing and also a shameful thing, Psalm. 130.
to feel and bear Gods displeasure for sin, the burden whereof is very death,
and more grievous then death it self: yet whereas confidence and trust in the
mercy of God is annexed with it, there follows great consolation and comfort:
As it is to be seen in this Prophet that spoke with a strong faith boldly: The
righthand of God ca^ change these things. So that the latter part of this
verse has more comfort, then the first part has discomfort. And it is a
plain doctrine, that although ye sins of man be many and horrible: Esai. 1.
yet be they fewer and less in estimation many thousand foldes, then Gods
mercies. Death is declared in the first part of the verse, in this, that man's
infirmity is not only sinful in body and soul, but also doutful of Gods
mercy and holy promises: Yet in the second part by grace is set forth life,
and clean deliverance from the tyranny of the devil, the servitude of sin,
the accusation of the law, and the infirmity of nature, by the strong and
mighty power of God, whose mercy in Christ is always ready to help poor
afflicted and troubled sinners. Ezech. 18.
After this confession of sin, and the great confidence that the prophet had
in God for his mighty power and mercies sake, 1. John. 1.
that was both able by power and ready with will, to help and remedy this
troubled spirit, and great adversities of the Prophet: he goes forth in the
consolation, and takes yet more and more of Gods benefits, used in times
toward such as were afflicted, after this sort.

11 I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to my mind thy wonders of
old time.

12 I will think also of thy works, and my talking shall be of thy doings.

13 Thy way (o God) is holy: who is so great a God as our God.

14 Thou art the God that does wonders, and have declared thy power amongst
people.

15 Thou have mightily delivered thy people, even the sons of Jacob and
Joseph. Sela.

16 The waters saw thee, o God: the waters saw thee and were afraid: the
deapthes also were troubled.

17 The clouds powered out water, the air thundered, and thine arrows went
abroad.

18 The voice of thy thunder was heard round about, the lightenings shone upon
the gound, the earth was moved and shook withal.

19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

20 Thou leadest thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Of these means how men take consolation in adversity, that the Prophet now
makes mention of: first we learn, what difference is between the
consideration of Gods works advisedly and by faith: and the consideration of
Gods works rashly and without faith. The which diversity is to be seen in
this Prophet. For the one part, as touching the remembering of Gods works out
of faith and in faith, he spoke before in the second verse, and in the fourth
verse, how that he considered the works and old doings of the Lord when he was
troubled. But, as ye have heard, because his spirit was in a doubtfulnesse and
mamering upon the certeintie of Gods doings: he felt no consolation thereof,
but much heaviness and anguish of mind. For those demaundes: Will God absent
himself for ever? Will he be no more merciful, and such like heavy and
doubtful complaints, could never proceed but from a sorrowful and much
troubled conscience. But now, after that Gods spirit has wrought in his spirit
this assurance and judgment, that God can in him change the conditions of his
miseries (as ye may see,) he makes no more complaint of doubtfulnesse, neither
remembers any more the fearfulness of his conscience: but goes forth with
repetition and rehearsal of all things comfortably, how that God in time past
help troubled spirits and afflicted personages, that put their trust in him.
So that of this we learn, that whosoever has a sure faith in God, takes
consolation of Gods word and works. And such as have not first true faith in
God, cannot in the spirit receive comfort of Gods word or works. Outwardly
men may meruel at God and his worker, but inwardly it eases not the
heaviness, nor yet quieteth the grudge of conscience.

Wherefore, Exhortation to prayer.
it behooves us all, that we pray earnestly unto GOD, to give us faith to
believe his word and works, when we hear, read, or see them: For the word and
works of God do nothing comfort the unfaithful, Esaie. 65.
as we may see by the Scripture: where God says, Romans 10.
He stretched forth his hand al day long to a people that believed not: Esaie.
6.
for such as have ears and hear not, John. 12.
eyes and see not, be rather the worse for Gods word and works then the
better. Ye shall see where the spirit of David was replenished with faith, he
was in assured and ascerteined of Gods present help, that he said he would not
fear, although a thousand men environed and compassed him round about: Psalm.
3.
No, he would not fear, though he should walk in the shadow of death. Psalm.
23.
At another time, when faith quailed and waxed faint, he was trembling in his
spirit, and fearful in his body: as we may see when he felt his spirit
wax faint, he said: Psalm. 6. 38.
My soul is troubled very sore, and my bones be weakened. And in other of his
Psalms he shows, Psalm. 42. 43
that his soul was very heavy and comfortless, and could take no consolation.

Also when the spirit is assured of Gods grace, then the eyes cannot look
upon any work of God. but the mind takes by the contemplation and sight
thereof, unspeakable consolation: As David declares in his Psalms, and
says, He would see the heavens the works of Gods fingers, and would mark how
one day was an induction to an other: and how the heavens praised the Lord.
Psalm. 8. 19. 148.


At an other time, when the consolation and life of the spirit was over whelmed
with troubles, he could not see at all with his eyes: but cried and complained
that he was stark blind. Psalm. 38.
And also in that meruellous Psalm in number 88. Psalm. 88
whereas prayer is made to be delivered from the horror and feeling of sin,
the Prophet says, that his eyes waxed dim and blind. The same is to be
seen likewise in the crosses and afflictions that God sends. As long as true
faith and confidence remains in the heart, all troubles be welcome and
thankfully taken: as we read. When Job had news that his goods and chidren
were taken from him, Job. 1. 2.
in manner soudeinly, he most patiently said: God gave them, and God has taken
them away, as God would so it is done. But when faith quailed, and the spirit
was troubled, then followed these impatient words: Job. 6.
I would my sin were laid in one balance, and my pain in an other. As
though God had laid more upon him, then he had deserved. When the spirit was
quieted, for all his poverty and nakedness, he rejoiced and was contented
with his birth and coming into the world, and also with the state in the world
appointed unto him by God, saying: Job. 2.
Naked I came out of my mothers belly, and naked I shall depart hence again.
But when faith fainted, then came out these words: Job. 3.
The day, the night, and the time be cursed wherein I was borne. With many more
horrible words, as the text declares. So that we see, whereas Gods spirit
wants, there is no learning nor consolation to be had of any thing: as it is
opened in this Psalm, in that at the first time the Prophet recorded Gods
works, and was so troubled in his mind, that he occupied his cogitations this
way: Will God be no more merciful? Has God shut up his mercy in his ire? But
now in the second record of Gods works, he begins his entrance clean
contrary, and says: Gods right hand can change his sorrow, and turn his
heaviness into mirth. And upon this ground and sure hope of Gods promises, he
proceeds forth to a consideration and deep record of Gods factes, in this
sort: I will remember the works of the Lord, etc.

In this verse and in the next following it, be contained three kind of words:
remembrance, meditation and speech. By the first we learn that it profits
nothing to read or hear Gods word, except we remember it, and bear it away
with us. By the next we learn that it avails us not, to learn and bear the
word of God in remembrance, except by meditation and thinking upon it, we
understand what it means. And by the third we learn, that neither the
remembrance it, nor the understanding thereof profits, except we teach and
instruct other in the same, of whom we have charge, if we may.

Now to consider further, we see how the Prophet begins with this word (
Remembrance,) whereof it appears that he had learned before out of Gods word,
Gods nature toward penitent sinners to forgive them: and toward wilful,
obstinate, and impenitent sinners to be a just judge to punish them. Here is
the ignorance of all people condemned, that never learn to know Gods word in
sickness, nor in health: but when they be troubled or sick, they send for such
as they think and fancy have learned and do remember how Gods word does
comfort in adversity. And then, if he that is sent for be not learned in Gods
word, he cannot remember how God is wont to comfort the troubled or sick: then
all that ever the sick man hears of an ignorant comforter or counselor, is
as clean void of consolation or counsel, as though he had never sent for a
counselor or comforter. For no man can have more of another, then the other
has himself, which is neither knowledge, counsel, nor consolation out of
Gods word. Therefore he is not able to give knowledge, consolation, nor comfort
to another.

If the Prophet Asaph, had been as the most part of people now a days be,
that fall sick and into many kinds of trouble, and had sent for an ignorant
fool, (which commonly is called a ghostly father,) he had been in as good
taking as these wretched souls be, that being comfortless seek comfort
where none is to be had, seek knowledge where none is, and seek counsel
where ignorance abounds. Let all men therefore remember this verse, that when
the Prophet was in trouble, he remembered the wisdom and meruellous works of
God: (for he knew them before:) so let all men and women learn, before they
come into trouble, a true knowledge of God, that in the time of trouble they
may remember it to their consolation. But now to the second word, where he
says, He will meditate in all the works of God.

Here is another notable doctrine, that neither the learning of Gods word, nor
the remembrance thereof profits any thing, except it be understood and
applied to the use that God has appointed it for. And here be two sorts of
people wonderfully condemned. The one sort be those, that for custom or
bondage to their profession, do learn without the book a great part of the
Scripture: or else by daily use in singing or saying their service (as it is
called) they learn to sing and say a great part of the Bible. But this
avails nothing, nor they understand it not in the sense and meaning that the
holy ghost appointed it for: nor perchance the Grammatical construction
thereof. And these remembrances of Gods word, be nothing but lip labor, and
honoring of God with the mouth, Esaie. 29.
but the heart is far away: which before God is in vain, Matthew. 15.
and of no estimation. The other sort of people be such as profess the
Gospel, that have learned much, and can remember much, but follow very little:
so that they be nothing the better for it.

The third word is, that the Prophet says, He will speak of God and his works,
as outwardly and inwardly he remembers them, and with his spirit does
meditate them: as it is likewise the part and duty of all Christian men so to
do. For as they believe in the heart to justice: Romans 10.
so will they confess it to salvation, as S. Paul says to the Romans.

Here in this word be three sorts of people condemned. Three sorts of people
condemned.
The one that will not confess and teach the truth for fear of loosing their
advantage. The other will not confess and teach the truth for sluggishnesse
and sloth. And the third will not confess and teach the truth for timiditie
and fear.

In the first sort be such as know doctrines for the soul, or medicines for
the body, and yet because they get gain thereby, they would not have too many
know thereof, lest their own gains should be the less. As we fee, such a one
as knows a good method and order to teach, would be loathe it should be
common, because his estimation and gain, (as he thinks) should diminish and
decrease. The excellent Physician would not have his cunning common, least many
men, as cunning as he, should part his gains amongst them.

The second sort of men be those that come to great livings by their learning,
Note well.
and when they have the reward of learning, they teach no more, as bishops and
ministers of the Church: whom the Prophet calls dumb dogs that cannot
bark, Esaie. 56.
their mouths be so choked with the bones of bishoppricks and benefices. I
speak of such as know the truth and love it, and not of such as neither know
it nor love it. For although those men speak but seldom, yet it is too much:
for better it were never to speak, then to speak falsely.

The third sort be our Nichodemes, Nichodemes.
that can speak of Christ in the night, or to their friends, but openly they
will confess nothing with the mouth, nor do any thing outwardely for fear of
the world, that should sound to Gods glory. And these men be assured they
shall have their reward: Matthew. 10.
that Christ will deny them before his father which is in heaven. Of this we
learn wherein our profession consists. Wherein does our profession consist.
First, to learn Gods word. Secondarily, to bear it in our heart and
remembrance. Thirdly, to understand it. And fourthly, to speak of it to the
glory of God, and the edifying of our neighbors. And Gods word this ways
used, shall keep us humble and lowely in prosperity, and patient and strong
in adversity. But in these two verses be more words necessary to be
considered, if we will take consolation in adversity. The first, I will (says
the prophet) remember the works of the Lord, and that of old time, (or from
the beginning.) The second, I will think also of all the works of the Lord, etc.

In this that the Prophet says, We ought not to be ignorant of any book in
the scripture.
He will remember the works of the Lord of old time, or from the beginning,
we learn that it is expedient to know, or at the least way,) not to be
ignorant of any book in the scripture. For where as we find not consolation
in the one, we may find it in the other. And where he says He will remember
all ye works of the Lord (meaning as many as the scripture makes mention of:)
we be instructed, that we cannot see these works for our erudition, neither yet
give ye almighty God thanks, except we learn them from one of his books to
the other. And here is to be noted, that seeing we be bound to know and to be
thankful for all the works of God contained in the scripture, we be much in
danger, as well for ignorance as unthankfulness, that we know not the
principal works of our own creation or redemption. We be therefore
admonished, to have books to read the works of God, and to be diligent to ask
better learned then we be, what Gods works do mean. As the children by Gods
law us bound to ask the parents, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. 31.
and the parents bound by the same to teach them: then shall both fathers and
children find comfort and consolation against all temptations, in the time of
trouble and heaviness. As we see this man's remedy (by ye spirit of God)
rises from recording, meditating, and speaking of Gods word and works.

Here has this Prophet meruellously opened, how a man in trouble comes to
consolation and comfort. First, that the spirit and heart of man must have
such strong faith, as may credit Gods power, and also his good will: and
believe that God both can and will for his truethes sake, help the troubled
conscience. Therefore Solomon gives a godly and necessary commandment:
Proverb. 4
Keep thy heart with all circumspection, for of it proceeds life. So did
David, when the Prophet Nathan had made him afraid for the murder of Vrias,
and the adultery with Bersaba, his conscience was in great anguishe and fear,
and among other things that he prayed for to God, Psalm. 51.
he desired that God would create and make him a new heart: that is to wit,
to give him such a steadfast and burning faith, that in Christ his sinful
heart might be purged. And secondarily he prays, to have so right and sure a
spirit, that should not doubt of Gods savor toward him. Thirdly, that God
would always preserve his holy spirit with the heart regenerated, that from
time to time, the heart might be ruled in obedience toward God. Fourthly, he
prays to be lead with a willing spirit, that quietly and patiently he may
obey God in adversities, without impatience or grudge against God. And, where
as this knowledge and feeling of the favor of God is in the spirit, there
follows recording, and remembrance of Gods works, meditating and thinking
upon heavenly things: and the tongue ready also to speak forth the glory of
God, to Gods honor and praise, and to the edifying of Gods people and
congregation, after this sort.

13 Thy way oh God is in holiness: who is so great a God, as God, even our
God? Here is a consolation much worthy to be learned and received of all
troubled men: and it is this, To understand and perceive, Consolation.
that all the doings and factes of Almighty God be righteous, although many
times the flesh judges, and the tongue speaks the contrary, that God
should be too severe, and punish too extremely. As though he did it rather of
a desire to punish, then to correct or amend the person punished. As we see by
Jobs words, that wished his sins laid in one balance, Job. 6.
and his punishment in another balance: as though God punished more extremely
then justly. The same it seems king David also felt, when he said: Psalm.
13.
How long Lord will thou forget me, for ever? With like bitter speeches in
the scripture: complaining of Gods justice, judgment and severity. Ierem. 20.
The same we read of Jeremy the Prophet, He spoke Gods word truly, and yet
there happened unto him wonderful great adversities: the terror whereof made
him curse the day that he was borne in. And doubtless, when he said, Why
haste thou deceived me Lord? he thought, God was rather too extreme, then
just in his punishment, Passur.
to afflicte him in adversity, and to suffer Passur the high Priest and his
enemy to be in quiet and tranquillity.

This prophet Asaph was before in great trouble, as ye heard), and especially
of the mind, that self not a sure trust and confidence in Gods mercy: and
thought of al extremities that to be (as it is in deed) the greatest, a mind
desperate and doubtful of Gods mercy: yet now he says, God is holy in his
way, and all that he does is right and just.

We learn hereby, that the pot can not say to the Potter, Ierem. 19.
Why have thou made me after this sort? Neither may the mortal man, Romans 9.
in whom is nothing but sin, Potter.
quarrel with the Lord and say: What layest thou upon me? But think, that
although he had made us both blind, lame, and as deformed as monsters: yet had
he made us better then ever we deserved. And in case he laid all the troubles
of the world upon one man: yet are they less then one sin of man does
deserve. Thus has the Prophet learned now and felt, and says: The doings of
God be holy and right, and there is none to be compared unto him: and shows
the cause why none is to be compared unto God. In the declaration whereof, he
continues seven verses, and so makes an end of the Psalm.

The first cause why he says none is to be compared unto God: is this.

14 Thou art the Lord that does wonders, and have declared thy power amongst
people. First he notes generally that God is the doer of wonders, God is the
doer of wonders.
and miracles: and afterward he shows, wherein God has wrought these
miracles. Of this we learn three doctrines. The one, that some men know
generally, Three doctrines.
that God works all things meruellously. The second, that other some know
that God works in some men meruellously. The third, that other also know
that God works in themselves meruellously.

Of the first sort be such as know by Gods works generally, that God has, and
does dispose all things upon the earth, and nothing has his beginning nor
being but of God: Romans 1.
of whom Saint Paul speaks to the Romans, that by Gods works they knew
God, and yet glorified him not. Of the second sort be such, as more
particularly know and speak of Gods miracles: Genes. 7.
as such be, that read how God of his singular favor preserved Noah and his
family, and drowned all the world besides: Exodus 14.
how he brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, and delivered the people
from the captivity of Babylon, with such like: and yet when they be in
troubles themselves, these meruellous works and mercies showed unto others,
cannot comfort themselves. Of the third sort be such, as know generally the
meruellous works of God, and perceive that in some God is particularly
merciful: and from some he finds it in him self singularly the mercy of
GOD, and from the remembrance of Gods benefits unto others he finds in him
self the working of Gods mercy, and finds in his conscience such comfort in
deed, that he remembers others before him, that had of Gods mercies in their
time of troubles.

The most part of men consider generally, Note.
that God is the worker of miracles: The true Christians take consolation
themselves of gods miracles wrought upon others.
the common sort of Christians consider, that God has wrought miracles
particularly upon others: but the very elects and Christians in deed, see the
miracles of God wrought particularly upon others, and take consolation
singularly of Gods mercies themselves. As we see this Prophet meruellously
declares Gods wonders, and puts the general working of Gods miracles
between a singular working of wonders: and a particular working of wonders.

The generality is this: Thou art God that does wonders, and have declared thy
power amongst people. The singularity and particularitie of Gods working of
wonders, is the one before, and the other behind. The singularity is in this,
that he perceived that is was his own infirmity, that made him doubt of Gods
promises: and yet Gods singular grace made him singularly feel and perceive
that God singularly would be good unto him. The particularitie is in this, that
he says: With Gods right hand God delivered the posterity of Jacob and Joseph
Jacob and Joseph.
from the servitude of Egypt, etc. The way to consider the meruellous works of
God is a profitable consideration and sight of them, as well to know them, as to
be ye better for them. For there is no man can take commodity or profit by
Gods goodness showed unto a multitude, except he singularly receive gain
thereby him self. As we see, when a whole multitude was fed meruellously with a
few loaves and fewer fishes, John. 6.
(almost five thousand people,) he taught the consolation and health of man's
soul in his own blood: Every man must believe for himself.
but none was the better for it, but such as believed every man for him self
that which Christ spoke. The miracles and merciful help of Christ unto
others, had nothing profited the poor woman of Canaan: Matthew. 15.
except she her self had been partaker of the same. And as it is in the
works of God, that do comfort the man afflicted: so is it in the works of
God, that bring men into heaviness and sorrow for sin.

Generally, the word of God rebukes sin, and calls sinners to
repentance: particularly it shows unto us, how that David, Peter, Marie
Magdalen and others repented. But to us those sorrows and repentance do no
good: Repentance.
except we every man singularly, repent and be sorrowful for his sins. For
it is not another man's sickness that makes me sick, Notable doctrine.
nor another man's health that makes me whole: no more is any other man's
repentance my repentance, or any other man's faith my faith: but I must repent,
and I must believe my self to feel sorrowfulness for sin by the law, and
remission thereof by faith in Christ. So that every private man must be in
repentance, sorry with the true repentaunt sorry: and faithful, with the
true faithful. For as God himself is toward man: so be all his works and
promises. Note.
For look to whom God is merciful, to the same be all his promises
comfortable: and to whom God is severe and rigorous, to the same Gods
threateninges be terrible, and his justice fearful. As king David says,
Psalm. 18.
With the holy, thou will be holy: and with the innocent; thou will be
innocent: with the chosen, thou will be chosen: and with the perverse, thou will be perverse.

Such as follow virtue and godliness, To whom God is merciful, and to whom
severe.
God increases with gifts and benefits: and such as have wicked manners, and
by false doctrine decline from the truth, in those God is severe and sharp. And
except such persons repent, God will spoil them from all judgment of truth:
and being blind and destitute of knowledge, permit them to the power and
dominion of most filthy lusts, and abominable desires. So that such as would
not love the beauty and excellency of virtue, shall tumble and wallowe
themselves like swine, in the filth and vomit of sin: of the which
abominations and just judgments of God, Romans ^.
Saint Paul speaks in the Epistle to the Romans. For this is to be noted,
look as every man is: even so he thinks of God. And as the good and godly
man thinks well of God: so does he evil and wicked man think evil of God.

Some think that man and all worldly things be ruled and governed by God,
with great justice and inscrutable wisdom, A wicked judgment of Gods doings.
with all mercy and favor. Others think that GOD rules not this world, and
worldly things: and in case they think he do, yet do they condemn his
administration and rule, of injustice and parcialitie: because God does as it
pleases himself, and not as man would have him do. And upon these
diversities of judgments in men's minds: God is to the godly, merciful: and
to the ungodly, severe and rigorous.

If the spirit of man judge truly and godly of him, by and by the spirit of
man shall perceive and feel the heavenly influence of Gods spirit, stirring
and impelling his spirit to all virtue and goodness. Oh horrible blindness.
If the spirit of man be destitute of spirit of God, and judge peruersly and
wickedly, the spirits of man shall feel the lack of Gods spirit, and true
judgment, to blind the eyes of his mind, and cast him self into al
abomination and sin: as the iniquity of the man justly has deserved. Of
the which thing comes this, that as the virtue and godliness of godly men
daily increases: even so does the iniquity and abomination of the ungodly
also increase. Lokewhat preeminence God obteineth of man: the same place has
man with God.
And look what place and preeminence God obteineth with any man: in the same
place and preeminence is the man with God. And such as do godly after Gods
word, honor and reverence the almighty God: judging aright of Gods might and
providence: they give most humble thanks unto the mercy of God: that alone,
and none but he, can teach or instruct the mind of man in true knowledge, nor
incline his will to godly doings, nor inflame the soul with all her powers to
the desire and fervent love of godliness and virtue. As we see by this
prophet Asaph in this place, that as long as his spirit, wanted the help of
Gods spirit, it judged doubtfully of Gods mercy and promises: but, when the
spirit of God had exiled and banished doubtfulnesse, and placed this strong
fortress of confidence, A strong fortress.
( The right hand of GOD can change this my woeful and miserable estate,)
with the judgment and feeling thereof, he was rapte and stricken with a
meruellous love of Gods wonders: and repeated them with great joy and
consolation, what God had done generally to all men: after that, what he had
done to some particular men, and private nations: naming Jacob and Joseph, whose
offspring and succession he brought out of the land of Egypt, as it follows
in the Psalm.

15 Thou have mightily delivered thy people, even the sons of Jacob and
Joseph. Sela. Of this verse we learn two consolations. The one, that every
Christian troubled, may see his elders, and also his betters troubled: Two
consolations.
not that it is a comfort to a man that is afflicted, to see another in
trouble: but to mark that God loved none so well, but in this world he sent
trouble unto, Whom God loved he always corrected.
and excepted not his dear son. Wherefore, it is a consolation to the
afflicted, to be made like unto the godly fathers, (that were before his time)
by tribulation: and to remember, that although all Christian men be not brought
under the captivity of Pharao in Egypt, Every Christian member has an Egypt
and a Babylon.
nor under Nabuchodonozer in Babylon: yet there is an Egypt and a Babylon for
every Christian member: that is to say, the captivity of sin, the bondage of
the flesh, the severity of the law, the danger of the world, the enimitie
of Infidels, the treason of dissembling friends, the wickedness of civil and
diuellishe ordinances, the dissimulation of hypocrites, the perjury of
inco^stant persons, the breach of faithful promises, the inconstancy of the
weak, ye cruelty of Papists, the love of man, and the hatred of God, with
many others: as ye ignorance of Gods laws, rebellion of the heart against it,
frowardness of the will to consent unto it, diffidence and mistrust of Gods
mercy, boldness to sin in the time of health, faintness and mistrust of
the remission thereof in sickness, love of vice and sin, hatred of virtue and
godliness, souden falling from grace, slow rising unto it again,
lothsomnesse to die mortally, readiness to live wickedly, sorrowfulness to
forsake this world, great delight to use it evil whiles we have it, loathe to
seek heavenly things, glad to seek earthly things, nothing feeling the
poverty and trouble of the soul, always grudging at the poverty and trouble
of the body, with innumerable other captiuities that every Christian is
entangled withal, as every man may judge by his own life.

The next consolation is to see the truth of Gods help promised to all men,
when they be troubled, to have been declared opened, and verified in others,
in time past. The greatest consolation in trouble.
For, this is the greatest consolation that can be to any man, in trouble, or
in sickness: when he is assured of such help, and such medicines, as never
were used, but did help the afflicted, and heal the sick. Now, against all
the troubles of man, and also against all the sickness of man. God has
promised his present and helping mercy: the which medicine and help never
failed, but did help as many as put their trust therein. Therefore does this
Prophet Asaphe, establish and assure himself of Gods help, against his
grievous temptations and troubles that he suffered, by recording that his
greefes were no greater, nor his troubles more dangerous then Jacobs,
Iosephes, and their posterities: nor yet so grievous. From the greater to the
lesser.
In so much that, seeing the mercy of God could help the greater troubles in
his predecessors: he could help and ease the less in him that was presently
troubled. And being so assured of Gods help, he spoke at the end of this
verse, ( Sela:) Sela.
as though he had said. It is most true that God can help and comfort me: as he
help and comforted my forefathers. And for the better consolation and more
firm assurance, he shows, how meruellously he did help the posterite of
Jacob and Joseph, after this sort.

16 The waters saw thee, oh God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid: the
depthes also were troubled. In this that he says, The waters were afraid,
when they saw God. Unto insensible things be attributed sensible qualities.
First the manner of speech in the Scripture is to be noted, that attributes
unto insensible things, sensible qualities: as in this place is attributed unto
the water sight and fear, whereas in deed properly the water cannot see nor
fear. But, when the Scripture uses any such phrase or speech, there is to be
marked diverse doctrines of edifying. Three doctrines.
First of GOD, then insensible creatures, and thirdly of man, for whose sake
the Scripture sometime speaks unto insensible creatures, as though they were
sensible, and works miracles in them for the instruction and amendment of
sensible and reasonable man.

The learning touching God is, The first doctrine touching God.
that he works his will, and uses his creatures, as it seems unto his
wisdom inscrutable most meet and convenient: as here he troubles and
alters the condition of the seas and waters. Gene. 1.
These waters were appointed by God, in the third day of the creation, to be in
one place, and was called The Sea, a pleasant element, and a beautiful thing
to see: and God said, It was good, as the effect thereof shows in deed: for
it nourishes the earth with necessary moisture, by privy veins and secret
passages, secretly passing through the earth. And when the floudes, that do
moisture the earth, have done their office, they return into their old
lodging, the Sea again: from whence rises the matter of showers and rain to
moisture from above, that floods beneath cannot be conveyed unto. And it
serves for transporting the necessaries of one realm to the other, quietly
suffering the ships of pass with great gain and pleasure. These and many more
commodities God works by this insensible creature, when it is calm and
nauigable: but when he moves it with his winds and tempests, it is so
horrible in it self, that no man may, without peril and death, travel within
it, so raging and fearful is that pleasant element of tho water, when God
moves it. It has (by Gods appointment) his time of calm, and time of storm:
time to profit men, Time.
and time to undo men: time to be a refuge for men in the days of peril, and
time to be a grave and sepulcher for men: time to conioyne strange nations
together, and time to separate them again: as it pleases the creator
Almighty God to appoint and direct it.

The doctrine that touches the insensible creature it self, The second
doctrine touching the insensible creature.
is: that it can be no longer calm, nor any longer troubled, then it pleases
the heavenly governor to dispose it. And here is to be noted, against such men
as attribute storms and calmes to Fortune: Psalm. 29.
whereas only the voice of the Lord moves tempests, and sends fair
weather. It is also a doctrine against all men, that do think the waters and
seas may be moved, and cease at their own pleasure: which is contrary to
this Prophets doctrine, Psalm. 77.
that says: The waters saw the Lord and were afraid. So that their trouble
rises from the commandment of the Lord, and they cannot do what they lust,
Psalm. 114.
but what God bids them to do. It is godly set forth afterward in
another Psalm, wherein the passage of the children of Israel is mentioned: as
it is in this Psalm.

The doctrine touching man, The third doctrine touching man.
in this verse, is a declaration of man's obstinacy and stubbernesse. The
insensible creature the water, that lacks both life and reason, at every
commandment be as the Lord their maker commands them to be. With every
tempest they be troubled, and with every calm so plain and quiet: that it
seems rather a stablished land, then a variable sea. Oh rebellion of man.
But let God send his word unto man, and the contents thereof threaten the
tempest of all tempests, eternal death, hell fire, and Gods everlasting
displeasure: yet man will not hear nor see them, nor yet be moved any thing at
all. Insensible creatures shall be a condemnation unto man.
Or let God gently and favorably offer his mercies unto man, and by his word
exhort him never so much to repentance: it is for the most part in vain.
Therefore God by his Prophets Moses and Esaie, called Heaven and Earth to
witness against man's stubbernesse and hardness of heart.

There is also out of this trouble of the water, this doctrine to be learned:
how to receive consolation, and how to learn fear by the creatures of God
that bear no life, and yet be thus troubled. Consolation in this sort: When
the penitent man that suffers affliction and trouble, sees insensible
things moved and unquieted that never offended, Mark most diligently.
he shall judge the less wonder at his own trouble. When he sees that a
sinner, and wretched offender of God, is punished, he shall learn fear. When
he sees God does punish his creatures that never offended, for the sin of
man: what punishment is man worthy to have, that is nothing but sin it
self? And what fear should this bring into Christian men's consciences, The
devil and man be only disobedient unto God.
to know that no creature deserves punishment, no creature disobeyeth God:
but the devil and man? Oh what man or woman can with faith look upon the least
flowers of the field, and not hate himself? In Summer time, when men shall see
the meadows and gardens so meruellously apparelled with flowers of every
color, so that he shall not be able to discern, whether their beauty better
please the eye, or their sweet savor the nose: Oh take heed miserable man.
what may they learn, in thinking of themselves (as the truth is) that there
is nothing in them but filth and sin, that most heynously stincke before the
face of God? And when man shall perceive that flowers vade, Consolation.
and loose both beauty to the eye, and sweet savor to the nose, that never
transgressed: what may miserable man think he is worthy to loose yt is
nothing but sin, and ever offends? Again, when man shall perceive that God
thus meruellously, after long Winter and great storms, does raise out of the
vile earth so beautiful flowers, plants, and trees: what consolation may the
man take that has his faith in Christ, to think that all his sins in his
precious blood be forgiven: and after long persequution and cruel death, he
shall come to eternal life. After this sort did the Prophet consider the
works of God, and the troubles of his creatures, and received great
consolation thereby.

In the end of this verse the Prophet says, Deapthes.
The deapthes were troubled. In the which words he has aptly showed the
mighty power of God, and perceives how the record of Gods fact may be his
consolation. In this that he says, The deapths were troubled: there be diverse
understandings. If the mean of the seas, when they are troublesome and
tempestuous by soul weather, he speaks rather after the judgment of such
(as suffer the trouble and peril of the waves,) that think at one time they
fall to the bottom of the sea, and at an other time they be rather upon high
mounteins then upon the waters, the rages thereof be so extreme: yet in deed,
the bottom of the seas be not felt, neither does the ship that is saved
descend so far: but the tempests be so sore, that it seems to the
sufferers thereof, that no extremity can be more. In this sense it serves
meruellously the Prophets purpose. A goodly similitude.
For as they that endure the tempests of the sea, think there could be no
more extremity then they sustain: so do they that suffer the tempest of
mistrust and despair (for a time) of the conscience, think they could endure
no more extremity of conscience: whereas in deed, if God should suffer them
to feel the extremity, it were eternal death: as the extremity of the sea
in tempests, is shipwreck and loss of man and goods. But if it be
understood as if stands in the letter, then has the Prophet relation to the
mighty hand of GOD, that brake the red sea even unto the very bottom, Exodus
14.
and also the water of Iordane: Joshua. 3.
that his people might have both a nighe way, a safe way, and a glorious way
toward the land that the Lord had promised them. And then in this sense we
learn, that although water and wind, with all troubles else, cover the face
of the earth, in the bottom of the sea, and is not possible to come to the use
of man: even so the troublesome temptations, and great terror of Gods wrath
against sin, covers the soul of man, that unto the judgment of the flesh,
it shall never come to have the use and fruition of Gods holy favor again. Oh
the merciful goodness of God toward man inscrutable
But now, as we see by miracle, God makes dry the deapthe of horrible seas,
and turns the bottom of them to the use of man: so does he in the blood of
Christ (by the operation of the holy ghost) dry up and clean lade out, the
ponds and deep seas of mistrust and heuines out of the soul, and turns the
soul it self to the use of his own honor, in the joys everlasting. And as
the water covers the beauty of the land: so do sin and temptation cover
the image and beauty of man's soul in this life. But as with a word God can
remedy the one: so with the least of his mercies he can redress the other.
And for the better experience and more certeintie thereof, we see it proved by
this prophet Asaph, in this place. For the ground was never more overwhelmed
with water, nor the bright Sun with dimmie clouds: then was this poor
Prophets spirit, with heaviness and sorrow of sin and temptations.
Therefore he feels how God eases the heart, and records how he banished
floudes and waters, to make his people a way to rest and tranquillity.

17 The clouds powered out water, the air thundered, and thine arrows went
abroad. Noah.
The Prophet remembers the meruellous inundation and drowning of the world,
in the days of Noah, that drowned all the world for sin: saving such as were
in the Arc or Ship with Noah. And he remembers also the horrible thunder that
was heard of the people, Gene. 7.
when God gave his law unto them upon mount Synai. Exodus 19.
Likewise, he calls to remembrance the plagues of Egypt, Note.
wherewithal God punished Pharao, Exodus 5. 6. 7 8. 9. 10. 11.
his people, and the whole land: which pains and plagues he calls (after the
phrase of the scripture) arrows and darts. These remembraunces may be
comfortes to the hearers, and to the readers, two manner of ways. First, in
this, that God (when he punishes) punishes justly: as he did the whole world
for sin. God punishes justly for sin.
Whereof the Prophet gathers, If sin justly merited, do trouble all the
generation of man: it is no great meruell, though sin trouble me, that am but
one man, and a vile sinner. If sin brought all flesh unto death, saving those
that were in the ship: is it any meruell, though sin make me to tremble and
quake? Again, If God, when he gave the law of Moses, and to the people, spoke
out of thunder, declaring what a thing it was, to transgress that law, in so
much, that al ye people were afraid to hear the Lord speak, Exodus 19.
and desired that Moses might supply his room: what meruell is it, that my
conscience trembles, feeling that my soul has offended the laws of God? And
if Pharao and his realm were sore afraid of Gods outward plagues: what cause
have I to fear the inward dread and sorrowful sight of sin, showed unto me
by Gods law? So that we may take this consolation out of this place, that God
is a just Judge to punish sin: God is no tyrant.
and not a Tyrant, that punishes of affection or wilful desire. And so said
David, Psalm. 51. 10. 119.
When so ever, or how so ever thou punish, (let men say and judge as they
list,) thou art just, God always preserves pemitent sinners.
and righteous be all thy doings.

The other consolation is, that in the midst of all adversities, God
preserved penitent and faithful sinners. As in the time of the universal
flood, the water hurted not Noah, nor such as were in the ship. In the time of
Pharaos plagues, the Israelites took no harm. At the giving of the law, the
Israelites perished not with lightening and thunder. Even so, sorrows and
anguish, diffidence and weakness of faith, they are plagues and punishments
for all men by reason of sin: yet penitent sinners, by reason of faith in
Christ, take no hurt nor damnation by them. As it appears by this Prophet
that was troubled in the spirit and in the body, as meruellously as could be:
but yet in Christ escaped the danger, Romans 8.
as all men shall do that repent and believe. Whereof we learn, that as the
rain falls generally, and yet bettereth no earth to bring forth her fruit,
but such as is apt to receive the rain (stony rocks and barren ground being
nothing the better:) Hebr. 6. 10.
even so does the plagues and rain of Gods displeasure plague all mankind,
but none be the better therefore, but such as repent and bewail their sins,
that gave GOD just occasion thus to punish them. The same is to be considered
also of the verse that follows, which is this.

18 The lightening shone upon the ground, the earth was moved, and shook
therewithal. By these manner of speeches, The lightening shone, and the earth
quaked: the Prophet sets forth the strength and might of Gods power, and
wills men to love him and to fear him: For he is able to defend and preserve
his faithful, and to punish and plague the wicked. And the like he says in
the verse following.

19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the deep waters: and thy footsteps
are not known. He takes comfort of this miracle, that GOD brought the
Israelites through the red sea, The Israelites were conducted by God, through
the red sea.
in this, that the waters knew the Israelites, and gave place unto them, that
they might dry footed go through them. But when king Pharao and his people
would have followed in the same path, persequuting Gods people, the sea would
make no way for him, nor yet show the steps where the Israelites troade,
Pharao and his were drowned.
but overwhelmed them in most desperate deaths. So in the seas of temptations,
Exo. 14.
such as put their trust in the Lord, Psalm. 121. 125. 13. 46. 54. 71.
pass, and never perish by them: whereas such as put not their trust in the
Lord, perish in temptations: as Pharao and his army did by water. And the
next verse that concludes the Psalm, shows by what means the Israelites
were under God saved in the red sea: by the hands of Moses and Aaron, as it
appears.

20 Thou leadest thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Of
this verse the afflicted may learn many consolations. The best is not able of
himself to resist temptations.
First, that the best people that be, are no better able to resist temptations:
then the simple sheep is able to withstand the brier that catches him. The
next, that man is of no more ability to beware of temptations, then the poor
sheep is to aboyd the brier, Sheephearde. They that do things at Gods
commandment, can take no harm.
being preserved only by the diligence of the shepherd. The third, that as
the shepherd is careful of his entangled and briered sheep; so is GOD of
his afflicted faithful. And the fourth is, that the people of Israel could
take no harm of the water, because they entered the sea at Gods commandment.
Whereof we learn, that no danger can hurt, when God does command us to enter
into it: and all dangers overcome us, if we choose them our selves, Math. 14.
besides Gods commandment. As Peter, Math. 16.
when he went at Gods commandment upon the water, took no hurt: but when he
entered into the Bishops house, upon his own presumption, was overcome, and
denied Christ. The Israelities, when they fought at Gods commandment, the
peril was nothing: Number. 14.
but when they would do it of their own heads, they perished. So that we are
bound to attend upon Gods commandment, and then no danger shall destroy us,
though it pain us.

The other doctrine is in this, Such as be ministers of the Church, ought to
attend only upon the voice of God.
that God used the ministry of Moses and Aaron, in the deliverance of his
people: who did commanded them to do nothing, but that the Lord did first bid.
Whereof we learn, that such as be ministers appointed of God, and do nothing
but as God commands, are to be followed. As S. Paul says, Follow me, as
I follow Christ. And these men can by the word of God give good counsel, 2.
Cor. 11.
and great consolation, both for body and soul: as we perceive this Prophet,
in marking. Gods doings unto the Israelites, applied by grace the same
wisdom and helping mercy unto himself, to his eternal rest, through Jesus
Christ in the world to come, To whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be
all laud and praise world without end. Let all Christians say, Amen.

FINIS.
A table declaring as well the general as the special contents of this whole
Book.
The figures note the number of the leaf. A. the first side. B. the second.

The argument of the 23. Psalm. fol. 9. A. Of this Psalm, there are seven
parts. ibid. B. 1 Who it is that has the cure and charge of man's life and
salvation. 10. A. 2 Wherein the life and salvation of man consists. 14. B. 3
How a man is brought to the knowledge of life and salvation: which part
shows, what man is of himself, and how he is brought into his life, and to
feed in the pleasant pastures of Gods word. 19. B. 4 Wherefore man is brought
to life and salvation. 23. B. 5 What trouble may happen to such, as God gives
life and salvation unto. 25. B. 6 Whereby the troubles of Gods elect be
overcome. 31. A. 7 What the end of Gods troubled people shall be. 41. B.

The Argument of the 62 Psalm. 43. A. Of this Psalm there are two general
parts, and six particular. ibid. A. and B. The first general part,
containing four particular parts. 1 How that the favor of God, and his
help, is able to remedy all adversities. 43. A. The second general part
containing two particular parts. 2 How that the favor of man, and his help,
is able to redress no adversities. 43. A. A brief paraphrase upon the whole
Psalm. 44. B. The six particular parts as they follow in their order and
place. 1 What is to be done by the Christian man that is afflicted. 45. A. 2
Why the troubled person seeks health of God. 51. A. 3 How the persequuters of
the innocent shall soudenly perish. 58. A. 4 Why trouble is patiently to be
borne, and faithfully to be believed, that God can and will remedy it. 63. B.
5 How man's power is not to be trusted unto. 66. B. 6 How that God has promised
to help the afflicted. 69. A.

The Argument of the 73. Psalm. 70. A. A Paraphrase upon the whole Psalm.
Fol. 70. 71. 72. 73. Of this Psalm there are eight parts. 74. 1 That God
loves the good, although he punishes them. 75. A. 2 How weak and frail a
thing the nature of man is. 77. B 3 Wherein the felicity of wicked men
consists, etc. 80. A 4 How frail, brittle, and weak a thing man is, etc.
84. B 5 How some men repeat their well doings, etc. 85 A 6 How great a danger
it is, temerously to judge of God, etc. 85. B 7 That man's reason is but
ignorant and beastly in considering of Gods works, etc. 86. A 8 The multitude
and number of Gods consolations, etc. 86. B

The Argument of the 77. Psalm. 87 A. Of this Psalm there are four parts.
87. A and B. 1 In whom a man should put his trust, and to whom he should
resort in the days of sickness, troubles, and adversities. 87. B. 2 How a
man should use him self toward him, in whom he puts his trust in the
time of trouble. 89. B 3 What great and perilous dangers, the man that is
troubled shall suffer, for the time of his trouble. 93. A 4 How a man takes
consolation in the time of his trouble. 113. B
Other points of Christian doctrine are referred to the consideration of the
reader.

FINIS.

