A CAVEAT to prevent future IVDGEMENTS: Or, AN ADMONITION to all ENGLAND; more
specially, to LONDON and other places where the death of Plague has lately
been. (*)

By ROBERT HORN Minister of the Word.

PSALM. 50.22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces and there be none to deliver.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Philemon Stephens and Cristopher Meredith, and
are to be sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL AND REVEREND MAtron, Mistress AGNES DANET of Westhope in
Shropshire, Widow; the comforts of this life, and the glory of the next.
WORSHIPFVLL M rs. DANET*
YOur Obligation upon Me, binds me, at least, to acknowledgement. I with my
wife, lived with you in house twenty years, save some few weeks. Most of
which time, or (save some few months) the whole of it, I lived Preacher to
your Tenants and private family, at a Chapel by; being there set and left by
that rightly worshipful and truly religious old Gentleman, your most kind
husband, JOHN DANET Esquire, long since with God. The instructions you received
that while from me, and before that while of time from faithful men elsewhere,
I doubt not but you remember and will practice for your part and time here.
Some testimony you lately gave in your zealous and constant observation of
those Fasts which were (weekly) commanded for London by Royal authority,
notwithstanding your often infirmities and great years: which makes me now,
under your name, to send forth this small Sermon, and to entitle you to it as
to your own by many interests. In regard of the Plagues late fearful
increase in London, and other places about, and further off, there came a
commandment from our Augustus (King CHARLES) that all of the Realm, that
could, or were fit, should meet together in a public weekly Fast on
Wednesdaies, to beseech the Lord by prayer and supplications, until it should
please him to say, as sometime he said to the destroying Angel, with his sword
over Jerusalem; it is enough, hold now thy hand, 2. Sam. 24.16. To this, and to
us his Royal Majesty began in a rare President: and so, did no more by precept
then what he first sealed by practice in his own high Person. The Plague was
great: and so we fasted, and besought our God for it: and he was entreated of
us, Ezra 8.23. upon the success (wonderful in our ears, most strange in
Londons eyes) his Majesty, has since published his Royal pleasure for public
thanks to God, through all the Kingdom. All which should move all of us of
this Land (if we have not lost all life of motion) even now to turn unto the
Lord with all our hearts. And therefore, for my particular, and to set my self
(some steps) forward inso good a way, I have left this little pawn in the
Sanctuary for mine own engagement. Where, I desire you (Good Mistresle DANET)
to go on in the same good way, you have been long upon, and that till you
finish your course: which, that it may be with true comfort, to your Bliss
eternal, I will pray (as I daily do) while we have being together. The time
cannot be long to you or me: which should make us therefore (and I pray God we
may be made;) to redeem all the good hours of it for the power of godliness
and a pure conversation in Christ. Which gift also I humbly crave at Gods hands
for those you have Adopted into your family, as the charge of your providence:
that, to Gods pleasure, they may longer yet have the comfort of you, your
Tenants in like manner, and that whole Neighborhood, in that light which now
you bear up among them by your life in the Gospel, and your being in the
world, He says Amen unto it,

Clon-bury near Ludlow; June 1. 1625. Who is yours truly for his best means
in the Word of Faith. ROBERT HORN.

AN ADMONITION TO ALL ENGLAND: More specially to LONDON and other Cities and
towns in England, where the death of Plague has (lately) been. (*)
JOHN 5.14. After these things Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto
him; behold thou art made whole: Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto
thee.


THis Scripture is a Scripture of admonition, and contains matter of
important counsel; which, directed to a man whom Christ loosed from his chain
of a long sickness, concerns us to amendment, that are sick of sin. He
was held in his infirmity thirty and eight years: verse 5. some of us have
been held longer in the chain of our sins. Now, after he was cured, (not
knowing by whom) he was found in the Temple, to wit by Christ who cured him.
And so, having strangely, and by miracle, without means, received health and
power to walk, he walks to the Temple, (the house of prayer and praise)
probably, (I think I may say purposely) to give thanks for his corporal
health, and to pray for spiritual. Doing so; his Physician, who had done one
good work upon him, purposing to do another, and better in the cure of his
soul, returns (after he had, for a while, withdrawn himself) and comes to
the Temple, where he found his Patient. Being found there, he begins
(instantly) the cure of sin in his soul: puts him in remembrance how long a
servant he had been to sin under an old infirmity; and telling him what a
blessing he had received in his body, which was made whole, wishes him to have
care of his soul by breaking off his sins, or the course he held in them,
after the course of the world: which, if he did not, would cost him dear, for
a worse thing then matter of sickness would befall him in a worse place: at
least, whom God could not amend with his Rod of correction, he would break
with his iron rod, punishing him yet seven times more, that is, grievously, for
his sins, Leuit. 26.18. Thus I have opened the Text, which is the effect of
the miracle here wrought; and shows where Christ found the Man, whom he had
made whole; and what he said unto him: for the first; it has two
circumstances; as of time, when he was found, and of person, who found him: for
the second; it contains a precept, sin no more; and the reasons persuading
it: and they are; the benefit he had received, thou art made whole; and the
peril, if he sinned still; a worse thing would come unto him.

The circumstance of time, in this word Afterward, or after these things, being
a word of context, and referring to the ninth verse before, shows what it
was, that more specially, moved this Man, at this time, to visit Gods Temple,
and to be found in it; and that is the healing of him by Christ upon a word
speaking: rise, take up thy bed and walk, v. 8. But I will take up no longer
time, either for the further opening of this sentence, which is not hard; or
for the taking in of Texts in coherence with this, which is not necessary. And
therefore I pass to the Doctrines of this verse, their grounds or reasons,
with their Use, and Application.

Afterward.
THat is, after this cure wrought, and person healed, Christ finds him in the
house of prayer, and (returning) found him thankful: which Precedent
deserves followers; Doct.
and teaches us after a benefit received from God, to be thankful to him:
greatly after a great benefit; and presently, after any. So Melchizedech
blessed God for Lot recovered by Abraham, Genesis 14.20. and Moses and the
Israelites sang unto him in praise for the Egyptian yoke broken, Exodus 15.1, 2,
3, etc. and the Jews kept a feast of memorial for their safety and the
destruction of their enemies, and of that wicked Haman, Hest. 9.17. In Psalm.
51.15. David desires God to give him cause and matter, and then promises to
praise God with joyful lips; not dividing between the effect and cause.
Hence further, he debates with himself about rendering to God in this manner,
Psalm. 116.12. and, in another Psalm, summons all within him to this duty,
Psalm. 103.1. The Apostle Paul ioynes with prayer thanksgiving by an
inseparable tie, Philip. 4.6. and good reason: for, as he says; Colos. 4.6.
praise sets the watch in our prayers, without which they would fall asleep in
our mouths: the Scripture is full in this point: the reasons:

We sit at an easy rent by such a return: Landlord by taking words unto us,
and by ordering our ways? Psalm. 50.23. Secondly, Exodus 12.14. and no better
then stolen waters, Pro. 9.17. Thirdly, Luke 17.13. but, when they should
return with acknowledgement, where are they? verse 17. Fourthly, Psalm. 50.23.
and here, what the body is without the soul; that is, prayer for a benefit,
and no praise for it. Fifthly, Psalm. 50.13.14. which made our fathers in the
estate of the Old Testament, often, and in many words to vow this oblation to
God, and (as it were) to enter into bond unto him to pay it, Psalm. 66.13.14.
Ecclesiast. 5.4.5. Sixthly, upon all he gives (who gives all freely) but the
old rent of a thankful heart, and of thankfulness in our lives: and, if this
be done, we shall be sure to be great gainers at Gods hands. Seventhly, Dan.
5.4. and shall not we praise that God that made us, and all the world?

The Use of this is for all England: London, and other Towns and Cities upon
which the Sword of Pestilence has bin lately laid: for, should not these be
found in the Temple with this man, healed by Christ? And, for London, the prime
City of the Kingdom; seeing that so lately, the ways of it so lamented,
being al shut up, Lam. 1.4. which now clap hands for their opening again, and
for their being sown with the seed of man: should it not register in marble of
remembrance a work of mercy toward it, so singular, and so strange? should it
not cry grace, grace unto it? Zach. 4.7. for, from 44.63. dead and buried of
the mortality of Plague in one week, in that City, the Bill fell in few
weeks to no less then half a score; yea to four only: and can such an
abatement, so wondered at, prove as the wonder that lasts but nine days?
Rather, may not the Citizens, and may we not all say (this admirable decrease
considered) as the people of Sion in captivity, after their return, said: We
were like them that dream? Psalm. 126.1. Surely, we cannot deny, that our
mouth is filled with laughter, and our tongues with songs, v. 2. and, shall
they be empty of his praise, who has done so great things for us, whereof we
sing? v. 3. When Iosh^^ah had made a great slaughter of Amaleck and his men;
even so great and so long as Moses his feeble hands could be held from falling
down, which was till the Sun went down, Exodus 17.12. Gods charge to Moses
was, that it should be written, for better remembrance, in a book, and
rehearsed to Ioshuah, verse 14. This was a great blessing of God, and this so
great blessing of his, must, both be written and spoken of: was it a blessing
bookeable, which God showed to Israel against Amaleck, who wasted so many of
his weak and feeble people? and, is it not worthy (both) to be spoken of and
bookt with letters of lasting praise in our hearts and mouths, that God has,
in manner, removed, so clean and quickly, from a City of so great use to the
whole Realm, that Amaleck of wasting Pestilence? But our dullness has need of
much spurring, and and of those nails that Solomon (the wisest King and wisest
Man) spoke of, fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies, Eccles. 12.13. for,
how soon had we forgotten a work of this nature, (a work all made of mercy)
by quitting London, as now, of the mortality of 3300. and odd, falling there
of a like stroke of Plague in one week, and in the year 1603. This, for some
years after, lay dead, and as buried in some perpetual grave: therefore has
God opened our graves again, by killing with the Plague of Pestilence in that
same City, and thereabouts, from about April or after, to the 15. of
December, 1625. no fewer then 35417. And I pray God this may be a warning for
those of London, and of all England to keep better in remembrance, and to
better purpose the Acts of Gods mercy; and to keep both them and us from
falling after the like manner of disobedience. If it be not; and if still we
will prove unfaithful; though the Plague were quite gone; God has other
Vultures (as one says) to send upon the carrion of a Realm, dead in sins,
and trespasses: for, beside the Plague of Pestilence, he has his glittering
Sword (which is a grievous Plague) that he can put into the hand of an enemy of
a fierce countenance, and of an implacable desire to our Land. But God turn
away the evil: and to do our parts to do it; let the last grievously
devouring Pestilence in and about London, and in other Cities and Towns abroad
be, the grave of our lusts, Number. 11.34. and let a sound confession of sins,
and turning to God from sin, bury them: else, it will be but to a greater
hardening, that the Lord in his singular mercy, at his last great assise of
commune mortality, reprieued us, pulling some then, as a brand out of the fire,
Zachary 3.2.

A reproof of those who bury Gods benefits so deep in Sepulchers of oblivion,
that, Use 2.
(like as it fared with the nine cleansed Lepers, Luke 17.17.) there is no
returning to give thanks. Many in some plunges of sickness (as dissembling
Saylors in a storm) will fall to their devotions; who yet, (when the weather
is over, and a calm sky of health succeedes) drown all remembrance of the
danger, then, in their profane Cannes of Wine and Beer. Then, (as unthankful
Seamen) insteede of finding them in the Temple, you may find them in some
Alehouse or Tavern, tossing their Cannes to the health of the devil. What is
this but to receive a blessing from God, and to thank the devil for it? but,
what man bestowing a benefit upon us, and loosing his thanks, will send
another after it? and, can we imagine God will, when men deal with him like
those unthankful Israelites, whose prayers and praise ended almost as soon as
they had passed the red sea? The Heathen did offer continually unto their false
Gods their cynamon and frankincense: and shall it be enough for us, or will it
discharge us, for a day, or some few days, and that in no true meaning, to
offer our tribute of praise to JEHOVAH, the true God, who is worthy, (and
only) to be served in righteousness and true holiness all the days of our
life? Luke 1.75. Shall we thus requite the Lord, as a people foolish and
unwise? Deuteronomy. 52.6. unthankfulness is a close Thief: and will we so
cunningly deceive God (indeed our selves) by robbing him of the praise that is
due unto his name? Rather, should we not extol him with our lips, and with
our lives praise him? But who will not say, that he thanks God for all? To
whom I say: true thankfulness stands not in words, but in obedience to Gods
Word: nor in saying, but in giving thanks: nor in labor of lips, but in
purity of life. Then, to come to an issue. Thou say thou thankest God for
all: but art thou a repentant and amending sinner? when God opens his
treasury, do thou open thy mouth, and art thou liberal of his praises, Psalm.
66.16.17. rather, and contrarily; when he shoureth blessings upon thee, do
thou not drop thanks unto him; praising him slenderly, when he gives to thee
plentiously? or, is not thy thanks cold thanks, and thanks only in words; not
zealous from the heart, nor faithful with a single heart? further, do thou
thank God with continuance; not churlishly, and with the thanks that has
soon done? do thou praise God with thy praiseworthy life? Is thy tongue an
instrument of the truth, and of his honor? Is his word thy counselor? are his
best Servants thy best Companions? his Sabbath days, thy best days? his
Communion Cup thy sweetest Cup? his Service thy liberty? and his yoke thy
crown, and thy glory? If this be so; thou may be numbered among the
thankful to God: but if not so, and thou be still the same man thou wast: a
drunkard still, a fornicator still, still a swearer, and prophaner of Gods Name
and Sabbaths; a cold hearer or no hearer of the Word, and at Prayer and
Sacraments carnal: so often as thou say; The Lord be thanked, thy mouth
does not bless God, but mock him: for, out of the same mouth proceeds
blessing and cursing, praise and unthankfulness, James 3.10. So much for the
circumstance of the time, that of the Person follows.

Jesus.
IF you ask who found this Man? it was Jesus: if you ask where? it was in the
Temple; the place where the means of Gods public worship were. In speaking of
the person, I will speak of both together: the person is Jesus, in english,
the Savior: the Temple was the house of public prayer and sacrifices; first
built by Solomon: but after destroyed by the King of Babel, and rebuilt by
Zerubbabel and Nehemiah. Here Christ revealed himself, Doct.
who (before) was not known of the Man whom he had healed: which teaches,
that in Church Assemblies Christ is found, and finds us. In this way, and to
such as are in it he reueales himself in the arm of his Word, Esaias 53.1. and
as they whom he healed corporally, were in the way by which he passed, Mat.
20.30.34. Mar. 6.55.56. so they must be found in the walk of Jesus, the way of
the means, whom he will heal spiritually. His ordinary walk is in the Temple
of the New Testament; that is, in the public assembly of Christians. Thither
(therefore) we must come, if we will know Christ in the arm of power to our
Salvation. David knew the way by his experience, and followed it with love to
the Temple. Psalm. 42.1.4. and, when Saul (his Father in law) took this way
from him by banishment for some time; how does he desire his return thither by
more then an ordinary affection? for, he fared as a woman, set a longing after
somewhat, which (because she cannot obtain) makes her sick of desire, Psalm.
84.2. There Gods evidences were kept, and there God was in place by an
extraordinary presence: hence, the Prophet was taken up with a love thereof,
even to the fainting of his soul: he had drunk deep of Gods blessings in
that earthly heaven; which being denied him by a kind of excommunication out
of that Paradise of God, first under Saul, and then under Absalom his own
son; how soule-sick was he for the daily sacrifices? Moses, when the people
of God were kept with Pharaos strong hand, as with a chain in Egypt, from
serving at some public Altar, asks their deliverance of the King, lest the
Lord should meet them with Pestilence or sword, Exodus 5.3. and so, upon pain
of death, God must be publicly served; which, if our bodies escape, our souls
shall not. Thus it was in the Law and under Moses. In the New Testament, in
like manner, it was the practice of Christians to beat this way to the Lord,
Luke 4.16. and why did they so assemble, and so many in houses, which they
called Synagogues, but because they were, upon promise, persuaded there to meet
the Lord Christ, who would be in the mids of them? Mat. 18.20. At another
time, the whole City came together in a like assembly, and to a like end, Act.
13.43.44. and for this, the assembly is called Gods Army, Psalm. 110.3. because
God takes the muster of his people there. But further, for this meeting we
have a commandment, and day set, 1. Cor. 11.17.18. 1. Cor. 16.1. Thus (then)
we have traced the way in which we may find and be found of Christ: even the
Kings highway which fools cannot miss, and which none, but worse then
fools, go out of, Esaias 35.8. the reasons:

There is Jacobs Ladder in the stairs of the means to heaven, Genesis 28.12.17.
there God has commanded the blessing, and life for ever, Psalm. 133.3.
Secondly, John 2.16. and where do children converse familiarly with their
earthly Fathers, but at home in their Fathers house? where have they the helps
of natural life, but there? and in what house, but therein? And shall we not
care to go home to GOD, our heavenly Father, in the Assembly; where we may
have him to speak kindly to us by his Word; where we may speak familiarly
to him in our prayers; where we may meet with his seals of assurance, and be
bettered by his nurture and rod of discipline; where he gives us his Son, and
gives us his Spirit, and grace in our hearts? where he keeps his wealth, and
where his household stuff lies? or do we not care for the abundance of Gods
house? or had we rather live beggarly in the world, then richly at Church? to
be short; had we rather loose our gracious Father then find him, or be found
of him in the way, wherein they that seek find, Mat. 7.7. we should be
followers of God: and will we be followers of those, who choose another Father
in their ordinary absences from the Assembly, then they have, who assemble
willingly in the day of Gods musters? Psalm. 110.3. Thirdly, hence, Cain was
cast out of Adams house, which was the Church then, he said to God; I am cast
out of thy sight, Genesis 4.14. meaning his face in the Assembly, which is the
Church now.

But is Christ found in Church Assemblies? Use.
and does he there seek us? and seek us for much good to our selves? how
unwise are we, and what fools for our selves, if we will suffer every twist of
occasion, though in never so small a thread, to hold us from thence? If a
mortal King should seek us in some special place to bestow honors, and
wealth upon us; and we (knowing the place) would not come thither, were we not
both undutiful to him, and unwise to our selves? This is the very case of our
Papists Recusant, and Protestants at large. The immortal King of kings seeks
them in our Church Assemblies to make them rich in Christ, and great in Heaven:
yet they will not be in place, nor tread upon the threshold of his Sanctuary,
save where Law binds; nor some, nay many, where they are so bound. Of David's
affection to the public places of prayer, hearing the Word, receiving the
Sacraments, and the like, we heard. The river of his desires rising mainely in
this case, could be kept within no bank: he could rest upon no ground, till,
being in exile from Gods Tabernacle, he was brought back again to God in his
ordinances. It was his Cross, and a weighty one upon him, that by tyranny,
and enforced absence, he was not permitted to worship at Jerusalem. But now,
who does not account it the least of his trouble, that by sickness, and other
impediments necessitated, not procured, he is held, as in bonds, from the
public Assembly? who wishes for his appearance before the Lord, as the Heart
brayeth for the brooks of water? Psalm. 42.1. who now fears the hand of the
Lord (that of which we heard) for omitting the public Service of God in the
Congregation? and not holden from it by Pharao, as some necessary chain in
Egypt, but with chains of their own, either unnecessary business, or carnal
sports? Exodus 5.2. It was David's desire, above, or more then all he desired, to
dwell in the house of the Lord all his time, and to behold the beauty of the
Lord in his Temple, Psalm. 27.4. we make no such request, nor will we take up
our pleasant days with such sad matters. And some, though they dwell not far
from the place, where the Arc of the Gospel is placed in the Preaching
Ministers mouth, as in the Tabernacle thereof; yet, if the wether be not to
their lazy minds, if any impediment seize them; a less matter then the buying
of a Farm, or the proving of five yoke of Oxen, will keep them away, Luke
24.18.19. you must have them excused; they cannot: but more truly, they will not
come: and why? they can serve God at home, as well as there: so could Abraham
as easily, as have gone the dolorous journey of three days, to Sacrifice his
dearest Son Isaac, Genesis 22.4. but Abraham must go, and Abraham did go to the
place which God showed him. And so God will be served in the place he has
showed us, and in the manner, and as we have heard of him: there we must offer
up, not the only child of our loves, but the foul children of our lusts,
James 1.15. and that upon the Altar of the law that threatens iniquities and
sins. The Jews came betimes to Jerusalem, though dwelling in the uttermost
lists of the Land: neither foul weather, nor peril by that long way could
hinder them: for, with Abraham, they drove away al unclean fowls of
exception, that might fall upon the carcasses that were for that sacrifice
them, Genesis 15.11. But now, David's place is empty: O Lord, how long? which,
though Saul's now do not mark, as Saul then; God does: and the Pews and Seats
that are empty so often, and for no cause he knows, who will one day say:
wherefore come not these to meat, neither yesterday nor to day? 1. Sam. 20.27.
I may add, and say; not these seven or eight weeks of days? And here let me
speak to such unwilling and pressed men (where, God will have none in his camp
but voluntaries, Psalm. 110.3.) what would such do, if the Master Widley his
Tract on the ^abbath. page 125.
Parisian line were stretched over the land, and men should be killed with
their bibles in their hands, their blood being sprinkled upon the seats they
sit on? would they not say: this evil is (all) of the Lord, and why should we
wait on the Lord any longer, 2. King. 6.33. But to make short: ye that thus
turn the back and not your faces to Gods Sanctuary, and sacred house; consider
your ways, and turn your feet unto Gods testimonies: consider who it is that
seeks you, and where, and for what. He that seeks you is Jesus, he that saues
his people, and must you, if you will not be damned: and he seeks you in the
assembly: and there seeks you for your own good. I say therefore, would you be
found of God in peace; or of your Savior (the Son of God) to your peace and
comfort everlasting: be in the way of the means: let your feet stand within
the gates of the Gospels Jerusalem: there fall down low on your faces, and
kneel before: he Lord your Maker, Psalm. 95.6. And God persuade Iapheth to
dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. But there are many out-lyers, and many,
who when they should dwell in Shems Tent, at the times of public prayer and
hearing, dwell in the tents of Cham, where their other impieties are
accomplished and made up with their scoffings at Noah, the Preacher of
righteousness O, how hardly are such persuaded to be in the Temple with Simeon
and Anna, Luke 2.27.38. or to be found in the Temple to be healed, as this man
whom Christ healed? but Jesus seeks them there, and they loose him in the
world, and in wordly lusts of profit and pleasures. God and Prince require
their presence: God upon pain of death; and the Prince upon pain of twelve
pence for every day: yet neither God nor Prince can be heard; and how shall I?

So much for the place where this man was found, with the circumstances of time
and person; it follows to consider, what Christ said.

And said unto him, behold, etc. IN these words that Christ spoke unto the Man,
we have a precept, and reasons persuading it: the precept in these words;
Sin no more: the reasons are two, as first the benefit of his health, thou
art made whole; and the threatening of a worse matter, if he should sin
afterward as before: lest a worse thing come unto thee: for the first of the
reasons; we have the benefit it self, and finger at it, in the word; behold.
After our Savior had cured this man, he presently left him, as appears in
the next verse before; now he returns again, as not meaning to be long hid,
that his power might be known, and his strange work had in remembrance: which
therefore made him to say; behold, as leading him by the hand to a deeper
consideration of what was done upon him: as if he had said; thou was it tied to
thy bed with a long infirmity of eight and thirty years continuance: now this
tie is loosed by him that said unto thee; rise, take up thy bed and walk, v.
8. and now thou art noe longer bound to thy bed, but free to God: remember and
forget not: or behold; that is, intend thy thoughts to this work of thy cure,
passing some pause upon it. This I take to be the meaning of our Savior in
these words: behold thou art made whole: which teaches that christians should
not pass over Gods proceedings toward them in his noble Acts, either of mercy
or justice with a careless, or blind eye. In Psalm. 32. the word Selah, which
is a word of attention, repeated three times, as ver. 4.5.7. imports as much:
and, what God did against Amaleck (Gods peoples enemy) must as we heard, be
written in a book or register, Ex. 17.14. and in Deuteronomy. 25.17. it must be
written, what God did that way, in sure tables of lasting memory. So Samuel,
taking a stone, and pitching it between Mizphe and Shen, called it by the name
of Eben-Ezer.
hitherto the Lord has helped us, 1. Sam. 7.12. The like stone of help for
memory, did the Jews set up in an extraordinary holy day to God for his
delivering of them from the butchery of Haman, Hest. 9.17.18. And David brought
his heart to an edge by such diligent booking of Gods daily mercies: for,
fighting the Lords battles, he set down, as in a commentary or just volume,
the Gests and Acts of every days march to the praise of God. The book of
Psalms shows he had the pen of a ready writer, this way: the reasons:

One maine end of God, Psalm. 50.22. Secondly, he that made all, does all for
himself; Pro. 16.4. that is, that his works might praise him, who is only
worthy to be praised, Psalm. 145.10. but how shall we give him the respects of
his power, praise, goodness, and infinite glory, when in his works that are
wonderful, we observe little or nothing thereafter; and when, from things that
are stranger then we thought of, and greater then we looked for, we draw no
matter to admire his wisdom so, as we be guided by it; or to magnify his
power so, as we repose upon it? and here, tell me if it be not a disgrace to
an expert workman, having made some excellent piece, that his friend should
pass by, with contempt, with neglect at least, not vouchsafing to look upon
it? To apply therefore: is this a disgrace, being offered to man who works
imperfectly? what is it then, not to have in esteem the works of God, so
perfectly wrought? And (here) Salomons counsel is, (and it is good counsel;)
consider the work of God, Eccles. 7.13. Thirdly, Psalm. 111.4.

An instruction therefore to gather matter from all Gods works, London, and by
opening that Fountain of trading that was so choakt up in the last Visitation
by Pestilence: we must not forget his loving kindness to observe it for his
praise, whose mercy endures for ever. The Prophet, the Author of the 147. and
148. Psalms, was trained up in this School, and learned very much by the
wisdom and justice that he found in all Gods works. And surely, if we would
go to School, but to our daily experience in this kind, having eyes such as
this Man of God had, and using our diligence so as he did, we should not be so
foolish and ignorant, and as beasts before God.

The very heathen, that were without the word, and had no other books but the
works of God to read in, did in them see somewhat of the true God, though not
to his glory by the wisdom which is of him, Romans 1.20. And shall we learn
nothing of God, who have not only the dark book of his works to look upon,
but the book of a plainer letter, the book of his word to meditate of? shall
we become more foolish then the wiser sort of the heathen were, that only
groped after God in their foolish hearts that were full of darkness, verse
21. And (now) to our purpose: do we think, or can we imagine that God sent
and took away so great a fire of Plague, save for some few sparks that yet
remain here and there untrodden out, only to hold talk of it, and not to fear
that God that has power over all Plagues? Then are we as blockish as those
Jews, whom Jeremy reprooueth for learning nothing of the fear of God by his
blessings, yea though he reserved unto them the appointed weeks of the
harvest, Ier. 5.24. But Gods children, and all whom the Lord has made wise to
their Salvation, will hear the Rod, and him who has appointed or betrothed it;
Mich. 6.9. If the father brings a rod, the fearful child will tremble: the
whip of Pestilence is a sore Rod, and they tremble at it, whom God has sealed.
By it, or in sight of it, they gather themselves, and all their wits together,
taking them up from their stray ways, before the decree (which is at the
seal) come forth, or be executed against them, Zeph. 2.1. or they fan and
winnow themselves from the chafe of sin, which cannot abide in the wind of
the Lords justice, and is driven to hell with sinners, and all that forget God.
They try their ways, and bring them to the touch, turning unto God, Lam.
3.40. and so are better by the rod, Gods loving correction makes them whole:
The wicked not so.

A reproof of those who set all Gods judgments, or Pro. 1.25. such are never
the better by his word calling them, nor by the whip lashing them: whether God
be angry or well pleased, they are all one. Let the earth be moved, they are
not moved, and let the hills tremble, they fear not. In the sad days of a
Land, caused by Pestilence, dearth, or the rumors of war, they drink wine
in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, not troubled for
the affliction of Joseph, Am. 6.6. no adversity can make them change their
merry note which they chaunt to their instruments of music, ver. 5. and they
put the day of evil far off, verse 3. They consider not the rod, and provoke
the striker, neither can punishments awe them, nor blessings win them: for
punishments, if they touch not them, no matter where they light: and for
blessings, they take them as gifts of fortune, or with Papists, as their due
and merit from God: they rise not by them to obedience, and they live in them
to the giuers dishonor. Hence, so few to this day, see to any amendment,
notwithstanding the singer of God, or rather whole hand in so grieuousa Plague,
or stroke upon London, never the like, or so great in any memory now living.
But though God has now stopped the sore, that so ran and ceased not; yet how
soon he may open it again, who knows? and who should not consider? he is the
same God that he was ever, and the God that hates iniquity as much as ever he
did. The Pestilence that was so lately sent, what was it but the fruit of an
evil tree, that is, of the Realms sin? Our Land was all overrun with sin:
Our Cities and great Towns were as the Pot, and the men in them, as the flesh,
spoken of by Ezekiel, Chap. 11.3. and 24.3.4.5. Our Masters in Israel were
(many of them) no Teachers: and some that taught, threw down by evil example
what they builded by doctrine, eating and drinking with sinners, Mat. 24.49.
the poor sheep were smitten with ignorance: all good fellowship was and did
consist in pots of drink, and pipes of smoke. In the whole Land there was a
large confederacy and increase of sinful men. The sins of the Churches
spoken of. Apoc. 2. and 3. Chapters, were the sins of some of better note in
their cold love of the truth: and for pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of
idleness (the very sins of Sodom) what were they but Englands crying sins?
Thus it was with us, and this we were, when the late Plague began: and if we
fall again upon this evil byas of old custom to like sins or worse, not
remembering Gods late hand, what can we expect but a new Plague, or the old
renewed? God has other rods of correction in his School, and iron rods to
break us, if we will not turn at the correction past: or if we will sin
still, provoking God in the Church, and grieuing him in the Commonwealth, the
Lord will watch upon worse Plagues to bring them among us: for, when one
affliction cannot prevail, he can send another, and many, till we be made
better, or confounded, Leuit. 26.18.19.

So much for the finger directing to the benefit: the benefit it self
follows.

Thou art made whole. CHrist here remembers the man of the benefit he had so
lately and strangely received in his health, which was given him, not mediately
in the Poole of Bethesda, but immediately by divine power. And these words are
the ground of the subsequent admonition first, as if the Lord Christ had said:
sin made thee sick, and God has made thee whole; fall not back to thy sins
past, lest the relapse make thee worse then ever. Quest. Quest. Answ. Doct.
But who made this man whole? Answ. God by his power, and Christ as God: whence
learn, that as God can make sick; so it is he only that can make whole. We
read as much in the Text of Hannabs song; which Text speaks of a greater
matter: for it says; the Lord kills and makes alive, brings down to the
grave, and raises up, 1. S^m. 2.6. Now, it is easier to raise from sickness
to health, then to bring from death to life. Therefore, Hezekiah (King of
Judah,) went the right way for health, when he turned his face to the wall, and
prayed unto the Lord, Esaias 38.2. hence Moses in his song says, what we have
heard Hanna in her song to say, Deuteronomy. 32.39. And the Prophet Hosea, exhorting
the people that went far from God in their sins, to draw back by
repentance, gives this for one reason, that the Lord would heal them, Hosea
6.1. as if there were no Physician but he, nor balm of healing but by him:
further also, so much the king of Israel (none of the best, rather one of the
worst) confessed, saying; that he must have Gods place, who will take upon him
to heal a man of his Leprosy, 2. King. 5.7. the reasons:

Hence, Ministers by whom we believe, 1. Cor. 3.5. and so, these are but
Ministers of health, and God is the giver: he that makes an unbeliever
faithful, is he that makes a sick man whole: and this is God, for Faith is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Secondly, sin causes sickness, Micah 6.10.13.
but God only forgiueth sins: it was alleged by the Scribes, and not denied by
Christ, Mar. 2.6.7. and therefore he only can take away sicknes^ and send
health.

An instruction to use such Physicians for our necessity, Israel, that ye go
to enquire of the God of Ekron for your health? 2. King. 1.3. God gives the
blessing: and can we think that he will enclose it to us in evil means?
further, having made our best choice this way, we must take certain religious
preparatiues, that their physic may have the better work upon us. And here,
we must humble our souls with repentance, and confession of sins: yea crave
pardon for them, and forsake them, purposing amendment: also, we must sanctify
our sick beds, and make them up by the Word of God and prayer, 1. Tim. 4.5.
The truth is; when a man is made whole, good medicines are good means unto it,
but Gods blessing is it that strikes the stroke of health, and recouers him.
Therefore let those who have lately felt the sweet fruit of Gods work, in
their restorings to health from the wound of Plague, bring forth like fruit of
thankfulness in their turnings to him that has healed them: else better they
had died then; and that the Plague had taken away their life, when it took
away their health. The want of this is (often) cause that diseases, curable in
themselves, are made incurable by our sins: which should make us, when God
begins his correction by sickness, to begin repentance by turning to him that
smites us: when we take physic for our recovery, we must not take it as
trusting in it, but repose on God for health: nor must our end of taking it be
to put off death further then God has bounded our term here: for, physic can
go no farther then he has appointed, who puts his staff into it without
which it falls to nothing.

A reproof of those who with Asa in sickness, Chron. 16.12. or to them in the
first place, and to God, when there is no other remedy. Some never call when
God binds them, Job 1.36.13. bid them pray, they list not, or cannot: and for
their sickness, they fret at it, and with Cain say; the punishment is greater
then they can bear, Genesis 4.13 as if they should say: God does not well so to
punish them; that is, so severely, or so for nothing. And so, they anger him
with their impatiencie, who must give them their health if they ever recover;
and increase the wrath, going further in but not coming out of sickness to
health. But some, insteede of seeking the Lord by prayer, seek to the devil in
some witch for ease of pain, or end of sickness: so did Ahaziah, who falling
through a lattesse in his upper chamber in Samaria, was so bruised with the
fall, that he lay sick of it upon his bed, till he died: hereupon, when he
should have sent to God in Israel he sent to an Idol in Ekron, Baal-zebub; that
is, not to God in faith, but to the devil in sin, to know if he should
recover of that disease, 2. King. 1.2.6.

The admonition follows.

Sin no more. Our Savior, having made this Man whole; here, like a good
Physician, tells him what diet he should keep, to keep so. The diet
prescribed is; Sin no more: the meaning is, not as thou have done: and so he
bidds him not to keep a course in sin, as before, and not to return to the
vomit which he has cast: or, he wishes him to look better to the health of
his soul, for neglect whereof, he had such ill health in his body; and to take
heed that by the ill diet of sin he fell not into a relapse. This may be our
Saviors counsel: where yet he intends not that he can be so free from sin, as
that he should never fall again; for that is impossible in this mid-vaile: but
intimates that his sickness was the fruit of his sin: Doct.
from whence we may draw this conclusion; that the diseases of the body (for
the most part) come from the disease of the mind, caused by sin: and so, God
corrects sin with the whip of sickness, not always, yet most what, and
commonly. I say not always: for, there are (sometimes) other causes of
sickness beside sin, not known to us, but well known to God, Ioh. 9.2.3 yet
sin (ordinarily) is cause. The first fall gave us this bruise, and ever since
we spat blood through or by means of it. Indeed, a peace since was made
between God and us in the seed of the woman, Genesis 3.15. but it never reached
so far as to conclude a peace between God and sin: and he that was contented
to be reconciled to sinners is at emnity with sin; hence, sin is the proper and
kindly cause of Plagues upon a whole Nation, or particular person; and so of
sicknesses upon it, and him. And for general strokes upon a Land, that sin
causes them, it is a plain case in the book of Lamentations: where Jeremy
showing what a folly it is for man so to vex himself, that is, so in vain by
mis-iudging of his estate, helps to wind him out of the by-pathes of so foul
mistakes; and directly tells him, that being smitten of God, he suffers
justly the punishment of his sin: man suffers for his sin, Lam. 3.39. but
more specially, in the instance of sicknesses, that these also come deservedly
for sin, beside the words here, the speech of Christ to the sick of the Palsy,
(in which disease his sin held him) does make plain as upon tables, Mat.
9.26. for, first he forgave him his sins removing the cause, verse 2. and then
he healed his Palsy, changing the effect, ver. 6. God was coming to Judah
with good things in both hands: but he turned away: the good came not, which
their sins hindered, and evil things were sent, which their iniquities were
cause of, Ier. 5.25. Eliphaz tells Job, that misery comes not forth of the
dust, Job 5.6. and bids him to seek another mother for it, even the proper
mother of misery, which is sin, ver. 3. The rebellious to Gods ordinances (who
are foul sinners) are threatened, for like matter, by the Lord himself, Leuit.
26.15.16. and the Psalmist says that fools, (by which he means wicked ones)
by reason of their transgression, and because of their iniquities are
afflicted, Psalm. 105.17. that is, afflicted with sickness, and visited with
troubles, Psalm. 89.32. the reasons:

In many things we sin all, James 3.2. and all in some: Romans 6.23. Secondly,
David's song to him is of his mercy and justice, Psalm. 101.1. Thirdly, Psalm.
89.32. but the God of judgment cannot do but what just is: and it is just to
give to every mother her own child; that is, correction where it is deserved,
and more, where more is due: therefore, God afflicting for sin, it follows
that sin is the deserving cause of that affliction whatsoever.

An instruction in all we suffer, because of Oaths, the Land mourns? Ier.
23.10. So, for every sorrow we must say; this is our sorrow; that is, that
which we are worthy of, and comes to the right owner, Ier. 10.19. If God lay
his finger upon us, touching us, in our estate with want, or in our name with
disgrace; nay, if he lay his whole hand upon us, smiting us with the calamities
of Pestilence, Famine, or Sword, we must clear the Lord in all, and in all say;
Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments, Psalm. 119.137. David,
when it was told him from the Lord by Nathan, that evil should be raised
against him out of his own house, that the Sword should be laid upon it, that
his wives should be defiled, and the child die, 2. Sam 11.12. pleaded to all
this no other defense, but I have sinned against the Lord, verse 13. And he
confesses, that when all those judgments should come and be executed upon
him, which God, by his Prophet, had threatened, yet God was free and he in
fault. The like confession made Daniel for the people, or rather against the
people for the Lord, in as fearful a judgment as could be executed upon a
Nation; Dan. 9.5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14. which was, that the Lord was just, and
that they had deserved so much and more: what David and Daniel did in a Plague
and calamity the greatest under heaven, that must we do in like manner, and
justify the Lord in all his judgments: for, no judgment is executed, which
is not executed for sin: the law reads the sentence, and God gives it: if God
pour out the dregs of his wrath, it is, because we are frozen in our dregs
of sin, Zeph. 1.12. the earth is filled with cruelty, before God will fill it
with water, Genesis 6. and 7. Chap. and Sodom burns with lusts, before God will
burn it with fire, Genesis 18.20. and 19.5.24 25. So Judah serves sin, before
God will give up Judah to serve in Babel. She will not serve the Lord: for 70.
years, therefore, she must serve a strange Lord, in a strange Land. And now
for our selves of this Nation; the Lord has lately broken in by a terrible
Plague: and shall we think other, but that the sins were strong and masculine
that called for it? and if so: should it not make us in all that is come, to
confess Gods righteousness, and our own open shame, because we have sinned
against him? Dan. 9.8. should it not make us to search and try our ways, and
to turn again unto the Lord? or make us to new-cast our selves, that we may
be a people, holy to God? Tit. 2.14. If we do not, rather, if we will not,
what hope, sin continuing, (the cause of Plagues) but that the effect should
follow, great Plagues for sin? either God must loose his justice, or we perish,
if we will not be reformed: this was more largely spoken of in my Commentary
on Psalm. 9 1. ver. 10. the words; there shall no evil, etc. Doctrine and Uses
there.

A reproof of those who being under the hand of God in their many sins, him
that strikes with it: so did that reprobate, Mat. 25.24. who charged his Lord
to be a hard man, and an unreasonable taker: one that had a very hard law, a
law that reaped where it never sowed: if they do not what he commands, the
law is intolerable, and who can help it? or, whose fault is it but his who
should have given them better grace? so say Reprobates; so said Cain, and that
Gods punishment was above the fault, Gen 4.13. The Hypocrite, when God lays
smart upon him, and paies him in justice, for iniquity and for sins, fares
like a beast that is sticked and haled with ropes, using neither meekenes nor
entreaty, but with roaring and struggling, and straining himself doubleth his
pain. He never considers his sin, in which he is bound fast unto judgment,
but complains of his punishment; also, he flutters like a bird in a Net, when
God has caught him: but, what is gotten by struggling thus under Gods hands?
they that are so impatient under the rod, must be bound to a form: and what
do we get by running against the rock and stone of offense but a dashing in
fitters, with the Plague Sore of a tormented conscience? if (then) we will not
be (as the most wicked) when we are in fault, we must humbly (as the most
penitent) submit when we have to do with the Lord; reuerencing his just law,
and clearing him. If he follow us with judgments, he is just: or, if he
reject us, he is just, holy, and righteous. If he take away our corn in the
time of harvest, he may do it, sin provoking him: if he bring the Plague
again, why may he not, who taking it away in mercy, may in justice, reduce it
for sin? if he kill with death, we cannot complain, the wages of sin being
in our hands, Romans 6.23. and the issues of it in his.

The last reason persuading, follows.

Lest a worse thing come unto thee. THis last reason goes off with a
threatening shot. It has a full charge, telling the man whom Christ healed,
that if he did so again, that is, so as before, he should not carry it so
easily: or then, it should be worse with him then ever, God having an iron rod
to break those, whom his rod of correction cannot make better. And indeed, the
Lord has many judgments in his storehouse that can never be emptied. If a man
will not be said unto by one or two warnings, he can send unto him by his
great ordnance. If ficknesse will not amend a land, if dear markets cannot,
there is a worse thing behind. And so we see, when one affliction can do
nothing, Doct.
God will send many and worse: if a light correction will not move us, he has
a heavier rod: and when one cannot, many shall. This is a plain case, as
appears, Leuit. 26.18. where Moses threatening, or God by him, obdurate
sinners, tells them, if they will not keep their hearts softer and more steep
in obedience to him; he will punish them seven times more, that is, more and
further, and that according to their sins. The like is threatened against the
like persons by the same Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.58.59. where, in the person of the
Lord, the obstinate and sinners are told, that they shall have, as their
purchase and merit, many strokes and wonderful, yea wonderrously durable, if
they persist to sin against that great and fearful name, the Lord their
God. In the next verse the 60. he holds on with more. And in Psalm. 32.10. the
Prophet speaks not of few sorrows, as crooks, to pull in the wicked when they
offer to break from God, but of many. I say therefore, go as far as thou will, if thou go from God, he can fetch thee again from any of all the
quarters of the earth, with many, yea innumerable sorrows: the reasons:

Even our earthly Parents, Deuteronomy. 32.34. he has a hammer to break the stone,
Ier. 23.29. and a rod of iron to break the horrible sinner, Apoc. 2.27. He
will be a moth to Ephraim, and so consume him insensibly, by little and
little, Hosea 5.12. or if the matter require more haste, a Lion to tear him
quickly, verse 14. also to the house of Judah, rottennes, which comes by
degrees, verse 12. or if more speed must be used, a Lions whelpe that makes
quick work, goes away with the spiole, and none can rescue it, verse 14. In
the book of the Judges; first, God kindles the fire of his wrath, selling his
people (their sin is the price) into the hands of a strange Lord, but eight
years, Judge. 3.8. after, he makes the fire greater; and they served Eglon
(King of Moah) eighteen years, verse 14. and after; and lastly, the fire was
great indeed; for, he delivered them into the hands of the Philistims 40.
years, Judge. 13.1.

An instruction to Christians, we often sin against him? yet (as one says)
there is great difference between Gods children, and no children, in this
manner of dealing: for, Gods children, are first called by the Word: if that
do nothing, or little, they shall be called by some works of his justice in
others: or, if they profit not that way, they shall feel smart themselves;
first, by light crosses and seldom, and after by sharper, and more often: and,
if yet they abide in sin, they shall be fetched out, as out of the fire with
strong and long afflictions: but for such as are no children but bastards, they
must look for one breaking after another till their necks be broken: Plague
shall follow Plague, till the last be executed, as upon Pharaoh. God will deal
with them as wise fathers do with graceless children: he will lay away the
rod, and put them out of doors. And here, let us (the people of this Kingdom)
take heed: the Plague has been among us, and hot in London: if so many
warnings will not serve, what shall we look for, but that God should lay away
the rod of our correction, saying; wherefore should ye be smitten any more,
Esaias 1.5. and so put us out of the doors of his kingdom for ever? if the fire
of Pestilence cannot purge us, there is a fire in hell will burn us: ye that
have escaped out of the fire of Pestilence, consider; that ye go not out of
one fire, and another fire consume you, Ezekiel. 15.7.

An admonition to Christians, and to thy feet to set them in Gods testimonies.
O remember this ye, that rise from sickness to sin, not to amendment:
hereby ye do but make work for another, and smarter Visitation. A man should
come out of sickness, as gold out of the furnace, which is purer by it, and
more shining: but many come out worse then they went in, who are not Gods gold
but Satan's dross: afflictions, sickness, poverty, pain are the portions of sin
from God, and rods of nurture in the hands of a loving Father: but if the rod
of nurture better us not, rather if it make us worse, what hope of us more then
of Salomons fool, who being sore and often beaten for his fault (it was of
drunkenness) would follow it yet more? Pro. 23.35. Of such blockishnes and
privation of sense we read in the wicked Israelites; who though strangers
devoured their strength; and this was no small affliction; yea, though gray
hairs were here and there upon them, and this was no new affliction; yet they
knew nothing, neither sought the Lord for all this, Hosea 7.9. no rod, no
calamity could do any good upon them: were these wise for themselves? or are
they wise, that will fall a sleep in a regardles security, while they are in
the heart of the sea, and far from any shore, as did Salomons drunkard, who
therefore might have perished without all remedy? So for the careless and
incorrigible in the hot brunt of Londons last Mortality, what wisdom in them,
that they had no better regard; seeing that by such senslesnesse of so
fearful and great a judgment from God, they purchase more strokes to the
fools back, which cannot but be so, when one stroke, and such a one, can so
little move them, or never a whit?

To have thirty and eight years sickness, and all that long time, to keep in
bed, must needs be a grievous chain: yet Christ tells this Man of a worse
thing in chains under darkness, binding to damnation: for such a matter I take
this worse thing to be. Doct.
And then we learn hence, that corporal pains here, should breed care in us
to prevent eternal in the helles: for, therefore the Lord judges us here, 1.
Cor. 11.32. and therefore, when we suffer here, and but for a very short time,
(or rather no time, compared to time endless,) in the ache of a tooth or anguish
of other member; and yet cry out as if we suffered, or should suffer
eternally: how should this put us in remembrance and fear of that place where,
and those torments wherein the wicked and all that forget God, do, and must
suffer world without end in ever burning flames of hell? should not such an
occasion set spurs of care into us to avoid the worse thing, when the thing
before was so grievous and tormenting: the reasons:

Good reason it should be so;

A reproof of those who mind nothing in sickness but health; nor in prison
but liberty; with some foolish happiness now: where David yet in the highest
flote of his kindomes, felt his sins as a mountain, and the pardon of them, as
the greatest ease worldly, Psalm. 32.1.2. to be shut up in sin, he esteemed it
greater thraldom, then to be shut up in prison: and the favor of God he
desired above all favors here, Psalm. 4.6. This use he made of his sickness
caused by his sin; the pain of it put him in mind of worse pains, and more
intolerable, which was his benefit thereby for our imitation. I pray God the
like mind may be found in those, whether rich or poor, at whose hearts the
Lord knocked by this last calamity of Pestilence; and I pray God it may be
found in all of us to our amendments: Amen.

ECCLESIAST. 7.13. Consider the Work of God.


FINIS.

