THE SOVLES HVMILIATION.

Job 22. verse. 29. And he shall save the humble Person.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the Bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1637.

THE SOVLES HVMILIATION.
Luke 15. verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc. 14. And when he had spent all, there
arose a mighty famine in that land, and he began to be in want.

15. And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country, and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine.

16. And he would feign have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did
eat: and no man gave unto him.

17. And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants in my
fathers have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger?

18. I will arise, and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned, etc.


THAT a poor sinner might come and be partaker of the precious merits and
death of our Savior and receive comfort thereby.

There are two things considerable. First, a fitting and enabling of the soul
for Christ. Secondly, an inplantation of the Soul into Christ. For howsoever
it is true there is abundance of mercy, and infinite merit in Christ: yet
unless the Soul be fitted and enabled by the hand of faith, to lay hold upon
Christ; he shall never receive comfort from him, be his necessities never so
many, and his misery never so grievous. Therefore John Baptist was sent to
prepare the way, that all those mountains of pride might be laid low, and all
the ditches filled up, and all the crooked things might be made strieght and
all rough things might be made smooth, that there might be a way for Christ.
The meaning is this: The heart of a man is the high way wherein Christ comes.
Now there are mountains of pride and untoward stoutnesse of heart, and many
windings and turnings, and devices which the heart has, by reason of many
lusts that are in it. This fitting and preparing, is nothing else but the
taking away of that knotty knarlinesse of the heart, and that pride, and all
such cursed corruptions, that the door may be set open, and the heart made
ready that the King of glory may come in.

The heart being thus fitted and enabled, then follows humiliation: for the
breaking of the heart, is not all that God has to do with a poor sinner,
though the Lord wound the heart of a sinner, and run him through, yet the heart
will be starting aside, and will not go out to Christ. Therefore I shall now
speak of humiliation of the spirit, yet before I come to it, give me leave to
lay open two passages.

1. The necessity of this work, it must needs be. 2. The nature of this work.
First, it is necessary that the soul should be thus humbled; for humiliation
pares away all selfe-sufficiency from the soul by compunction: the Lord
breaks the heart, and wearies it with sin, and then the soul will be no
more drunk, nor loose, nor vain, no more foolish, nor dissembling, nor hating
of Gods servants, nor use no more false weights; by humiliation the Lord plucks
away the confidence in a man's privileges, and all his good performances, and
all his duties, by which he is ready to shelter himself, and by which he
thinks to get some succor and comfort to his own soul. Now as sin shall
not rule in the heart, so the Lord will make the sinner see, that whatsoever he
has and does, can never help him, except the Lord Jesus come down from
heaven by his mighty power. For the further opening of these, you must know
that there are these two maine lets, which hinder the coming of faith into the
soul, and which keep a man from believing in Christ, that Christ may have
possession of him.

First, 1. Let of Faith.
when the soul is taken up with a secure course, and rests it self well
apaide in his own practices, and therefore it never sees any need of a
change, nor never goes out for a change: now while he lives thus, and blesses
himself in his sin, it is impossible that ever the soul should receive
faith, or ever by the power of faith repair to Christ upon these terms: for
ever where faith comes it works a change, all the old things are done away, and
become new, he is new in heart and life; now the secure sinner that sees no
need of a change, will never see need of faith, nor labor for it; and if the
Ministers of God bid such a man to leave his sin, and to pray in his family,
and forsake his sinful practices, and to sanctify the Lords day, and take up
new courses, he thinks they bid him to his loss: now by that time the Lord
has taken away this let, and burdened the soul mavelous extremely, and
says, is it well that you live in drunkenness, and in covetousness, in
cheating, in lying and the like, then take your sins and get you down to
hell with them; thus the Lord is forced to break the heart: then a poor
sinner begins to see where he is, and now he says, and is this true, then I am
the most miserable creature under heaven, and except I be otherwise, it had
been good for me if I had never been borne; by this time the soul sees need
of a change: Therefore as they said, Men and brethren what shall we do, Acts
2.37.
we have been thus and thus, but if we rest here it will be our ruin for
ever, oh what shall we do. Thus the soul comes to a restless dislike of it
self, and says, I must either be otherwise or else I am but a damned man for
ever.

When the soul is thus resolved that it must of necessity change, and there
is no dallying with the Lord nor with himself, and this heart must be altered,
and this course must be amended. When it sees that it must change, it begins to
improve all means to see if he can possibly do it by his own strength, and
by his means using, as if the soul did say, good Lord cannot my wit compass
it, and cannot my prayers work it, and though I am a sinful wretched man, yet
I will be no more drunk, nor unclean, nor the like: but by prayer, and
hearing, and fasting, I will labor to mend all in this kind; will not these
duties do the deed? this very resting in a man's selfe-sufficiency does
marveilously cross and hinder the work of Faith, for this is the nature of
Faith; It goes out of it self, and fetches a principle of life, grace, and
power from another. The soul apprehends it self miserable, and it falls upon
the arm of Gods mercy, and merely goes out to God for succor. Now for a man
to fetch all from without, and yet to seek for sufficiency from himself,
these two cannot stand together, they are professely cross one to another; and
therefore after the Lord has made the soul see an absolute necessity of a
change, and now the soul sees an utter impossibility in himself, to change
or alter himself, then he is content to go to Christ for grace and power.
Thus Humiliation pares away all a man's privileges and all his hearing and
praying etc. not, that a man must use these noe more, but he must not rest upon
them for strength to help and succor himself withal. as it is with the
graft. 1. it must be cut of from the old stock 2. it must be pared and made
fit for the implantation into an other. So the Soul being cut of from sin:
then humiliation pares it, and makes it for the ingrafting into Christ. What
humiliation is.
thus you see this work is absolutely necessary.

But what is this humiliation of heart. It is thus much. When the soul upon
search made despaires of all help from it self: he does not despair of Gods
mercy, but of all help from himself and submits himself wholly to God, the
soul strikes sale and falls under the power of Jesus Christ and is content to
be at his disposing,

In this description let me discover these three particular passages.







For the first part of the description that the soul seeks for remedy else
where and not from Christ. this is expressed here in the 15 verse of this
Chapter. The Prodigal would needs have his portion, and he would not ever be
a slave in his fathers family: well he had his portion and gone he is, and he
has spent all, and when all was gone there fell a great famine in the Land;
and, what did he then? he would not now riot any more as he had done, because
poverty pinched him in this kind, but he turns good husband. and is content to
use any means for his maintenance, and he would make hard shift before he
would go home to his father, and therefore he joins himself to a Citizen of
the Country, etc.

This prodigal is a true picture of every poor distressed sinner that has
ryotted away his time, yet at last when the venom of sin begins to scorch
and pearce his soul, and he is famished for want of Gods favor and the wrath
of God pursues him, and a desperate sorrow seaseth upon his heart, and he is
wearied and burdened and tired with his sin, and sees that he has noe
help, he sets all his wits to work to see if he can tell which way to
succor himself in these his grievances, and though he will not take up any
base courses as he had done, but prooves a good husband and uses all means
to succor himself. so the doctrine from hence is this.

Doctrine.
A sinner naturally in his trouble and distress seeks for succor (not from
God nor from Christ) but from himself and from his own abilities.

So that the soul being in this great extremity of heart by reason of his
sin, he dares not, nay he will not meddle with sin any more but it betakes
it self to hearing and praying, and to other duties ordinary and extraordinary,
and by these he thinks to be absolutely succored. I confess the best of Gods
Saints must use these means, they must hear and pray, and fast, but they must
not rest upon these; it was very fit that the Prodigal should labor for his
living, but not that he should not withal seek home to his father for
relief. So, it is requisite that we should hear and pray and fast, but
these should not keep us from a father. It is the nature of man naturally to
make of means a Savior to himself: he scrapes for some succor and, and
rests upon some rotten endeavors, and because he can hear and pray and fast,
he thinks this is enough to save him, he uses not these to bring him to Christ
but rests on them.

It is a natural thing ingrafted into all mankind since the fall of Adam: as
you may see by the Apostle; Romans 9.31.32.
because the Jews were scrambling for life and happiness from the works of
the Law, therefore they could not attain it, but the Gentiles which did not
seek it from the works of the Law, they got it. as if he had said, when they
saw their anguish and trouble then they fell upon these duties of hearing and
praying and fasting, and they thought that was enough in Conscience, and here
they took up their stand, this is to cleave to a man of the Country. Romans 10.3.
and the same Apostle says, they being ignorant of the rightousnes of God,
sought to establish themselves in their own righteousness, etc: this they
would have, here they would rest, and here they would die. In common experience
we may see it: take a poor sinner that has been soundly awakened in the
sense of his own vileness, what is the ground of his hope? Oh says he, now
the world is well amended with me, and I have not been drunk so many years,
and I have performed these and these duties, as if that would serve the turn:
this is to look for happiness from a man's own duties. It is with a poor
sinner as it was with Ephraim, when Ephraim saw his wound and his sickness,
Hosea 5.13.
then he went to Ashur and to king Iaribbe, that is to the king of contention
or advocate, but he did not heal their wound. Therefore the lamenting Church
says Ashur shall not save us, Hosea 14.1.
we will not ride upon horses neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, you are our gods: as if they had said, we made king Ashur, and the King
of Egypt our gods, and we thought we might have hired help from them; but
now we see there is no help in them: as it was in that temporal distress,
so it is in this spiritual affliction of the soul. When the soul sees his
wound and his sin before him to condemn him, and misery prepared to plague
him, and he has (as it were) a little peepe-hole into hell, the soul in this
distress sends over to prayer and hearing and holy services, and thinks by
his wits and duties or some such like matters to succor it self, and it
begins to say my hearing and my prayer, etc. will not these save me? thus the
soul in conclusion rests in their duties. Though these duties be all good,
honorable and comfortable, yet they are no gods at all able of themselves to
save us, but they are the ordinances of God that lead us to God, yet they
cannot give salvation to any that rests upon them. It is the nature of a
sinful heart to make the means as meritorious to salvation; yet mistake me
not, these duties must be had and used, but still a man must not stay here* a
man will use his bucket, but he expects water from the well: these means are
the buckets, but all our comfort, and all our life and grace is only in
Christ; if you say your bucket shall help you, you may starve for thirst if
you let it not down into the well for water: so, though you brag of your
praying, and hearing, and fasting, and of your alms, and building of hospitals
and your good deeds, if none of these bring you to a Christ, and if these are
not means to settle you on a Christ, you shall die for thirst, though your
works were as the works of an Angel.

But why does the soul seek for succor from it self, and will not go out
to Christ?

and the staff is in his own hand there is some hope, and he would willingly
do any thing for himself; but for the soul to have salvation out of his own
reach, and to put the staff out of his own hand and to hang his salvation
upon Gods good pleasure, whose love and mercy (as yet) he was never persuaded
of. Oh this is very hard, and the heart is mavelous shie and careful in
this; and it is with the heart in this kind as Rabshecah said to the people of
Israel; If you say to me, Esa. 36.7.
is not that he whose altars you have broken down, etc. Thus he labored to
pluck away the hearts of this people from trusting in the Lord: The soul in
this kind sometimes shakes and shrinkes in the apprehension of his own
vileness, and says as this wretch did, have you offended him? and do you look
for any succor from him? this argument was very peevish and keen and yet
false, for they were the altars of Idols, but the soul says against it self
and mavelous truly: when a Minister would persuade a man to go to heaven for
mercy, the soul begins to reason thus with it self, and says, shall I
repair to God? Oh that's my trouble, is not he that great God whose justice,
and mercy, and patience I have abused? and is not he the great God of heaven
and earth, that has been incensed against me? oh, with what face can I
appear before him, and with what heart can I look for any mercy from him; I
have wronged his justice, and can his justice pardon me? I have abused his
mercy, and can his mercy pity me? what, such a wretch as I am; If I had never
enjoyed the means of mercy, I might have had some plea for my self, but oh, I
have refused that mercy, and have trampled the blood of Christ under my feet;
and can I look for any mercy? no, no, I see the wrath of the Lord incensed
against me, and that's all that I look for: the soul rather desires the
mountains to fall upon him, that he may never appear before God. Nay, I have
observed this in experience. In the horror of heart, the soul dare scarce
read the Word of God, for fear he should read his own neck verse, and he
dare not pray, for fear his prayers be turned into sin, and so increase his
Judgment: thus the soul out of the guilt of sin dare not seek out to the
Lord, and therefore it will use any shift to help it self without going to
God.

Adam after his fall could not have found out this way, if the Lord had not
revealed it. Had not the Lord Jesus Christ that came from the bosom of his
Father, made this bosom truth known, we had never been acquainted with it;
therefore the soul cannot come to Christ upon these terms. As our Savior
says, Ioh. 3.13.
No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven. Now,
this poor distressed sinner as yet guilty of his sin, and yet not seeing a
way revealed, and not able to ascend into this heavenly mystery, because it
sees no better way, it will betake it self to these duties, that may be done
by his own strength without seeking to Christ.

Adam had it, and he might have procured Gods favor, and have kept the Law,
and have been blessed by the Law, because the Lord had given him a stock in
himself, and made him able to do it of himself, and we retain thus much of
Adams nature, we are loath to live of another, but we would feign be as able to
do duties as Adam was. And it is with every natural man as it was with
Sampson: he had once Sacramental hair, and therefore when any temptation
came, he did shake himself, and was able to break strong cords, and to
overcome his enemies, and when his hair was gone, he went out as at other
times, and thought to do as he had done, but the Spirit of God was gone from
him: So, because Adam had power of himself to yield exact obedience and to
please God, a natural man makes an offer of this still, and would be doing,
and he goes out and shakes himself, and says, cannot my wit, and my prayers,
and my good meanings, and my privileges save me, and satisfy divine Justice,
must the guilt of sin still lie upon me. Thus the soul would give content
to God by his own strength; as it is with a man that has been a rich
Chapman, and has had a fair stock, but is now decayed, it is hard to bring
down the pride of this man's heart, he is loath to be a Iourney-man again, he
will be trading though it be but for pinnes: So, the Lord put a stock into
Adams hand, and he turned bankrupt; and yet we will be trading here for a
company of poor beggarly duties, dead prayers, and cold hearings, and we
think this will be sufficient. This is the disposition of the soul naturally:
So, the issue of the point is thus much; if the soul through the guilt of
sin dare not appear before God, and it knows not yet how to come to God,
in, and through a Mediator; and in regard of Adams innocence, it needed not to
go out to another, for any power and strength, hence it is that the soul will
invent any way, and take up any course rather then come to Christ, but all the
former truths are true, and therefore still this turns the heart to deal
with God in this manner.

Adams nature, and every man seeks it, but if ever God draw you home to the
second Adam Christ Jesus, he will draw you from the first Adam. You wonder to
see a company of poor wretches, build all their comfort upon what they can
do, and they will patter over a few prayers, it may be in their beds too; it
is easy to consider it. Nature makes a man thus give way to himself in it,
and no wonder though his heart is prepared for this way when it comes.

But for instruction for our selves. An use of instruction.
Does the soul seek out every where before it come to the Lord God? and to
the Lord Jesus Christ? and will the Lord Jesus spare, and succor a poor
sinner when he comes? then hear, and see, and admire at the goodness of the
Lord, that ever the Lord should vouchsafe to give entertainment to a poor
sinner, when he has made so many outs. If he come home never so late, the
Lord receives him when he comes. Is not this mercy, that when we have been
roving and ranging, here and there, and we have coasted this way, and that
way; and never thought of Christ, nor mercy, nor of his blood? I say, is not
this admirable mercy, that the Lord Christ, should receive us when we come, yea
though we come to him last of all? He may deal with us justly, as he did with
the people in Jeremy; Where are thy Gods (says the Lord) that thou have made
thee, Ier. 2.22.
let them arise if they can help thee in the time of thy trouble, for
according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, oh Judah; The people made
Idols and served them, and when the time of trouble came, and all their gods
failed them, then they come for succor to the Lord, and would feign shelter
themselves under his wings. Nay, says the Lord, go to your gods that you have
loved, and let them help you, as if he had said unto them, do you come to
me in the day of your distress, have you honored and worshipped your Idols,
must they have all the honor, and I have all the burden, get you home to your
Idols, and let them succor you. Oh, think of it and wonder. So the Lord may
justly deal with us; we that rested here upon our good prayers, and our
hearings, and fastings, and yet when all these prevail not, but the guilt of
sin remains, and wounds the conscience still, and at last we are forced to
look up to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to say, except the Lord Jesus Christ's
blood purge these filthy hearts of ours we shall never have help, and good
Lord be merciful to us. Did you rest in these, because there was no God in
Israel, and no mercy in the Almighty, that you have rested upon your
privileges? Go then (may the Lord say) do you come to me to be saved and
succored? go to your meritorious works now, let them cheer your hearts, and
pardon your sins and comfort you, for I will not succor you at all. It were
just with the Lord to deal thus with us, because we give him the leavings, and
come last to him. But here is the wonder of mercies, that whenever we come,
he casts us not of, yet if we would but come to him, and leave these broken
reeds, Ier. 3.1.
he would receive us: Yet return to me (says the Lord): as if the Lord had
said, you say that all that you can do will not succor you, you have played
the adulterers with many lovers, yet at last come home to me, and believe in
me, and settle your hearts upon my mercy, and whatsoever your weakness and
rebellions have been, I will save and succor you.

The second use is for Exhortation, seeing it is so, that we are ready to
seek for succor and relief from our selves, then let this make us watchful
against this deceit of our hearts. Yet, I do not dishonor these ordinances,
but I curse all carnal confidence in these. You cleave to these poor beggarly
duties, and (alas) you will perish for hunger: the devil knows this full
well, and therefore he will sink your hearts for ever. Judas did so, and hell
is full of hearers, and dissemblers, and carnal wretches, that never had
hearts to seek unto Christ in these duties, and to see the value of a Savior
in them. The devil slides into the heart this way unsuspected and unseene,
because he comes under a color of duties exactly performed; but now in that
the devil labors to cheat us of heaven and salvation, we should be so much
more watchful. This is the stone that thousands have stumbled at, yea many
that have gone a great way, in the way of life and salvation. For howsoever,
the soul that is truly broken cannot be satisfied without a Christ, yet it may
be much hindered from coming to Christ: but those that are not soundly broken
and wrought upon by the work of contrition, they are daubed up, and come to
ruin and destruction for ever. When the soul lies under the hand of God, and
under his stroke, and a man sees his drunkenness, and his base contempt of
God, and his grace, and all his sins are presented before him? Oh, then he
voweth and promises to take up a new course, and every man will mend one, and
he begins to approve himself in the reformation of the evils committed, and
then he thinks he need do no more, and now the soul says, well now I see the
justice of God is provoked, and I see now what sin is, and what the danger of
it is, I will have no more drunkenness, now I will be a sober man, and now no
more scoffing and scorning at those that go to hear the word; I will attend
upon the good word of God my self, and by this time he thinks thus? what can
you say against me? what can I do more, to heaven I must go; all this is but
a man's self. Its true, this is the way, and these are the very means, but all
these cannot procure the pardon of one sin, if he go no further. We have
many such trials: I have known many that have done great works, but never had
a thought of Christ, and never expected salvation from him, and thus they fed
upon the husks: and when the devil says, you pray, and hear, and do
duties; so did Judas and many others that are now in hell, then the heart sees
his vileness, and he is driven to a desperate despair, so that no Minister
under heaven is able to comfort him, but he goes away with the husk of duties,
but Christ who is the substance of all, and the pithe of a promise is
forgotten, and a Christ in hearing, and a Christ in prayer is not regarded, and
therefore he famisheth for hunger.

The ground of the second point.
Now see the success that the Prodigal found, the case is clear, he found no
relief at all. No man gave unto him: his hungry stomach was not refreshed,
and his wants were relieved; so that now the soul of the poor man sinkes
unrecoverably in his misery. And that he does thus, consider two phrases,
first in the 16. verse, no man gave unto him. Not, that no man gave him husks,
for he that fed the swine might have fed himself, but the meaning is, no man
gave him man's meat, if he might have had man's meat, though never so poor and
mean, he would have been content, but no man did give him, and hence follows
the phrase in the 17. verse, How many hired servants in my fathers house have
bread enough, and I die for hunger. It was not because he had no husks, but
because he had no bread, as if he had said, perish I shall, I see no succor;
nay, I look for none, I may shuffle on here for a while, but if I stay here I
am a dead man. This condition of the Prodigal, discovers the second passage in
the description of Humiliation; So the Doctrine from hence is this:

2. Doctrine.
The broken hearted sinner finds no help; nay, he has no hope to receive any
help from himself in the matter of justification.

You see the ground of the point is clear: The Citizen relieved him not, but
he gives himself as as lost, and says; I cannot help my self, and no man
will succor me, and therefore I perish for hunger. This is the picture of a
soul that is famished for want of the sense of Gods favor, though he use
means; and hears, and prays, and fasteth; yet he finds no good, and no
sound comfort in all these: not that a man must not use these means, but he
must not rest upon these: a man must not think that his bucket can quench his
thirst; but he fetches water from the fountain with it: So, these duties are
as the bucket, a man may famish for all these duties, unless he go to the
Fountain of Grace, and pardon, and mercy, and in the use of all these see a
need of Christ, and go to God for a Christ by them; these means must be used,
but these cannot be saviors of him; these means must be used to bring him to
a Christ, yet they cannot save him without a Christ. What was spoken temporally
to Ephraim, it is true of the Soul spiritually: When Ephraim saw his wound,
Hosea 5.13.
and his sickness, he went to Ashur and King Iarib, but they could not help
him, nor cure his wound. It is true, this Text mainly aims at a temporal
deliverance, but this may draw us to consider the success that a poor Soul
finds in his duties, resting upon them. When a poor Soul is broken in the
sight of his sin, and weary of it; he sends down to prayer, and hearing, and
the like; but these cannot succor him without Christ: Esaias 55.2.
and therefore the Prophet Esaias says, Why lay you out your money for that
which is not bread, etc. The Lord accounts the pains of his faithful servants
good labor, and would not have them lay it out for that which is not bread.
All the profits that may enrich a man, and all the honors that may advance a
man; nay, all the privileges that a man has; as Word, Sacraments, and
Ordinances; and that a man is baptized, and has often come to the Lords Table;
these come no farther then the very bare husk; if they go no farther, and
have not an eye to their Savior; these are no true bread: the horror of heart
cannot be quieted, nor his sins pardoned, barely by these duties doing: the
meat of the Soul, is not the bare Word, nor the bare Sacraments; but a Christ
in all these: this is the prop of the Soul: all the bare duties in the world
cannot succor us, if we rest upon them, without justification through Christ.

The Apostle Paul, a learned Pharisee, Phil. 3.5, 6, 7.
and a man of an unblameable life, because he was a man of a good life, of the
Tribe of Benjamin, and a Jew circumcised the eighth day; he thought to do
great matters, and he thought he had done enough; he counted these his
privileges, gain. What, learned Paul? reverend Paul, unblameable Paul; What,
not he go to Heaven? he accounted these his greatest gain; as if he would
lay down enough upon the nail to purchase Heaven to himself: but these were
so far from saving of him, that he found them to be loss. Thus you see that
a distressed sinner finds himself helpless, and hopeless, in regard of any
sufficient succor in himself, or the creature, if he go no further then the
very duty.

Now the Soul finds that there is no saving succor to be had in these duties
barely: I say, he comes to see it by these three means.

First, from his own experience that forces him to confess it.

Secondly, from the examples of others.

Thirdly, The greatness of the evil that lies upon him, makes him see an
utter inabilitie to receive any good from that which he does.

First, From his own experience. Though he thought to take up a new course,
and to perform holy duties, and thought that without all question these would
save him, yet he finds now that these will not do the deed, he has no
saving good in these; and that appears by these three particulars. First, He
sees that the guilt of sin still remains, and the justice of God, being
unsatisfied still pursues him, though he pray, and hear, and perform many
duties, as the Lord told the people, when they were sharking for their own
comfort, and they thought to give God content by their new courses. Yet the
Lord tells them, Though thou wash thee with Nitre, Ier. 2.22.
and take thee much soap, and though thou use all means of reformation, yet
thy sins are sealed up, and thy iniquity is marked before me. It is with a
poor sinner as the Psalmist says of himself; Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9.
or whither shall I fly from thy presence, if I ascend up into heaven thou art
there, if I lie down in hell thou art there, if I take the wings of the
morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even thither shall thy
right hand lead me, etc. So, let a poor sinner go where he will, and do
what he can, the guilt of sin will ever be with him, it will lie down, and
rise up, and walk with him in the way. His sins remain unpardoned, and the
wrath of God is not appeased: and hence it is that all his prayers, are but as
so many inditements against him, and he dare not read the word for fear he
should read his own damnation. Nay, at every Sermon that he hears, he sees
more vileness in himself, and every Sacrament that he receives, increases
(not his comfort but) his horror, and he thinks thus with himself, good Lord, I
have taken my bane this day for I come unpreparedly, and the Lord knows, what
an unfaithful, and unbelieving heart I have.

Secondly, as the guilt of sin cannot be remooved by all his duties, so his
conscience cannot be quieted by all that he does; if his heart be thoroughly
pierced by the Sword of the Law, still conscience calls upon him, and quarrels
with him, and takes exceptions against him in the best of his duties, so far
they are from yielding any satisfaction to God, or from bringing any peace to
his conscience; if he rest upon the bare performance of them. I speak of a
broken hearted sinner: for the conscience is now Eagle eyed, it was full of
filme, and scales before, but now it is open, and Eagle eyed, and can spy, all
his weaknesses, and pick matter of disquiet, even in the best of all his
duties that are done. The Soul thought them very good payment, yet now the
heart is touched, and conscience is awakened, and tells him of his barrenness,
and deadness, and roaving thoughts, when he does pray, and how insufficient,
he is to pray, and therefore he dare not pray with his Family, and conscience
says to him, you have formerly contemned prayer: and now you cannot pray. And
when the Soul comes into the congregation, there Conscience notes him, and
when he goes home, Conscience says thus unto him, how dead were you, and how
unreverently did you attend to the Word, and how unwilling was your heart to be
in subjection to the Word, thus Conscience becomes Gods Sergeant, and says,
do thou think that these prayers will save thee; Nay, they are rather a
means to condemn thee, so heartlesse, so cold, and so dead hearted thou art
in them; and is this hearing sufficient to save thee: Nay, will not the Lord
curse thee for thy weak performance of these duties? Now the distressed Soul
comes to a stand with it self, and he sees so much weakness in his duties,
that he almost leaves off all, saying: I had as good not go to the Word at
all, for I profit not by it; and I had as good not pray at all, as pray thus
deadly, and untowardly: thus the Lord drives the Soul out of himself; and
when Conscience thus picks quarrels with him, and says; Will prayer, and
hearing, and these duties so meanly performed, save you? Nay, may not God
justly confound you for them? It is admirable mercy that God did not confound
you in hearing, and strike you dead in praying! and then Conscience calls him
in question for his old sins, and says; If God may condemn thee for these
duties, and for these prayers? Then what may God do for thy old drunkenness,
and railing at good men, 1 John 3.20.
and good means? as the Apostle says, If our conscience condemn us; God is
greater then our Consciences, and knows all things: so the Soul says, I
know thus much by my self, but God knows more.

in upon the Soul a great many infirmities, and a swarm of weaknesses that
are present with the Soul: and so he sees an utter inabilitie in himself to
help himself against them; the one of these two things befalls him. If he be
a man of mean parts, and small gifts, he sees himself so weak, and so
unprofitable under all means, that his Soul almost sinkes down in desperate
discouragement; and when he gets nothing by all the duties that he does, he
falls out with himself, and pineth almost to desperation. And if he be a man
of great parts, and gifts, and learning, and has wisdom to conceive of
things; the Lord suffers many corruptions to fall upon him: and when he comes
to humble himself before God, he says, I am able to discourse of this, and
that; and I can hear, and pray; but (oh) this heart of mine: a man had as good
move a mountain, as move my heart; this hard heart will not stir, nor be
broken under all, and helped against these as it should be. Now, the Soul
upon these terms is even content to leave off all: and it befalls the heart in
this case, as it did Hagar: Genesis 21.15, 16.
When her bottle of water was spent, she cast the child under a tree, and sat
a far off, because she would not see the child die; so it is with the Soul.
When the bottles of these Saints, and scantie duties are done, the soul sits
down in discouragement, and says, Good Lord, it will never be, my Soul shall
never be accepted, and my sins will never be pardoned; and the heart begins
to reason thus with himself, and says; I have had as good means as ever any
poor creature had, and many gracious friends have counseled me, and yet the
guilt of my sins is ever before mine eyes; and my Conscience is not yet
quieted: Nay, these sins, this blind mind, and this hard heart will not be
subdued; but the Lord Jesus Christ can do more then thou, and the world too.
The Lord will make thee see that thou and the world can do nothing, that
Christ may take away the guilt of sin, and quiet thy Conscience, and subdue
thy corruptions for thee: thus much he sees from his own experience.

The second passage is this; as his own experience makes the Soul confess
that there is no hope of good in himself; so the example of others does
confirm a broken hearted sinner in this; that all the creatures in the world,
and all the duties under Heaven without Christ, cannot purchase salvation to
the Soul; because the Soul now sees, and considers in the Scriptures, that
many thousands have had all these privileges, and done many duties, and yet
come short of perfection. Many reprobates have had these privileges as well as
Gods people; and the Soul thinks thus with it self: If beauty, or honors,
or riches, might have purchased eternal life; then Pharaoh, Absolon, and
Nebuchadnezzar, should have been accepted of God: therefore, What have I that
many thousands have not had? and, What do I that reprobates have not done, and
yet for ought I know, it never did them good? Isaac was circumcised, and so was
Ishmael too; Abell offered Sacrifice, so did Cain too; and the stony ground
received the Word with joy, and many there were that waited upon God in the use
of his Ordinances, as you may see in the Prophet Esaias. Ahab fasted, and Judas
repented, Esaias, 58.2, 3.
and yet he is a devil now in hell this day: Psalm. 130.3.
And the Prophet David says, If the Lord should mark what is done amiss, who
could abide it? there was enough in David's prayers to condemn him; and if all
these did thus, and much more then I can do; Then why should I think to find
more help in my prayers then they did: thus the Soul sees that Gods people
never had Justification from any privileges that they enjoyed, nor from any
duties that they did, without relying on Christ.

Thirdly, the greatness of the evil which now the Soul sees, and the
desperate misery wherein it is, is so great, that now it finds an utter
in-abilitie, that all the creatures under heaven should ever remoove the evil
of it. For the soar that is made, and the wound that is given by sin, is
broader then all the salve (that the creatures can apply) is able to cover. The
Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and duties cannot reach the evil that lies upon the
heart in this particular; and this is considerable; the means that must
comfort and quiet the heart in distress, must be able to bear the wrath of
God, and to take away the venom and poison of the wrath of the Almighty. Now,
the Soul sees that no creature can do this; no creature can beat back Gods
wrath but it will fall; and hence it is that the Lord says, he has laid
salvation upon one that is mighty; there are mighty corruptions, and mighty
indignation, and mighty guilt, and therefore the Lord has laid salvation upon
the mighty. It must be more then a creature, that must bear or remoove the
wrath of the Creator; As the text says, There is no other name under heaven,
whereby you can be saved but only by Christ. Prayer says, there is no
salvation in me; and the Sacraments and Fasting say, there is no salvation in
us; there is salvation in no other but in Christ. The other are subservient
helps, not absolute causes of salvation; As the holy Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 3.23.
showing the peoples desperate condition and there misery therein, says, In
vain is salvation hoped for from the mountains; he had said before in the
22. verse, Return again, oh, disobedient children and I will heal your
rebellions, and they answered, behold we come Lord for thou art the Lord our
God, and in vain is salvation hoped for from the mountains: By salvation in
the mountains is meant the Idols set up in the hills, which the poor people
worshipped, and thought they were able to succor them, but in the day of
trouble, they said, we come Lord, for in vain is salvation hoped for from the
mountains. So, if thou trust in thy praying, and hearing, and good works,
though thou had a mountain of them, they can do thee no good, unless with
the eye of faith, thou look upon Christ for acceptance: but in the Lord our
God is salvation for evermore. Then gather up all: if the Soul sees by
experience, that no good will come by these, and if examples show so much, and
if the greatness of the evil, show that it is impossible for any comfort or
pardon to be brought home to the Soul; barely by these means, then the heart
concludes thus, and says; these will not do the deed, I may have all these
privileges, and perform all these duties, and yet salvation is not in these;
if I trust in them, there is no pardon in them, and no hope of redemption from
them says the Soul. The Soul does not despair of all good in Christ, but
the Lord is compeld (as I may say with reverence) to weary us from this
confidence in our selves, and from seeking any succor from our selves, that he
may make us go to Christ.

Let us do what we may, but yet go beyond all that we can do in this case;
when your hearts are hankering after these crazie holds, stay them, and deal
by your hearts, as the Lord sometimes did with the people of Judah. In their
distress, they did not go to the Lord, but they went to Egypt, and Nilus,
^eremie 2.18.
and therefore the Lord says unto them: What have thou to do in the way of
Egypt, to drink down the waters of Nilus? etc. When they were thus ranging
for their own relief in the time of their trouble, the Lord (as it were) calls
after them, and says, you will down to Egypt? what have you to do there:
Deal so by your own Souls, when thou find thine heart hammering help
from itself, and catching it out of the fire, thou see thy sins, and art
troubled; and now to quiet all, thou will hear, and pray, and perform duties;
and thus thou think to forge comfort out of thine own shop; therefore call
upon thy own heart, and say: what have thou to do to rest upon these broken
staves, upon thy praying, and hearing, and professing; these, if not
accompanied with faith in Christ's merits; will lay thee in the dust, and if
thou make Gods of them, the Lord will pluck them away. Judas prayed, and
preached, and heard, and received the Sacraments too, and yet he is a devil
in hell this day, and except thou have more then he had, thou will be no better
then he was: and therefore think thus with thy self; what have I to do to
stand here in these duties? I may be deluded by these, but saved and comforted
by them I cannot be, therefore use these I will, but rest upon them I will not.
If I could look up to heaven, and speak to Abraham, and Paul, and David; and
say, how were you saved; they would all make answer, and say, oh, away to the
Lord Christ, it is he that saved us, or else we had never come here; and he
will save you too, if you fly to him. Therefore (brethren) bring back your
hearts from these, and dream not to receive any saving succor from what you
have, or, what you do, unless you rely on Christ.

But, me thinks I hear some say; Oh, Question.
it is mavelous difficult, and hard; we hang upon every hedge, and we are
ready to think that it is enough, if we can but take up a task in holy
duties; How shall we pluck our hearts from resting upon them?



Now, that we may find these means to be so to us, as they are in themselves,
and that our Souls may be able to say, It is true; these are the holy
Ordinances of God, but it is in vain to expect any salvation, or justification
from them alone. I say, the means are mainely four, and I will handle them
something largely; because, if I be not deceived, here is the maine set of a
Christian; and herein appears the root of old Adam; we will not part with our
selves: the means are four.

First, consider seriously with thy self, and be convictingly settled, and
persuaded, of the unconceiveable wretchedness of thy natural condition. If
thou can but see this thoroughly, it will make thee see how vain it is to
look for any succor from thy self; labor to see the depth of thine own
misery because of thy sin, and to see how thou have sunk thy self into such a
desperate gulf of misery; that all the means under heaven will be short to
succor thee, unless the Lord Jesus come down from heaven, and his infinite
power be let down, to pluck up thy Soul from that misery wherein thou art:
there thou lie, and there thou art like to perish for ever, if God in mercy
succor not. Now, that I may pull down the pride of every vile wretch; give me
leave to discover the depth of our misery, in these four degrees.

Four degrees of our misery by nature.
First, consider that by nature thou art wholly deprived of all that ability,
which God formerly gave thee to perform service. Whatsoever is borne of the
flesh, Ioh. 3.6. Romans 7.18.
is flesh: (says our Savior) and therefore the Apostle Paul says, I know
that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing. All men by nature are
flesh, and therefore think thus with thy self, and say, there was never good
thought in my heart, nor good action done by me, for in me dwells no
spiritual good thing: there may be moral good in us, but though we are good
morally, yet we are naught spiritually; howsoever you pranke up your selves,
and think your selves some body, yet there is no spiritual good in you:
unless God work upon your hearts; whatsoever you have thought, or done, is
all in vain.

Secondly, thou art not only deprived of all spiritual ability, 2. Degree of
our misery. Ephesians. 2.1.
but thou art dead in trespasses and sins. What is that? a man is wholly
possessed with a body of corruption, and the Spawne of all abomination has
overspread the whole man, and it leavens all the whole lump of body and mind.
You often read this phrase in Scripture, but you perceive it not; as it is with
a dead body being deprived of the Soul (which did quicken it, and enable it to
do the works of a reasonable man) there comes a kind of sencelesnesse, and
after that, all noisome humors breed in the body; and all filthy vermin come
from the body, and therefore a man may bury it, but he cannot quicken it any
more. Just so it is with the Soul that is deprived of the glorious presence of
Gods Spirit, and grace which Adam had in his innocence: For, look what the
Soul is to the body, the same is the grace of Gods Spirit to the Soul. When
the Soul is deprived of Gods Spirit, there follows a senseless stupidnesse
upon the heart of a man; and all noisome lusts abound in the Soul, and take
possession of it, and rule in it, and are fed there; and appear in a man's
course in this kind. There is no carrion in a ditch smells more loathsomely in
the nostrills of man, then a natural man's works do in the nostrills of the
Almighty: There are some works of a dead body; it rots, and stinkes, and
consumes: so, all the works of a natural man are dead works: nay, all the
prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. If you can but say over
the Lords Prayer, you think you do a great piece of work; but, though thesr
are good in themselves, yet because they come from a corrupt heart, they are
dead, and loathsome prayers in the nostrils of the Almighty; as the wise man
says, He that turns his ear from hearing the Law, Prove. 28.9.
even his prayer is abominable. The prayers of a drunkard, of an adulterer, or
of a blasphemer, are an abomination to the Lord, He cannot abide them; they
are such unsavory, dead, stinking prayers, that the God of heaven abhors them:
I would to God you were persuaded of it. I would have a man to reason thus with
himself, and say; This is just my condition; How many gracious commands have I
slighted, and despised? How many precepts have I trodden under my feet;
therefore even my best prayers are abominable to the Lord; and if my prayers
be such? then what is my person, and all my sinful lusts? Look what we
do with a dead body, we may pity him, and bury him, but we cannot quicken
him: So, we may pity a poor drunkard, and pray for him, and bury him with
tears; but we cannot save him: Nay, all the means in the world will not save
him, except the Lords mighty power come from heaven to work upon his heart.

Three degrees of our misery.
Thirdly, the sentence of condemnation is now already past upon him, and one
foot is in the pit all-ready. Ioh. 3 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already: He does not say, he may be
condemned; but the sentence is already past upon him: his hard heart was never
soundly broken, and his proud heart was never content to part with it self and
all for Christ, and therefore he goes to endless torments for evermore. Every
natural man is an unbeliever, and therefore stands under the sentence of
condemnation: So that, unless the Lord be pleased to open his eyes, and to
break his heart, and to draw him from that estate, he is like to perish, and
go to hell for ever.

Fourthly, and lastly, if this be not enough, The fourth degree of our misery.
he is not only deprived of all spiritual good, and dead in sin, and
stands under the sentence of condemnation, though this were enough to lay out
hearts low before the Lord. You see the sinner in the pit; But will you see him
sinking into the bottom? I am loath to speak the worst: Nay, I durst not have
thought it, had not the Lord Christ spoken it in his Word. Therefore see what
he says, Ioh. 6.70.
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? Who was that? It was
Judas. Why, what did he? What, a dead man, and a damned man, and a devil too:
What will become of such a poor forlorn creature? It is said of Judas, that
the Devil put it into his heart to betray Christ, out of a covetous humor to
get money, and the Devil entered into Judas. Thus the devil puts it into his
mind, Ioh. 13.27.
and suggested it into his heart, to devise a way how to compass his end: nay,
the Devil entered into Judas, not by a corporal possession; but by a
spiritual kind of rule, which the devil did exercise over Judas, that is,
when the devils counsel, and advise took place with Judas to betray his
Master: this is not Judas his condition alone, but it is the condition of all
men by nature. That, look as it said of the Apostles, They were inspired with
the Spirit of God; Act. 1.4.
and as it is said of all sound Christians. They are led by the Spirit of God:
So, on the contrary, the wicked are led by, Ephesians. 2.2.
and with the spirit of the devil, He rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience: The devil casts wicked thoughts into their hearts, and carries
them into the commission of those evils, which formerly he had suggested: The
devil rules in them; he speaks by their tongues, and works by their hands,
and thinks, and desires by their minds, and walks by their feet; Revel. 2.10.
The devil shall cast some of you in prison, says Saint John. All men are
naturally under the power of Satan, and therefore Saint Paul was sent to
preach the Gospel that he might deliver them from the power of Satan to God.
Acts 26.18.
You think your selves brave men, and you can despise the word, and the grace
of God and abuse his Ministers: Alas, the devil has power over you; as it is
with a dead sheep, all the carrion Crows in the Country come to prey upon
it, and all base vermin breed and creep there: So, it is with every poor
natural sinful carnal creature under heaven; a company of devils, like so
many carrion crows prey upon the heart of a poor creature, and all base lusts
crall, and feed, and are maintained in such a wretched heart. Now (brethren)
think of all these, and search seriously. It is better to know this now, then
to know it when there is no remedy: I say no more for pity; is it so with
thee, and me, and all of us by nature? Then judge the case clearly, and pass
the verdict. Do thou think that a few faint cold prayers, and lazy wishes,
and a little horror of heart can pluck a dead man from the grave of his
sins, and a damned soul from the pit of hell, and change the nature of a
devil to be a Saint? No, it is not possible; and know that the work of
renovation, is greater then the work of thy creation; and there is no help in
earth, either go to Christ, or there is no succor for thee. We can pity
poor drunkards, and sorrow for them; but we are as able to make worlds, and to
pull hell in pieces; as to pull a poor Soul from the paw of the devil. Nay,
he is a devil, and a damned devil, as you have heard: if this were well
considered; it would dash in pieces, all those carnal conceits of a great
many, which make nothing of turning a devil to be a Saint.

Secondly, consider seriously the infirmity, The second means.
and feebleness, and the emptiness of all means that we enjoy, and all
duties that we do: it were argument enough, to persuade a poor brokenhearted
sinner, not to rely upon a poor broken reed that will deceive him when he
has most need: therefore since they cannot succor us, let us draw our hearts
from resting on them. This is a matter of great weight also; for the Soul
being thus broken for sin, sets a great matter of excellency, and sufficiency
in holy duties. Nay, people hang all their hope of eternal life, upon what
they have, and what they can do. Come to a poor broken hearted sinner, and
tell him of his sin, that he stands guilty of. Mark what his reply is. I
confess (says he) it is true; I have been so, and so, but the world is well
amended, I meddle not with my sins, and I have reformed all those base
courses. Nay, the Lord knows that my corruptions have cost me hot water, my
heart has been exceedingly vexed with them, I hope, I have had my hell here,
and I shall no hell hereafter. Alas, poor wretch, is this the hook that
upholds thy heart, and is this all the ground that thou go upon? it is good
that thou do repent and amend, and reform thy ways, and blessed be God,
for what he has made thee able to do; but, this I must tell thee; If thy
repentance, and reformation be all thy hope, and thou relyest upon them, as the
Jews did upon their Legal righteousness: thy Soul and all will sink
everlastingly; if thou look no further for help, for all these cannot procure
thy acceptance before God in that great Day of accounts; nor give any
satisfaction to Gods Justice. Now the weakness of all these privileges, and
duties, may appear in five particulars.

First, Thou can not do that which God requires of thee, Romans 8.14.
in all this that thou so much braggest of. Thou have a hard heart, and can
not repent: If thou can do what God requires of thee; then why do thou
not break that hard heart of thine. It is a heart that cannot repent. The
Saints of God find this; though they see their sins, yet their hearts will
not break. Thou art as able to rend the rocks in pieces, as to break thy hard
heart. The good that I would do (says Saint Paul), Romans 2.5.
I cannot do, and the evil that I would not do, that I do. The Church
complains of it, and says? Why are our hearts hardened from thy fear.
Therefore God may justly take exception against thee.

Secondly, Thou art not many times careful to do what thou can; sometimes
thou let pass opportunities; and if thou take the occasions, it is
mavelous slightly, and hoverly; though God have put power, and ability into
thy heart, to perform holy duties; so, that thou see the occasions, yet thou
slightest them over most shamefully. Iam. 3.2.
In many things we sin all, (says the Apostle Saint James) and the Prophet
Esaias says, Esa. 64.7.
There is none that calls upon thy name, neither stirs he up himself to
take hold of thee. It was the common fault of the wise Virgins, they all
slumbred: Matthew. 25.5.
this befalls even those that are the most beloved of the Lord.

Thirdly, Do what thou can in the best of all thy services; when thou
come to the highest pitch of the holiness of thy heart, and to the most
ferventest prayers that ever thou did make, and the most broken heart that
ever thou had, and the most exactest way of godliness; I say in the very
best of all thy duties; there is still some imperfection, and for which God may
in exact rigor frown upon thee: now Judge this; can that service save thee in
which there is enough to condemn thee? that's impossible; in the best of thy
duties there is enough to make God frown upon thee. And therefore the Priest
that was to offer Sacrifice; Heb. 7, 27.
Was to offer Sacrifice for the sin of his offering. Where we see that even
the holiest service that ever the Minister puts up to God, and in the best care
that ever he expressed, he has need to offer Sacrifice for his offering: and so
it is in all your services. You little think that God may condemn you, for
your Prayers, and Sacraments, and Fastings. But I will make it clear to you:
for, this is a common rule, we all believe in part, we know in part, and we
love in part, so that, though our hearts are renewed, yet they are but renewed
in part, there is some hatred mixed with our love, some unbelief with our
faith, and some ignorance with our knowledge: And as the Apostle says, Gal.
5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so
that these two are contrary the one to the other. There is so much corruption
in thee, so that when thou would do good, thou can not do it with that
readiness that thou ought; thou can not do it with all the whole stream
of thy heart. The Law requires, that we should love the Lord with all our
hearts, and with all our strength; So that we have no hangings back in our
duties; but in all our prayers, and hearings, and readings, there is flesh that
opposes the spirit, and corruption, that crosses the work of grace. So that
we are not able to perform any service, as God does require of us: how
backward are we to duties, and how weary in duties? what wandering thoughts?
what privy pride? and what seeking of our selves have we in them? You know
nothing, if you know not this; but whether you know it or no, it is so. There
is much corruption, opposing and thwarting the work of the Spirit; and
therefore you had need pray for the repentance of your repentance; and to beg
the pardon of all your prayers: and whereas you think, that you will repent,
and amend, and hear, and pray, and the like; I tell you; that though it be
commendable to pray, and hear; yet there is so much sin in your amendment,
and repentance, and duties; that in exact justice God may curse all that you
do, and execute his Judgments upon you for the same, therefore these cannot
save you. He that heretofore has profaned the will now Sanctifies it, and so
he thinks all is quit; but I tell thee that in all thy sanctification of the
same, thou have need of a Savior.

Fourthly, Were it granted, and let it be supposed (which I confess will not,
nay can never be) but Imagine it were so; that after God has opened a man's
eyes and broken his heart, he should never commit the least sin in all the
world, and never have any failing in holy duties, nor any distemper in his
Soul, though this cannot be; but Imagine it were so: that he did never sin
after his repentance, yet even the sin of his nature which he brought into
the world with him were enough to make the Lord take the advantage of him for
ever, and to cast away all that ever he does as abominable from his presence.
Our repentance, and our exactest performance of duties, though we could do
them even to the uttermost: it is a duty that we are bound to do, and the
doing of that which we owe; can never satisfy for that which has been done
amiss by us: but our repentance of sin and our reformation is a duty which
the gospel requires, and therefore will not satisfy for that which is done
amiss before our conversion. As a Tennant that is run behind hand with his
Landlord so many hundreths, and at last he begins to consider with himself
what he has done, and he bringes the rent of the last half year when his
lease is out, will this man think that he has now satisfied his Landlord?
if he should say, now Landlord, I hope you are contented, and all is answered
and have fully paid all that is between you and me, you Landlords would be
ready to reply thus, and say, this satisfies me for the last half year past,
but who pays for the odd hundreths: so it is with a poor soul, be it so
that after those arrerages that thou have run upon the score with God, after
all thy contempt, and pride and all thy Stubbournes of Spirit, at last God
opens thine eyes, and breaks thy heart, and gives thee a fight of, and sorrow
for these sins; will thou come before the Lord, and say, Lord, I have
repented of my sins past, and so I hope thy Justice is satisfied, and all
accounts made even between thee and me, the Lord would answer, it is true
thou do repent and reform thy self, the gospel requires it, but who pays
the od thousands and who satisfies for thy old drunkenness, and for thy
thousands of pride and Stubbornness, and all thy carelesnes, and all thy
contempt of God and his grace, and who satisfies for all thy blasphemies, and
omissions of holy duties, and the like, the Lord may justly take the forfeit of
thy Soul and proceed in Judgment against thee to thy destruction for ever.
our repentance and amendment is a new duty which the Lord requires of us from
the gospel, but it is not the paying of the old debt; for if we do not repent,
we stand guilty of the breach of the gospel, and so must satisfy for that
sin. The breach of the Law is sin, and the wages of sin is death, the wages
of sin is not repentance nor amendment, but it is death; then repentance will
not satisfy for sin: noe, noe, the wages that must be laid down for a man's
sin, is death. As the Lord said, In the day that thou eatest of the forbidden
fruit, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall dye the death. And therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 3.10.
cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Law to do
them. Repentance is only a work of the gospel to bring our hearts in frame
again, but the breach of the Law must be satisfied for; so that, having
sinned against the Lord and wronged his Justice we must either dye our selves
or have one to dye for us; then, there is noe laying down of any satisfaction
to God by any thing that we can do in this case but we must have recourse to
our Savior who only can satisfy gods wrath for our sins.

Fifthly, As a sinner is utterly unable to bring himself into a good estate,
by all the means that he can use; so he is unable to maintain his lot: and to
keep himself aforehand in a Christian course, when he is brought unto it.
Therefore as it necessary to have a Savior to pardon us: So, it is necessary
to have a Savior, to continue that estate of grace to us for our good. When
the Lord in mercy had given to Adam in his innocence, perfect holiness, and
righteousness; insomuch that he was able to keep the Law, and to purchase
favor for himself, Adam then fell, and spent all that stock of grace; and if
we had our stock in our own hands, we should spend all and be ruinated for
ever, if God did leave us to our selves. If Adam having no sin, could not
keep himself in that happy estate; much less are we able that have much
corruption in us; therefore it is not only required to go to Christ for grace
to pardon us; but we must go to Christ to maintain our grace, and to keep
our hearts in frame here, and to bring us to a Kingdom for ever hereafter.
When Adam had spent all the stock of grace; and proved a bankrupt, the Lord
would raise him up again; but he would not put the stock into his own hands
again; but he puts it into the hands of Christ. As, a man that gives his
child a portion, and he spends it all; now his father will raise him again,
but will not put it into his own hands, but into the hands of some friend, and
will have his Son go to that man for his allowance every day, and for every
meal: So, it is with the Lord our heavenly Father, because we have misspent all
that wisdom, and holiness, and righteousness, which God gave Adam, and in
him to all of us; therefore the Lord would not put the stock of grace into our
own hands again, but he has put it into the hands of Christ, and will have
us depend upon Christ for every crum of grace; yea, even for the will to do
any good; and we must go to him, that he may preserve and maintain the work
of grace in us; and wonderful happy are we that it is so. For, should the Lord
set the devil, and us together, all were gone. The Lord Jesus gives grace, and
continues it, and helps us to persevere in grace; and so makes us come to the
end of our hopes, even the salvation of our Souls. Oh therefore, look up to
the Lord Jesus Christ; and say, Oh, it is a blessed mercy; that when my heart
is proud, vain, loose, and foolish; that then I may go to the Fountain of
grace, 1 Peter. 1*5.
for humility, and for grace. We are kept (says Saint Peter) By the power of
God through faith unto salvation: As if he had said, all the powers of hell and
darkness are come about us, and a world of wickedness besets us, and all the
powers of the world, and the corruptions of our own hearts allure us. Now, we
cannot stand by our own strength, therefore we have need of a Christ, that we
may be kept by his power, and be able to suffer, and to do any thing for his
names sake, and that he may preserve us in that great day of accounts. 1 John
4.4.
And the Apostle John says, Little children you are of God and have overcome
the world, for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world.
He does not say, greater are you, then he that is in the world, but greater is
he that is in you, etc. He does not say, greater is your humility then your
pride; greater is your patience, then your impatience; and greater is your
love, then your hatred; but he says, The Lord Jesus is greater in us, to
succor and to help us; then all the temptations of the devil, and the
corruptions of our hearts that can press in upon us, to do us any hurt, or to
hinder us in a Christian course. Do thou think thy own hearing, and
praying, and duties will serve the turn and save thy Soul? No, no, thou art
an undone man, if thou rest upon thy own crazie bottomes? Amend thou may,
and pray thou ought; but these will not save thee; these will not cause the
acceptance of thy person with God; nor justify thy Soul before his
Tribunal. All these are poor, weak, and crazie means? For, if thou can
not do what God requires; and if thou do not what thou art able, and if in
the best of thy services, there is pride, and stubbornness enough to condemn
thee, and when thou risest up from prayer, thou had need pray again for
pardon of thy prayer: Nay, could thou do all that thou should after
conversion; in the most strictest and exactest manner; yet that does not
satisfy for the sin, that thou had committed before conversion; and if
thou can not maintain thy own grace, then there is an absolute necessity
of going to Christ for all. Nay, ask your own hearts, and services; and say
thus? prayer, wilt not thou save me, and hearing? wilt not thou save me; they
will all profess plainly, and say; salvation is not in me (says prayer), and
salvation is not in me (says hearing), and salvation is not in me (says
repentance, and amendment; Indeed, we have heard of a Christ; that he has
dyed, and satisfied, and suffered, and risen, and delivered his poor servants;
and plucked poor Souls from hell; and we need a Savior to pardon us, alas, we
cannot save our selves. All thy duties will say to thee, as the King said to
the woman; when the famine was great in Samaria: And the King was going upon
the wall, there cried a woman to him, 2 King. 6.26, 27.
saying, Help, oh King. And the King made this answer, If the Lord God succor
not, how can I help? So, me thinks the Soul says; When it is besieged with
the wrath of God? Oh help prayer, and hearing, and Sacrament, and the like?
Me thinks, I hear them reply in this manner; Alas, how can we help, you have
prayed sinfully; and heard the Word untowardly; and received the Sacraments
unworthily? Oh, let us all go to heaven for a Mediator; good Lord, pardon the
sin of these prayers, and these hearings, and the unworthiness of these
Sacraments; and all this frothinesse, and deadness in hearing: Thus they will
all send you to heaven for a Christ; and say, alas, I cannot save you; how many
commands have I disobeyed? how many duties have I slighted, and therefore send
to Christ for pardon; we are weak, and feeble, and only come to the ear, and
to the eye; but the Lord Jesus must come down from heaven, and be powerful,
every way to do good to your Souls. You must go to a Christ, to batter the
proud flesh; and to pardon all that is amiss, and to perform all duties that
you would have done. When Elisha took up the cloak of Eliah, he said, where
is the God of Eliah; he did not say? 2 King. 2.14.
Where is the the cloak, but where is the God of Eliah. All the ordinances of
God, are but as the bark of the tree; but Christ and the Promise are the pith.
The heart, and life, and power of all is in Christ only: therefore look
higher then these, for they do all proclaim; that there is no succor but in
Christ.

The third means to drive our hearts from resting upon our duties is this. The
third means.
We must consider the unconceivable hazard, and danger, and the inconvenience
that will come if we put any affiance in any of those privileges that we have,
or any duties that we perform. The very consideration hereof is able to
withdraw our hearts from resting upon them. The danger appears in two
particulars.

First, This carnal confidence in what we have, and do shut a man out from
having any part in Christ. He that is guilty of this sin, withdrawes
himself from the favor of the Lord, and he becomes incapable of that mercy
and good which God has revealed; and Christ has purchased for poor
distressed sinners. For this is all that the Lord looks for at our hands, that
we should deny our selves, and wholly cast our selves upon his goodness and
mercy. nay, that man which relyes upon what he does, puts himself without the
reach of all that mercy and great salvation that is in Jesus Christ. Christ
came not to call the righteous to repentance, nor them that trust in
themselves; nor them that think they can save themselves, but he came to call
sinners to repentance, and those that see an utter insufficiency in themselves
to save or succor themselves in the day of trouble, there is great salvation
in Christ, and plenteous redemption purchassed by Christ, and you hear of all
this, and it is all true, but this I must tell you, all that Christ has done
and deserved shall never do you good, if you rest upon your selves. You do
think that it is such a great sin, as indeed it is, sometimes you make
conscience of drunkenness and other sins, if you make conscience of any thing,
then know that this is the greatest sin in the world. Gal. 5.2.
See how the Apostle sets himself against this carnal confidence, where
speaking to the Galathians that trusted in their own circumcision, that
answers to our Baptism: Behold (says he) I Paul, say, I, not a bare man, but
I, Paul enspired with the Spirit in an extraordinary manner, and I, an Apostle
that do not, nay that cannot err, I that have received a commission from the
Lord, I say, that if you be Circumcised, that is, if you trust in your
Circumcision, Christ shall profit you nothing. nay, (says he) Jesus Christ is
made of none effect to you if you seek to be justified by the works of the
Law. Verse 4.
If you rest in the merit of your prayer, Christ is made of none effect to you,
and you shall never receive any power from the death of Christ: the blood of
Christ will never purge those filthy hearts of yours, and his resurrection
shall never quicken you. Whatsoever your case and condition is, or can be, if
your sins were never so heinous for greatness, continuance and for number, if
you will but renounce your selves and go to Christ nothing shall condemn you,
but if your sins were never so well reformed and amended: and reformation,
nay, Christ himself shall never do you any good. It is with the Soul of a
poor sinner, as it is with the body of a man. If it had some slightie disease
or sickness, and that may (happily) be cured, but if his throat begin to swell,
and the vital passages be stopped up that he can receive no meat nor physic,
every neighbor will say, he is but a dead man, all the means and men in the
world can do him no good, he can receive nothing down: So it is with the
Soul; it is annoyed with many base corruptions, and sinful distempers; and if
it be wounded with many rebellions; there is means enough in Christ to cure
all? If thou were a filthy besotted drunkard, or an adulterer, the blood of
Christ can purge thy drunken adulterous heart, one touch of Christ, can cure
all: thy bloody issue. If thou were dead in trespasses and sins, the Lord
Jesus could quicken thee, and raise thee from death to life; but if thy proud
heart swell with thy own sufficiency, and thou will rest upon thy self, all
the merits and grace in Christ can do thee no good. This is the maine
conclusion, Ioh. 5.40.
into which all the rest is resolved. You will not come to me (says our
Savior) that you might be saved. He does not say; you have many sins and
shall not be saved; but, you will not come to me, etc. that is, you will not
go out from your selves to the Lord Christ; and therefore cannot receive mercy
and grace from his Majesty's hands: though thou art never so base and vile, if
thou could go to the Lord Jesus, and rest upon him for mercy, nothing should
stand between thee and heaven, but if thou stickest in thy self, all the
grace in Christ can do thee no good.

Secondly, This carnal confidence, makes a man unprofitable, under all the
means that God bestows; Ier. 17.5, 6.
As the Prophet Jeremy says, Cursed is he that trusts in the arm of flesh,
and departs from the Lord; Why? What shall become of him? the text says, he
shall be like an heath in the wilderness, and shall never see good. The nature
of the heath is this; though all the dew of heaven, and all the showers in the
world fall upon it; and though the Sun shine never so hotly, it will never
grow fruitful, it will never yield any fruit of increase, but it is
unfruitful still. Such a Soul thou will be; thou that restest upon thy own
services and, say; because thou hear, and prayest, and do sanctify
the Lords Day; therefore thou must needs go to heaven; I say, thou shall never
see good by all the means of grace; if thou make them independent causes of
salvation; all the promises in the Gospel shall never establish thee, and all
the judgments in the world will never terrify thee; thou shall never have any
saving grace wrought in thee by them: The truth is, he that has all means,
and has not a Christ in all; he shall never see good by all. Therefore thou
that restest upon thy parts, and gifts, and upon thy duties; thou will have a
heart so besotted, that grace will never come into thy heart, and God will
never quiet thy conscience. It may be a poor drunkard is converted and
humbled; but thou stand still, and can get no good by all the means in the
world. Therefore say thus to thy self? does this carnal confidence cut me
off from all the grace and mercy that is in Christ; and without mercy, and
pardon from Christ I am undone for ever; and without grace I am a poor defiled
wretch here, and shall be damned for ever after; if I rest here, I may bid adue
to all mercy: Nay, all the means that I have, never do me good. Is this the
fruit of my carnal confidence? Oh Lord withdraw my heart from it.

Lastly, When all the means of grace, will not pluck away the Soul from
resting upon it self, The fourth means.
when reason will not rule him, nor means will not prevail with a poor
sinner, as commonly a great while they will not; then the Lord tires a poor
Soul with his own distempers. And the Lord deals with the Soul, as an enemy
deals with a Castle that he has besieged; When the Citizens will not yield up
the Castle, he famisheth them, and cuts off all provision, and makes them
consume within, and so at last they are forced to resign it up upon any
terms. So, When the Lord has laid siege to a carnal heart, and has showed
him his woeful condition, and yet the heart will not of, nor will not take up
any terms of peace, but still he will shift for himself. Now, what does the
Lord do? he takes away the comfort of all the means that he has, till he
is famished with the want of Gods favor; and then he is content to yield up
all to the God of heaven and earth. It was just so with this Prodigal; all the
world could not persuade him but he might live better of his portion, and so
away he goes; and when he had tried the world, and could get no succor, at
last he confessed, it was better to be at a fathers finding, and now he saw that
a fathers house was admirably good, and that the servants and children in their
fathers house are happy; for they have bread enough and enough again, and to
spare too: and so he is forced to return. So, it is with many poor
distressed souls: all the arguments under heaven cannot quiet them, and all
the means in the world cannot pluck them from themselves; and we tell them
daily, that they must not expect grace, nor power, nor pardon from themselves;
2 Ioh. 3.
It is mercy and peace (says the Apostle). You would have peace of conscience,
and pardon of sin, and assurance of Gods love; and whence would you have it,
you would have it from your duties? it is not prayer, and peace, nor hearing,
and peace; but it is mercy and peace; and therefore away to the Lord Jesus,
that you may receive mercy from him: Yet we cannot get poor creatures from
themselves, but they would feign shuffle for themselves, and have a little
comfort of their own, and they say, Lord, cannot my prayers, my care and
fasting merit salvation? Now, what does God then? he says, to such a Soul,
go try then, put to the best of thy strength, and use all the means that thou
can, and see what thou can do; See if thou can cure thy conscience, and
heal those wounds of thine; and subdue the corruptions of thy heart, with thy
prayers and abilities: but when the Soul has made trial, and weltred, and
wearied it self, at last, he finds that all the means he can use cannot quiet
him, nor comfort his conscience, and the poor sinner is pinched and wearied,
and the Lord will not answer his prayers, nor sweeten the desires of his Soul,
and the Lord will not bless the Word to him for his comfort, and at last, the
Soul says: Such a poor Christian (even a man of mean parts, and weak
gifts) how is he comforted, and such a profane drunkard is pulled home, and has
gotten the assurance of Gods love; The Lord has pulled down the proud hearts of
such and such; and they live comfortably, and sweetly; and I have no peace nor
assurance of Gods love. You may thank your selves for it; they saw nothing,
and they looked for nothing from themselves; and therefore they went home to
the gate of mercy to the Lord Jesus Christ, and they have bread enough, if you
would come home to Christ, you might have been comforted also. Now therefore,
go to the Lord Jesus Christ, and as certainly, as God is in heaven; refreshing
and comfort will come into your hearts, and mercy (which is better then marrow)
shall satisfy those feeble fainting spirits of yours. You see what the way is,
and what the helps be to pluck off our hearts from resting upon these duties,
and therefore think thus with thy self, and say, is my misery so great? and
are my duties so weak? and is my carnal confidence so dangerous; that I may
be troubled for ever? for any thing that I can do of my self; and is comfort
no where else to be had, but in the Lord Jesus Christ? Oh then Lord, work my
heart to this duty. Stick not in your selves, do all this, but go beyond all
that you can do, and labor so to approve your hearts to God, that you may see
greater mercy in God, then in all that you can do.

Now there are two Cavils, which carnal persons slander this truth of God
withal; and these must be answered before I can come to the trials.

The first Cavil.
The first cavil with which wretches are content upon this truth, it is this.
Oh say they? What, is it so that all our prayers, and hearings, all our care,
and desires, and all our improvement of means are nothing worth? will not all
these justify us? nor make us acceptable to God? then let us cast care away,
let us swear, and riot, and drink, and live as we list, we hear that all
the duties that we can do, will not save us, the Minister tells us so. Thus a
company of carnal wretches run headlong down to eternal destruction, one
swears, and another casts all the commandments of God behind his back.

has spoken? Does not the Apostle say, You are saved not of works, etc. And in
another place, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in the
Lord that shows mercy. Romans 9.16.
It is the spirit of God that says it, and do thou stand to outface the
Lord Jesus Christ in it? But stay a while, and take a full answer with thee,
and know these three things thou that do abuse this doctrine of Gods free
favor. First, howsoever thy good works are not sufficient to save thee, yet
thy evil works are enough to damn thee. As the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
that all they might be damned which believed not the truth but had pleasure
in unrighteousness. You that take pleasure in your drunkenness, and
profaneness, and in your jibing and jesting at the means of grace, there is
room enough in hell for you all: that all you might be damned. Yea, thou that
delightest in thy drunkenness, thou may drink down thy last, and thy
damnation too, and thou that blasphemest against the truth of Christ, take heed
that God pour not down his wrath upon thee. It is true, though thy good
works are not perfectly good and cannot save thee, yet thy bad works are
perfectly naught and and will condemn thee. nay, thy prayers are an
abomination to the Lord, and will the Lord save thee for that which is
abominable to him? thou think hell is broke loose because mercy is come
into the world, this thy wickedness will condemn thee for evermore. Secondly,
they that thus stand it out against Gods free grace in Jesus Christ (the Lord
in mercy open their eyes, my soul mournes for them and for that strange
punishment that shall befall them, except the Lord break their hearts in time)
as any sin is enough to condemn them, so their sin is of an unconceiveable
heinousness, and their judgment will be answerable. Their sin is become out
of measure sinful, because mercy is revealed, and they have made a mock of it.
The very height of all, that wrath that is in God shall be their portion. Good
Lord, is it possible that ever any man should dare to despise the mercy of God,
and to trample the blood of Christ under his feet, and not only to commit
wantonness, but to turn the grace of God into wantonness, and to make the
Lord Christ the Patron of all their filthiness? How will the Lord Jesus take
it at at their hands: that, whereas the Lord Jesus came into the world to
destroy the works of the devil, they should make Christ a means to uphold the
works of the devil. Oh, that ever any man should dare to sin, because mercy
abounds! and because they hear that Christ will one day save them, therefore
they in the mean time will do all they can against him that must save them.
See what S. Paul says against such, Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, Romans 2.4, 5.
long sufferance and forbearance, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
to repentance, but after thy hardness of heart, thou treasurest up to thy
self wrath against the day of wrath. Thou that live in the bosom of the
Church, where the Angels come down from heaven, and rejoice in this free grace
of God in Christ, and have thou the offer of this mercy, and do thou despise
it? then thy drunkenness is not bare drunkenness, but there is a treasure of
vengeance in it. And thou say, thou will be drunk, and profane, because
thy sobriety and thy good works cannot save thee. I tell thee, it is not bare
scorning and bare prophanes, but there is a mass of vengeance in all these.
And when thou shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and shall be
indicted for a drunkard, and a scorner, and a profane person, and such a one as
have tossed the people of God with scorns upon thy Ale-bench; when the Law
has thus proceeded against thee, then will mercy come in against thee, and
say, Lord, execute vengeance upon him for me, and for me, says another, for I
have been dishonored, and because mercy did abound, he would have his sin
abound also. And then comes in the blood of Christ, and cries aloud, saying,
Vengeance against that drunkard, indeed Lord, there is a poor wretch that knew
no other, but vengeance (Lord) against that drunkard, and that scorner, because
my blood was shed, and mercy was offered, and he despised it. You that know
your drunken neighbors and servants, and see their ryoting and scorning, tell
them that there is a treasure of vengeance in those sins; and you that are
guilty of it, go your ways home and mourn, and the Lord give us hearts to
mourn for you. You that know what this sin is, when you go to the Lord in
Prayer, put up one petition for them, and say, Good Lord take away that
treasure of vengeance. Oh, pray that if it be possible this great sin may be
pardoned. Thirdly, all such persons must know that it is carnal confidence, in
the means that withdrawes a blessing from them in the use of the means. What
things were gain to me (says Saint Paul) I accounted loss for Christ; Phil.
3.7.
that is, when he put any confidence in them, he lost the benefit of the
means.

The second cavil.
Secondly, Some will say, you do nothing but reproove us for duties, and labor
to pluck us from them? then, why should we pray, and hear, and what good
shall we have by all that we do, if we cannot be saved by these means; then,
what use is there of them?

Titus 3.14.
Let us also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses. When he had
spoken of free Justification through his grace; then the Text says, teach a
man to maintain good works for necessary uses: and in the 4. and 5. verses,
Verses 4. and 5.
he says; After that the kindness, and love of God our Savior toward man,
appeared not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration. Now, least any man should
say, if God do not save a man for his works, then why shall we do good works
and the like? See what he adds; Let us learn to maintain good works, etc.
There are many necessary uses of the means, though they be not meritorious,
and of absolute sufficiency. Were not he a mad man that should say, what shall
I do with my money if I cannot eat it? and what shall I do with my boat if
I may not dwell in it? A man may buy meat with his money, and row with his
boat. So, you must use all means, and improve all importunities, and if ever
pray, and fast, pray and fast now in these days of trouble, but think not to
be saved, nor justified by the worth and merit of them: yet use them for some
necessary uses; and the uses are three.

Of the means.
to lead us by the hand to the Lord Jesus Christ; and as lights to show us
where life is to be had. John Baptist professed plainly, that he was not the
Messiah, but he pointed at him, and said, Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world. So, I say, all the ordinances of God which are
honorable, and commendable, and comfortable; they all profess, that they are
not our Saviors: only they point us to a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ;
the Word reveals Christ, and Prayer goes to a Christ, and the Sacrament
presents Christ to us; and therefore they all say with one accord, let us go
to the Lord Jesus, and look up to him. When your hearts are troubled and
disquieted, all your duties knock at your hearts, and say, would you not have
mercy, and power against corruption, and some evidence of Gods favor? Oh (say
you) it is that which we want, and it is all that we desire in this world; Come
then (says Prayer and the Word) we will go to Christ with you; there is all
fullness in him: this is the end of all the holy ordinances of God, not to make
them Saviors: but to lead us to a Savior.

Of the means.
mercy and comfort from Christ to our souls. Though they are not meat yet
they are as dishes that bring the meat. They are the means whereby salvation
has been revealed, and is conveyed to you. There is a fountain of grace in
Christ, but the word, and prayer, and Sacraments, and fasting, these are the
conduites to convey this water of life, and to communicate this grace to us.
You do not use to drink the conduite, but the water that the conduite
bringes. Ask, that your joy may be full, (says our Savior) and so the Lord
speaks by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 55.3.
incline your ear, and come unto me, hear and your souls shall live. As if
he had said wait upon God in his word and ordinances, and your souls shall
live. Though the means are not life it self, yet life is conveyed by them. In
Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Colloss. 2.3.
If you would have any grace and holiness, the treasure of it is in Christ.
The word is as the Indenture or great will of God whereby the treasure of Gods
favor is made known to your Souls. The bond or will is not the treasure, but
conveyes the treasure to us, and makes us have a right, and title to it: our
Savior says, my peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, and, all
the promises in Christ are, yea, and Amen. yea, that is truth it self, and,
Amen, that is confimed now, you must receive the tenure of all these in Christ.
And the holy Sacraments, are as the broad seals whereby the Covenant of grace
is confirmed, made authentical and ratified to your Souls. When a man has
much goods and lands and would make an other his heir, he passes his lands or
goods over to him by will, and if the will is not only drawn but also sealed,
then, though this will is not the treasure it self, yet it is a special
means to convey this treasure to the heir that must have it. So, the Word is
the will of God, and the Sacraments are the Seals of it, and all that mercy
and goodness in Christ is made known to you by the Word, and made sure to you
by the Sacrament; the Word and Sacraments are not this treasure, but they are
blessed means to convey this treasure to your Souls. Therefore, when your
hearts, are dead, weak and heavy, and you begin to breath for some
consolation, saying, who will tell me how I may have my dead heart quickened,
and my heavy heart refreshed, as David once breathed for the water of Bethlem;
then me thinks the word and prayer, and Sacraments do all say, we will go
to the Lord Jesus Christ for all these for you, and then Christ will sanctify
you in his word, and if you have strong devils hanging upon you, fasting, and
prayer will fetch power and grace from Christ; and cast all these devils out:
So then you see their good use of all these. Thirdly, the last use of the
means is this, Of the means.
and by the improvement of our times and means, we may glorify the God of
grace that has given us all these means, and that we may wait upon him with
fear and reverence, and honor God in his word, and come to his table, and
there partake of the dainties of life and salvation, and express the virtues
of him that has called us to this mavelous light, that we may see Gods grace
in prayer, and in professing, and delight in the duties of his worship. These
are all very good uses; so then, the conclusion is this, you must not think
that your duties can pardon one sin, yet they must be used, and bless God
for them, and (if ever) now is a time to improve all these, for they are a
means to lead us to Christ, and to convey grace and life from Christ into our
souls, and thereby we may glorify the God of grace that has been so
merciful to us. When we do despair of all help in the means.
The second thing that I mentioned is this. When shall we know that our hearts
are brought to this pass, that the means of grace do work so kindly that our
hearts may be brought to this holy despair. I would not have you go away and
say, the minister says, we must despair. Its true you must despair of all
saving succor in your selves but you must not despair of all mercy in Christ.



The first trial.
First, the Soul of a poor sinner that sees all means helpless and
hopeless in themselves, will freely confess and acknowledge (and that openly)
that the work of salvation is of an unconceiveable difficulty, and he sees an
utter insufficiency and impossibility in himself, and in any means in the
world to be saved of himself: He sees that it is beyond his power, and the
staff is out of his own hand, and the Soul almost sinks under it, and
conceives it almost impossible to come out of it, in regard of that which it
apprehends. He sees now that all those broken reeds and rotten props, and
all that boldness whereby the heart did bear up it self, they are all broken
in pieces, and all those Castles which he has built in the air, wherein he
comforted himself with dreams of consolation, they are all thrown down to
the ground, and battered about his ears, and now the Soul wonders how he was
so deluded, to trust to such lying vanities, and to such deceitful shadows.
This is the difference that the Soul will find in it self before this work
of conversion, and after it is wrought. Before, a man thinks it an easy matter
to come to heaven, and judges it a foolishness in people to be cast down and
discouraged in the hardness and difficulty of the work of salvation; and he
conceives it to be a foolish conceit in the frantic brain of some precise
Ministers? Oh (says he) God bless us if none be saved, but such as these,
whatsoever he says, a man may go to heaven, and repent, and get the pardon of
his sins, it is nothing but confessing his sins before God, and craving
mercy in the pardon of them, and is this such a hard matter; this man in the
days of his vanity, thinks he has heaven in a string, and mercy at command,
and he can come to heaven, and break his heart at half an hours warning: but
take this man when the Lord has awakened his conscience, and put him to the
trial; when he sees that after all his prayers and tears, yet his conscience
is not quieted, and his sins are not pardoned, and the guilt still remains,
now he is of another mind, now he wonders at himself that he was so deluded,
and now he says? where is the deluded heart, that did think it, and the mouth
that did speak it: Nay, he thinks it a great mercy of God, that he is not in
hell long ago; and he stands and wonders that ever any man comes to heaven,
and he says, certainly their hearts are not like mine; and their sins are
not so great as mine, good Lord, who can ever be saved, such a devil to tempt,
and such a world to allure, and such corruptions boiling within. He wonders how
Abraham got to heaven beyond the Stars, and Moses, but above all Manasses,
yet he says, blessed be God that ever he did this for them, but for my self
(all things considered) I think it a matter impossible, how I, nay, how can I
ever be wrought upon? shall ever any mercy comfort me? and shall ever any
means do me good? Why have not all those means that I have had done me
good, I shall never have power to pray better then I have done, and I shall
never be able to wrestle with God, more earnestly then I have done, and yet I
see all means profit not, therefore I am but a gone man. I am but lost, and I
know not which way my soul should be saved. When our Savior Christ was
discovering the difficulty of the way to Salvation; His Disciples said, Good
Lord, who then shall be saved. So, the poor Soul says? Oh the means that I
have had, and the prayers that I have made; So that I have thought the heavens
did even shake again, and yet, Good Lord, my heart did never stir at all,
and therefore how can I be saved? And as the Prophet Jeremy says; Shame has
eaten up the labors of our fathers, and we lie down in our shame, etc. They
had the means of grace, and the ordinances of God, and shame has eaten up
all, and where are their Temples, and Privileges now? Shame has consumed them
to nothing. So, it is with a poor feeble fainting Soul, he says, shame has
eaten up all my labors, I have labored in prayer, in hearing, and in fasting;
yet I have no pardon sealed, nor no mercy granted, I am as much troubled as
ever; I see as much evil as ever I did; hell is gaping for me, and so soon
as life is gone from my body; the devil will have my Soul. This is the nature
of despair, to put an impossibility in the thing that it despaires of: and to
say, can it be? and will it be? and will it ever be? Nay, it is impossible, for
ought I know. Where is the man now, that thought it an easy matter to go to
heaven, he is in an other mind, and his heart is of an other frame; now he
has found by woeful experience, that there is no hope, nor help in himself
nor in the creature.

Secondly, The second Trial.
this follows from the former disposition of spirit; the Soul is restless,
and remains unsatisfied in what he has, and what he does. The heart cannot be
supported, and therefore it grows to be marveilously troubled, and it is not
able to stay it self. There is nothing that can satisfy the Soul of a man,
but it must be some good. No man is satisfied with evil, but rather more
troubled with it. It must be some good, either in hand, and in present
possession, or else in expectation of some good that he may have, and he says,
it may be, and it will be. But, when he sees the emptiness of all his
privileges, and the weakness of all his duties; when these fails, his heart
and all must needs sink; because he sees no other good, but them for the
while. As it is with the building of a house, if the bottom and foundation be
brittle, and rotten, and begin to shake all the whole building must needs
shake: So, the Soul that sought for comfort, mercy, and salvation from his
outward privileges and duties; when all these begin to shake under him, and to
break in sunder, and he sees no help thereby, and that it can receive no
ease therein; hence it is, that Soul (thus troubled and despairing) is in such
an estate, that if all the Ministers under heaven should come to flatter him,
and to daube him up with untempered mortar, and persuade him of Gods mercy
toward him; Take this man upon his deathbed, when all the Ministers come to
give him comfort upon any terms, and they say unto him, your course has been
good and commendable, and you have lived thus, and thus; and taken much pains
in praying, and hearing, and fasting; therefore undoubtedly you cannot but
receive mercy from the Lord. See what the poor Soul will reply: It is true
(says he) I have done, and may do all these, but I have not done them in a
right manner. I have not had an eye to Christ's mercy; but have accounted these
duties, as satisfactory to Gods justice, so that they savor not so much of
duty, as arrogance; whilst presuming upon their worth: I have not depended
upon Gods mercy; but even challenged his justice in the reward of my labors.
Thus the Soul argues with it self, I have depended too long upon these
outward works, and thought to purchase heaven by them, but now I find it
necessary, that I get them dyed, and sanctified in the blood of Christ. Thus it
was with Saint Paul when he said; 1 Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self? What might some say, Paul, You are a reverend
learned man, and have had a great name in the Church, and who can say, black
is your eye. It is true, (says he) I know nothing by my self? but what then,
yet I am not thereby justified. Nay, it is the difference that he makes
between himself a Pharisee, and himself a poor contrite sinner. When he was
a Pharisee he counted his privileges gain to him; but now he thought them
loss in regard of Christ. They are good mercies, Phil, 3.7.
where God gives them in regard of themselves, but in the way of Justification,
and Salvation, they are as dung and dross in respect of any merit in them.
This is one difference between a dead hypocrite, and a living Christian. A
dead hypocrite will be content with dead hearing, and dead praying, and with
the bare shell of duties, but, a living Christian that sees his own evil,
and sin; cannot be filled nor contented without a Christ. That which will
maintain a Camelion, will starve a man; for a Camelion will live upon the
air? but, put a Man into the best air that is, and it will starve him, if he
have no other food. So, if thou can feed upon the air of hearing, and the
picture, and shadow of praying; it is a sign thou art a dead man; whereas if
thou be a true man in Christ Jesus, thou must have bread, or else all the world
cannot content thee. Bread for the Lords sake, (says the hunger-starved man:
therefore let me give thee an Item this way; go thy way home, and take notice
of thine heart, thou that can lick thy Soul whole, and cure all thy sins
with a few prayers, and tears, and fastings, and in the mean time see not a
necessity of a Savior, know that it is a notorious sign of a cunning
hypocrite, as there are many in these days. It is with an hypocrite, as it is
with some men written of in Stories, they have such an antidote, and
preservative, that they can eat poison, and it shall never hurt them: So it is
with some hypocrites, that have their reservations of some sins, and they
retain some base distempers, and they will tipple in a corner, and lie in some
secret sins, and yet they trust so much to their antidote, and to their
duties, that it will cure all, and it is but praying, and fasting so much the
more often. The God of heaven open the eyes, and awaken the consciences of all
such, if there be any such here this day. If it be so that thou can pray, and
keep a close hollow heart, and thou can lick thy self whole, and then
sin, and a little prayer will serve again; and then go, and be unjust, and
unclean, and keep false balances still, know then, it is certain thou never
had a part in Christ, and did see a need of Christ. And as it was with
the Prodigal: if he had been a Hog, the husks might have served him; but
he was a Man, and therefore must have bread. Therefore thou hypocrite to thy
Stye, if these husks will save thee, and serve thy turn, and if the mill of a
prayer will serve, (I do not discommend these duties: No, cursed be he that
does it) but if thou content thy self with a mill of praying, and yet there is
as much power of Christ, and sap of grace in thy heart, as in a chip, then (I
say) thou art a Hog and no Man, whom these husks will content.

The third Trial.
Thirdly, he that sees himself helples and hopeles in the means, he will
constantly labor to go beyond all the means. Because he is in need and
finds no help here, he will seek it else where that his heart may be
refreshed, when the Lord has awakened the heart and showed him the emptiness
of all means, it makes the soul go further then the means: this is the
heavenly skill. It is with the Soul in this case as it is with a mariner;
though his hand be upon the oar, yet he ever looks homeward to the haven
where he would be. And it is in professing as it is in trading. You know when a
man sets up for himself and would live of his calling, he will buy and sell,
but his eye is ever upon the gain, that's it which must keep the Cart on the
wheels, or else he may die a beggar and shall never be able to keep him and
his; it is not enough to trade and to buy and sell, but he goes beyond all
these, and labors to get something. Just so it is in professing; it is like
thy trading, thou hear and praiest, and professest, but the gain is to have
Christ made to thee in life and death gain; so that, all the gain a man gets
is Christ. Thou art a professor, and have been baptized and have received the
Sacrament, but, what have thou gotten by all thy praying, and preaching, and
other services? unless thou have gotten Christ, thou have gotten just nothing
at all. It is with thee as it is with a man that has a great shop, and much
wares, and quick return, and yet he is not able to pay his debts: so thou
performest many fair duties, and have many rich privileges, and yet thou art
not able to satisfy Gods Justice; nor to recompense the Church for the wrong
done to it, and when thou art going the way of all flesh, but specially in the
day of judgment, then shall people say of thee, such a man was buying, and
selling, and professing all his life and yet got nothing; and when a poor
Soul is breathing out his last, then comes justice, and says, give me my own,
thou have sinned, and therefore thou must die for it, Lord (says he) take some
prayers, and readings, and fastings, in stead of payment, and if these will not
serve, then he is blanke, and justice carries him down to the place of
execution, and he shall not come thence till he have paid the utmost farthing.
And then the Soul says, some comfort, some mercy and consolation for me; oh
says he, I have received the Sacrament, and prayed and fasted, and professed,
can thou not feed of these? oh no! (says the Soul) these are husks, bread
for me as the world thinks of a man that has got nothing by his trading, such
a man that made wonderful show in the world to day; so many hundreths, and
thousands worse then nothing, this is lamentable. Just so it will be with thee,
if thou have not gotten Christ. If a man have gotten Christ in his hearing, and
praying? he will answer all easily, and when the devil comes in, and says?
Thou have many sins who shall satisfy Gods Justice for them? The Soul makes
this answer; Christ has paid all. Oh, but thou have broken the Law of God
(says the devil). Oh (says the Soul) Christ has fulfilled all
righteousness for me. You have many corruptions (says the devil; but Christ
has purged me (says the Soul). Oh, but you shall be damned (says the
devil to him: Nay, (says the Soul) there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ, but I am in Christ, and therefore shall not be damned. Thus the
devil shall go away ashamed, and say, That man is out of my reach, I shall
never get him down to hell, he has gotten Christ.

But here this question may be asked, Question.
how may a man go beyond himself in all his duties?



First, The first Direction.
labor to see an absolute necessity of a Christ in all these privileges that
thou have, and in all the duties and services that thou performest. First, in
all thy privileges. See a need of Christ to make all these powerful to thy
Soul. Hearing, and reading, and fasting, will do thee no good, except thou
have a Christ to go with all these. As a Ship that has fair Sails, and
strong Masts, except there be a wind it can never go. So, the Soul is like
the Ship; and the precious ordinances of God are fair Sails and good Masts;
and it is good hearing, and good reading, and good fasting, but except the
Spirit blow with these, thou can get no good by them: the Spirit blows
where it lists, and except the Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of his Spirit,
go and breath upon thy hearing, Preaching, and upon all the ordinances, they
can do thee no good. When the Lord was to come into his Garden, which was the
Church. The Spices are the graces of Gods Spirit. The Spices could not grow,
because the Spirit would not blow upon them, and therefore the Spouse says,
Arise oh North, Cant. 4.16.
and come (oh South) and blow on my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow
out, As if she had said, Good Lord, blow this way, and that way, and give a
blessing to the means, and then comfort will come indeed. And as there is need
of Christ to bless all means, so secondly there is need of Christ to make all
thy services acceptable to God the Father. Oh send to heaven for a Christ, that
he may hide all thy weaknesses, and present all thy duties to God his Father,
in his merits and righteousness. They that brought a Sacrifice in the time of
the Law, were to offer it upon the golden Altar, and no Sacrifice was accepted
without it: So, if thou will have thy hearing, and praying, and fasting
acceptable to God, lay them upon the golden Altar, the Lord Jesus Christ. And
know that thou have need of Christ to cover all the failings and weaknesses in
thy duties.

The second Direction.
Secondly, In all the beauty and excellency of Gods ordinances that thou see
and prizest. See a greater beauty and excellency in the Lord Jesus Christ,
then in all these. See what comfort it is that thou would find, and what
sweet is it that thou would get from hearing, and reading, praying, and
professing; go beyond all this, and say, if the beams be so sweet, what is
the Sun it self, and if the ordinances of God be so sweet and comfortable,
what is the Lord Jesus Christ then. You come to hear, and it is well that you
will come? What would you have in hearing? You would have some life to quicken
you, and some wisdom in your minds to direct you, and some grace into your
Souls to purge you; and then me thinks I hear you say, Blessed be the Lord
this day, I found my heart something more quickened, and my Soul something
enabled to hate sin, and to walk with God; bless God for that. But, is a
little life in the word so good, and is a little grace in the Sacrament so
sweet, Oh then away, away higher, if these be so sweet, what is the Lord Jesus
the God of all wisdom, grace, and power. If the Word do so much quicken thy
Soul, what would the Lord Jesus do, if thou could get thy heart possessed
of him. Let all these drops of life and mercy draw up thy heart to heaven.
When the Spouse in the Canticles had sought after her beloved, see how she
describes him, Can. 5.10.16.
his mouth is white and ruddie, and so forth, and in the 16. verse she says,
He is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely. The original has it, he is
altogether pleasant, yea, pleasantness it self. You have some comfort, and
some discomfort with it, you have some wisdom, and some folly, some power,
and some weakness with it, but the Lord Jesus is all comfort, and no
discomfort, he is all power, and no weakness, he is all life, and no
deadness, therefore in all the ordinances of God, carry your hearts a little
higher, and look upon that fullness that is in Christ.

Thirdly, Let us labor in the use of all means, The third means.
as to see the beauty of a Christ surpassing all means, so let us be led by
all means into a nearer union with the Lord Christ. As a wife deals with the
letters of her husband that is in a far Country, she finds many sweet
inklings of his love, and she will read these letters often, and daily, she
would talk with her husband a far off, and see him in the letters, Oh (says
she) thus and thus he thought when he writ these lines, and then she thinks
he speaks to her again; she reads these letters only, because she would
be with her husband a little, and have a little parlee with him in his pen,
though not in his presence: so these ordinances are but the Lords love letters,
and we are the Ambassadors of Christ; and though we are poor sottish
ignorant men, yet we bring mervailous good news that Christ can save all
poor broken hearted sinners in the world.

You do well to come and hear, but it is all that you may chat and parlee a
little with Christ. Our Savior says, Matthew. 24.28.
Where the carcass or the dead body is, there will the Eagles be. This is the
nature of an Eagle, she will not go to catch flies, (that is the nature of the
hedge Sparrow,) but she will prey upon the carcass. So, this is a good heart
that will not prey upon dead duties, but upon the Lord Christ, who is the life
of the Soul. If thou art of a right brood, thou will not fill and glut thy
Soul with a few duties like a hedge Sparrow; still, mistake me not, I do not
dispraise these duties, but (I say) they are nothing in the way of
justification: if faith in Christ's merits be not joined with them. Therefore if
thou have a dunghill heart of thine own, thou may go and content thy self
with profession, and with a few cold dead duties, but if thou art an Eagle, and
a sound hearted Christian, and one, that God has been pleased to do good
unto: thou will never be but where the Lord Jesus is, and where his grace and
mercy is. As we do at a Feast; the dish is greater then the meat, yet we
reach the dish (not for the dishes sake) but that we may cut some meat: So, the
ordinances of God, are as so many dishes, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is
dished out to us. Sometimes Christ in his merits, is dished out in the
Sacrament to all the senses, and sometimes he is dished out in the Word;
therefore as you take the dish to cut some meat: So, take the Word; that
Communicates Christ to the ear, and Prayer Communicates with Christ, and the
Sacrament Communicates Christ to all the senses; cut the meat, and let not the
Lord Christ go whole from the Table, and no man look after him, fill your
hungry Souls with Christ. When a poor traveling man comes to the Ferry; he
cries to the other side; Have over, have over; his meaning is, he would go to
the other side by a Boat; he only desires the use of the Ferry-man to convey
him over. So, Christ is in heaven, but we are here on earth (as it were) on the
other side of the river; the ordinances of God are but as so many Boats to
carry us, and to land us at Heaven where our hopes are; and our hearts should
be. Therefore you would be landed: Have over, have over (says the Soul). The
Soul desires to be landed at the Stairs of Mercy, and says, Oh, bring me to
speak with my Savior. Mary came to the Sepulcher to seek for Christ, and
therefore when the Angel said to her, Woman why weepest thou, she made this
answer, Oh, they have taken away my Lord. Ioh. 20.13.
So, it is with you, if you be not hypocrites. Is there ever a Mary here? is
there ever a man or woman that prizeth a Christ, and sees need of a Christ,
and that comes weeping and mourning to the holy ordinances of God? whom seek
thou (says the Word, and Prayer, and the Sacrament? Oh (says the broken
hearted sinner) they have taken away my Lord Christ? Oh this sinful heart of
mine; oh these cursed corruptions of mine! if it had not been for these,
Christ would have comforted my conscience and pardoned my sin; if thou see
my Christ and my Savior; reveal him to my Soul, that I may receive comfort
and consolation by him. This is the frame of a Christian Soul: when the
Ferry-man has carried the traveller over, he stays not there, but goes to
the house of his friend, and says, is such a man within, he desires to speak
with him, and to receive some good from him. We hear, and pray, and read till
we are weary, we do not cry; Have over, let me come to enjoy a nearer
Communion with my Savior, that I may dwell with him, and have a nearer cut to
the Lord Christ; I would have way, that I may receive grace and mercy from
Christ according to my necessities. When a man has gotten so many hundredth
pounds, he not only tells that he has met with the Ferry-man, but he shows
the money that he has gotten. So, you come to Church, and go from Church, and
you have your hearing, for your hearing: and your professing, for your
professing and the like; but you should labor to say; I have gotten the pardon
of all my sins, and the assurance of Gods love to my Soul; I have been with
my Savior, and thus graciously, and mercifully he has dealt with me. All
that I have said, is but a speech of a little time, but it is a task for all a
man's life. Oh think of it and say, what have I gotten by all that I have done?
and what would I get when I go to prayer? I would have a Christ and mercy from
him. This is not in our minds. I tell thee what thou must aim at, and labor
for, hear, and pray for a Savior. See a need of Christ in all, and see
greater beauty in Christ then in all, and be lead nearer to Christ by all, or
else you get nothing by all that you do. If there were no gold in the
West Indies, the King of Spain would not care for his Ships, nor for that
place. Schoole-boyes care not for the Carrier, but for Letters from a Father.
So, now raise up your hearts higher toward heaven: All holy duties are but as
Ships, and Carriers, but the golden Mines of mercy are all in the Lord Jesus
Christ. It was a sweet speech of a man (whether he was good or bad I know not)
that a man should loose the creatures in God. So, I would have you do, loose
your selves, and all ordinances, and creatures, and all that you have and do,
in the Lord Christ. How is that? Let all be swallowed up, and let nothing be
seen but a Christ, and let thy heart be set upon nothing but a Christ. As it
is with the Moon and Stars, when the Sun comes, they loose all their
light, though they are there in the heavens still; and as it is with rivers,
they all go into the Sea, and are all swallowed up of the Sea: and yet there
is nothing seen but the Sea. So, all the ordinances, and creatures, are as so
many rivers from that Ocean of mercy and goodness in Christ, and they all
return thither; therefore only see a Fountain of grace, goodness, wisdom,
and power in Christ: When a man is upon the Sea, he can see no fresh water, it
is all swallowed up: So, let it be with thy Soul, when thou would find
mercy and grace. The ordinances of God are good in themselves, yet loose them
all in Christ. That wisdom in Christ is able to direct, and that grace and
mercy in Christ is able to save, when all other helps fail, and that power of
Christ must support the Soul in the time of trouble. There is some comfort and
sweet, and some refreshing in the Word, and in the Sacrament, and in the
company of Gods people; but loose all these in the Lord Christ. And see that
mercy, and compassion, and that boundless goodness that is in the Lord Jesus;
and that mercy that will pardon all sins, and forgive all sorts of sinners,
if they be humbled before him. There is no pardon in grace, nor in means, in
Word, nor in Sacraments, there is none but in Christ, see none but that, and
when thou art there, hold thy heart to it; drench and drown thy Soul there,
and fling thy Soul into the Sea of that plenteous Redemption in Christ; and
though thy prayers and all fail, yet that mercy in Christ will never fail.
Away with these rivers, these are all fresh water comforts that will fail, but
that Sea of mercy in Christ will hold for ever. See a Sea of misery and
confusion in thy soul, and a Sea of mercy in Christ, and say, none but that
Lord; Here sit, and here fall, and for ever establish thy soul, that it may
go well with thee for ever. Thus you ought to go beyond all means, and he
that does thus, does truly despair of all saving succor in them. Therefore
go home, and say thus, the Lord has given me some comfort, and some grace,
and a heart enlarged to walk with God, and to perform duty to him, but I
trust not in this comfort, nor in my enlargement, all my comfort is in Christ,
that Sea of mercy is still full, and I rest there; go from all these to that,
and rest there and let that content thee for ever.

Thus you see how far the Prodigal has gone. Text.
What does he now? he comes to himself and says, I will arise and go to my
Father, and say to him Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and
am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servants. Now his stout stomach is come down, and he comes home by weeping
cross, and he that had formerly slighted the kindness of a father, and said,
He would not always be holden within his fathers house, he would have his
portion, and he has it, and is gone, and at last when his heart and all fails
him, he comes to himself and said, here I may starve and die too, the hogs
fare better then I do, therefore home I will go to my father etc.

This is the third passage that I told you of in the description of this work
of humiliation.

In these words there are these two things clear.

First, he submits himself to his father.

Secondly, he is content to be at his fathers disposing; he does not seek to
be his own carver, and say, if I may be my fathers steward, and have some
eminent place in the house, then I will go home, no, but he says, father, I am
not worthy to be a Son, make me as a hired servant, if I can but get into my
fathers house again; I will die rather then go away any more: he is content to
be any thing, so his father will but receive him into his family, though it
were but to be a drudge in the kitchen, here is a heart worth gold, oh! (says
he) let all the weight lie upon me I care not what I be, only let me be a
servant. So then from the former of these two, the Doctrine is this.

The third Doctrine.
The distressed sinner that despaires of all supply and succor in himself, is
driven to submit himself to the Lord God for succor and relief.

It is no thanks to the Prodigal that he comes home now, neither is it any
thanks to a poor sinner that he returns after all his wandering away from
God, yet better late then never. For the opening of this point I will show two
things.





What is subjection.
The first, how the Soul behaves it self in this subjection. The sinner having
a sight of his own sin and being troubled and overwhelmed with the
unsupportable sorrow that attends there unto, and yet he is not able to get
power over his sin, nor assurance of pardon from the Lord; for you must
conceive the sinner to be in the work of preparation, and he yet conceives
God to be an enemy against him, though he is in a good way to mercy, yet God
comes as an angry God against him, and he takes what course he can and seeks
far and wide, and improves all means and takes up all duties, that (if it were
possible) he might heal his wounded Soul, and get ground against his
corruptions, but the truth is, he finds no succor and receives no comfort in
what he has, nor in what he does, and therefore being in this despairing
condition; he sees he cannot avoid Gods anger, neither can he bear it,
therefore he is forced (though loath) to make trial of the kindness of a
father, and of the Lord, though for the present he apprehends God to be just
and to be incensed against him, and though he has no experience of Gods
favor for the while, and no certainty how he shall speed if he come to God;
yet because he sees that he cannot be worse then he is, but he may be better
if God please, and this he knows that none but God can help him: therefore he
falls at the footestoole of mercy, and lies grovelling at the gate of grace, and
submits himself to God that he may do what he will with him. When Jonah had
denounced that heavy judgment and (as it were) thrown wildfire about the
streets, saying, Jonah 3.9.
within forty days Nineveh shall be destroyed; See what they resolve upon,
they fasted, and prayed, and put on sack cloth and ashes; the Lord in mercy
grant that we may take the like courses, who can tell (said they) but God may
turn and repent him of his feirce wrath that we perish not. As if they had
said, we know not what God will do, but this we know that we cannot oppose
Gods judgments, nor prevent them, nor succor our selves: yet who can tell but
the Lord may be gracious and bountiful, and yet continue peace and goodness
to us in this kind; thus it is with a sinner despairing of all succor in
himself, when he sees hell fire flashing in his face, and that he cannot
succor himself, then he says, this I know that all the means in the world
cannot save me, yet who can tell but the Lord may have mercy upon me, and
cure this distressed conscience and heal all these wounds that sin has made
in my Soul: when Paul went breathing out threatenings against the Church of
God, and he came furnished with letters from the high Priests, with all his
tricks and implements to persecute the Saints; the Lord met him and there was a
single combat fought between them, the glory of the Lord amazed him, and threw
him flat on the ground, and when Paul saw that the Lord Jesus had the advantage
against him, he yielded himself and said, Act. 9.6.
Lord what will thou have me to do. This is the lively picture of the Soul in
this case; this subjection discovers it self in four particulars.

can a man be profitable to the Lord; as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself, Job 22.2, 3.
is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous, or is it any gain
to him that thou make thy way perfect. So the Soul says; Is all that I can
do any thing to the Lord, is the Lords Justice any gainer by it? Nay, Justice
is yet unsatisfied, because there is sin in all that I do, and therefore
Justice may proceed against me: therefore the soul resolves, that the Lord may
and will: Nay, why should he not come in vengeance, and Judgment against him?

Job says, He is one mind and who can turn him, Job 23.13, 14, 15, 16.
and what his soul desires that does he. It is admirable to consider it: for
this is it that makes the heart melt and come under; When the Soul says, If
God come who can turn him, he will have his honor from this wretched proud
heart of mine, he will have his glory from me, either here in my humiliation,
or else hereafter in my damnation. And in the next verse, Job says, Many such
things are with him: As if he had said, he has many ways to crush a carnal
confident heart, and to make it lie low, He wants not means to pull down even
the most rebellious sinner under heaven. And now mark what follows, He can
crush them all; what became of Nimrod, Cain, Pharaoh, and Nebuchadnezzar; They
are all brought down; therefore (says he) I am troubled at his presence, when
I consider it I am afraid, for God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty
troubles me.

David; 2 Samuel 15.25.26.
When the Lord had cast him out of his Kingdom, he said to Zadock; Carry
back the Ark of God into the City, if I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, he will bring me back again, and show me both it and his
habitation. But if he thus say to me, I have no delight in thee, Behold, here
I am, let him do with me as seems good in his eyes. Or as it was with those
people, 2 King. 10.2.3, 4.
2 Kings 10.2, 3, 4. Where when Iehu sent this message to the people of Israel,
saying, Now as as soon as this letter comes to you, seeing your masters
sons are with you, and there are with you chariots, and armor, and a fenced
City, look out even the best and fittest of your masters sons, and set him
on his fathers throne, and fight for your fathers house. But the text says,
they were all exceedingly afraid, and therefore they sent word to Iehu and
said, two Kings could not stand out against thee, and then how can we stand? We
are thy servants, and will do all that thou shall bid us, we will make no
King, do thou that which is good in thine eyes. This is the frame of a poor
Soul: When a poor sinner will stand upon his own privileges, the Lord says,
bear my Justice, and defend thy self by all that thou have if thou can; and
the Soul says, I am thy servant (Lord) do what is good in thine eyes, I
cannot succor my self: therefore the heart gives up it self to be at the
command of God.

much; The sinner sees that all he has, and can do, can never succor him,
and therefore he throws away his carnal confidence, and he submits himself
to the Lord; and now he sees that the Lord may justly come against him, and
that his justice is not satisfied, and that he cannot bear Gods wrath, nor
avoid it, and he casts away all his shifts, and lies down at the gate of
mercy. As it is with a debtor that stands bound for some far greater sums,
then ever he is able to pay; to satisfy of himself he cannot, and his friends
will not: and he knows that the bonds are still in force and his creditor will
sue him; avoid the suit he cannot, and to bear it, he is not able; and
therefore he comes in freely, and offers himself, and his person, and gives up
himself into his creditors hands, only he beseeches him to remit that which
he can never pay. Just so it is with the soul of a poor sinner. The Soul is
the Debtor: and Divine Justice is the Creditor. When the poor sinner has used
all means to save and succor himself, and to make payment, and he has (as
it were) made a gathering of prayers all the Country over, and yet he sees,
that there is a controversy between God and him; and yet his sin is not
pardoned: and God is Just and will have his honor, and he is not able to avoid
the suite nor to bear it, Psalm. 139.7, 8.
and the Soul says, as David did; Whither shall I go from thy spirit? and
whither shall I fly from thy presence? if I ascend up into heaven thou art
there, etc. So the Soul says, God will have his payment from this heart blood
of mine, if I go into the East the Lord will follow me; and bid his Sergeant
Conscience to arrest me, and I shall lie and rot in the Prison of hell for
ever. Now the Soul offers himself before the Lord, and says, Father, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee: Oh show mercy (if it be possible) to
this poor distressed Soul of mine: thus the Prodigal did. An other
Similitude is this. Me thinks the picture of those four famished Lepers, may
fitly resemble this poor sinner. When the famine was great in Samaria: 2 King.
7.3.8, 9, etc.
There were four leprous men sat in the gate of the City, and they said, Why
sit we here until we die? If we enter into the City, the famine is there,
and if we sit here we dye also; Now let us therefore fall into the hands of
our enemies, if they save us alive we shall live, and if they kill us we shall
but die. They had but one means to succor themselves withal, and that was to
go into the Camp of their enemies, come (said they) we will put it to the
venture, and so they did, and were relieved: This is the lively picture of a
poor sinner in this despairing condition. When the Soul of a poor Leprous
sinner is famished for want of comfort, and he sees the wrath of God pursuing
of him, and the Lord besets him on every side: at last he resolves thus with
himself, I say, when he has used all means, and finds succor in none; he
resolves thus with himself and says, if I go and rest upon my privileges,
there is nothing but emptiness and weakness if I trust in them, and if I
rest in my natural condition, I perish there also. Let me therefore fall into
the hands of the Lord of Hosts, who (I confess) has been provoked by me,
and for ought I see is mine enemy, I am now a damned man, and if the Lord cast
me out of his presence, I can but be damned that way, and then he comes to the
Lord, and falls down before the footstool of a consuming God, and says as
Job did, What shall I say unto thee oh thou preserver of men? I have no reason
to plead for my self withal, and I have no power to succor my self, my
accusations are my best excuse, all the privileges in the world cannot
justify me, and all my duties cannot save me, if there be any mercy left, Oh
succor a poor distressed sinner in the very gall of bitterness. This is the
behavior of the Soul in this work of subjection.

The reason why the Lord deals thus with the Soul, and why he plucks a
sinner upon his knees; there is great reason why he should do it. The reason
is twofold. First, That the Lord may herein express and glorify the
greatness of his power. And secondly, To show forth the glory of his mercy.



Exodus 9.27.
It is a fine passage. You know how Pharaoh would outface the Lord, saying, Who
is the Lord that I should obey him? And as the Master sometimes says to his
servant, You shall, And you shall do this says the husband to his wife. This
is the sturdy fierceness of a company of wretches. Well, the Lord let him
alone for the while, but in the 27. verse, when the Lord had freed and
delivered his servants, and had plagued the Egyptians with the hail, then
Pharaoh said, Now I know that the Lord is greater then all Gods, and that he is
righteous, but I and my people are wicked. Where is Pharaoh and Nimrod, and all
the rest of those mighty ones of the world? they are all gone down to hell,
and God has destroyed them, for, in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he
was above them. Herein is the glory of Gods power. So, it is here. As we use to
say, Do you know such a man? Yes. What was he? A professed drunkard, and a
desperate despiser of God and his grace, and one that did hate the very face of
an honest man. Oh, the Lord has brought him upon his knees. Oh, admirable
(says he) what is he humbled, and is his heart broken? Oh yes, the Lord has
dejected him in that wherein he was proud. As it is amongst men; If two men be
in controversy, and the one enters into suit with the other, and before a man
will submit and yield himself, he will dye, and rather spend all that he has
then to want his will, and he will make that tongue deny what it has spoken.
He thinks this his excellency: So, it is with our God. Herein is the power of
the Almighty magnified, that he has brought down those great Leviathans; and
all those Nimrods and great Kings, which said, Who is the Lord? he has made
such as these are, to come in; and to submit unto him.

Secondly, The second Means.
by this means the Lord does mervailously promote the praise of his mercy.
First, Partly for the greatness of it. And secondly, partly for the freedom
of it. First, in that the Lord helps a poor sinner at a dead lift, and when
all prayers, and hearings prevailed not, and when all privileges were not able
to purchase mercy and favor, then the Lord shows mercy. Does not this argue
the excellency of that Balm? that will cure when all other means cannot do
the deed, that the Lord should then (I say) look upon a poor sinner, and
refresh him with one drop of mercy: Oh, this is unspeakable mercy! As the
Prophet David says, All my bones can say, Lord, who is like unto thee? as if
he had said, This eye that has wept for my sins, this tongue that has
confessed my sins, and this heart that has grieved for sin, all these have
been refreshed by thee. This prayer is not like to thee, this fasting and
these privileges are not like to thee, for these could not succor me; but
thou art the Lord that did deliver and succor thy poor servant. And
secondly, herein is also admirable freeness of mercy; that when the Lords
mercy was but lightly looked after, that then the Lord should give mercy, and
that to an enemy. For, the Soul can say, if any thing in the world would have
saved me, I should not have gone to the Lord for mercy; and yet when all would
not do, and when I did not think of any such matter, then the Lord saved me.
This is free mercy. The hope of Israel is not like others, and the God of Jacob
is not like other Gods. You distressed Souls, did not you know the time when
God terrified you, and then offered mercy and you would none, but you would
scramble for mercy, and shift for your own comfort, and yet the Lord brought
down those proud hearts of yours, and when you were at a dead lift, and could
find comfort no where else, then did the Lord show mercy to your Souls. Was
not this free mercy? wonder at it, and give God glory for it, even for ever.

Hear and tremble all you stout ones of the earth, you that account it a
matter of credit to cast off the Commandments of God, and that you can lift up
your selves against the Almighty. Good Lord, is it possible? you know what I
say; there is many one here, and if they be not here, (as commonly they are
not) let them hear of it. How is it that men slight all corrections, and snap
all Gods Commandments in sunder, as Samson did the Cords, and they say, their
tongues are their own, and their lusts are the commands that carry them; Nay,
is it not come to this pass now adays (for the Lords sake think of it) that
men account it a matter of baseness of spirit to be such childish babes, and
to be so womannish, as to stoop at every command. Oh, you must not be drunk,
(says one) it is a hot argument, and are you such a child as to yield to it.
No, let us follow our own ways; is it not thus? I appeal to your own
Souls: there are too many guilty in this place? Do you think to out-brave
the Almighty in this manner? do you provoke the Lord to wrath, and do you
not provoke your Souls to your own confusion? Do thou think to go to
heaven thus bolt upright: the Lord cannot endure thee here, and will He suffer
thee to dwell with himself for ever in heaven? What, thou to heaven upon these
terms? Nay, thou must not think to out-brave the Lord in this manner, and to
go to heaven too? How did the Lord deal with Lucifer, and all those glorious
spirits? He sent them all down to hell for their pride. Let all such spirits
hear, and know their misery. I do not trouble my self with any matter of
indignation, it is no trouble to me, but only because of your sins, for you
are the greatest objects of pity under heaven. You that know such, and have
such husbands: oh mourn for them exceedingly. The Lord does detest their
persons, As the Wise man says; Prove. 11.20.
The froward in heart are an abomination to the Lord. The Lord does abhor
that heart of thine: And, shall God abhominate that proud heart of thine, and
yet bless it, and save it, and will He dwell with such a heart in heaven? No,
he has some body else to give heaven to. Secondly, thy estate is desperate
here, and mavelous unrecoverable. As the same Wise man says, He that being
often reprooved, hardneth his neck, and will not stoop to any counsels, nor
reproves, but says? Who meddles with you, and I know what I have to do, and
let every Tub stand upon his own bottom. How many of you here have been
reprooved for your swearing, but you leave it not. How many of you have been
reprooved for your profaning of the Lords Day; do you withdraw your selves
from it. Oh no such matter! Go your ways then and mourn over those hard
hearts of yours; and in private say thus. This is my sentence right. The Lord
be merciful to my father (says the child) and the Lord be merciful to my
proud husband, (says the wife), and to my wife (says the husband), are not we
they that have been often reprooved? have not we had such exhortations as have
made the Church to shake, the devils would have gotten more good if they had
had them, and yet we have cast of all, and we would not come in, we do not yet
pray in our Families, but we throw away all; the Lord has said it, he that
being often reprooved hardens his neck and will not come in, shall perish,
he is gone then, and therefore thou may say? Oh my husband is but a dead man,
and my child is a dead child, he shall perish: but is there no remedy, (may
some say) No, the text says so, he shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. The truth is, I need say no more, but you that know your own
hearts, bewail those hard hearts of yours, that (as the water by continual
dropping, at last melts the flint so) if it be possible those proud hearts of
yours may be brought down. If a drunkard, or an adulterer will submit to the
Word there is remedy for them; but there is no remedy for him, that will not
yield to the Spirit of God. The Lord be merciful to the Souls of them. Will
you see your sturdy hearted husbands and children perish? the Lord in mercy set
this home to your hearts at last, and prevail with them. Will you perish, and
that suddenly? Oh let us pity them! will you not yield now, but you will stand
it out to the last man?

The Lord comes out in battle array against a proud person, and singles him out
from all the rest, and when the vyalls of his wrath are poured out upon all
wicked ones, (me thinks) the Lord says, Let that drunkard and that swearer
alone a while, but let me destroy that proud heart for ever. You shall submit
in spite of your teeth, when the great God of heaven and earth shall come to
execute vengeance, and do not think to scarre God with your mocks, you that
will swear a man out of your company. Consider that place in Job, and see how
the Lord comes with all his full might against a proud man. Job 15.25.26, 27.
It is good to read this place often, that God may pull down our proud hearts.
For he stretches out his hands against the Almighty (says the text) and
strengthens himself against God, and he says, I will do it though my life
lie at the stake for it, he strengthens himself and will do it. Surely God is
afraid of him, he comes so well manned; the Lord must deal some way with him
to overthrow him. Mark what the text says; The Lord runs upon him even on
his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers, because he covers his face
with his fatness, and makes collops of fat upon his flanks; the Lord comes
upon him not at the advantage, but in the height of his pride, and in the rage
of his malice the Lord will come upon him, and ruinate him for ever: Those that
now stand it out, and cast off all, carelessly throwing away the commandments
of God; I would have them at the day of their death to out-stand the curse of
God. The Lord God commands to sanctify his Sabbaths, and to love his truth and
his children, yet, you will not, but you will strive against all, I would have
you to out-stand the curse of God in the day of judgment, and when the Lord
Jesus shall say, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, stand it out
now, and say, I will not go to hell (Lord) I will not be damned. No, no; you
broke the cords here, but the Lord will bind you in chains of darkness for
ever, remove those chains if you can. No, Esaias 2.17.
the haughtiness of men shall be brought low, and the loftiness of men shall
be abased, and the Lord shall only be exalted in that day.

it is informed, if it have no good reason to gainsay it. It is not of that
wayward and pettish disposition, that it will not be satisfied though all his
reasons be answered, and all objections taken away. It is not led by his own
humors, as many a man is, though his conceits be against reason, and opposite
against God and his grace. Nay, it is content to yield to the authority of the
truth, and to take the impression of every truth; it hears, and yields, Job
34.32.
and obeyes, and frames it self answerably. As Job says, That which I know
not teach thou me, and if I have done any iniquity, I will do so no more. The
humble Soul is content to confess his ignorance, and to submit to any truth,
that may inform him, and it is content to receive that mercy and grace that is
offered, by what means soever God sees best to Communicate it. Nay, the heart
that is truly submissive, is as willing to take comfort when it is offered upon
good grounds, as it is to perform duty enjoined. By a foolish pettishnesse,
the devil withdrawes the hearts of Gods own people from much comfort, that
God has dished out of purpose for their benefit. For howsoever the Soul of a
poor sinner be truly touched, yet for want of this lowliness, and this
teachablenesse, and submission it refuses, that sap and sweet, that it should
take and receive from the Lord. Take a poor sinner, that has many sins
burthening of him, and he is crushed with them, and that in truth he desires
comfort, but receives none: Let the Minister of God come, and answer all his
arguments, and satisfy all his quarrels that he can make, and set him on a
clear board, and tell him that the work of grace is clear, and mercy is
appointed for him: Now mark how he flies of through that sullenness, and
untoward peevishness and pride of Spirit, he casts away the mercy, and yields
not to the comfort offered, though he is content to yield to the duties
enjoined, and so he deprives himself of that mercy, and comfort that is
offered; and thus when all is done time after time, the Soul says, I see it
not, and I perceive it not: and all the world shall not persuade me of it. Why?
what, are you wiser then all the world? what a pride of heart is this? Oh says
he, another man may be cozened and deceived, but I know my own heart better
then any Minister does. But you tell the Minister what your condition is, and
so, what you know he knows, and he has more judgment to inform you, then
you have of your self. Then says the Minister, all your cavils and objections
are answered, and remooved; and all that work of grace that God has wrought,
you have made it known and revealed, and all this is made good by the Word of
God; now if all these quarrels be answered, and if all the reasons and
evidences of the work of grace be made clear, that you cannot deny them;
then, why may not you take comfort? Down with that proud heart of yours, that
will not believe whatsoever the Minister says. Oh the height of pride, and
haughtiness of heart in this case! I speak to you to whom comfort and mercy
is impropriated, down with those proud spirits I say. It is not because you
cannot, but because you will not. It is said in Esaias, God prepares the garment
of gladness for the spirit of heaviness. When the Lord sees the soul
prepared and humbled, Esa. 61.3.
he takes measure of it, and disheth out a comfort answerable, he prepares a
consolation as fit as may be, and yet the Soul will not put it on, nor be
warned and refreshed with it; as it is with some way-ward and untoward child,
who when his father has prepared a suit of clothes fitting for him; because
he has not such and such a lace, he will not put it on, but throws all away.
Oh, it is mavelous pride of spirit! a rod, a rod. Even so, when the Lord
prepares the garment of gladness, you will not put it on, nor receive the
comfort that is offered, and so swelt your own hearts.

Now I come to this last passage in this work of Humiliation, and this is the
dead lift of all. The Prodigal does not stand it out with his Father and say,
I am now come again, if I may have half the rule in the Family, I am content
to live with you. No, though he would not stay there before, yet now he cannot
be kept out, he is content to be any thing. Oh (says he) I confess I do
deserve the worst, but if any man will once help me in, and but throw me over
the threshold, if I may but Scour the Kettles, or do any drudgery, I will
never out again. Oh that I could get in once. As if he had said, you that
think nothing sufficient, if you had tasted the bitterness of affliction as I
have done, you would be glad of any thing in a Fathers house; Come all you
drunkards, and adulterers, you will needs away from God, and his grace? I tell
you, if you were bitten and troubled as I have been, then you would say, it is
good being in a Fathers house, and it is good yielding to the Lord upon any
terms: as it was with this Prodigal: So it is with every Soul that is truly
humbled with the sense of his own vileness. When the Soul sees that no
duties will quiet his Conscience, nor get the pardon of his sin, he comes
home and is content, (not only to take up the profession of the Gospel upon
some agreements with the Lord, and to say, if I may have honors, and
preferments, and ease, and liberty, and the like, then I am content to follow
it. Nay, the Soul says, let me be a miserable slave and imprisoned, let me
be a servant, and be brought to the heaviest hazards, I care not what I be, if
the Lord will but receive me to mercy. Lord (says he) show me mercy, and if
I am content to be, and to suffer any thing. So from hence the Doctrine is this.

4. Doctrine.
The Soul that is truly humbled, is content to be disposed of by the
Almighty, as it pleases him.

The maine pith of this point lies in the word, content. This phrase is a
higher pitch then the former of submission: and this is plain by this example.
Take a debtor, who has used all means to avoid the creditor: in the end he
sees that he cannot avoid the suit, and to bear it he is not able. Therefore
the only way is to come in, and yield himself into his creditors hands; where
there is nothing, the King must loose his right; so the debtor yields himself:
but suppose the creditor should use him hardly, and exact the uttermost, throw
him into prison; Now to be content to under-goe the hardest dealing, it is a
hard matter: this is a further degree then the offering of himself. So, when
the Soul has offered himself, and he sees that Gods writs are out against
him, and his Conscience (the Lords Sergeant) is coming to serve a Subpena of
him, and he is not able to avoid it, nor to bear it when it comes, therefore
he submits himself and says, Lord, whither shall I go, thy anger is heavy
and unavoydable; Nay, whatsoever God requires, the Soul lays his hand upon
his mouth, and goes away contented and well satisfied, and it has nothing to
say against the Lord. This is the nature of the Doctrine in hand: and for the
better opening of it, let me discover three things.







How shall a man know when his Soul is thus contented? this frame of heart
discovers it self, in three particular acts, or passages.

First, You may remember, that I told you before, Wherein this contentedness
consists.
that the sinner was resolved to yield to God, and to submit himself to his
power, and pleasure, and he did beg mercy. Now the Soul that is truly
abased, (though he seek mercy) yet he sees so much corruption, and
unworthiness in himself, that he acknowledges himself unfit for mercy. He
cannot avoid the wrath of God, neither can he bear it, therefore he says, Oh
mercy, mercy Lord! What (says the Lord) I had thought your own duties, and
prayers, would have carried you out against my Justice, and have purchased
mercy? Oh no (says the Soul) it is only mercy that must relieve and succor
me, but such is my vileness, that I am not fit for the least mercy and
favor, and such is the wickedness of this wretched heart of mine, that
whatsoever are the greatest plagues, I am worthy of them all, though never so
insupportable: and all the Judgments that God has threatened, and prepared for
the devil and his angels, they are all due to this wretched Soul of mine, for
I am a devil in truth; only here is the difference, I am not yet in hell: and
oh (says the Soul), had the devils the like hopes, and means, and patience
that I have enjoyed, for ought I know, they would have been better then I am.
It is that which shames the Soul in all his sorrows, and makes him say, had
they the like mercy? Oh those sweet comforts, and those precious promises that
I have had, and that the Lord Jesus has made to me, and has come so many
heavy Iourneyes to knock at my heart, and said, Come to me ye rebellious
children, turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die. Oh that mercy, that has
followed me from my house to my walk, and there mercy has conferred with
me, and from thence to my closet; and there mercy has woed me: and in my
night thoughts when I awaked, there mercy kneeled down before me, and
besought me to renounce my base courses, yet I refused mercy, and would needs
have my own will; had the devils but such hopes, and such offers of mercy,
they that now tremble for want of mercy; they would have given entertainment to
it for ought I know: And what, do I seek for mercy, shall I talk of mercy?
Alas, shall I seek for mercy, when in the mean time, I have thus slighted and
despised it; what I mercy? the least of Gods mercies are to good for me, and
the heaviest of Gods plagues are too little for me. Nay, the Soul finds no
end in pleading, and therefore he reasons thus with himself, and says, that
God cannot do more against him then he has deserved; but be sure, he thinks
that God will not lay more upon him then he is worthy of. Nay, it is sure the
Soul cannot bear nor suffer so much, as he has deserved and plucked upon
himself, if God should proceed in rigor with him. For the sinner that will
deal plainly, and discernes his evil exactly; it is easy for him to number
up all his abominations, and the Soul thus reasons with it self, and says,
I only deserve eternal condemnation; for the wages of all sin is death,
being committed against an infinite Majesty, and against a Divine Justice, and
then, what do all these my sins deserve, committed, and continued in, and
maintained against the light of Gods Word, against all corrections, and all
checks of conscience, and all the Commandments of God, hell is too good, and
ten thousand hels is to little to torment such a wretch as I am. In truth, I
begged mercy, but what, I mercy? I am ashamed to expect it, and with what heart
can I beg this mercy which I have trodden under my feet? Shall that blood of
Christ purge my heart, that blood that I have trampled under my feet, and
accounted it as an unholy thing? and when the Lord has woed me, and his
wounds were bleeding, and his sides goared, and his hideous cries coming into
mine ears, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, yet this Christ have I
slighted, and made nothing of his blood, and can the blood of Christ do me
any service? indeed I do crave grace, but how do I think to receive any. All
the pillars of the Church can testify, how often grace, and mercy has been
offered to me, but I have refused it; therefore how can I beg any grace? And
as the text says, They shall see their sin and acknowledge their ways, and
Judge themselves worthy to be condemned. So the Soul confesses, that it is
worthy of nothing that is good, it is not worthy of Gods love, nor of Gods
preservation nor any other privilege, only he confesses that he does loath
himself, and says, Oh this stubbornness, and villainy, and this wretchedness
of mine? what I mercy? no I am not worthy of any, it is more then I can expect,
I am only worthy to be cast out for ever. As the Prophet Ezechiel says, That
thou may remember, Ezech. 16.63.
and be confounded, and never open thy mouth more because of thy shame; that
is, they shall remember the evil that they have committed, and the Lords
kindness and mercy that they have opposed, and they shall be confounded, and
not open their mouths any more. So, now his tongue cleaves to the roof of his
mouth, and he says, I remember my evil, and am ashamed to expect any mercy, I
sought for mercy before, but now I see I am unworthy of any, and worthy of all
the judgments that God can pour upon me. The Soul confesses clearly, that
he has deserved more then God will lay upon him; for if God should pour all
his wrath upon him, he must make him infinite to bear his infinite wrath, and
therefore the Lord only lays so much upon him as he is capable of.

Lament. 3.22.
It is the Lords mercy that we are not confounded, because his compassions
fail not. When a poor drunkard sees how he has roared in the Alehouse
against God and his truth, and how he has plotted against the Saints, he
wonders that ever God could bear with such a wretch, and that the earth has
not swallowed him up quick. And when the Lord has humbled the heart of an
adulterer, or adulteress, he begins to think thus with himself, the Lord saw
all the evils that I have committed, and all my plottings, and all my
inveighings and allurings to this sin, and my delight in it: then the Soul
admires that ever Gods Justice was able to bear with such a monster, and that
God did not confound him in his burning lusts, and cast him down to hell. Oh
(says he) it is because his mercies fail not, that my life and all has not
failed long ago. Nay, the Soul concludes, that the Lord should not save him.
As Nehemiah says, Howbeit, Nehem. 9.33.
thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done right, but
we have done wickedly; as if he had said, It is righteous that every man
should lie under his own load, and therefore thou may justly condemn us.
Nay, the Soul says, That God cannot but plague him for ought that he
perceives in Justice; as Daniel says, Dan. 9.14.
Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us, for
the Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he does, because we obeyed
not his voice: He speaks there of the 70. years captivity. So the Soul
says, Because the Lord is just, and righteous, and does not only punish, but
he cannot but punish, and therefore he justifies the Lord in all the plagues
that ever can be inflicted upon him. And hence it is that the Soul will not
maintain any kind of murmuring or heart rising against the Lords dealings,
much less does he hide it in the Lord. But, though nature and corruption will
be stirring, and sometimes the heart will be grudging against the Lord, and
say, Why does the Lord thus, and why are not my prayers answered, such a Soul
is humbled, and such a Soul is comforted, and why not I as well as he, yet
when any such matter rises in the heart, he stifles, crusheth and chokes
these wretched distempers, and does abase it self before the Lord, saying,
What if God will not (as the Apostle says) speaking of the rejection of some,
and the receiving of others: so the Soul says, What if God will not hear thy
prayers? and what if God will not pacify thy conscience? nor show any mercy to
thee, thou have thy own, and does the Lord do me any wrong, vile hell-hound
that I am, I have my sin and my shame, wrath is my portion, and hell is my
place, I may go thither when I will, it is mercy that God deals thus with me.
Now the Soul comes to clear God in all his providence, and says, It is just
with God that all the prayers which come from this filthy heart of mine, should
be abhorred, and that all my labors in holy duties should never be blessed,
for I have had these ends, and by respects in all my duties; it is I that have
sinned against checks of conscience, and against knowledge; and therefore it is
just that I should carry this horror of heart with me to my grave; it is I
that have abused mercy, and therefore it is just and righteous with God, that I
should go with a tormenting conscience down to hell; Oh that (if I be in
hell) I might have a Spirit to glorify and justify thy name there, and say,
Now I am come down to hell amongst you damned creatures, but the Lord is
righteous and blessed for ever in all his dealings, and I am justly condemned.

Thirdly, Hence the Soul comes to be quiet and frameable under the heavy hand
of God in that helpless condition wherein he is; so that the Soul having
been thus framed aforehand, it comes to this, that it takes the blow and lies
under the burden and goes away quietly and patiently, he is quiet and says
not a word more: oh! this is a heart worth gold. He accounts Gods dealing and
Gods way to be the fittest and most reasonable of all. Oh (says he) it is fit
that God should glorify himself though I be damned for ever, for I deserve
the worst; whatsoever I have it is the reward of my own works, and the end of
my own way, if I be damned, I may thank my pride, my stubbornness, my
peevishness of Spirit and all my base corruptions; what, shall I repine
against the Lord because his wrath and his displeasure lies heavy upon me? let
me repine against my sin that made him do it. Let me grudge against my base
heart that has nourished these adders in my bosom, shall I be unquiet and
murmr against the Lord because this horror of heart does vex me? oh, noe,
let me bless the Lord and not Speak one word against him, but let me repine
against my sin; as the holy prophet David says, Psalm. 39.9.
I held my tongue and Spoke nothing, because thou Lord had done it. So the
Soul says, when the sentence of condemnation is even seazing upon him, and
God seems to cast him out of his favor, then he says, I confess God is
just, and therefore I bless his name and yield to him: but sin is the worker
of all this misery that has befallen me. The holy Prophet Jeremy pleading of
the great extremity that had befallen the people of God, says, woe is me for
my hurt, Ier. 10.19.
my wound is grievous, but I said, truly this is my grief and I must bear it.
This is the frame of a heart that is truly humbled; it is content to take all
to it self and so to be quiet, saying, this is my wound and I must bear it,
this is my sorrow and I will suffer it, thus you see what the behavior of the
heart is in this contentedness. Hold these well for they are of marveilous
difficulty and great use. Quest.
But, what is the dealing of the Lord that the Soul must be contented with?



The first thing that God will have the Soul contented with.
1. First thing that God will do to the Soul, and which the Soul must be
contented with, is that salvation, and happiness, and the acceptance of a
man's person now, must be no more in a man's own hands, nor in his own ability,
the Lord has taken the staff out of his hand; and salvation must be no more
put in his own power. Here is a wonderful height of pride expressed before the
Soul will yield to this. When Adam was created in his innocence, the Lord put
a fair stock into his hand, and he might have traded for himself, and he
had liberty of will and power of grace, so that he might have gotten the
favor of God, by that which he could do, if he would have done he might
have lived: But, when Adam had betrayed that trust which God committed to him
in the state of Paradise, because he had forfeited this trust, the Lord took
all away from him, and nothing shall be in him, or from him any more in the
point of Justification, or acceptance as any way meritorious. Adam in his
innocence might have required mercy by virtue of a Covenant from God, but Adam
shall now have nothing in his own power any more, but he shall have his
Justification and acceptance (not in himself but) in another, even Jesus
Christ. So that the reason why any Soul is justified and accepted with the
Lord, it is merely in an other, not in himself. It is a great matter to bring
the heart to this: for the Soul to see nothing in himself, but all in and
through Christ; Oh this is a difficult work. The Lord will not trust him with
a farthing token. There are two passages marveilous useful this way, and
therein you shall see the exceeding pride of a man's heart, and it is very
common. One passage is in the Romans, Where the text says, Romans 9.31.32.
The Jew and the Gentiles sought for righteousness, that is, how they might
find acceptance and righteousness in the sight of God. The Jew sought this by
the works of the Law, that is, by himself, by his sacrifices, and washing, and
the like; and he thought these would have acquitted him in the sight of God.
But the text says, Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has
not attained it, that is, they have not attained it, because they sought it not
by faith and from Christ, but, in and of themselves, and therefore they never
came to attain it. But most pregnant is that other place, Romans 10 2, 3.
where the Apostle says, I bear them record that they have the zeal of God
but not according to knowledge, for they being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to Gods righteousness: the cause why any man is acquitted of God;
it is not because of any thing that he has or does, but it is from another
righteousness. But what a great matter is this: The text faith, That going
about to establish their own righteousness they have not submitted, etc. here
in this place there is this remarkable. They thought to establish their own
righteousness, that is, their own duties, and services, their own parts and
abilities, and because they thought to find acceptance for what they did, they
did not submit. Submission argues a point of subjection, and the want of this,
horrible pride. This is marveilous divellish pride, that a man should set up
the lusts of his own righteousness, and duties, and think to find
acceptance, and reconciliation with, and pardon from the Lord because of these.
So that now the Soul is nothing, and the Lord says unto him, thou shall go
in rags all thy days, that Christ may be thy righteousness. Thou shall be a
fool, that Christ may be thy wisdom; and thou shall be weak, that Christ
may be all thy strength, and I will make the submit to that righteousness of
Christ. Nay, the Lord says further, if you think to find acceptance, and to
purchase mercy by what you can do, then come your way, and bring all those
prayers, and duties, and see if they can all answer my exact Law of
righteousness, and satisfy my Justice. Thus the Lord is feign to empty a man
of himself, this is an admirable work of the Spirit, when the heart is thus
content to be at Gods carving, and to have nothing of its own, to be ignorant,
weak and mean, and to have all from a Christ. This is considerable, every man
would feign bring something with him, even where God has wrought grace, and
then we are all dead in the nest, and all amort when we find it not, and we are
ready to say, if I had these, and these enlargements, then God would accept
me, but because I have not, the Lord will reject me. What is this but to set
up the merits of a man's parts and duties: therefore it is that the Lord will
bring the Soul to this, to be content to be justified, (not for what he has,)
but for something in another, besides what he can do to entitle himself to
heaven and happiness. Therefore the Apostle says, Romans 4.5.
To him that works not but believes (on him that justifies the ungodly) is
faith accounted for righteousness. This is our nature; We would feign be
Ioynt-purchasers with Christ, and have something of our own of merit (to make
us find acceptance with God) as well as Jesus Christ in the point of
Justification. But the Lord will bring the heart to this, it shall come as an
ungodly wretched traitor, that the Lord may Justify him in Christ. Why dare
not a poor sinner sometimes come to Christ, and look to him for mercy? Oh, he
is not worthy. But, art thou not content to see thy unworthiness? Yes (says
he) but I see such pride, such lithernesse in holy duties, and such corruption
that I dare not go to Christ for mercy. If this be a burden to thee, and if
thou art content to be rid of this, then Christ has prepared mercy for thee,
and thou may take it; the Lord will make thee know that thou art not
accepted, because thou art worthy, but through Christ. The Lord justifies the
ungodly.

The second thing that the Soul must be content with.
The second part of the Lords dispose, that he brings the Soul unto, it is
this. As the Soul must look for what it has from another: so in the second
place, it must be content to take, what mercy, and what that other will give.
Not, what the Soul thinks fitting; but, what mercy accounts the best for him.
Now, see this blessed frame of heart in these three particulars.

2 Samuel 15.25.26.
and it befalls the Soul in this case as it did David: See how willingly he
takes, whatsoever the Lord shall allow him. Where he says; Carry back the
Ark of God into the City, if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord,
he will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation; but if he
shall say, I have no delight in David; Behold here I am, let him do whatsoever
is good in his eyes. As it was with David for a Temporal Kingdom. So it is
with the Soul for a Spiritual Mercy. The Soul says, if there be any mercy
for a poor rebellious creature, the Lord may look graciously upon me; but if
the Lord shall say; thou have brought damnation to thy self, therefore I will
leave thee in it. Behold, here I am, let the Lord do with me what he will.





First, Contentedness sometimes implies nothing else, but a carnal security;
and a regardlesnesse of a man's estate, he regards not his own Soul, what he
is, nor what he has, nor what shall become of him. This is a most cursed
sin, and this contentedness is nothing else, but a marveilous negligence,
either of Gods glory or his own good; and it is a sin to give way to it: and
it is a forerunner of damnation to that man which entertaines it. The Soul
that is truly humbled and abased, cannot (nay it dare not) say so in cold
blood, setting aside passions, and temptations). Nay, this contentedness
argues damnation for ever. This is not meant in this place, neither is it
lawful to give way to it; and it is certain, upon these terms the Soul
shall never be saved; God will make him prize mercy, and care for it too before
he have it.

But then; Secondly, it implies a calmness of Soul not murmuring against the
Lords dispensation toward him, and this contentedness is ever accompanied
with the sight of a man's sin, and the following of God for mercy. The Soul
that is thus contented to be at Gods disposing, it is ever improving all
means, and helps that may bring him nearer to God, but if mercy shall deny it,
the Soul is satisfied and rests well apaid; this every Soul that is truly
humbled may have and has in some measure. Yet you must not throw all at six
and seavens, no, it is a cursed distemper of Spirit that you must hate as hell
it self. But this contentedness is opposed against quarrelling with the
Almighty, and this every humbled Soul does attain unto, though it be not so
plainly seen. As it is with some theife that is taken for a robbery and the
sentence of death has past against him: he should not neglect the using of
means for to save his life and to get a pardon, and yet if he cannot get a
pardon, he must not murmr against the Judge for condemning of him because he
has done nothing but Law. This thief should use means for a pardon, but if he
cannot get one, he should be contented though the sentence pass against him:
So, we should not be careless in using all means for our good but still
seek to God for mercy, yet thus we must be, and thus we ought to be contented
with whatsoever mercy shall deny because we are not worthy of any favor; and
the humble Soul reasons thus with it self, and says, my own sin and my
abominations have brought me into this damnable condition wherein I am, and I
have neglected that mercy which might have brought me from it, therefore why
should I murmr against mercy? though it deny me mercy, and if mercy leave me
in that miserable estate, which I have brought my self into, A Sillogisme.
I have but the reward of my own works. Mark this well. He that is not
willing to acknowledge the freeness of the course of mercy, is not worthy,
nay, it is not fit to receive any mercy: but that Soul which is not content
that mercy deny him what it will, he does not give way to the freeness of the
Lords grace and mercy, and therefore that Soul is not fit for mercy. I conclude
all thus. Judge with your selves whether this be not a mavelous hideous
pride of heart or no? that the sinner does murmr because the Lord will not
dispense of mercy as he will himself, either the sinner thinks that he has
deserved mercy, and therefore he is angry with God because he gives it not, or
else, he thinks himself wiser to dispose of mercy then God; both which are
most devilish pride of heart, and arguments of a haughty heart that is not yet
fit for mercy; nay, if this be in the heart and if the heart allow of this and
continue in this distemper, the Soul cannot receive mercy.

any man know this in his heart?



First, that the Soul out of the nature of it, and in nature cannot but desire
the preservation of it self, and it is a rule that God has stamped in the
creature, and therefore we must not think that nature must or should, or can
go further then nature, and it is not the fault of nature, that it is carried
in this kind.

But secondly, the Soul being humbled, cannot but yield it self, to be
disposed of by the Lord as he will, yea, if the Lord will bring destruction
upon it.

Thirdly, though the Soul sometimes find a secret rebelling against God, and
a grudging against the Lords dealings, and the sinner begins to say, these are
my corruptions, and still my sins prevail against me, and I shall one day
perish, and the Lord seems not to look at me, and with that, the Soul
sometimes grudgeth, and repines at the providence of God, yet the heart that is
truly humbled, grudgeth at himself, because he has such a quarrelling heart
against the Lords dealing with him in this kind. Nay, I have known many in
the anguish of heart, when they have thus quarrelled with the Almighty, they
have fallen into a desperate extremity, and thought they had committed that
sin against the holy Ghost; Insomuch, that it has made them to walk more
humbly before God all their days; but (I say) when the Soul finds these
distempers, it labors to undermine them, and it dares not quarrel against
God, it dare not but yield, and this is an argument that the Soul is content.

leave a man before he be content to be a despised man, that he may find
mercy and be saved, and mercy will pluck away all those parts and gifts from
him, and make him glad to have salvation, and all in another: And in
conclusion, when God cheeres up his heart again, he is more wise than ever,
and more able than ever, both for temporal, and spiritual affairs. Ioh. 5.44.
How can you believe (says our Savior) that seek honor one of another.
Without this dealing of God, no man would ever come to heaven, though the Lord
sometimes abates some measure of it. It may be before this work, the Soul
says, if I may have honors, and ease, and liberty, and credit, so it is; I
care not whether ever I have drop of mercy or no: But the text says, How can
you believe which seek honor one of another, and not that honor that comes
from God only. Mercy will bring you down upon your knees, and you shall not
be content with the honors of the world; No, no, mercy will make you content
to be fools, and to take that honor only which is from God, though you be
abased, and hated, and persecuted in the world. It is against reason that the
Soul can believe, except this be in the heart.

An humble Soul is content that mercy shall rule him.
As the humbled soul is content, that mercy shall deny him any thing, and take
any thing from him, so it is content, that mercy enjoyne what it will, and make
what Edicts, and Law it will: So that the Commands, and Precepts of the mercy
of God in Christ may take place in his heart. When John Baptist came to prepare
them for Christ, and the hearts of the people were humbled, the Publicans came
to him saying, Master, What shall we do? Luke 3.13, 14
and so the soldiers said, Master, what shall we do? and he said, Do no man
wrong, but be content with your wages. The question is not now, covetousness,
and cruelty, what shall we do? No, the soldiers came now, and said, Thou
art our Master, the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of wisdom is revealed to
thee in the Word, command and enjoyne thou what thou will, and they are
content, with whatsoever he commands them. The humbled heart is content, that
mercy do what it will with him, not only that mercy shall save him, for so
far a reprobate, and a carnal hypocrite may be content. The hypocrite is
marveilous willing, that mercy shall save him; but his lusts and corruptions
must rule him still. You are content, that mercy should save you from your
peevish heart, and yet your peevish heart must rule you still; and you are
content that Christ should save you from your drunkenness, and profaning of
the Lords Day, but these lusts must rule you still. A drunkard that has gotten
some dangerous surfeit, is content that the Physician should cure him, not
because he would leave his drunkenness, but because he would have his health,
and therefore being up, he returns to his drunkenness again. And the thief
that is condemned to die, cries for a pardon, not because he would live to be
an honest man, but to be free from the halter; and therefore when he is freed,
he goes to the hie way and robs again; it is not for honesty that he desires a
pardon, but for liberty. Deceive not your selves: mercy will never save you,
except mercy may rule you too. Here is a heart worth gold, and the Lord
delights in such a Soul, that falls into the arms of mercy, and is content
to take all from mercy, and to be at mercies disposing, and to have mercy
sanctify him, and correct him, and teach him, and to rule in him in all
things. This the heart of a truly abased sinner will have, and it will say,
Good Lord do what thou will with me, rule this Soul, and take possession of
me, only do good to the Soul of a poor sinner. If the Lord give any thing,
he is content, and if the Lord take away any thing, or command any thing, he is
content. You that are ruled by your lusts, think of this. When the Lord has
awakened and arrested your Souls, and you are going down to hell, Oh, then
you will cry, Lord forgive this and that sin, it is true, I have hated and
loathed the Saints of God, good Lord forgive this sin, oh that mercy would
save me, then mercy will answer, and say, When you are out of your beds, you
will return to your old courses again, no, he that ruled in you, let him save
and succor you. I will save none (says mercy) except I may rule them too.

mercy gives. The beggar that comes to the dole, though he have no means to
help himself withal, and though he can challenge nothing of the man, yet he
has a hand, and can receive the dole that is given him, but a poor sinner is
brought to this low ebb, (and this shows the emptiness of it) that as he
has no spiritual good at all, and can challenge no good, neither is he able
to take that good which mercy provides. The hand of the Soul whereby it must
receive mercy, is faith, and the humbled Soul sees that he is as able to
satisfy for his sin, as to believe in a Savior that must satisfy. And he
is as able to keep the Law, as to believe in him that has fulfilled the Law
for him. In Saint John, believing is called receiving, Ioh. 1.16.
and therefore the poor sinner sees that it is not only mercy and salvation
that must do him good, but he sees that if mercy and salvation were laid
down upon the nail for believing and receiving of it, he could not do it of
himself, and therefore the Lord must give him a hand to receive it with. You
know the Apostle Paul says, Phil. 1.29.
The natural man cannot receive the things that be of God. And the same
Apostle is plain, to you it is given to believe. So that faith is a gift, and
a poor sinner is as able to create a world, as to receive mercy of himself.
The want of this, is the cause why many a man that has made a good progress
in the way of happiness, he falls short of his hopes. Many a sinner has
been awakened, and his heart humbled, and the Soul comes to hear of Christ,
and thinks to lay hold of mercy and Christ out of his own proper power, and
thus he deceives himself, and the faith that he dreamed to have was nothing
else but a fancy, a faith of his own framing, it was never framed by the
Almighty Spirit of the Lord in heaven, he never saw need of the power of God,
to make him able to believe as well as to save him, and therefore his faith and
all came to just nothing. Now the broken hearted sinner says, All that I
expect it must be from another, and I am content to take what mercy will give,
and that mercy shall deny me what it will, and give me what it will, and I am
content that mercy rule in me, nay, that mercy must give me a heart to believe
and to take mercy, or else I shall never believe. Now you see what it is that
the Soul must be contented withal.

The manner of Gods dealing.
Now I come to show the manner of Gods dealing with the Soul, for the Soul must
be content with this too, as I told you before. The manner of Gods dealing may
appear in three particulars.

Job 14.17.
and that all his sins which have been sealed up in a bag, as Job says, they
are all set in order before him, and the wrath of the Lord (more heavy then
any mountain) falls upon his back, (I say) when the poor sinner finds
himself thus pursued after, in the fiercest and most terrible manner, the
abased heart dare not fly away from God, nor repine against the Lord, but he
lies down meekely. 1. He will not fly away from God, for that is his pride.
Nay, he dare not do it. He will not go with Saul to the Witch of Endor, nor
with Judas to a halter. When the Lord let Judas see that he had betrayed
innocent blood, and filled his heart with horror, he did not go to God and
lie down under the harshest horror, but he went to a rope and hanged himself,
and all through his pride, because he was not content with the harsh dealing
of God, though he leaped from the firepan into the fire, As the proverb is.
And likewise Cain went into the land of Nod. So, when the Lord has awakened a
poor creature, and after a good while, that a man would have thought he had
gone on a good way in a Christian course, at last when he finds that he is not
able to bear the wrath of God, but more iniquity comes in against him, then
he flies of from God, and falls from a Christian course, and goes to the
Alehouse, or some other base course, and so hardens his conscience: but (I
say) the humble Soul dare not do so, but lies at Gods footstool, and if it
were the very bottom of the dregs of Gods wrath, and the very fire of hell, he
is content to undergo Gods dealing. He does not question Gods dealing, and
say, others are not thus, and thus terrified, and why should I be so? No, the
Soul returns all against it self, and says, why do I talk of others? they
have not such untoward, unclean peevish hearts as I have. The humble soul
resolves with the Church in Micah, Micah 7.9.
I have sinned and therefore I will bear the indignation of the Lord: So the
Soul says, I have sinned most hainouslly, I know not their sin, but I know
my own sin, and therefore I will bear the Lords wrath, though it be never
so unsupportable, and unsufferable; Lord give me a heart, that I may be able
to bear it. When a Malefactor comes to the Assizes, he looks for nothing but
condemnation, and execution, if he can escape with burning in the hand, or
branding in the forehead, or shoulder, he is glad, and goes well apaid, and
cries, God save the King, because he thought he should have been hanged: So
it is with an humble, and a selfe-denying sinner; When the poor creature finds
the heaviest of Gods indignation upon him, and such strange distempers, as if a
thousand devils were within him, the Soul quiets it self thus, and says, Why
do I thus fret? and wherefore am I thus perplexed? it is well that I escape thus:
I might have been in hell this day, and blessed be God that it is no worse,
that I am not in hell; I might have been roaring in hell, as thousands of
poor reprobates are, that have no more hope of mercy; therefore I will bear
whatsoever the Lord lays upon me.

Secondly, as he is content with the hardest measure, so he is content with the
longest time. He is content to stay for mercy, be it never so long. After the
poor soul has his eyes growing dim with waiting for mercy, his hands grow
feeble, and his tongue cleaves to the roof of his mouth, and his heart begins
to sink, and his Soul shakes within him, with waiting for the mercy and
goodness of the Lord; and yet he finds no mercy, and has no Inkling of any
favor, yet God looks a far of. Yet his Soul is content with this. If a
beggar should stay half a day for an alms it would grieve him, though that be
his pride. See what Esaias says, I will wait upon the Lord that has hid his
face from Jacob, and I will look for him. Esa. 8.17.
As if the poor sinner did say, The Lord has hid his face away, and turned
his loving Conntenance from me, yet I will look toward heaven, so long as I
have an eye to see, and a hand to lift up, I will yet look to heaven to the
Lord that has not (as yet) heard nor answered my prayers, the Lord may take
his own time, it is manners for me to wait and stay Gods time: Away
therefore with that peevishness, and that discontentednesse of Soul, that
when a poor sinner has called, and cried, and finds no answer, and hears no
news from heaven, he secretly intends to lay all aside; As if a man, lift a
weight again, and again, and sees that it is to heavy for him, he lets it
alone. So many poor creatures are content to let all alone, and say; why
should I wait upon God any more? I have prayed, and cried thus long, and find
no answer; why should I wait any longer? How now? who shall have the worst of
it? cannot God have his glory without your prayers? why should you wait? this
is horrible pride of heart. Why should you wait? Its no marvel, that you
should take such State to your selves? who must wait then? Must the King
wait, or the Subject? The Master or the Servant? The Judge or the Traitor?
Down with that proud and sturdy heart of yours. An humble Soul dare not do
so; he is content to wait for Gods mercy, and you will be brought to it too,
before ever the Lord will give you any mercy. The humble soul says thus, I
have waited thus long, and the Lord seems to be angry with my person, and
prayers, and all is blasted, yet I will wait still; Nay, I am glad that I may
wait? What, wait upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and mercy: Yes, and glad you
may. Kings and Princes have done it, and blessed are they that wait upon
mercy. Nay, the poor broken heart resolves thus, and says, if I lie and lick
the dust all my days, and cry for mercy all my life long, if my last words
might be mercy, mercy, it were well I might get mercy at my last gasp: Oh, I
bless God, that yet I live here, and and that I am not in hell as thousands
are, that wait for judgment and vengeance, blessed be God, that yet I may
wait, till God look upon me in goodness and mercy.

Matthew. 15.26.
and he said, It is not lawful to cast the children bread to dogs, truth Lord
(says she) I am as bad as thou can call me, I yield all, I am as vile a
sinful poor creature as ever any was; Yet Lord the dogs may eat the crumbs
that fall from their Masters table. verse. 27.
You know the Dog must stay till his Master comes in, and when he is come, he
must stay till he sit down, and then till he cut his meat, and he must not
have the meat from his trencher neither, when he has stayed all this while,
he has nothing but the crumbs. So it is with a poor sinner; you must not
think that God will be at your beck: No, you must be content with the crumbs
of mercy, and pity, and lie under the table, till the Lord let the crumbs fall.
The humbled soul says, Lord, let my condition be never so hard, do what thou will with me, let the fire of thy wrath consume me here, only recover me
hereafter, and let me find mercy, and if the time be never so long, if at last
gasp I may find mercy I am content, and whatsoever thou give, I bless thy
name for it. The Soul does not quarrel with the Almighty, and say, Why are
not my graces increased? and why am not I thus, and thus comforted? and
refreshed: Nay, it lies, and looks for mercy, and if it have but a crum of
mercy, it is comforted, and quieted for ever. Thus the heart is brought very
low.

Why does the Lord thus bring the heart under, Reason.
is this necessary and requisite? Yes, it is without all question, not only
convenient but very necessary, that it should be so. And the reason is taken
from the nature of the covenant of grace which requires this; and without which
the covenant of grace could not be fitted for us. For the covenant of grace is
this, Believe and live. The condition on our part is faith, and believing. Now
faith is nothing else, but a going out of the Soul, to fetch all from another,
as having nothing of it self, and therefore this resting in our selves, will
not stand with the nature of this covenant. Now were it so, that we were not
resolved to yield to, and to be guided by another, it is certain, we could not
have our hearts enlarged to go to that other: by whose wisdom, and
providence, we would not be guided and disposed. To be in our selves, and out
of our selves, to have power in our selves, to dispose of any thing belonging
to our spiritual estate, and to fetch all from another; these are two
contraries, and therefore cannot stand together. To have the dispensation of
life, and grace in our own hands to dispose of it as we will, it utterly
overthrowes the nature of this second Covenant of mercy and grace in Christ.
For (I pray you observe it) this I take to be the maine difference, between
the second maine Covenant of grace, whereof the Apostle disputes so often. And
the first Covenant of works, which he so often confutes. The first Covenant is,
to Do and Live, This Adam had, and if he had stood still, he should not have
needed any Savior: The second Covenant is, Believe and Live, that is, to live
by another. These two cannot stand together, in one and the same Soul, at one
and the same time. The same Soul that is saved by the Covenant of Grace,
cannot be saved also by the Covenant of Works. The Lord in the beginning, put
the stuff into Adams hand, and he had liberty, to dispose of Life and
Salvation; by reason of that ability, and that principle of Grace that God had
given him; for he had perfect knowledge, and perfect holiness, and
righteousness, and by the power of these he had liberty, freely to please
God, and to keep the Law, and to be blessed in so doing, and if he had done
that which he had power to do, he might have been blessed for ever, and we
all in him, but he lost it, and so overthrew himself, and all his posterity:
Now we being thus fallen in Adam; and being deprived of all that holiness, and
righteousness which Adam had: Now the sinner is neither able to fulfill the
Law, and so to purchase mercy for himself; nor to satisfy for that which is
done amiss. A sinner must die, and yet he cannot satisfy in dying: he is dead
in sins and trespasses, and having lost all that ability which Adam had:
therefore the Soul must go out of it self, and since it is so, that nothing
which he has, or does can save him, he must go to another, that whatsoever is
amiss, that other may satisfy for it, and whatsoever mercy is needful, he
may purchase it, and whatsoever is to be done, he may do it. Now, what we have
done amiss, Christ has satisfied for it, and what we cannot do, Christ has
done it, he has fulfilled all righteousness. And hence it is, that these two
are so professedly opposite the one to the other, the Law, and Faith. The first
Adam, and the second Adam. Consider a passage or two. The Covenant of Works,
and the Covenant of Grace cannot stand together in the point of Life and Grace;
As the Apostle says, If it be of grace, Romans 11.4.
then it is no more of works, and if it be of works, then it is no more of
grace. As if he had said, If a man be saved by grace, then he cannot be saved
by works, and if he be saved by works, then be cannot be saved by grace. And in
another place the same Apostle says, Romans 4.14.
If they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is
of none effect. If a man that thinks to merit life by the Law be an heir, what
needed faith, or the promise. For, it is the nature of faith, to go out to
Christ, and to receive all from him; now if I had enough in my self, I had no
need of Christ, and faith were made of none effect. You are saved by grace
through faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
says the Apostle,) and that not of your selves. There S. Paul brings in a
denial, not only of sin but of works, and says, You are not saved of your
selves. He does not say, of your sin; but, your selves; you, and your works,
and all must be renounced, and all that you are and do, as any way
meritorious; and not to be found in your selves but in Christ, before ever you
can receive mercy from Christ. So I dispute thus. There is none that will save
us, Man nor Angel, and our works will not; therefore we must go to Christ, and
if we go to Christ for all, and expect all from him, then we must be content,
to be guided by him in all. Now, let me propound this question: Either thou
must be content, to be at the dispose of God, and mercy, or at whose dispose
will thou be. If thou will have any thing else (besides mercy) to dispose of
thee? thou make that to be a Mediator to thee. But happily thou would dispose
of thy self, and dispose of mercy after thy own mind? Yes, so I thought. It
may be thou say, I will have grace, if I may dispose of it. Thus a proud
heart would feign have it in his own hands; but upon these terms thou never
had: (nay, thou never shall have) grace. Here is the winding of the Soul.
Therefore many dare not venture their salvation upon Gods free favor. But they
would have it in their own power, that they may receive it when they will,
that they may be drunk and take grace, and be proud, and profane, and take
grace when they will. It is a sottish delusion of men, that are deluded, and
blinded by the devil. But that the Soul (which would have it thus) cannot
have it upon these terms, I thus reason.

He that will have grace from his own dispose shall never have grace,
Sillogisme.
because he has none in his own power to dispose of;

But he that is not content to be at the dispose of grace, and to be at the
dispensation of Gods good pleasure for mercy and grace, he would have it to be
at his own disposing.

And therefore he shall (nay he never can) have grace.

In a word. Who must dispose of you? Your selves? then you must have that grace
which you can dispose of, and that's just none at all. Grace is merely in Gods
hands to dispose of. Thus we have brought the Soul to be fitly prepared for
Christ, and mercy, and grace.

Now let us do as travelers do, The sum of all this work of preparation
they sometimes sit down, to reckon how many miles they have gone. So let us
enquire, what we have spoken. You know I mentioned two things, necessary in
this work of preparation for Christ. First, Contrition. And secondly,
Humiliation. First, God brings the sinner to a sight of himself and his sin;
and makes him to be insupportably burdened with the vileness of it, so that
now the heart of a poor sinner, sees an absolute necessity of a change, and
therefore thinks thus with himself, if I rest thus, I shall never see God with
comfort. That Is for Contrition. Now he sees that he must change, and he is
content to change; and therefore, though he will no more be drunk, nor follow
his old base practices, yet he begins to sherke for his own comfort, and he
uses all the ordinances of God, to see what they can do for him, and he goes
to himself, and his selfe-sufficiencies, and finding no succor there, he
falls down before the Lord and begs mercy, and yet he sees himself unworthy
of mercy, without which he must perish. He has nothing, and he can do
nothing to merit it; yet he is content, that God should dispose of him as he
thinks good, only (if it be possible) he prays, that the Lord would show
mercy to a poor forlorn creature. Now the sinner is pared, and fitted for
Christ, as a graft for the stock. He is come to the very quick, and is as
little as may be. All his swelling sufficiency is pared away: For, he is not
only brought to renounce his sin, but even his sufficiency, and all his
parts and abilities; which Adam needed not have done, if he had stood in his
innocence. In a word, he is wholly plucked from the first Adam, (for here is
the maine lift) So that now the second Adam Christ Jesus, may take possession
of him, and be all in all in him, (as the Apostle says): Now, the Soul is a
fit matter for Christ to work upon, namely, to make him a vessel fit to
receive mercy and grace: and when he has fitted him for mercy, he will give
it to him: and when he has given him grace, he will maintain it, and increase
it, and then quicken it, and crown it, and perfect it in the Day of the Lord
Jesus Christ. And lastly, he will glorify himself in all these. Here is a
right Christian indeed, that expresses Christ in all. Christ preparing, Christ
giving, Christ maintaining, and increasing, and Christ quickening, and Christ
crowning. Thus you see that it is not left as a matter of liberty, but it is
of necessity required, that the heart be thus contented: every humble heart
has this in some measure, though not (all) so sensibly.

The uses are double. First, to the people, Uses.
to show them what to do. Secondly, to the Ministers.

The uses for the people are. First, for Instruction. Secondly, for
Examination. Thirdly, for Terror. Fourthly, for Exhortation.

The first use is for instruction, and that is double. The first use to the
people.


First, Is it so that the humble Soul is content to be thus at the Lords
disposing? then from hence we collect this use, that, they which have greatest
parts and gifts and means, and places, abilities and honors, for the most part
they are most hardly brought home to the Lord Jesus Christ. They that are most
harly humbled, they are most hardly converted; how hard a thing is it for such
men as have gifts, and learning, and wisdom, or any bigness that makes them
swell naturally, how hard is it (I say) for such men to be saved. I wish their
courses did not testify the same; they that are most high and greatest in
gifts, and place, they must come in at the strait gate, and what a hard and
difficult work that is, judge you, and therefore it is hard for them to come
home to the Lord Jesus Christ. Humiliation is the emptying of the Soul from
whatsoever it has that makes it swell. The heart must not joy in any thing,
nor rest upon any thing, but only yield to the Lord Jesus Christ to be at his
disposing and carving, now these parts and gifts, and abilities and means
(both for Judgment and place) they are great props and pillars for the heart
of a carnal man to rest upon and to quiet it self withal, and to look for
some good there from; and when the heart is settled upon such pillars as these
are, it is hard for the word of God to prevail with that heart. The Prophet
Jeremy knew it well enough and therefore he said, I will go to the rich and
honorable, ^eremy. 5.5.
and they burst all bonds asunder and brake the yoke. The poor were naught,
but the rich were exceedingly vile; and our Savior proves it, for when the
rich young man came to Christ and said, Master what shall I do to have
everlasting life: Math. 19.24.
Christ answered thus, go sell all that thou have, but he would not, and
hereupon our Savior comes to show the difficulty of the work of salvation,
saying, it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. It is true, a rich man may be
brought home, but it is easier for a Camel etc. There is great difficulty for a
man that has many gifts and parts to deny all, and to be at the Lords
disposing. If a man were fit to cut a Camel so small till he were fit to go
through a needles eye, what a work would it be: so it is with a great man. The
blind Pharisees saw this when they said, do any of the rulers believe in him?
as if they had said, John 7.48.
a company of Cobblers, and Tailors, and the basest sort of people believe in
him, it is they only that will not swear, and that will sanctify the Lords
Day; But do any of the great men, and rulers believe. The Apostle also took
it for confessed, and therefore he said, Brethren you see your calling, how not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty men, 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many noble men are called. Indeed, blessed be God, there are some great,
some wise, and some noble men converted. But, not many. For they have so much
of themselves, that they are hardly brought to renounce themselves. Therefore
commonly greatness and wickedness, go both together. And it is a pretty
speech of the Prophet David, There is that great Leviathan, that great Whale,
little rivers have their little fishes, but there is that Leviathan. So, there
is that hideous pride of spirit, and that strange resistance of God and his
grace; those fearful crying sins in great men. Yea, many mighty men,
except God give them a great deal of grace, they are pestered with a great
deal of corruption; Insomuch that they are hardly brought home. For a rich man
to become poor, and a noble man to be abased, and for a wise man to be nothing
in himself, this will cost hot water, and yet it will be in all that belong to
the Lord. See what the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias. 2.12.13.
The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, and upon all
the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of
Bashan, and the glory of the Lord shall be exalted in that day. As if he had
said, The Lord shall undermine the mountains, and make these tall Cedars fit
to come in at this strait gate. The poor receive the Gospel, and he that will
have the pearl, must part with all that he has; not that God will take away
all these outward things and parts, but that he must loosen his affections from
these if he will have Christ. A poor creature that has nothing, may more
easily come to the price of the Lord Jesus Christ, then he that has his
hundreths, and thousands a year: What (says one) must a man part with all
these? Yes, the Lord will have the love, that was set upon these wholly to
himself.

Right worshipful and beloved, and you of the Ministry, suffer the words of
Exhortation. The greater your parts and abilities are, the greater is your
danger; and the greater your places are, the more hard will it be for you to
come home to the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore as ever you desire comfort to
your selves; go aside into your closets, and think thus with your selves, The
Spirit says, Not many noble men, not many mighty men, not many wise men after
the flesh are called. Has the Lord advanced me? then the more care I had need
have, and the more I had need to tugge and toil for Christ, for it is
mavelous hard to have this proud heart humbled, and for an honorable man to
lie and lick the dust and to take the crummes under the table. You that have
these honors, and friends and means and parts for the Lords sake let none of
these bear up your hearts against the truth of Christ, and let none of all
these make you swell, and say, because I am great, or rich, or honorable or
wise, therefore I must not be checked, and shall such a man as I be at the
command of a poor Minister? alas, we desire not to have you at our commands,
only we would have you be content to be at the dispose of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and that you must be; if you belong to him: and glad you may. It is
observable, that when the Turk comes into the congregation, or the Temple of
his Idol, he lays by all his state, and has no man to attend him for the
while: so let every man that has riches, honors, and parts, let them be as if
they had none. You that are rich, be as if you had no riches, and you that are
honorable as if you had no honors: and you that are wise, as if you had no
wisdom; when you come to hear the word of God, humble your selves, and say,
my wisdom, my riches, and my depth of judgment shall not hinder me, but
whatsoever it is that is my part and my portion, let the Lord speak to me, as
if I were the meanest and weakest in all the congregation. The Lord give you
hearts to do it, the work is hard, and therefore put hard to your hearts to do
it.

Secondly, The second use for instruction.
is an humble Soul content to be at the Lords dispose? then hence I collect
that, an humble heart makes all a man's life quiet, and marvellously sweetneth
whatsoever estate he is in. That which makes a man content in every condition
must needs make him quiet whatsoever estate he is in; howsoever the heart that
is truly humbled may sometimes be tossed and troubled, yet he is not
distracted, because he is contented, as it is with a ship upon the sea, when
the billows begin to roar and the waves are violent, if the Anchor be
fastened deep, it stays the ship; let the tempest be what it will: so this
work of humiliation is the Anchor of the soul; the world is the sea, and the
ship is a soul that is truly humbled, the deeper this humiliation is, the more
quiet is the heart, and the more it is calmed. When Job in the time of his
extremity gave way a little to his proud and sturdy heart, he quarrelled with
the Almighty, his friends and all, but when the Lord had humbled his proud
heart, Job 40.4.
he said, behold I am vile and base, once have I spoken, yea twice; but now no
more. And it is observed of Jonah that when he was in peace and in quietness,
he had a fullen heart, and when the Lord said, do thou well to be angry? yea
(says he) I do well to be angry. See how distracted a distempered proud heart
is, but take Jonah in the whalls belly, and we shall hear no more news of
quarrelling, but of praying, and there he abased himself; as it is with a
Physician, when the Patient has some vehement fit of a fever or the like; that
he cannot sleep, they use to give him a little Opium and that makes him rest a
little. This humiliation of heart is like Opium: there are peevish fits of a
proud heart that no word nor commandes will rule a man, but he must have what
he will, or else he will set his mouth against heaven, but a little receipt of
this Opium will quiet all, if he could but come to see his own emptiness and
wretchedness, and get his heart to be at Gods disposing, then his heart would
be wonderfully calmed and meekened whatsoever he endures.

Humiliation gives quiet to a man's course in three causes. First in the
fiercest temptations; Secondly, Three benefits of Humiliation.
in the heaviest oppositions of men, Thirdly, in the greatest poverty that can
befall a man in this life.



Satan objects. Do thou think to get mercy from the Lord?and do thou
dream of any mercy at the hands of God? when thy own conscience dogs thee.
Nay, go to the place where thou live, and to the chamber where thou lie,
and consider thy fearful abominations, and how thou art foiled by them to
this day, set thy heart at rest, God hears not, and respects not the prayers
of such vile sinners.


The Soul answers. Now, the Soul sees this easily, and confesses it
plainly, and the humbled Soul says, it is true. I have often denied the Lord,
when he has called upon me, and therefore he may justly deny me, yet seek
to him for mercy I must, and if the Lord will cast me away, and reject my
prayers I am contented; if he do cast me away, what then Satan?


Satan. what then, says the devil? I had thought this would have been enough
to make thee despair. Yet this is not all: for God will give thee over, and
leave thee to thy self, and to thy lusts and corruptions, and thy latter end
shall be worse than thy beginning; and thou shall call, and cry, and when thou
have done be overthrown; that loose, unclean, and proud heart of thine will
overthrow thee for ever, God will leave thee to thy self, and suffer thy
corruptions to prevail against thee, and thou shall fall fearfully, to the
wounding of thy conscience, to the grieving of the hearts of Gods people, to
the scandal of the Gospel, and the reproach of thy own person.


The Soul answers. Yet the humble Soul replies in this manner, and says, if
the Lord give me up to my base lusts, which I have given my self so much
liberty in, and if the Lord will leave me to my sins; because I have left
his gracious commands, and if I shall fall one day and be disgraced, and
dishonored; yet let the Lord be honored, and let not God loose the praise of
his power, and justice, and I am contented, if God do leave me, what then
Satan?


The Devil objects. What then says the devil? I had thought this had been
enough to drive thee out of thy wits, yet this is not all. For when God has
left thee to thy sins, then the Lord will break out in vengeance against
thee, and get praise from that proud heart of thine, and make thee an example
of his heavy vengeance to all ages to come, and therefore it is best for thee,
to prevent an untimely Judgment, by an untimely death.


The humble heart is quieted all this while, and replies,

The Soul answers. whatsoever God can, or will do; I know not: yet, so great
are my sins, that he cannot, or (at least) will not do so much against me,
as I have deserved; if the Lord do come in Judgment against me I am
contented; say what thou will, what then Satan?


Thus you may run the devil out of breath; then the devil leaves the
humbled Soul.

The want of this Humiliation of heart, it is where by men are brought to
desperate stands; so that sometimes one man goes to a haltar, another runs out
of his wits, and another drownes himself: all this is horrible pride of heart.
Why will you not bear the wrath of the Lord? It is true indeed, your sins
are great, and Gods wrath is heavy, yet God will do you good by it, and
therefore be quiet. In the time of war, when the great Cannons fly of, the
only way to avoid them, is to lie down in a furrow, and so the Bullets fly
over them, whereas they meet with the mountains and tall Cedars. So it is
with all the temptations of Satan which besiege us. Lie low, and be contented
to be at Gods disposing, and all the temptations of the devil, shall not be
able to disquiet or distract thee. The second benefit.


Secondly, when Satan is gone, then comes the troubles, and oppositions of the
world. And this Humiliation of heart, gives a secret settling to the Soul,
against all the railings, and oppositions of the wicked world: For, this takes
of the unrulinesse of the heart. So that when the Soul will not contend with
oppositions, but is content to bear them, it is not troubled with them. The
humble Soul sees, God dispensing with all oppositions, and therefore it is
not troubled with them. A man is sometimes Sea-sicke, not because of the
Tempest, but because of his full stomach; and therefore, when he has emptied
his stomach, he is well again: So it is with this Humiliation of heart. If
the heart were emptied truly, though a man were in a Sea of oppositions, if he
have no more trouble in his stomach, and in his proud heart, then in the
oppositions of the world, he might be quieted. Consider David, when he was in
the wilderness, 1 Samuel 25.12, 13.
and sent to Nabal for some relief, see how he raged extremely against him,
because he was denied it: The reason was not in the offense, but in the pride
of his heart. Take the same man in the persecution of Absalon, and when Shimei
cursed him, 2 Samuel 15.25.
saying, Art not thou he that killed such and such, and that committed adultery
with the wife of Vriah. 2 Samuel 16.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
In this his heart was marveilous quiet, and now he was able to bear it,
better then the soldiers that were with him. Though his cause was just, and he
might have revenged it: yet now he was humble and brought under, and therefore
quieted, though never so much opposed. This Humiliation of heart, so settles a
man, that though ten thousand oppositions come against him, yet nothing will
disquiet him. Cast disgrace upon the humble heart causelessly, and he cures it
thus, he thinks worse of himself than any man else can do, and if they would
make him vile and loathsome, he is more vile in his own eyes then they can
make him, and therefore he is contented. If they imprison an humble Soul, and
persecute him, he wonders at Gods goodness, so far he is from being
discontented, that he wonders at Gods goodness, and mercy toward him, that he
would cast him into a Dungeon, when he might have cast him into hell.

Thirdly and lastly, this Humiliation of Soul, The third benefit.
brings in satisfaction and contentedness, in all the wants that may befall
him. Take away from him what you will, and deny him any thing, yet he will be
quiet. He that is contented with all Gods dealing toward him, cannot be
disquieted with any thing; The humble Soul justifies God, and is pacified, and
joins side with Gods providence; he justifies God in whatsoever he does, and
therefore is quiet in whatsoever he has done. The ship that goes with wind and
tide goes easily, but if it goes against wind and tide, it is wonderfully
troubled; so, when the humble Soul goes on with Gods blessed providence, and
goes that way which the will of God goes: he goes on quietly, and the want of
this humiliation of heart is the cause of all your disquietnesse; when you will
stand in opposition against the Almighty; the Lord will have you poor, and you
will be rich, the Lord will have you base and mean in the world, and you would
be honorable, the Lord on the one side, and you on the other side, you would
have it, and the Lord says you shall not; if all come not according to your
mind, oh then you fly out, God must be of your mind, and be at your beck, and
this you must have, and that you will have, or else God shall hear of you: thus
you make your own trouble, and this troublesome Spirit breeds all the sorrow
that befalls you; whereas if you would go on with God, you might be quieted and
comforted whatsoever condition you were in; as one said, that he could have
what he would of God; why, how was that? because, whatsoever Gods will was,
that was his will; humiliation quiets all, and supplies all wants, once make
the good will of God that which thy heart shall yield unto, and Gods providence
the best that can befall thee, and then live comfortably for ever. Oh! that our
hearts were brought to this. But the pride and vileness of our hearts is such,
that we trouble our selves needlessly: therefore above all, labor for this. Be
content to want what God will deny, and to wait Gods good pleasure, and to be
at his disposing, and then live quietly, and comfortably for ever. Oh! that I
could bring your hearts to be in love, with this blessed grace of God. Is it
so, that Humiliation brings quiet in all a man's conditions? Is there not a
Soul here that has been vexed with the temptations of Satan, did you never
know, what it is to be under the malice of an enemy, and did your own
distempers never trouble you? Have none of you found hard measures at the hands
of wicked men? is there never a Soul here that is burdened with many wants,
and that loves his own comfort? have you not many necessities at home, the
want of friends, and means, and even of common necessaries, and would you arm
and fence your selves, that no wants may disquiet you, nor trouble you, but in
all, to be above all, and to rejoice in all; more then all oppositions in the
world can do you hurt, then be humbled, and for ever quieted. Whatsoever can
or shall befall you, by the devil and his instruments, and if every spire of
grass were a devil, be humbled, and then be above all the devils in hell, and
all temptations, and oppositions, that they shall not so disquiet you, as to
cause you to be unsettled or uncomforted.

In the next place, you are to be desired, The second Use.
to try your selves by the former truth: and let every man try his own heart,
whether ever God has given him this gracious disposition of Soul or no? You
must come to this truth: for there is no justification nor acceptance without
this; Nay, there is no faith can be infused into the Soul, before the heart be
thus fitted and prepared: no preparation, no perfection. Never humbled, never
exalted; therefore let every man and woman, lay their hearts to the former
truth, and consider this one thing in the general. So far as the heart is
from this contentedness, to be at Gods dispose, so far it is from true
preparation for Christ. You must be empty, if ever Christ fill you: you must be
nothing, if you would have Christ all in all to you. Thus much in the general.
But, now let us come to the particular trials: and herein let us consider two
things. First, the truth, and soundness of our Humiliation. Secondly, the
measure of it: both of these, this Doctrine does discover to us. It is very
profitable to handle them both, that they which have not this work may be
humbled, and that they which have it, may see how far they come short of the
measure which they should and might have, the want of which is the cause of
much sorrow, and the want of much comfort.

How to try the truth of our Humiliation.
You may try the truth of this work of Humiliation, thus. In the general,
look how you are disposed of in your lives, and conversations. But in
particular, that you may see where we be, let us observe these three rules.

First, Let us see, what it is that swayes our reasons, and judgments.
Secondly, What it is that over-powers our hearts, our wills, and affections.
Thirdly, What it is that rules our lives, and conversations. Try your hearts by
these rules, and then it will be plain and clear, whether you be truly
humbled and abased or no. You know (I told you) that you must not only be
disposed of by God (for God will dispose of you, whether you will or no, he
will rule all things in heaven and earth, he will either crush those proud
hearts of yours by Humiliation here, or else cast you down to hell for ever),
but you must be content to be at Gods disposing. To begin with the former;
namely, to see what swayes our judgments. If you will attend, I hope you shall
know something in your own hearts, you that are weak; as for the other, happily
they come to quicken up their hearts, and to renew that which they knew before.

What swayes our Reasons.
First, Let us try whether we submit in our judgments or no? Here is a maine
breach; contrary to this submission, is a man's carnal reason, and that
mavelous height of our conceits, when we raise up our own carnal
reasonings, as so many holds, and we maintain them against the truth of
Christ; and wheresoever this frame of mind is, there this work of Humiliation
was never wrought. And this is in too many. When a man swells in his own
conceits against the truth of Christ. That's a sweet place to this end in the
Romans. Where the text says, The Wisdom of the flesh, or as it is in the
Original. The carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The carnal
mind, and all the reasonings, and wisdom of it, is not only an enemy, but
it is enmity against God. The Apostle does not say, that a carnal man's
wisdom and reason does not obey, but, he is not able to bear the truth, he
(as it were,) sets himself in battle array against it, it cannot be subject to
the Law of God. This is a maine wound in all the sons of Adam, That a man (as
it were) deifies himself, and his own dreams, and devices, and makes his
own conceit, a line and level to all his conversation. So that the carnal
mind, will bend the truth to his mind though he break it. Here is the
mavelous pride of a man's mind. Hence it is that the Apostle advises us to
be wise with sobriety. Romans 12.3.
As if he had said, a man may be drunk with his own conceits; as when a
drunkard has gotten his brains well steeped in Wine and Bear; then
whatsoever he conceits in his mind, must needs be as true as Gospel. So it is
with a carnal mind. Though arguments be never so plain, and Scriptures never
so pregnant; yet a carnal wretch will carry himself against all, and say, it
is not my Judgment, I am not of that mind. This is the height of our mind,
as if he did say, I do not think it, let the word of God, and his Ministers
say what they will to the contrary; they shall not persuade me of it. Do
thou find this in thy self, then it is an undoubted argument, thou never
had a heart truly humbled. See what the Apostle says, If a man thinks that
he knows any thing, 1 Cor. 8.2.
he knows nothing as he ought to do. You think you are as wise as you need
to be, and you are not children yet. You that thus lift and set up your selves
in your own conceits, whatsoever you be, you know nothing as you ought to do.
And therefore the Apostle speaks of some that were puffed up in their own
conceits, Colloss. 2.18.
intruding into those things which they have not seen, vainly puffed up in
their own minds. You conceive and imagine thus and thus, and will not believe
the Minister of God whatsoever he says, therefore you are puffed up, and this is
not a heart truly humbled and kindly wrought upon.

A carnal man presses into some imagination, as to his own propper
possession. As the old proverb is: The fool will not leave his babble for all
the City of London. So a carnal heart says, I cannot be otherwise persuaded.
I say, then the case is clear, is it so with thy judgment, and carnal
reason? then as yet thou were never under the power of this truth, thou
shuttest up doors against Jesus Christ, he cannot come in to inform thee,
thou art so full of thy self.





First, A carnal reason being thus puffed up, it is not willing to know the word
of God, nor his truth, especially those truths that are troublesome and
tedious to him; preach and speak what you will, but preach not that. He
either wishes himself deaf that he could not hear, or the Minister dumb
that he could not deliver those truths. The Lord sent the Prophet Esaias to
preach to the people, and yet to seal them down to eternal destruction,
Esaias. 6.9, 10.
and therefore the Lord says, Go tell this people, hear but understand not,
see, but perceive not, make the heart of this people fat, they wink with their
eyes. As it is with a bleare eye, that is not able to look against the Sun,
but shuts for fear the Sun should hurt it. So, a carnal proud mind is not
able to look into the truths that may trouble it, and that would awaken his
bleare eye. And in another place, the people do entreat the Prophet Esaias, to
go out of the way, and to turn aside out of that path; Esaias. 30.11.
cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before us. As if they had said, We
cannot endure this holiness, we cannot brook this exactness, you bid us to
be holy or else God will destroy us, get you out of that path, they were weary
of those blessed truths. A double example we have of this distemper of spirit
in holy Scriptures. As in Job, Where the wicked say to God, depart from us for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. The drunkard desires not to hear of
any horror of heart for his sin: and the hypocrite desires not to hear that
he must be sound, and sincere, and keep touch with God in every thing; and so
all ungodly men go against the truth of God, which crosses their lusts and
corruptions. And in Timothy, it was the tange of a cursed distemper of spirit
in a company of wretches in this age. The text says, The time shall come when
they shall not endure sound doctrine. Tim. 4.3.
And here it is to be noted, that a company of carnal Gentlemen and base
refuse people of other degrees are come to this pass, that let a plain
searching truth be discovered, they turn away from it, and cannot hear it
with patience; but if any man will tell them some fine stories, Oh, this
pleases them admirably: they cannot endure sound doctrine that searches the
heart, and awakens the conscience, they cannot brook that: now, an humble
heart is of another mind, it is willing to hear any thing from the Lord, and
any message from heaven; and the humble Soul says, Speak on Lord, thy
servant desires to hear: the word never so troublesome, and the truth never so
much crossing his lusts, he is well content to hear it. Nay, he desires that
especially, and he is calmed with it. Mark what Eli said, Sam. 3.17.
Keep not back from me, but let me hear whatsoever the Lord has said unto
thee. An humble Soul comes to this pass, and says, If there be any sin or
any wickedness in my heart, good Lord discover it, and, if there be any duty
to be done, Lord let me know it. And as Cornelius said, Acts 10.33.
We are all here present before the Lord to hear whatsoever thou art
commanded us of God. So the humble Soul says, Whatsoever trouble it brings, I
yield to the truth, and desire to hear it.

Thirdly, As the carnal reason shuts his eye, and will not look upon the
truth, so in the second place, if it be so that it must hear that which it
would not, what is the next shift that it has, he will not suffer himself to
be convinced by the truth, but when the truth comes in with plainness, and
power, he labors what he can to gather up objections and cavills against the
truth, that he may oppose the power of Gods word, that since it is so that he
must hear it, he labors to make it false. This is considerable. Romans 2.8.
Unto them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness shall be indignation and wrath. Who are they that are
contentious; not only they that contend with their neighbors, but they that
contend against the truth, for so the words following do import so much, Which
obey not the truth. One man hears a close point, and then he goes away, and
says, I will not believe it, I know reason, and I will be bound to confute it,
and all this is nothing but a smoke: and he deals by the truth, as men do
with an enemy in this case. First, they labor to keep him out from their
confines, and if they cannot do that, then they leavie forces to drive him out
from their land: So it is with a company of carnal men; they would not look
upon the truth to be informed by it. Well. Hear they must, and hear they
shall, if they live under the power of the Gospel, but if they must hear it,
they are contentious, and advise with this carnal friend, and that carnal
Minister, and if they can get any man to plead for their lusts, that they may
arm themselves against the blessed truth of God, they think themselves happy
men.

If a Minister come home to the heart of a carnal wretch, that will buy, and
sell upon the Lords Day, and say to him, Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath; then he goes to some carnal man that buys and sels as well as
himself, and then he will have an army of forces against the truth of God. As
the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.8.
As Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these men resist the truth, men
of corrupt minds, and reprobates concerning the faith; how is that? When Moses
came to Pharaoh, to deliver the people of Israel, and when Moses showed some
signs and wonders; Pharaoh would not yield to the Miracles, and therefore he
called for Iannes and Iambres, and they made some appearances of Serpents, as
Moses had done, and so Pharaohs heart was hardened: even so, When the Word of
God is plain, and the evidences of it are uncontrolable, then a carnal mind,
sends for carnal quarrels, and pleas, and objections; and this he does to
oppose the truth of Christ, and to make an army against the blessed ordinances
of God. They count it a matter of favor, if any man will deliver and rescue
them from the truth.

As when this truth comes, You must not buy and sell upon the Sabbath, but you
must be holy, as God is holy, etc. If this truth be troublesome; oh they
cannot bear it, and they would feign be rescued, they account this truth an
enemy to them, and if any man will deliver them from the truth, they think him
a God; and they admire at his judgment, and say, such a man is wise, and a
deep Scholar, and he says thus and thus, he will defend this as well as I:
thus a man is fortified against the truth.

But an humble Soul will not do thus. After the Word and Truth of God is
revealed in this kind, and all reasons answered: The understanding of this
humble Soul, gives way and opposes not the truth. Give an humble Soul
Scripture for that you say, and he has done; and lets all carnal counsels
pass: and all matters objected, and he says, I am fully persuaded of it, the
truth is plain, God forbid that I should quarrel with it. This is for the
understanding.



As, when a debtor is arrested, at first, he grapples with the Sergeant, but
when he sees the Bailiffe, or Sergeant, is too good for him, he labors to
make an escape, and trusts to his feet, rather then to his hands. So, it is
with a carnal wretched heart. When he cannot but confess, and yield that the
truth is plain, and that he cannot grapple with the truth, then he falls
flat against it: when his Serpent, is eaten up by Moses Serpent; and all
carnal pleas are eaten up by the truth, then he is feign to withdraw himself
from the authority of it.

From hence comes all those shifts: we tell people they are miserable, and in a
natural, and damnable condition: Oh say they, God is merciful: oh but (say
we) the mercy of God is such, that as he pardons men, so he purges them, and
if mercy will save you, mercy will purge you too, and make you forsake your
sins, do you think that mercy will carry you, and your peevish proud
lustful hearts to heaven: No: he will not; then say they, we will repent
hereafter: and then we tell them again, harden not your hearts, to day if you
will hear his voice, take mercy now while it is called to day?

God requires repentance now, and now you must humble your selves and repent.
Yet the Soul goes on, and says, we bless God, we do repent, and when we
swear we cry God mercy, and though we have been, and are sometimes drunk,
yet we are sorry for it, then we make them answer, and say, you say you are
sorrowful, but sound sorrow is ever accompanied with sound reformation. As the
Apostle says, This same thing that you have been sorrowful, what
carfulness has it wrought in you, 2 Cor. 7.11.
what clearing of your selves, what indignation and the like? And as the wise
man says, He that confesses and forsakes his sin shall find mercy. Pro.
28.13.
Then the sinner replies, no man can do thus. What, would you have us without
sin? we must be content to do, as we may. Thus you see, they yield to the
truth, and cannot but confess that it is plain, but they take away the power
of the truth, and the command of it. You may see this in that cursed shift of a
carnal man. When Balack sent for Balaam saying, Number. 22.23.19.
Come curse this people, and I will advance thee. The Lord met Balaam, and
said, thou shall not curse them, then Balaam rose up early, and said to the
Princes of Moab, get you home for the Lord refuses to let me go with you: he
laid all the fault upon God, as if he had said, I have a good affection to go
with you, but the Lord will not give me leave. Well, when they came again, he
said, tarry here all night, that I may know what the Lord will say unto me
more. He would go to advise with God, to do that which God had formerly
forbidden.

Thus the carnal heart goes to work, when he cannot avoyde the truth, and he
would feign have some reservations, and such exceptions, and he says, is it
not possible that I may be drunk, and adulterous, and covetous, and yet make a
shift to go to heaven too, this is a wretched heart; as Balaam did, so do many,
nay, the most of the world do so; consider that place of Scripture, and let me
have your judgments in it; 1 Ioh. 3.2.
he that has this hope (says the Apostle) purges himself as Christ is pure.
He does not say, he may and ought to do it, but he does purge himself, and the
Apostle Peter says, be ye holy as Christ is holy in all manner of
conversation. 1 Pet. 1.15.
He does not say, he may and should be so, but, be holy as Christ is holy,
that is in truth and sincerity; as a child goes like his father though not so
fast as he. And as an apprentice works as fast as his Master though not so
well, and as the Apostle says, abstain from all filthiness of the flesh and
Spirit: as if had said, if there be ever a harlot or alehouse in the world
avoyde it, and all those appearances of evil, come not near them. This is the
condition that God requires. You hear all these truths, now let me call for
record from heaven I would feign know what any wicked opposer can say against
these truths; oh that I could know your minds a little! You that think a man
need not be so exact and precise, nay, you blame your children and servants
for it. I know not what you would say; except it be this: It is true, this is
good, but does any man do it? and it were to be wished that we could do it,
and happy are they that can do it, a man may be a man though not so good as an
other man etc. away with those tricks, the text says, he that has this hope
purifies himself, as Christ is pure, though not for the measure yet in the
same manner. Thou and I and all of us must do it or else we may cast away all
hope. The Lord be merciful to us; If your judgments were humbled I can tell
what you would do, the heart that is humble takes the truth, and yields to the
authority of it, whereas a carnal heart Lords it over the truth; if it be
thus with thee thy mind was never soundly enlightened, and as the Lord lives
never humbled, never converted, and never brought home to the Lord, see what
our Savior says, Matthew 15.3.
why do you also by your traditions transgress the commandment of God. They
set their own carnal traditions cheek by joll with the commandments of God,
they made the Command of God without any royalty or power. They were content to
give Christ the hearing, but they turned aside from the truth that should have
prevailed with them. If ever thou would have the word, work upon thee to do
thee good, then, whereas heretofore thou would not come in, nor yield; now
show thy self to be humbled, and go thy way home, and let this truth take
place in thy heart, and be delivered into the form of this doctrine now in
hand, and when profainenesse, lewd and ungodly sports come: then remember this,
and say, I must purge my self as Christ is pure, did Christ ever thus and
thus? did he ever sit up till twelve a clock at night ryotting and
banqueting? it is a truth, (oh Lord) let it take place in my heart, and let it
be fastened there. When the Lord has a man in his fetters, and breaks the
heart with horror, Job 36.8, 9, 10.
he opens his ear to discipline and commands him to return from iniquity.
He does not leave a man there and say, this is the way and the truth, walk in
it, but he says, I must have that unclean heart purged, and that carnal
company abandoned and so forth; and so the Lord says to the Ministers, command
that dissembler and that hypocrite, and that base wretch to come out from their
ungodly practices, and to yield to me. Oh let the power and royalty of this
truth take place in your hearts, as it will do, if you be Subjects of the
truth. I charge you before God and his Angels if you know any command, obey it,
and if you know any sinful course, remember the commandment is plain, you
must purge your selves as Christ is pure. Let this word prevail and have his
authority over you, and be not carnal hypocrites to oppose it now, and so to
be damned for it everlastingly.

The will must be subject.
As the reason must be subject to Gods will, so the will and affections must be
humbled, and the frame that is contrary to this humility, is this; when the
will and heart of a man (and that part whereby you say, I will have this, and I
will not have that) when this part does not yield to the authority of Gods
word, when there is a kind of Sovereign Command in this waywardness of heart,
and the heart would challenge a kind of monarchical authority, and would not
be overtopped by the truth of God. This cannot stand with any saving work of
humiliation. The general is thus. Jeremy 2.31.
As the people said, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee, we know
what to do. And as it is said in the Psalmist, Psalm 12.4.
our tongues are our own we ought to speak who is Lord over us.





First, The heart is weary of the command, and wishes secretly there were no
command of God to cross him in his course, and to hinder him in his way of
sin. I will not declare what I have heard wicked wretches say in this kind,
because I will not teach men to be wicked. He wishes that there were no
righteous God to bound him. The adulterer wishes that there were no such Law
as this, he that burns in his lusts here, shall burn in hell. And the
drunkard wishes that there had never been any Law made against that sin,
and he says, it is pity that every man may not drink what he will: and the
unjust person that would be stealing and pilfering, he wishes there were no
Law against that sin, and when the Word and his Conscience works, and the
Law makes havocke in his heart, and labors to throw him to the wall, Oh he is
weary of it.

Now a carnal heart thinks it the greatest plague in the world, to be paled in
within the compass of Gods commands, that he may not do what he list, but
still, Word, and Conscience, and the Ministers check him.

When the Lord required, Sacrifices at the peoples hands in Malachy; Malachy
1.13.
They thought it a wearisomenesse, and snuffed at it. What every morning
Sacrifice? and every evening too? what a wearisomenesse is this. So, you ought
to have morning, and evening prayer in your Families, how are your hearts
affected toward it? do not you say, what a wearisomnesse is this? why do you
tell us of prayer, and of humbling your souls? This is a burthesome thing;
this argues a heart that is above the truth, and that would be free from the
truth, and justle it to the wall, therefore the wicked are (as it were) in
bonds and fetters, as the Apostle says, Romans 1.28.
they did not like to have God in knowledge. As if he had said, it is a
vexation to their Souls still to have conscience calling, be holy and humble,
and and be not proud, nor drunk, nor adulterous, their consciences flies in
their faces, and the word galls them, they do not like to have this in
knowledge. And therefore the Lord deals with them after their desires, and he
gives them over to a reprobate mind, and to a heart that shall never embrace
the truth. You that have no delight to hear of your duties, and wish there
were no minister to control you, the Lord will satisfy your desires and give
you up to a reprobate sense. As if the Lord did say, you are weary of my
wisdom, and goodness, and weary of my word and commands, I will ease you of
that burden, you shall have hearts that never shall be moved with my spirit;
go all you damned lusts and reign in him, rule over him and make him a slave
and bring him down to destruction for ever.

Romans 1.18.
they withhold the truth in unrighteousness. The word in the original is,
they imprison the truth; as if the Apostle had said, you know you should not
be loose nor covetous nor drunk; is it so conscience? are you drunk, loose
and covetous still? when the conscience says, I will be loose, and covetous
still, and you will have the vengeance of God to follow you and go to hell too.
They do imprison the truth: The covetous man imprisons the truth, and he must
have his covetousness still; and the truth is imprisoned at the suite of the
adulterer, and he must be unclean still. And so, the oppressor must lie, and
dissemble, and oppress still, and therefore he justles the truth and will of
God to the wall. He takes the wall of Gods will. As the people said, there is
noe hope but we will walk after our own devices, Ier. 18.12.
and we will do every one the Imaginations of his evil heart. They said most
desperately, we will do it; hear it and fear all you whose consciences do
convince you of it, and you know that theeving and stealing, and pettishnesse,
and peevishness, and all your profainnesse is forbidden; what says your
hearts to this? who disposes of your wills in this case? do not you say, 1 Samuel 8.19.
we will do what we list? As when Samuel had made an evcellent sermon and
told them the danger of having a King, they said, nay, but we will have a King
over us. So it is with many of you. Is this humility? The Lord says, you
shall not, and you say you will: oh fearful! is this humility? ask but
common reason; you say, we must have and we will have it, we have had our
liberties and we will have them, and so destruction too.

into your hearts, to awaken you if it be possible. Thus it is with some
Ministers that are content to be painful in their places, so long as they may
have honor, and be respected, but if they miss of their end, they give over
all. If there be any such here, you are hypocrites, and shall never be
comforted upon these terms.

Now I come to the third passage of this trial, A man's life must be subject.
namely, what it is that disposes of our lives. A man's life and conversation
must be at Gods disposing. If the heart be distempered, and the reason be thus
lifted up, then the actions of a man's life must needs be answerable: If those
wheels go false, then the actions of a man's life must strike false. As they
said, they would walk in their own ways. And as the Lord says, Esa. 66.4.
I will bring their fears upon them, and my soul shall loath them because
they did choose their own devices. That is, whatsoever their own corrupt
hearts would have, that they will take; and that way they will walk in. Not
according to Gods will, but according to their own rebellious hearts. So that,
all the practices of a man's course, are nothing else but as so many distempered
behaviors of a rebellious carnal mind and heart. This disordered carriage
discovers it self in three particulars.

Having their understandings darkened, Ephesians. 4.18.
have given themselves over to all lasciviousness. They do not what God will,
but what their pride and idleness will. Prove. 28.18.
The wise man says, He that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once. And
the Apostle says, When you were the servants of sin, Romans 6.20.
you were free from righteousness. What Is that? Holiness and Gods command had
nothing to do with them, that never took place in their hearts. Do you
think these men's hearts are at Gods disposing? See what the Apostle says;
Fashion not your selves like unto this world. Romans 12.2.
I only appeal to men's consciences, what strange apparel, and hair laid
out, and what Spanish locks be there now adays? who disposes of these things?
Oh forsooth, they are newly come up, and they must come up to thy head, and
arms and all. These strange fashions do argue strange distempers of spirit,
and do you think that God rules in those hearts? and minds, and God
overpower those affections? when as they will not give him leave to meddle
with a hair, or a lock, or an excrement: this is my judgment in this case.
If it be so, that the Word of God may not take away a lap, and an excrement,
our shame, and those things that are scandalous, then surely the Word of God
must not pluck away our lusts. No, no, you are as far from subjection, as
heaven is from hell, and as the devil is from the God of Hosts. The Lord
speaks plainly by the Prophet Zephany, Zeph. 1.8.
He will visit all those that are clothed with strange apparel. When the
fire shall flame about your ears, and the enemies come to pluck your feathers
from your Caps, then you will remember this. You would not have God to dispose
of your clothes, and hair, and the like, and therefore God will now dispose
of your lives and liberties, and when you lie upon your straw, and see that you
must not go gay to heaven, you would then be content that the Lord should
dispose of you, and look graciously toward you; and then you will recommend
your souls to God. But then the Lord will make you answer and say, who had the
disposing of you before, a drunken, adulterous, and fashionable Soul,
therefore let them succor you now, get you to your fashions, and let them make
you fry and roar in the fashion, he that will not have these base trifles to
be at Gods command, surely he will never have his heart at Gods disposing, and
therefore neither mind, nor heart, nor life.



Yet secondly, they use all carnal shifts, and sinful devises to come from
that woeful condition into which God has cast them. A man cannot endure to be
poor, and therefore he will steal, coosen, or oppress, and take any course
to lift up himself.

he will do the duties that God reveals, and leave the sin that God
forbids, and gives a charge against: but why will he do this? He does not
these to honor God, but for some by and base ends. As when the hypocrite
prays, God does not make him pray as the first mooving cause of the work,
but his hypocrisy: and so the dissembling professor, that will profess for
advantage, to draw people to his house, or to sell off his Wares more readily.
And that people may say, Oh he is a mavelous honest man; yes, and a covetous
wretch too, and he makes Religion as a stalking Horse, for his lusts. You are
not at Gods disposing, unless you be at his command in all these.

Thus you see the pride of a man's reason, in his will, his heart and life,
wherein you see the desperate villainy of a man's nature, and all is opposite
against the God of heaven. If every bird had her feathers, and the worm her
silk, and every creature their own, what would become of the man that is
proud. This is base enough, yet this is nothing to that Mass of haughtiness,
and Luciferian wretchedness that is in the heart. That a poor creature should
set his will against Gods will, and his way against the way of the Almighty;
before whom the Angels stand amazed, and the devils do tremble. God says, I
will have this, and the Soul says, I will not have it: God says, thou shall
not walk in this way, but the Soul says, I will walk in it; God says, thy
reason, thy will, thy life, and all shall be subject to race, but the Soul
says, they shall not. Is not this infinite intolerable haughtiness? What, to
make God no God, and that he must have no will, no providence, and no rule over
a man's life. Oh you that are guilty in this case take notice of it. And, let
me exhort you all that have heard the Word of God this day, and are poor
ignorant men, and profane, and carnal hypocrites. Ignorance rules one man,
and his corrupt lusts rules an other man, but there is no good rule at all.

You have the Word of God and his counsels, and you have seen the way set out,
now what remains, but that you be entreated to go home and humble your selves
in secret, and say, this is my proud reason, my proud heart, and this is my
proud carriage, it is I that would not submit to the command of Gods Word. And
let every servant come in, and say, this is my proud heart, my Master, and my
Mistress may not speak, but I give word for word: this is my fault. And you
wives reason thus: Now the Lord has revealed the pride of my heart, and this
is my proud reason and will, that would not yield to the command of my husband
though never so warrantable. Let the child also humble himself, and say, when
my father counsels me, I turn my deaf ear; and my mother is but a woman,
and therefore I would have my own will, and walk in my own way, this is my
vain mind. How many be there present here this day, that are not willing to
know some truths. You know you have made many conspiracies against the Word of
God in the middle of the night, because your honors, ease, and liberties lay
at the stake, therefore the Word must not rule, If it be thus, then to this day
you are carnally minded, and stout-hearted and vain. Go home therefore I
charge you, and as you tender your own good, go into your private chambers,
or else into some fields, and there get down your knee, though your hearts
will not bow, and say, good Lord, I know and confess it to this day my carnal
mind has not been brought under, and this vain and idle conversation has
not been ordered by thy word: I have known much, and gone on in rebellion
against thee, and it is a weariness to me to sanctify the Sabbath, and
hearing, praying, and other holy duties are a burden to me: to this day my
heart is not prepared for mercy, good Lord, to this day I am a wretched carnal
man.

This is something, Now there is some hope. And the Soul goes on further, and
says, Good Lord, what will become of my Soul, am I Gods to dispose of; no,
no, pride and peevishness has ruled me, and I must cloth my self as Pride
would have me. This is somewhat indeed. And the adulterer says, If the
adulteress come, I must go though I dye for it. When the drunkard comes to
pull you out, tell him of this, and say, Who has disposed of you this day, and
all your life, a drunken wretch, and a base queen. You have heard the word of
God checking of you, and yet nothing would do, Oh now at last yield, and say,
The Lord has not disposed of me. Now therefore labor that God may dispose of
you, and let the mighty God pull down that mighty heart: Challenge the Lord
with his promise, and give him no rest till he have mercy upon you. And you
servants, humble your selves, and say, We have been proud and idle together,
now let us mourn and pray together. The time shall come when you will be
content that God should dispose of you, and you shall desire the Lord to look
graciously toward you, and that God would take away your corruptions, and that
pride which accuses you, and all those abominations that have been a shame
and disgrace to you, therefore now resolve with your selves, and say, Lord,
take away this sin, and subdue that corruption, and do thou rule and reign
over my heart and life for ever: let the power of thy truth carry me, and
turn me from my wickedness, and overpower this proud will of mine, and
whatsoever vanity is in my life, good Lord take it away, and frame me after thy
mind. When this time comes, say, That a poor Minister did wish you good, and
that you had a fair offer. If you will be at Gods disposing, in mind, in
heart, and life, the Lord will prepare a place for you in heaven, and rank
you there amongst his blessed Saints and Angels for evermore.

If another man's servant come to demand of you meat, drink, and wages, you
will say, You have not been at my command, therefore go to the Master that
you have served, let him pay your wages: So it will be with you, if you go to
God for mercy, and comfort in that day, the Lord will send you to your lusts
and new fashions, etc. but if any man be Gods servant, then every thing shall
be fitted for him, and though that day be troublesome to the proud and haughty
spirit, yet it will be a comfort to the godly, that they have submitted
themselves to Gods word. For, then Christ shall fill their minds with
wisdom, and their wills with holiness, and their lives shall be made
honorable and acceptable before him. Think of this, and labor to bring your
hearts to it, that Gods will may be your wills, and if you be humbled, you
shall and must be for ever comforted. Thus much of the trial of the truth of
our humiliation.

The second part of the use.
Now I come to the second part of the use, that is, to examine the measure of
our humiliation: for (as I conceive) all the difficulty of a man's course lies
here, and the cause why a man receives not the assurance of mercy from God that
he desires, or that comfort that he might, it is all from hence (I say)
because he is not empty. For if the heart be prepared, Christ comes immediately
into his temple, and the less we have of our selves, the more we shall have
of Christ. This is mervailous useful, and therefore you must know that though
the heart be truly humbled, and laid low in it self in truth, and the thing is
done, yet there remains a great deal of pride in the heart. Take a mighty
Castle, though it be battered down, yet there remains many heaps of rubbish,
and happily some of the pillars stand many Winters after: So it is with this
frame of Spirit, in a high imagination, 2 Cor. 10.5.
in these Towers of loftiness. Though this Dagon of a man's self be fallen
down, yet still the stumps remain, and will do many years. And it will cost
much horror of heart, and much trouble before this haughtiness of heart will
be every way pulled down, and made agreeable to the good will of God. Though
this distemper is mervailous secret, yet a man may take a measure and scantling
of it, How to try the measure of humiliation. The first particular Trial.
and he may know how much of this cursed rubbish remains in his heart, by
these four particular rules.

First, look what measure there is of carnal reasoning against the truth of
God when it is made known, what measure there is of it either subtly coming
in upon the heart, or else that does violently transport the spirit against the
spirit, so much need thou have of Humiliation, and so much thou want of it.
This is a clear case. Every Saint of God is willing to know the truths that he
shall doubt of, and is content to yield himself to the truth that shall be
revealed, and of which he shall be convinced, yet there remains much carnal
reasoning against the truth. As the Apostle says, Let no man deceive you;
intruding into those things which he has not seen, Coloss. 2.18.
vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind. The ground and root of this carnal
reasoning, or the measure of it may appear in two causes.

First, There is a kind of perverse darkness in the heart, still sticking in
the mind and understanding, even of a gracious Godly man. And from hence,
namely, out of this mistaking of the mind, follows all that carnal
reasoning: that, howsoever the Soul is satisfied, yet it will not sit down,
but still it sticks in this carnal reasoning, and the sinner cannot conceive
the truth, nor fathom the compass of it, by reason of his own weakness,
therefore it is long before he will be persuaded that it is truth, and that he
is bound to yield to it. When the wisdom of the truth is so plain and
evident, that he cannot resist the clearenesse of it, yet because he cannot
conceive of it, he thinks, that he is not bound to yield thereunto.



Nicodemus. When Christ spoke of the work of regeneration, Ioh. 3.9.
he said, Can a man be borne again the second time. Well, Christ opens the
mystery of regeneration, and the secrecy of it the second time, and when
Nichodemus could not comprehend what Christ had spoken, yet he would hold his
own, and said, how can this be, I cannot conceive it; because he could not
comprehend it; therefore he throws all away. Mark how Christ hits him in the
right vein, and strikes him to the bottom, and see how he tames him: Art
thou a Master in Israel and a Doctor in Law, and yet art such a novice in this
work of regeneration; down with that proud heart of thine. Lay down all thy
carnal reasoning, and become a fool, and so thou may understand this truth
that is communicated to thee.

This is ordinary amongst us, for a man to say, I cannot believe it, I see it
not, and I think not so; and yet they have no reason at all to carry them, but
because they cannot comprehend it by that light which they have, therefore they
will not yield to any reason, because they cannot see it by their own light,
they will not use Gods spectacles (as I may so say) look how much of this
carnal reasoning thou have, so much pride thou haste, and this is very much,
specially in the most ignorantest Souls.

Secondly, because of the weakness, and feebleness of their judgments,
which are not able to hold a truth when they have it in their hands, but it
goes away like lightening, and because the minds of these poor creatures, are
over-worne with many thoughts, and cursed reasonings, and troubled therewith,
they grow unable to help themselves against those distempers. And hence it is,
that though the Word of God be let in, and made clear, yet a man stoopes to
those conceits, and cursed reasonings that have been attended to, so that they
take of the power of the truth. As it is with a Ferriman: he applies the Oar,
and looks home-ward to the Shore where he would be, yet there comes a gust of
wind that carries him back again whether he will or no: So many a poor
humbled creature, that is truly wrought upon, and has a true title to Christ;
he applies his Oar, and would have assurance of mercy from Christ, yet the
overwhelming of carnal reasonings, and cursed suggestions (that are either
cast in or stirred up in his heart) throws him back again, and take of the
power of the truth; insomuch that he can see nothing, nor yield to any thing
for the good and comfort of his Soul. I take this to be the ground of all the
trouble that befalls a broken heart. Let any man under heaven give me the
reason of this; why any Soul that is truly burdened for sins as sin, and
has found God mavelous gracious to him this way, why (I say) after all his
cavils are remooved, and all his objections are fully answered, and all
controversies are ended, and this often done; yet a poor broken hearted
creature, will still recoyle to his former carnal reasonings again, the
reason is, because all the answers that were given are now forgotten, and all
his cavils, and carnal conceits will be fresh in his mind as ever they were,
partly from the haunt they have had in his mind, and partly from that
selfe-willy waywardness of the heart, that is content to go that way.

They that have been long overwhelmed with these cursed carnal cavellings,
they will rather labor to oppose a direction, then to hold it and to walk in
the comfort of it, only because of the weakness of their understandings, and
their carnal reasonings are so violent against them. Upon this hindge it is
that (as I take it) all the objections of a company of poor broken hearted do
hang, and by this means they keep out that comfort which they might have, and
in the strength whereof they might walk all their days. I might propound many
instances, as thus; come to a contrite Soul, and say to him, why walk thou
so uncomfortably seeing thou have now a title to mercy and salvation in Christ?
see what he replies, I a title to mercy? nay, I am utterly unworthy of that
title, it is a great gift and few have it, and I have been a vile wretch and
an enemy to God and his glory, what I a title to mercy? we reply again. God
gives grace to the unworthy, he justifies the ungodly, and not the godly, and
if he will give you mercy too, what then? he replies again, What mercy to me?
Nay, it is prepared, for those that are fitted for it, had I such a measure of
humiliation, and so much grace, if I were so and so fitted, and if my heart
were thus disposed, then I might have some hope to receive it: we reply
again. But have not you been weary of your corruptions, and are you not
content that God should do that for you, which you cannot do for your selves;
this is the qualification which God accepts, and requires, and by which he
fits the Soul for mercy; unless you have that other of your own conceits you
will have none, and so you deprive your selves of mercy; you have a child's
part, and a good portion too, if your proud hearts would suffer you to see it.
Then the Soul says; I would have the Lord say to my Soul, be of good
comfort, I am thy Salvation; if the Lord would witness this to me by his
Spirit, then I could believe it: content then, only let us agree upon the
manner how it must be done, and how God shall speak it. Will you then yield
it? Yes, then know this, what the Word says, the Spirit says, for the hand
and the sword, the Word and the Spirit go both together. For as the text
says, My Word and my Spirit are one. Then take the Word and lay thy heart
level to it, and see it. The Word says, Every one that is weary shall be
refreshed; Have not thou been weary, and have not thou seen sin worse then
hell it self? The Text, the Word, the Lord, and his Spirit says, Thou
should come: and the Spirit says, thou shall be refreshed. Oh says the
sinner, I cannot find this assurance, and this witness of Gods Spirit, I
cannot see it, and I cannot believe it: Thus he leaves the judgment of the
Word and Spirit, and cleaves to the judgment of his finding, and feeling: and
thus he judges Gods favor in regard of his own imaginations, and not
according to the witness of the Word and Spirit: the Spirit says, Thou art
fitted for mercy, but because thy ignorant blind mind conceives it not, hence
it is that thou shuttest the door against the mercy of God revealed, and that
would be settled upon thy Soul for thy everlasting comfort. Think of this, and
say, Whether is it fit that my wit should determine my estate, or the word of
God? Will you determine the cause, and perke into the place of judgment, and
say, I feel it not, and I fear it? Is not all this carnal reason? Here they
run amain, even abreast against their own comfort, and will not receive
the Word that might convey what comfort is needful for them. I charge every
poor Soul to make conscience of resisting the word of God, as you desire to
make conscience of lying and stealing: This is a sin though not so great as
the other. Make conscience of this carnal cavelling, pull down those proud
hearts, lay down all those carnal reasonings, and let the word of God rule
you, and then comfort will come amain. I take this for a truth; That, when the
heart is truly humbled and prepared for mercy, and rightly informed and
convicted of the way to salvation, the cause why the heart cannot receive
comfort, it is mere pride of a man's spirit one way or other, it is not because
he will not, nor because God will not, but because he listens to what his
carnal reason says, and not to the plain will and word of God. I say, make
conscience of it, and then comfort will come amain into your Souls.

The second trial of the degree of humiliation.
The second trial of the measure of our humiliation, is this. Look to thy
discouragements. For as the discouragements of thy course are, so is the pride
of thy heart.

If the stream run amain here, there is much pride, if little discouragement,
then there is little pride. This is nothing else, but when the Soul out of the
fear of evil that it either feels or expects, and the price that it puts
upon it self, and that it looks for from it self, it is nothing else but the
sinking of the soul below it self. As the Author to the Hebrews says,
Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, Heb.
12.3.
least you grow weary, and faint in your own minds. The word in the Original
is, as if their sinews were shrunk. This is an undoubted argument and
evidence of so much pride as this does appear. When a man is driven to a
desperate stand, and comes to lay a dispondencie, and to lay himself too low,
and is not able to bear the blow that God lays upon him: for, were the Soul
as willing to take the want of good if God deny it, as to take good when God
gives it, it would not be so discouraged. The heart is content to have good,
but if God take away this good, he is not content to be at Gods disposing
therein, but if this good go away, he sinks and is discouraged, and this
argues pride. The heart desires to have riches, and especially honors in the
world, happily God denies this, and throws filth and disgrace upon his person,
and now the Soul is desperately down and forlorn in himself: So much as thou
have of this, so much pride thou have. Why art thou not content that God take
away any thing? the truth is, thou would be at thine own disposing, and
that which thou would have thou art not able to want. Now because this is a
thing that we must take special notice of, know therefore that this
discouragement appears in these several passages, and pride vents it self in
them all.

Signs of a discouraged heart.
Though the Word of God is never so plain, and his calling to it never so
clear, yet he is loath to come in at Gods call, and when he is come he is
quickly weary, and says, what do I hear? Ask God that, because he thinks,
he shall not find the success that he desires, therefore he is loath to come
to it, this is horrible pride. Thus it was with Jonah: he was sent to Nineveh,
and because he thought God would show mercy to them, and he should be
accounted a false Prophet; therefore he would not go, but turns to Tarshish,
he was not able to bear the crossing of himself.

Secondly, It damps the Soul, and (as I may so say) it knocks of the wheels
of a man's endeavors, when he sets upon the work, and it kills him at the
root. As the Prophet David says, Why art thou cast down within me oh my
soul? Psalm. 43.5.
why art thou so disquieted within me? As a man that awakens from a swound, he
wonders at himself: so did this Holy man. Thus it comes to pass, that the
Soul recoyles upon it self, and the heart gives in, and he (as it were) trips
up his own heels, that, howsoever a man is able to do duties, yet by reason
of discouragements, he is not able to put forth that which he can do, for
fear he should not do that which he would.

to see what pride there is. One man is sick of the sullen, because the breath
of men departs, and he falls short of that which he expected. Though I should
prepare my self never so well, yet if the Lord did stop my mouth now in the
pulpit, let me be humbled, but comforted and contented therewith.

The third Trial of the measure of our humiliation, is this discontentednesse
in a man's occasions, The third trial, of the measure of our Humiliation.
and so much of this as there is, so much pride thou have in thy heart, where
this discontentednesse grows, there is this bitter root of pride also. The
nature of a proud heart is not able to bear any superior, and if it be
checked, it falls to strange murmuring, and gaine-saying. This
discontentednesse lets out it self in five particulars, and there is a world
of pride in them all.

First, the Soul will grudge at the dispensation of God, and snarle at the
providence of the Almighty, as if God had forgotten himself. He quarrels
exceedingly with the Almighty, if God answer not his will, and his hearts
desire. When the Lord had prevailed with the peoples hearts, and they had
humbled themselves, and the Lord had turned from his wrath; see how this man
falls out with God! Oh, says he, Jonah 4.1, 2.
I thought so much when I was in my own country, that thou would save this
people, and I should be accounted a false Prophet, and thus my glory lies in
the dust. You think God is beholden to you for your prayers, and fastings, and
you say, how is it that after all our prayers yet we have not comfort, such a
man is cheared, and such a poor creature is refreshed, and yet they have not
the parts that we have, and they have not prayed as we have done, thou have
showed mercy to them, and therefore why not to us too. This is horrible pride.

See how a proud soul justles God out of the place of of his providence, and
brings the Almighty to his bar, and to his judgment; and the heart begins
to reason inwardly, and sometimes vents it outwardly, and says, had the Lord
given me that grace and fitted a place for me, I could have done much for
God, and some good to his Church, and I could have ministered much comfort to
others: this is the English of it. As if he had said, had the Lord been so
wise (to devise a means to effect this glory) as I am, then great matters
might have been done. This is to make a man's wisdom above God, and his mercy,
grace wisdom and all. Oh! this is devilish pride.

Secondly, It slights all mercyes received, and all that God bestows from day
to day; because he cannot have what he would, therefore he cares not for it,
and he regards not what he has. As Haman said, Hester 5.13.
all this honor and these riches avail me nothing, so long as I see the Jew
Mordecai sitting in the gate. This one thing denied him, made him no to regard
whatsoever he had; and it was not only so with Haman, but even with good
Jonah. When God had prepared a goard, because he took it away again
suddenly, Jonah took on exceedingly, and forgetting all Gods mercyes in the
depth he quarrels with heaven, Jonah 4.9.
and when the Lord said, do thou well to be angry; yes (says he) even to
the death, thus he commends himself. The reason is, the Soul is like a sullen
child, who because his coat is not guarded as he would have it, therefore he is
discontented and will havs none at all. Therefore the Soul says as they did
of the two little fishes, John 6.9.
here are five barley loaves and two fishes but what are these amongst so many
people. So the Soul says, oh! he has nothing and he can do nothing, and God
frowns upon him etc. but, has not God given you a care and conscience to
reform your lives? and has not he done this and that for you? oh yes, but
what is this to that I might have had and that I would have? oh, down with that
proud heart.

Genesis 25.22.
Rebecca could not be contented without children, and yet when she had
conceived, and the children began to strive in her womb, she said, if it be
so, why am I thus? So it is with a proud discontented heart. He must have
this, and he will have that, and if there be any weakness, he sinks down in
his sorrow.

Josh. 7.7.
It is a strange passage of good Iosuah: when the Lord had discomfited the host
of Israel by the men of Ai, see how he complains, saying, Alas, (oh Lord God)
wherefore have thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into
the hands of the Amorites, would God we had been content to dwell on the other
side Jordan. As if he had not begged Gods blessing, and had not seen Gods
hand in succouring of him before, and yet now because he had not what he
would, he takes all in the worst sense. And as Moses said, when the Lord had
called him to go before Pharaoh, send by whom thou should send. Exodus 4.13.
As if God must not dispose of him, because he had not that eloquence which he
desired.

Eliah, when he said, 1 King. 19.4.
Lord take away my life, for I am no better then my Fathers. So it was with
Jonah, and with Job. Job 3.10, 11, 12.
You women think of this. It may be your husbands will not speak to you as
you would have them, and then you wish; Oh, that you had dyed in such a
sickness, etc. Down with those proud hearts. The Lord has given you life,
and continues it, that you may seek to God, and yet you will needs dye in a
sullen fit: its mercy that you may live to seek mercy.

Fifthly, in conclusion, when the Soul has thus quarrelled with God, and
slighted all mercies, and quarrelled with his condition, and is grown weary of
his life and all, then the Soul comes to a desperate distraction in himself,
and a wonderful thought seazeth upon the Soul of a discontented man, that his
heart is almost driven beyond himself, and out of this comes a great deal of
madness in the wicked, and it does much hurt to the good too. His thoughts run
in a mavelous hurry one upon another, and makes the Soul unfit to do any
good to others, or to receive any good from others. Here is the cause: when God
has opened your eyes, and the wrath of God first began to pursue you, then you
could have been content to fall into a river, and to make away your selves;
Now, what if God will have you bear his hand, and will not give you grace yet,
why do you quarrel against God? Oh, sit down and humble your selves with
meekness, and calmnesse, and wonder that you are not in hell; what if you had
been damned long ago? Thus it was with Rachel, she would not be comforted
because her children were not. So it is with thy Soul, thou must have what
thou will, or else thou will not be comforted. Now, there are two objections
against the former truth, which I must remoove and answer before I go any
further.

Rachel like, and not to be comforted, but to let his Soul fall in sorrow.



The Soul thinks he does mavelous well to be thus discouraged, and that
there is no other Humiliation but this. Know therefore this double difference.

First, The differences between a heart humbled, and a heart discouraged.
This Humiliation leaves the Soul more calm and better able to under-goe a
light blow when it has borne this. Whereas after discouragement the Soul is
more full of trouble, and more unable to bear any trouble, because it has
sunk under this: If the Lord denies to the humble Soul that which he would
have, it makes him more able to bear the want of any thing: but the
discouraged Soul flies off, and is less able to bear the hand of God in the
want of any thing. Humiliation seasons the vessel, and makes it more wide, and
more fit to hold liquor, but, discouragement crackes the vessel, and makes
that it will hold nothing at all. And, humiliation is like the Tentures that
stretches the cloth, and makes it more smooth and plain: humiliation
stretches the Soul, and makes it more humble, and meek: but discouragement
rends the heart, and makes it more unfit to undergo that which is laid upon
it. As Saint Paul to the Hebrews says, you have forgotten the exhortation
which says, Heb. 12.5.
My Son despise not thou the correction of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. The Word faint, that is, discouragement is spoken of by our
Savior, When he was moved with compassion toward the people because they
fainted, Matthew. 9.36.
and were as sheep scattered abroad having no Shepherd. So I say, do not
suffer thy self to be so far scattered with these troubles, that thy heart
be unable to gather up it self again. As it is with some stubborn child,
when his father comes to correct him, he snuffes, and falls into a fwoune with
grief, whereas an other child is quiet and takes the blow quietly, and goes
away contentedly without any manner of fainting. So the heart truly humbled, is
like the child that takes the blow quietly; but the discouraged Soul faints,
and is not able to bear the hand of God in this kind.

The second difference.
Secondly, the second difference is this. As Humiliation ever leaves the Soul
calm and quiet, after the hand of God has been upon it: so it makes the
Soul more ready, and puts a kind of ability, and cheerfulness in attending
upon God in any service, without any hankering after his own ends, and without
this quarrelling, and this drawing back from the Lord. So, that because he
has borne the hand of God, therefore it is much more ready that the Lord
should dispose of duties, and the success of them, seeing it has found God
going out with him heretofore; and he says, the truth is, sometimes the Lord
did deny me that mercy which I desired, and blessed be God for it, for by this
means I found my proud heart humbled and brought down; therefore if God will
have me do any duty, I will do it, and if he cast shame and disgrace upon
me in it, I am contented. This is a heart truly humbled: but, the discouraged
Soul not receiving that strength and assistance in his duties that he would
have, he is mavelous untoward, and unwilling to come to the like service any
more. For fear he want success, and shall not be able to bear the want of
it. Humiliation (as it were) levels the heart, that the Lord Jesus may take
place there; but this discouragement delves the heart, and makes it more unfit
for Christ. John Baptist was sent to prepare the way for Christ, that every
valley might be filled, and every mountain and hill brought low. The high way
wherein Christ went is the heart, and the ditch or valley, was the desperate
discouraged heart, and this fainting of heart unfits the way for Christ, Luke
3.4.
as well as the mountains and hills. As, Humiliation levels the heart, and
makes it fit for Christ, so this discouragement delves and unfits the Soul to
be quickened, and to give way to a Savior, and to entertain him. Humiliation
takes off the knottinesse of the heart, and makes it run faster in the way of
Gods Commandments, but discouragement hangs a back byas upon the Soul, that,
as a back byas holds a boole that a man cannot make it run right to the mark:
so this discouragement is like the back byas, and that's the reason why a
discouraged heart comes so awkely to holy duties, as to conference, fasting,
and the like. If a man go to fasting, and prayer privately, if God give him
not that success that he would, and he cannot do it as he desires; oh, how
hardly is he drawn to it again: but the humbled Soul says, blessed be God,
though I had not that strength, and that success that I desired, yet if the
Lord shall call me to the like duties, I will go again though I cannot do
as I would. So then, know that there is no ground for discouragement; that's a
sin: be contented, yet for ever humbled.





Thou may (and ought to be) discontented with thy pride and corruption;
and with thy unbelief, but, take heed that thou be not discontented with the
weakness of thy gifts and parts. This is damnable pride; and it is an
argument that thou art not content to be at Gods finding, and this is thy
disease twenty to one.

Now, that thou may know whether thy coffeehouse is for thy corruption,
or for thy estate and the weakness of thy parts, I show it thus: he that is
discontented with his sin, will never sin in his discontentednesse. As we
use to say of immoderate sorrow. If any man loose a friend and begin to grieve
and sorrow excessively, we use to say, take heed that you mourn not out of
measure. Mark what he replies; may not a man sorrow for his his sin? To this
I answer. Art thou sorrowful for sin, and will thou sin deeply in thy
sorrow and resist the good will of the Lord? no, thou have lost a friend, and
means, and therefore thou mournest.

This is carnal sorrow, and in this thou never sorrowest for sin, he that is
sorrowful for his sin, will not sin in his sorrow, it is for thy condition
that thou art so sorrowful and discontented. Is it not so with thy Soul? that
thy heart is tossed up and down in a restless disquiet, and art thou not out
of the command of thy self? and art thou not hurried up and down in a
confused lumber in thy mind because thou art not fit for duties? if it be so
with thee, then thou do sin desperately in thy coffeehouse.

It is a rule in war; If an Army be once scattered and dispierced, it will
hardly come on again, because it is put out of rank and order. So that Soul
is discontented with his estate, that is made unfit for duties, and unweldy in
them; that coffeehouse which unfits a man to be at Gods disposing, it is not
the work of humiliation, but a work of pride. But it is so with thee, thy
coffeehouse makes thee unable to bear Gods hand, and the want of any thing,
and makes thee more unfit for duties, and it is not for sin, but for thy
weakness in gifts, and for thy condition, and therefore thou art possessed
with this pride of heart.

The fourth and last note of the measure of our humiliation.
The fourth and last note and trial of the measure of our humiliation is this.
If thou will know how much pride is in thy heart; then consider how thy Soul
stands in regard of the word and truth of God that crosses thy beloved lusts,
and those corruptions to which thy Soul has cleaved in the time of thy
wretchedness; and in this there are two passages.

First, see how thy heart behaves it self, in regard of the strict commands of
God.

Secondly, in regard of the keenest reproves, and the sharpest admonitions
that are suggested into thy heart. See how thy heart is able to bear the
reproof of an enemy, or the admonition of a faithful Minister of God, when he
meets with thy darling lust. When thy heart comes under these commands, and
these reproves, if thou find thy heart swelling, and bubbling against the
truth, and thy heart begins to be angry with the Word, and Minister and all,
then know this, that certainly so much of this as there is in thy heart, so
much thy Soul wants of Humiliation. Is not this pride that the Soul should
lift up it self against the Lord of heaven? and take the way of Gods Word? and
when the frothy frantic heart of a man will bear down the command of God? and
let the command of God fall to the ground, rather then let a corruption fall,
is not this infinite pride?

You may take notice of this distemper in several passages. When the Prophet
came to that wicked King Amaziah, and said to him, Why have thou sought after
the Gods of the Heathen, 2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16.
which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand? then the King
said to him, Art thou made of the Kings counsel? forbear why should thou
be smitten? Then the Prophet said, I know that God has determined to destroy
thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened to my counsel.
Amaziah was naught, and God did deal with him accordingly: So, when Gods Word
does meet with men's hearts, and lusts, they are mad, and if it were not for
shame, and fear; they would pull a man from the Pulpit.



Aza was a strange man; though Divines hold him a good man: When Hanani the
Prophet dealt plainly with him and said, 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 10, 11.12.
Thou have done foolishly in resting upon the King of Aram, etc. See how the
King entertaines this; He was wroth with the Seer, and put him in prison: But
see what befell the King. He never saw good day afterward: he fell into many
sins; so the Lord leaves a man to his corruptions; and after that he fell
into a strange disease in his feet: A strange thing that God should leave a
good man in this misery; thus he dyed, and all this was for opposing the Word
of God. This is the nature of a peevish colericke spirit. The humble spirit
does not quarrel with the Word of God, Iam. 1.21.
but receives it with meekness, and with a quiet still spirit. If any sin
be revealed, and if any duty be commanded, he bears the Word without
contending, unless it be now and then, for flesh will have his bouts. Look
home therefore into your own hearts, and families: how can you bear the
checks and reproves of a Master or Mistress, when they say, you are idle. And
so, you wives, when your husbands reproove you, is not all on a light flame?
Oh, this is infinite and intolerable pride. You may be good servants, and
good women, but its strange if you be so.



of God are sometimes discontented and discouraged, but when they see it, they
are content that the Word should work upon them against it, and they complain
of these wretched hearts, and when they find this discontentednesse, they
quarrel with themselves for it, and a good man would even pull out that heart
which quarrels against the Word of God, and he says, is not this the Word of
God by which we must be saved? and is not this the power of Christ? and shall I
be angry with it? God forbid: But, these distempers are natural in a carnal
man, and though he be reprooved for a foolish fashion; yet he will hold his
corruptions still, he pulls, and the Minister pulls, the Minister would pull
down his proud heart, and take away his corruptions, but he will have his
pride, and foolish fashions, and his corruptions still: then keep them, and
perish with them, and know that thou art a wretched man: the humble heart
contends with his corruptions and sinful distempers, and he is not quiet
therewith. As it is with a treason, If it be revealed to a Traitor, and a good
Subject: the Traitor keeps it secret, but the true Subject reveals it, and
complains of the Traitor, and the Treason; and calls for justice against
them: so it is with a gracious good heart. He sees these cursed distempers,
and sometimes finds bublings of heart against the Word of God, and this shakes
his Freehold; yet, when a good heart seeeth the Treason, he does not join
with it, but he complains to the Lord of it, and says, Oh treason Lord, this
vile heart will be my destruction, good Lord, reveal it yet more to me, and
take away all these corruptions; take thou the possession of me, that I may
serve thee here, and be with thee for ever hereafter. Thus much for the use of
Examination.



First, Four degrees of a proud man's misery.
Pride is professely against God, and is the most directly contrary to the
whole being of God, and that in the whole man.

Indeed, Pride opposes God.
all sins are nothing else, but a kind of crossenesse to the Lord of Hosts,
and a kind of thwarting of some Attribute or other in God: As, falsehood
crosses the Truth of God, impatience crosses the patience of God, and
injustice, crosses the Justice of God: So that, these sins go against the
Almighty in their measure, some against one Attribute, some against another:
but a proud heart, smites at the whole Essence and Being of God: Nay, he does
as much as in him lies, labor to take God out of the world, and he would be
God himself, and have no God but himself: The Lord does principally Attribute
two things to himself, which can be in none but himself. God is the first of
all causes, and the last End of all. All things were created by him for
himself, He made all by his Will, and Wisdom, and by his Wisdom, and
Providence, he governes all for himself. Before any thing was, God was, and
all must return tribute of praise, and thankesgiving to God. A man may be like
God in Mercy, and in Justice, though not so perfectly, yet sincerely; and a man
may be like God in other of his glorious Attributes, but God only is first and
last. If it be a creature, then it was made: but here is the venom of a proud
heart, he would be first and last. He does all by his own power, and he will
promote his own praise in all that he does. As the great King Nebuchadnezzar
says, Dan. 4.30.
Is not this great Babel that I have built, by the might of my power, I built
it, there is the first, for the honor of my Majesty, there was the last. So,
it is not the wisdom, and pleasure of God that must stand, but his own proud
heart: it must not be what God commands, but what he would have, all of a proud
man is against the Almighty.

The Saints of God have wondered that the Lord is able to bear a proud man
that thus out braves God in regard of his special prerogatives; it is a wonder
that God sends not some lightning from heaven and even stamp them to powder,
and send them down packing to hell suddenly, I take this to be the sin of
the devils that are now chayned up in eternal darkness until the judgment
of the great day, nay, I take this pride of a man's Spirit, of his mind, his
reason, his will and affections to be an other old man of sin. Drunkenness
is a lymme of this old man, and so is adultery and other sins, but pride is
(as it were) the old man it self.

This is the broader, the Spawne and the very mother from whence the sin
against the Holyghost grows, and there wants nothing but the illumination of
the truth to come in upon the heart; when a man's understanding is enlightened,
and this Illumination comes upon the heart, and he is violently carried
against the truth with indignation, this is the sin against the holy ghost. 2.
Pride opposes the covenant of grace.


Secondly, as Pride is opposite to God himself, so it is opposite to the
covenant of grace, believe and live; for the truth is, that which we call
infidelity and the ingredients of it, are pride; as the Apostle says. Romans
3.7.7.
Where is boasting then? it is excluded, by what Law? by the Law of works? no,
but by the Law of faith. If there be believing, then away with carnal
reasoning and with pride.

Therefore I may say by collection, if faith exclude all boasting, then pride
or boasting opposes the covenant of faith. Faith is excluded by this pride of
a man's Spirit; and by this swelling of heart: and the holy Prophet Habakkuk
says, Habak. 2.4.
the Soul that is lifted up himself is not not upright within him, he that
swells and bubles up in his heart and puffes up himself against the word of
God, he has no upright Spirit within him, but the just man shall live by his
faith; above all, see that place in Esaias, hearken to me all you stout hearted
ones of the world which are far from righteousness. Esaias. 26.12.
Let me speak to all you stout hearted men and women that are here this day;
you that swell against the truth of Christ, and will not come under the power
of Gods ordinances, you are far from righteousness. The further you are gone
in this sin, the further you are from the righteousness of God. A stout
hearted man is a thousand miles from righteousness.

Drunkards and adulterers are far enough from it, but a proud man is (as it
were) 20. hundredth thousand miles from it; he is far from the covenant of
faith.

Faith goes out for all that it has to an other, it reaches up to heaven for
all, it wants meat and nourishment, and therefore it goes to Christ for all,
and pride only rests upon it self for all; faith gives the glory of all that
it has to another, but pride takes all the glory to its self. Faith goes to
another for strength in what he does, but pride rests upon it self for
strength: So that, though all sins hinder the work of faith, yet, pride
hinders it more then any thing. You that think it a brave matter to be proud,
and you must not buckle to the Minister, and you must do what you list, you
are stout-hearted men, but you are far from believing men. The more faith,
the less pride, and the more pride, the less faith.

3. A proud soul is far from mercy.
Thirdly, As pride opposes God himself, and as it opposes the covenant of
grace, so it follows from the two former, that the proud Soul upon these
conditions (that it is in) shall never receive any grace from the Lord. Set
your hearts at rest for that. You may swell, and lift up your selves, but if
ever you receive the work of grace, and mercy upon these terms, I will be
your bondman for ever. For, he that is professely contrary to the grace of
God, that gives all; and he that is contrary to the covenant of grace by which
all is conveyed, let him set his heart at rest, for ever receiving any mercy.
The Lord himself is not able to endure the sight of a haughty spirit, he
cannot look upon him, much less will he live with him. He beholds the proud
man a far off, he drives a proud man far from heaven. Psalm. 138.6.
The Lord deals by a proud man, as a man does that is carried with indignation
against his enemy, he will not look upon him: So it is with the Lord, he will
not be within the ken of a proud man, and if the Lord do come near a proud
man, woe to him that he does so. The Lord resists the proud. He whets all the
sharpest arrows of his vengeance, and shuts them all against a proud man. You
broken hearts consider this. The Lord gives grace to the humble, but the proud
man must be content with his portion, he shall be resisted, not received, he
shall be resisted, not converted, nor saved, nor sanctified. He may bid
farewell to all grace, he shall never have it upon those terms: and as God
intends no good to him, so a proud man comes not within the scope of mercy, nor
of that redemption which Jesus Christ has wrought and purchased. Christ came
not to call the righteous, that is, them that look loftily in regard of what
they do. You stout hearted people, think of it. The Lord Christ came not to
call you. The devil calls, and you may go to him: but Christ came to call and
save the poor broken hearted sinners. It is said of Christ, That he was
anointed of the Lord, Esa. 61.1, 2, 3.
to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel, to whom? to the meek, etc. You
meekened Souls shall hear good news from heaven. But there is not any one
syllable of one promise in all the Gospel, that any proud spirit can conceive
to belong unto him. If I could separate all the good from the bad, I would have
the good to stand by, and hear these good news that I have for them, and if
you proud hearts will come in and yield, they may be yours too: You that
tremble at Gods Word, and are willing to do what God shall command, if there
be any such here this day, as I doubt not but there are many, then know, that
the Son of man came to seek and save you; it is good tidings. Nay, in the
Lord Jesus Christ are all the Treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, and out of
this fullness of holiness, and happiness, he fills all your meek hearts, and
he will give all grace according to your necessities; here is news of
salvation, life, and comfort from heaven. But to whom is it? Christ came to
seek, and save them that are lost: that is, them that are lost in their own
apprehension: but the proud man was never lost in himself. A lost man in the
Wilderness is content to be guided into his right way: but the proud man
says, he will be filthy and fashionable still, therefore he was never lost,
and Christ never came to seek nor save him. All means do a proud man no good.


All the means of Grace that God gives, will never benefit a proud man. So
that now, it is as possible, nay, more possible for heaven and earth to meet
together, then for a proud man to come to heaven, except God give him a heart
to stoop. No man can receive benefit by the word, except he be under the power
of it, if the wax be not under the Seal, how can it receive any impression? As
the Apostle says, Rom 6.17.
They were delivered into the form of that doctrine propounded. The form of
the Gospel took place in their hearts. There is no Soul can get any benefit
by the Gospel, but he must receive what it reveals, and what it commands,
he must do, and what it forbids, he must labor to avoid, but a proud heart
is above all means, and therefore the word will not, nay, it cannot work
savingly on him. As those wicked ones said, Our tongues are our own we ought
to speak, Psalm. 11.4.
who is Lord over us. What reproof shall awe me, says a proud heart, I will
be led by my own lusts. Your own reason leads you, and your own wills rules
you, your own minds, and your lusts: and what your hearts will have, they
must have. You stout hearted ones that are resolved not to yield, nor to come
under the grace of God: you will not have your affections framed, nor made more
teachable, then, seeing you will not be taught, be for ever deluded, go your
way, and be for ever hardened, and for ever cast off from the presence of God,
and go down to the bottomless pit, you will have your own wills, therefore
go to your own places, for that is all you can have. You that are the
faithful of God, and know any such, mourn for them.

Fourthly, Again. 4. A proud man's end is exceeding fearful.
The destruction of a proud man is both certain, exceeding heavy, and it is
like to be mervailous fearful. There is nothing to be expected and hoped for,
but total ruin, and that suddenly and unconceiveably to every proud spirit,
that bears up himself against the blessed God of heaven. Let me open it
thus. A proud man is marked out for Gods Judgments, and is made (as it were)
the white against whom all the arrows of his vengeance are fully bent. When
Amaziah would needs out bid the Prophet in his advice, 2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16.
and said, forbear, Why should thou be smitten? I will forbear (says the
Prophet) but know what shall befall thee, I know the Lord has purposed to
destroy thee, because thou will not hearken to my counsel. You that are
acquainted with your stout-hearted husbands, and wives, and friends, and know
how your children bandy themselves against the blessed truth of Christ; go in
secret and bemoane their estates, and pray for them, that if it be possible
destruction may be prevented: go in secret and say, it is my husband, or my
wife, or my child, that yields not to the direction of the Word, and therefore
howsoever we may live a while together, yet I know God has decreed to destroy
him and her. Think of this with your selves you that are proud, and say, If I
will not be exhorted, then I shall be destroyed, I cannot avoid it. Oh, me
thinks if every proud spirit, would write this upon the palms of his hands,
and upon the tester of his bed, that he might see it wheresoever he goes; how
would his heart sink within him. When thou go abroad, say, for ought I know
I shall never return home, God has decreed to destroy me. And when thou lie
down think thus, for ought I know I shall never rise more. It is not the word of
man, but of the Almighty. When the Lord would (as it were) frame a path for
destruction, he sends a proud heart. If once the Lord intend to destroy a
People or Nation, he gives them over to pride of heart. The sons of Ely did
not hearken to the voice of their father, because the Lord meant to destroy
them: 1 Samuel 2.25.
he gave them over to proud hearts. Nay the proud Soul is not only the aim
of Gods wrath, but as the Lord determines destruction for him; so, he brings
destruction first upon him. When the Citizens said, We will not have this man
to rule over us, then the King was wroth, and said, Luke 19.4.27.
bring hither those mine enemies, and slay them before me, etc. There was no
delay, nor no mitigation of the punishment to be granted. Oh think of this,
all you proud spirits. Indeed, the Lord will confound all the wicked in the Day
of Judgment, but he will execute even the fiercest of the Vials of his
vengeance against a proud man; and when the Lord shall say, where are those
wretches mine enemies? then the Ministers of God shall come in and say, this
man was a drunkard, and this man an adulterer; Yes (says the Lord) I will
plague them anon, but, where are those mine enemies? those stout-hearted men
and women, that hated to be reformed? let me see those damned and destroyed
for ever. And for ought I know, God has a strange indignation in store for
them. Nay, it shall be so executed upon a proud man, that there shall be no
reclaiming of it, and God will not be persuaded to pity him. Prove. 1.26, 27,
28.
They shall call upon me (says the Text) but I will not answer, they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me. So that, it is no wonder though
a company of rebellious wretches have no comfort upon their death beds, and
though a thousand devils seize upon them, and hurry them down to hell, its no
wonder, I say, cry and call they may, but God will not hear them. Nay, the
Lord will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes; It is
a grief for a man to be in misery, but to be laughed at, that is a plague of
all plagues. But, to have mercy rejoice in the destruction of a man, this makes
the plague out of measure miserable.

If any man say this is false doctrine, and this is too sharp and too keen.
Brethren, we dare do no other, and we can do no less, and you had better
hear of it now while you may prevent it then to hear of it, and feel it
hereafter when there is no remedy. But, here is the maine wound of our
Ministry, you will not stoop nor yield to our Ministry. We speak not in
wrath and anger (as you imagine) but in mercy, we now preach against a proud
heart, that you may be humbled, and find mercy, and so be comforted and saved
for ever. Therefore take your own shame, and the Lord prevail with those
hearts which word and counsel cannot work upon. And the Lord now fit you for
mercy, that you may receive mercy from the Lord. That Is all the hurt we wish
you. Oh, that you would so hear of these plagues that you might never feel
them. The Lord has an old grudge against a proud heart. Go away you proud
hearts, fear and tremble. When you are gone from the congregation, do not say,
What if he say so, we fare well enough yet, and we see none of all these
judgments, and all this wind shakes no corn: no, no, once stoop and come
in, and take the yoke of Christ, and the Lord make it easy. Go in secret and
reason thus, good Lord, have not I only lifted up my self against man like my
self, but against God? and against his ordinances? and has God yet showed me
mercy in sparing of me? and it is yet mercy that I may bow my body, though I
cannot bow my proud heart, oh what mercy is this! You wives, thank God that
yet he has spared your husbands, and that yet they have breath and being
here: pray to God, that they may lay about them for humble hearts, that so they
may find mercy against the evil day. Our God is very merciful, but it is no
contending with him. Did ever any man provoke the Lord and prosper? Come in
therefore, shame your selves, that the Lord may humble you now, and show mercy
to you hereafter.

heaven; I would I had an humble heart and so forth. You must not think that
God will bring you to heaven before you be aware of it, and that a humble heart
will drop into your mouths. The Saints of God have always had it before they
received Christ, and thou must have it too if ever thou will have him,
therefore make it a chief part of thy daily task to get it, And suffer not
thine eyes to sleep, nor thine eye lids to slumber, nor the temples of thy
head to take any rest, before thou have this gracious disposition of spirit.
You see the price, the worth and excellency of this blessed grace, do not now
let this grace lie lay, cast it not into a bye corner, but in all your desires,
covet this, and in all your hunting up and down after commodities, prize this
more then all, and labor to get it above all.

I know one man has his eye upon the world, and another on his pleasures, and
every man says, what shall we eat, and drink, and wherewith shall we be
clothed? but do not thou say, how shall I be rich, or honorable, but how
shall I get this humble heart? What Is that to thy Soul, that thou art rich and
a reprobate, and that thou art honorable and damned. If thou be once humbled,
then thou art past the worst. It is the choicest good, and the chief of thy
desires should be for an humble heart. Now to draw our hearts to this, there
are three considerations that may be seasonable, and serviceable to this end.
And they are these.

First, Consider, that it is possible to have an humble heart.

Secondly, Consider the danger if you have it not, I will not give a rush for
all that you can do without it, though you live Methuselahs days.

Thirdly, Consider the exceeding benefit that will come by this grace.

For the first, 1. Motive.
It is possible for any Soul present (for ought I know or that he knows) to
get an humble heart. This may be a provocation to us, to set upon this duty.
If a man had no hope to get this desire, he would have no heart to use any
means for it. A man had as good sit still, as rise up and fall, as the
Proverb is. But, seeing it is possible, why may not thou, and I, or any man
here get an humble heart? and therefore seek to the Lord for it, and say,
there has been many as proud hearts, and as stout as mine (though I have
been like a devil for my pride) yet they have had this grace, and therefore
(Lord) why may not I have it as well as they? who knows but God may give me
an humble heart too? though my heart be now stout, and stubborn, and
rebellious, yet Lord, I see no command that forbids me not to expect this
mercy, and I see no truth that excludes me, no, the Lord says in his command,
humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. Yea, the Lord has appointed
means for the working of this grace, and has ever blessed those means for
the good of others, and why not me Lord? Lord, have thou blessed these means
to others? and made them stoop and yield, why will thou not bless them to me
too Lord? who knows but God will do it for me, as well as he has done it
for others?

Therefore go thou to God, and say, The truth is (Lord) I confess this
haughty and this rebellious heart of mine will not come down, it is not in
man's power to pull down my proud heart: No, it is not in the power of Angels
to humble a proud heart, Lord, now take this stout heart, and humble it, and
do what thou will with it, did not thou tame the heart of Manasses, that
Witch and bloud-sucker that made the streets of Jerusalem to swim with blood?
did not thou humble him? and did not thou bring down the proud heart of
that sturdy Iaylor? and did not thou tame the heart of proud persecuting
Saul? Did not thou make him come creeping in upon his knees? Lord, thus thou
have done, Lord, humble me too. Thus importune the God of heaven. Nay, press
God with his promise, and with that engagement whereby he has tied himself.
The day of the Lord of Hoasts shall be upon every one that is lifted up, Esa.
2.12.
and that is proud and lofty, (says the text) and he shall be brought low, and
upon all the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the
Oaks of Bashan. That is, upon all mighty, vile, sturdy, and unreasonable men;
and what then? they shall be brought full low, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day. The day of the Lord shall be upon all flesh; press God
with this promise, and entreat the Lord to remember it, and say, Lord make all
those sturdy hearts yield. Oh that this may be the day, and that I may be the
man, and that my heart may be the heart, that thy mercy and grace may only be
admired and wondered at. Thus you see, that God may do as much for you, as he
has done for others; and it is possible to get an humble heart, therefore
labor for it.

Secondly, as it is possible to get an humble heart, 2. Motive.
So, consider, that if you mistake your selves, and fail here, the danger is
wonderful desperate, and fearful, and therefore, use so much more care and
diligence, not to be deceived therein. If you miss here, never look to be
saved nor recovered hereafter. Miss now, and you are undone for ever, its as
much as your souls be worth: as your Humiliation is, so your Faith, so your
Sanctification, and your obedience will be. If that be naught, all will be
naught. It is observed by Philosophers, and Physicians that if there be any
fault in the first disgesture, it cannot be amended in the next, if the
stomach digest the meat ill, the Liver can never make good blood: So a wound
here, can never be amended. If the bottom and foundation of a building, be not
sound and substantial, though the frame be never so neat and handsome, yet
there is no mending of it, it must be all pulled down, and the groundwork made
more sure; and therefore, when men set up some maine pillars to uphold a house,
they dig deep and low, and set them strong: So, if this work of Humiliation
be not deep and low enough, all the frames of a man's profession will fall
down, there is no mending of it. If the foundation of the house be sound,
though the thatch and sparres fly of, there is some help: but if that be
naught, the house will down whatsoever the other be: So, many weaknesses may
be succored, and the heart may be sustained under them all, if this work of
Humiliation be good, but if a man once prove false here, thy faith and
obedience will be naught, and the Spirit of God will never dwell in thee, nor
quicken thee. See what our blessed Savior says, Math. 7.13.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate, etc. This gate, or this entrance into
life, is Humiliation of heart. When the Soul is loosened from, and bids
farewell to sin, and himself, then the gate is opened. And as it is in other
ways; If there be but one way or gate into an house, and the traveller misseth
that gate, he loses all his labor, and must go back again: but if he once
get in at this gate he is safe enough then. So it is here, There is a most
narrow way of Gods Commandments, and there is but one way or gate into this
happiness, it is narrow, and a little gate; and a man must be nothing in his
own eyes, and if you miss this gate, you loose all your labor, and shall
never come to Salvation. If a man could hear and pray all his days, yet, if
his heart be not humbled, he and his profession shall go to hell together. In
Saint Matthew the conclusion is very peremptory; when the Disciples were
contending who should be highest; Christ set a child in the midst of them,
and said, Except you become as little children, Math. 18.3.
you cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. You may do any thing with
Infants, and all that they have to do, is to cry. Unless you have humble
hearts, you cannot enter into heaven. He does not say, You cannot be great
men, or, you cannot go far into heaven, but he says, You cannot enter. So
then, the danger being so great, and the mistaking so full of hazard, and
seeing it is possible to have it, therefore let us use all diligence to make
this work sure.

Thirdly, 3. Motive.
consider the mervailous good that God has promised, and which he will bestow
upon all that are truly humbled. And let all these be as so many cords to draw
us to look for this blessed frame of heart. We have need of all the motives
in the world. I know it is a hard matter for a man to lay down himself, and
his parts and all his privileges in the dust; I say, it is mervailous irksome
and tedious to the nature of a carnal man; but, it will quit all his cost in
the end. When we shall taste of those sweet benefits that come by a humble
heart, and have gotten Jesus Christ and mercy from him, then it will never
repent us that we have spent so many tears, and made so many prayers, and
used so many means to pull down the pride of our hearts; Oh brethren, think
of it. See and consider the admirable benefits, and the exceeding great good
that will come to you thereby. The good things that come by a heart that is
truly humbled, they are specially four, and with those the truth and substance
of whatsoever the heart can crave and desire.

The first, benefit of an humble heart, is this, by this means we come to be
made capable of all those riches of the treasure of wisdom, and grace, and
mercy that are in Christ: and not only of the blessings for a better life, but
of all things in this life so far as they are good for us.

First, we are made capable of all those treasures of wisdom, grace, and
mercy that are in Christ, and for this cause was Christ sent to preach glad
tidings to the meek as you heard before: all the Gospel, and all the glad
tidings of it do belong to an humble soul. And the Prophet Malachy says,
Malac. 3.1.
Behold, I will send my messenger to prepare the way before me, and the Lord
whom you seek shall suddenly come into his Temple. John Baptist was Christ's
harbenger, and he made way for Christ, and when the way was prepared, Christ
came immediately: We are the Temple of the holy Ghost (says the Apostle.) Now,
if the heart be once prepared and humbled, look then immediately for Christ.
Are you not content to have Christ dwell in your hearts? If you will be
humbled, and so prepared, there is neither want of love, nor speed on his part.
This should mervailously lift up the heart of every man, to seek for this
blessed grace. If thou art truly humbled, care not for the love of men, the
love of Christ will satisfy thee. And though thy father and mother cast thee
out of doors, and thy husband tumble thee out of his bed, yet if thou be truly
humbled, Christ will be in stead of father, and husband, and all comforts to
thee. God has but two thrones, and the humble heart is one. So the Text says,
Esa. 57.15.
I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, etc. If the Lord Jesus come to dwell in thy heart (and that he
will do if thou be truly humbled) then certainly he will provide for thee all
needful comforts for this life. See what Zephany says, Zeph. 2.3.
Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be you shall be hid
in the day of the Lords anger. When all things threatened desolation and
destruction, see who they were that had safety promised, only the meek.



seek meekness. The humble Soul may take this to himself as his part and
portion: If there should be desolation amongst us as there is in Bohemia, in
the Palatinate, and in other Countries, the humble Soul shall be hid. When the
mighty tall trees are blown down by strong winds, the little shrubs may be
shaken a little, but they stand still; they are safe and sure, when the mighty
Oaks are either horribly shaken, or pulled up by the roots: So, if ever you will
seek safety and deliverance, seek meekness, and then you shall be hidden.
When the proud heart shall be weltering in his blood, the Lord will provide a
shadow to succor, and to comfort you. If Christ dwell in your hearts, he is
bound to all reparations.

2. Benefit.
Secondly, as Humiliation of heart does estate a man into Christ, and his
merits, and all provision in this kind, so, it gives him the comfort of all
that good which he has in Christ. There are many that have a right to Christ,
and are dear to God, and yet they want much sweet refreshing that they might
have, and as the Proverb is, They never see their own, because they want this
Humiliation of heart in some measure. To be truly humbled is the next way to be
truly comforted. The Lord will look to him that has an humble contrite heart,
Esaias 62.8.
and trembles at his word, that is, an humble Soul, a poor Soul, a very
beggar at the gate of mercy; the Lord will not only know him (for he knows
the wicked too in a general manner) but he will give him such a gracious
look, as shall make his heart dance in his breast; thou poor humbled Soul,
the Lord will give thee a glimpse of his favor when thou art tired in thy
trouble, and when thou look up to heaven, the Lord will look down upon
thee, and will refresh thee with mercy. It is that which God has prepared as a
sweet morsel for his child, he will revive the humble. Though the proud man
shall sit and swelter himself in his trouble, Esaias. 57.15.
yet the Lord will not only be in the house, and heart of an humble man, but
look to him and revive him. It is the condition to which the Lord has
promised consolation, and this Humiliation of heart is the maine terms of
agreement, upon which God has ever showed mercy. Rev. 3.26.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open, I
will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. As when men sup
together and eat in the same dish, it argues a sweet rejoicing in the
familiarity one of another. I know you would feign have much comfort; the Lord
now knocks, if you will but open the door, he will come into your hearts, and
he will bring his own provision with him, even the sweet cordialls of his
grace and comfort, and he will refresh you with those consolations which the
eye of man has not seen, and the ear of man has not heard, etc. only the
Saints of God shall feel them. Every valley shall be filled, Luke 3.5.6.
(says the text) and every hill shall be brought low, and the crooked things
shall be made straight, and then all flesh shall see the salvation of the Lord.
When shall they see it? when those things are done that are there promised.
John Baptist was to make way for Christ, and the Text says, Every valley shall
be filled, that is, every desperate discouraged heart, and every mountain
shall be levelled, that is, every proud heart shall be humbled; and then all
flesh shall see the salvation of God; here is the cause why we find not the
assurance of Gods love that we might and ought to have; there are mighty
mountains of carnal reasonings, and strange mists of coffeehouse between
Christ and the Soul; and these keep of the light of Gods love in Christ,
which else would shine in our faces for our everlasting comfort. Now be
humbled, and throw away all those distempers, and then the Lord Jesus who comes
with healing under his wings will comfort you, and you shall see the salvation
of God. There is a Christ, and comfort in him, if your Souls be humbled, you
shall see it, and find the evidence of it. When the Sun is near setting,
because there is a mountain between us and it, therefore we think it is set
when it is not, whereas if a man were on the top of it, he should see the Sun
clear: So it is with all those mountains of carnal reasonings, they stand
between the Lord Jesus and thy Soul, and that is the reason why thou see not
the light of Gods countenance shining upon thee.

The third benefit of an humble heart. Matthew. 23.12.
Thirdly, we also may have glory in this comfort that we have in Christ; as
our Savior says, Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, but whosoever
humbles himself shall be exalted. He does not say, If such a man and such a
woman humble themselves, but the words are universally to be understood;
whatsoever thou art, be thou humble, and the Lord shall lift thee up. It is
impossible that the exaltation and glory of an humble Soul should be hindered
by men or devils. Let the devil and all his instruments labor to cast shame
and disgrace upon thee; nay, be thy condition never so base and mean in the
worlds account, be thou humbled, and it cannot be hindered, but that the Lord
will exalt thee; the Lord has promised it, and thou being as thou should be,
the Lord will do what he has engaged himself to. The Lord many times for
want of this, leaves men of great parts, and gifts in the lirch: they fret and
are grieved exceedingly, because such a poor man finds acceptance, and is
approved of, and yet no man looks after them; If you know any such, tell them
it is by reason of their pride, they seek their own honor and not Gods, they
are not humbled but seek to exalt themselves, and God will abase them. Let them
fawn and flatter, let them flatter and dissemble never so much, (as most men
do to get honors,) yet God will abase them. And for this cause God blasts one
man's endeavors, and withers another man's gifts, and brings him to shame,
because he is proud; whereas the humble Soul that is content to honor God in
his abasement, the Lord will set up that man in mercy and goodness, Psalm. 25.9.
the Lord will teach the humble in his way. Does the Lord care for any man's
parts or gifts, or for his honor and respect? No, 1 Cor. 1.28.
the Lord has chosen things that are not, that is, things that in the eyes of
the world are accounted as nothing, those has God chosen, to confound the
haughtiness of the hearts of proud men in this kind, See how David answered
Michall when she mocked him, and said, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21.
Oh how glorious was the King of Israel this day, etc. Is not this a goodly
matter for the King to do? See how he answers her, it was before the Lord who
chose me rather then thy father and all his house, and commanded me to be ruler
over his people, and therefore I will play before the Lord, and if this be to
be vile, I will yet be more vile. Thy father was naught, and thou art so too,
and he is gone to his place. The meanest in all the place will honor the
humble heart, but though happily the people may fear a proud man, yet they
will never honor him in their hearts.

The fourth benefit. Math. 18.4.
Fourthly and lastly, we have blessedness in all that appurtaines to an humble
heart. Whosoever humbles himself as a little child, shall be greatest in the
Kingdom of heaven; He does not say, he that is greatest and most lofty may
happily be great, but he that is humble, and trembles at every truth of God, and
every truth prevails with him, and every terror awes him, he shall be
greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. You take it as a disgrace to be reprooved
by a servant, or an inferior, but the humble Soul, takes it whatsoever it is,
and is willing to be reprooved by any; and he that does thus, shall be in the
highest degree of grace here, and shall be greatest in the glory of heaven, and
be lifted up to the highest pinnacle of glory, the wider and deeper a vessel
is, the more liquor it holds; So, Humiliation makes the heart wide and deep:
and as thy Humiliation is, so shall be thy Faith, and thy Sanctification, and
Obedience is answerable, and thy Glory shall be suitable. Now to conclude all.

The conclusion.
Do you consider that it is possible to have an humble heart? do you consider
the danger if you have it not? and do you consider the good that comes by an
humble heart, and do you sit still? as he said in another case. Me thinks
your hearts begin to stir, and say, has the Lord engaged himself to this?
Oh then (Lord) make me humble. Me thinks your countenances say so; The Lord
make me and thee, and all of us humble, that we may have this mercy. Let me
make but this one question to your Consciences, and give me an answer secretly
in your souls; when the Lord shall close up your eyes here, and put an end to
your pilgrimage, would you not be content to dwell with Christ in heaven? which
the Apostle did account his greatest happiness, to be ever with the Lord; we
shall be ever with Christ to comfort us, when we shall be no more with sin,
to vex and trouble us: would not you be content to be with Christ? me thinks
your hearts say, that is the end and upshot of all, that is the end why we live,
and pray, and hear, that we may be ever with him. And do not you meet with
many troubles, while you are members of the Church Militant? I know you have
sometimes distempers without, and troubles without, would you not have comfort
against them all? and what would you give, that Christ would look in, and ask
how your Souls do, and say, thou art my redeemed, and I am thy Redeemer. No,
you know, all flesh desires it. Would you not be content to have some honor in
the Church? and to leave a good name behind you, that the disgraces which
wicked men cast upon you, may not be as a blot upon your names? and when you
shall be no more, and you shall bid adue to friends, and honors, and means;
would you not be blessed, and though you would be content to be the meanest in
the Kingdom of heaven, what would you give to be the greatest in heaven? let
me put a condition to you; get but humble hearts and you have all. Men,
brethren, and fathers; If there be any Soul here, that is content in truth and
sincerity to be humbled, and to be at Gods disposing in all duties to be done,
do not you make too much have to go to heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ will come
down from heaven and dwell in your hearts, he will sit, and lie, and walk
with you; his grace shall refresh you, and his Wisdom shall direct you, and
his Glory shall advance you, and as for happiness, take no thought for that.
Everlasting happiness, and blessedness, looks and waits for every humble
Soul; Come (says happiness) thou that have been vile, and base, and mean
in thine own eyes, and in the contempt of the world, come and be greatest in
the Kingdom of heaven. Brethren, though I cannot prevail with your hearts,
yet let happiness that kneeles down, and prays you to take mercy, let that
(I say) prevail with you. And answer me now, who would not be humbled? If any
man be so regardlesse of his own good: I have something to say to him, that
may make his heart shake within him. But, who would not have the Lord Jesus to
dwell with him? who would not have the Lord Christ by the glory of his grace to
honor, and refresh them? and that he should set a crown of happiness upon
their heads? Me thinks your hearts should earne for it, and say, oh Lord
break my heart, and humble me, that mercy may be my portion for ever. Nay,
me thinks every man should say, as Saint Paul did, I would to God that not
only I, but all my children, and servants, were not only thus as I am, but
also (if it were Gods will) much more humbled, that they might be much more
comforted and refreshed.

The Lord in his mercy grant it. Let all parents labor to have their children
humbled, and every master his servant. This will give them cheering of heart in
that great Day of accounts: when palenesse comes upon your faces, and leanness
to your cheeks, then I know you would leave your children a good portion, then
get their Souls truly humbled. Me thinks it cheeres my heart to consider of
it, if a man could get his own heart, and the hearts of all truly humbled;
when he leaves the world, if he could but say, my wife is humbled, and such a
child, and such a child, is humbled; how comfortably might he go away, and
say, though I go away and leave wife, and children behind me, poor and mean
in the world, yet I leave Christ with them. Brethren, though you care not for
your selves, yet care for your little ones, never leave exhorting of them,
never leave praying for them, and for your selves too, that you and they may
get these humble hearts. When you are gone this will be better for them then
all the beaten gold, or all the honors in the world.

There are many that have heretofore stood out against the Lord, and they would
not come in, nor yield to the conditions of mercy, all those proud, haughty,
and rebellious spirits that have stood out against Gods Truth, his Word, and
Ministers, and have stood out long, some twenty, some thirty, and some forty
years, let all such fear and tremble, and now resolve not to stand it out any
more, but since the Lord offers so kindly to comfort you, and to honor you
upon your Humiliation; Now kiss the Son, be humble, yield to all Gods
commands, take home all truths, and be at Gods disposing. There must be
subjection, or else confusion: will you out-brave the Almighty to his face,
and will you dare damnation? as you love your Souls take heed of it. As proud
as you have been crushed and humbled. Where are all those Nymrods, and
Pharaohs, and all those mighty Monarchs of the World? The Lord has thrown
them flat upon their backs, and they are in hell this day. Therefore be wise,
and be humbled under the mighty hand of the Lord. It is a mighty hand, and
the Lord will be honored, either in your Humiliation and conversion, or else
in your damnation for ever. Let all the evil that is threatened, and all the
good that is offered prevail with your hearts, and though means cannot, yet
the Lord prevail with you, the Lord empty you, that Christ may fill you, the
Lord humble you, that you may enjoy happiness, and peace for ever.

FINIS.

