A Preparation into the way of life, with a direction into the right use of
the Lords Supper: Gathered by William Hopkinson, Preacher of the word of God.

Printed at London, by Robert Waldegraue, for John Harrison the younger, and
Thomas Manne. 1581.

To the right Honorable Sir Henry Sidney, Lord President of her Majesty's
Counsel in the Marches of Wales, Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, and of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel: VV. H. wishes
plenty of those blessings which have promises of this life and the life to
come.
Seeing that it is the duty of every true Christian (Right Honorable) from
the highest to the lowest, according to the measure of the grace that he has
received of the Lord, to reach out him self with continual attendance to
profit every his fellow neighbor, especially in the charge over which the
Lord has set him for the time, so laboring in him self to exceed the
measure of the most, who make much of life without consideration wherefore
they live: I have held my self bounden, by all means that I might, to
endeavor the regard of those over whom the Lord by your Honor has set me.
And seeing that not only the judgment of reason, but continual experience
does teach us, that to make a scholar learned in the tongues, the readyest
way is, to begin with the letters, or well profited in any Science, to set
first a sure foundation in the principles of the same, I have held it the
most ready entrance to make the Lords truth familiar to his people,
especially them of whom I have special knowledge, and over whom peculiar
charge, to lay the groundworke as sure as I might, namely in leading them in
the light of the Lords word, to the true sight of them selves in two
respects, that is, what they are by nature, and what by grace, vvherof if
either be vvanting in the knowledge of Christians, the Lord loses (in
respect of him) his due glory, and the people their salvation. As if the first
be not known, men receive the Lords promises in security, as which number
at this day seems to be great, and if the second be not had, men's hearts are
surprised in the way of death. And as he that buyldeth without a foundation
laid, shall build in the ayrc, so this steddie groundworke surely founded,
and well beat upon, shall give an easy entrance to further buylding by the
word of doctrine and faith, that the Lords Saints by this means may
through his grace not only be gathered, as the Apostle says, but that through
the work of the ministry they may be built up into him which is the head,
even Christ Jesus.

And for this cause I have, as I might, gathered these directions by the Lords
word, for a perpetual testimony to remain with the^, a consent to such as
turn to the Lord, and for a witness to the rest. But especially (next unto
this foundation laid) have I labored to lead them into the right use of the
Lords Supper, a special confirmation of Gods promises in Christ to our
comfort, a matter also miserably neglected and lightly accounted of, to the
lamentable ruin and downfall of many thousand souls, for the Lords
judgments stand inuiolably: whose works does testify that they are
justly in danger of his endless indignation, who profane his mysteries in
unworthiness, of what condition or sort soever they be, for with him is no
respect of persons. In both which I have joined the desire of mine own
discharge, with the peoples safety, and gathered the sum of both into such
a form, as may best agree with their experience: not as refusing or lightly
accouting of the labors of such godly brethren as have much profited the Lords
people in the like way, but as casting in two mytes with the poor VVidow to
the Lotds work, which as it was specially meant for mine own charge, so
have I yielded to the persuasion of certain godly friends, to communicate the
same with the Church of God by suffering it to be published in print, both for
the comfort of the godly, the Lord blessing it: and testify to the Papists
the Lords enemies, that though the variety of speech be diverse, yet that we
hold firmly one and the self same ground and substance of truth, and that
there is not amongst us at all any odds or variety of doctrine, whatsoever
they and their like, shame not unjustly to say against us.

But in this case considering that it must undergo the view as well of foes as
favorers, and that as I am assured of favorable acceptance amongst the
godly, yet as the sun never wants light, the fire heat, or the srostie
vvynter coldness: so have there ever been, and will be, plenty of such who in
stead of well deserving, do please them selves with unjust reproching of
others labors. In this respect, as that I might content my self, in accepting
gladly any just occasion to leave some testimony of a right thankful heart
for your Honors favors many ways vouchsafed me, whereby I hold my self in
the Lord continually bound to your Honorable house in all that I may, and in
consideration vvherof, when other means be vvanting whereby to testify the
same, I shall not cease (I trust) right humbly to commend your estate unto
the Lord, who has promised to hear the just prayers of his servants for
the worthiness of his Christ: So have I been bold to present the same unto
your Honor, such as it is, the rather having just cause to persuade my self
of your honorable acceptance and protection of whatsoever may profit the
Church of God, I have also together delivered to the print, for the care I have
of my brethrens health, a most notable and christian comfortable letter,
written by that notable member of the Church of God in his time, M. Edward
Dering, to a godly christian ge^tlewoma^, by which through the Lords blessing
I must needs confess to have gained much comfort, as also mine hearty desire
and hope is that others shall. So that while the unclean and impure
Atheistes, frozen hearted Papists, temporisers, carnal Gospellers, and
infidels, shall suppe out the measure of Gods judgments to the bottom, we,
well warranted in our Christian estate, soundly directed in the right use of
the Lords mysteries, by the word preserved in the extremities of sin, and
in all, lightened to the right application of the grace of Christ, shall with
invincible constancy run out the course that is set before us, and patiently
wait for our deliverance, even the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom it is written that he shall appear the second time without sin to
salvation, to them that wait for him. Which that we may continually do,
our good God and Father grant unto us by the special direction of his holy
spirit of sanctification and grace, and power plentifully upon your Honor
those blessings which specially concern the advancement of his glory, your
Honors safety both in body and conscience, and the peace of his Church, in
and for his son our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Your Honors most humbly to be always used in the Lord Christ, WILLIAM
HOPKINSON.

A preparation into the way of life: with a direction into the right use of
the Lords Supper.
Question.

How had you your being at the first:

Answer. God created me and all men in Adam, as it is written, The Lord God
made man of the duste of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life,
and man was made a living soul.

Question. Wherefore did God create you?

Ans. To seek his glory, as it is written, Of him, through him, and for him
are all things, to him be glory for ever. Amen.

Qu How will God be glorified?

Ans. According to his will revealed in his word. For it is written: Deuteronomy.
12.32.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed that you do it, thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Josh. 1.7.

Qu. In what estate were you created?

An. Holy and excellent, without sin, in perfect righteousness and holiness
before him, as appears Genesis Let us make man in our image according to our
likeness, Genesis 1.27.
etc.

Qu. How became you subject to so many infirmities?

Ans. By sin and disobedience. As it is written: Because thou haste obeyed
the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee,
Genesis 3.17.
saying: Thou shall not eat of it: cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow
shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life.

Qu. How became you sinful?

An. Adam transgressed the Lords precept in eating the forbidden fruit, lost
his innocence, and brought sin upon him self and all his posterity. As
appears when he had yielded to disobey the Lord. Genesis 3.9.10.
The Lord God called to the man, and said to him, Where art thou? Who said, I
heard thy voice, and was afraid, because I was naked, therefore I hid my
self. Also the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, Genesis 3.23.
to till the earth from whence he was taken. etc.

Qu. Is this sin in every one by nature?

An. Yea in all Adams posterity, none excepted: as it is written, Romans 5.12.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
went over all men, in as much as all men have sinned.

Qu. What is the reward of sin?

An. Death eternal: as it is written, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that continues not in all the words of this law, to do
them. Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10.

Qu. Shall I escape this death by the works of the law?

An. No. For it is written, Romans 8.3.
For that that was impossible to the law, in as much as it was not able because
of the flesh, God sending his own son in the simisitude of sinful flesh
condemned sin in the flesh.

Qu. Since the Law does not instifie us before God, what profit has a
Christian by it?

An. The use of the law. Josh. 1.8.
First it is a way for Gods children to walk in: as it is written, Let not
this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and
night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is written
therein, for then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou
have good success. etc. Deuteronomy. 6.6. Secondly, it teaches man not to trust in
his own innocence. For it is written, We have proved that all both Jews and
Gentiles are under sin. Romans 3.9.
10. Psalm. 14.1.53.4. Thirdly, it pulls down the pride of man's heart, and
humbles him before God: as it is written, We know that whatsoever the law
says, it says it to them which are under the law, that every mouth may be
stopped, To. 3.19.20.
and all the world culpable before God. And by the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified, for by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Fourthly,
it is a scholemaister to Christ. Gal. 3.23.
for it is written, Before faith came we were kept under the law, and shut up
unto the faith that should afterward be revealed, wherefore the law was our
scholemaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith.

Qu. Why should we do good works, sith they do not justify us?

An. First, The right end of works. Ioh. 14.15.
to show our love to God our father, in walking as becomes his children. For
the Lord says, If you love me keep my commandments. Leui. 11.44.19.2.
Secondly, to show our love to our selves, making our election thereby sure unto
our selves. For it is written. Ephesians. 1.3.4.
Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. etc. He has chosen
us in him before the foundation of the world was laid, that we should be holy
and without blame before him in love. 1. Pet. 1.2.2. Pet. 1.10. Thirdly, to
profit our brethren, and glorify the Lord. Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may
glorify your father which is in heaven. 1. Pet. 2.12.

Qu. What works be good, and the contrary. Rom 14.23.
How many things are principally to be considered in good works?

An. Three. First, that they proceed from an heart purified by faith.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Mat. 7.17.18. Secondly, they must be
ruled by the word of God: for it is written, Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he has
prepared for us to walk in. Thirdly, the special end for which they are done
must be the glory of God: 1. Cor. 10.31
for it is written, Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all
to the glory of God. Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.

Qu. What is eternal death?

An. The everlasting curse of God, which contains all the torments that can
be devised both of soul and body: for it is written, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is he that continues not in all the words of this law to do them.
Gal. 3.10.

Qu. By what means shall I escape this death?

An. Only by faith in Christ: as it is written, Romans 3.28.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.
John. 3.13, 36. 5.24. 6.40, 47. 11.25. 20.29, 31. Math. 9.2, Luc. 7.50. Act.
10.43. 16.3. Romans 1.12. Gal. 3.26. Phil. 3.9. Col. 1.23. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 11.6.
1. Pet. 1.9. etc.

Qu. What is a Christian faith?

An. What faith is.
A full persuasion and assurance of mine heart, that whatsoever Christ has
wrought for man's salvation, pertains not only to others, but to me also, and
is furely mine: as it is written, For I am persuaded that neither death for
life, Romans 8.38.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 2. These. 1.7. Heb.
11.1. 1. Job. 3.2.

Qu. Shall all men be saved by Christ?

An. No. None but they only that do in deed believe in him. For it is
written, To whom the death of Christ is profitable.
He that believes in the son has life, and he that believes not in the
son has not life. And, he that believes not is damned already, because he
believes not. John. 5.24. 6.47.

Qu. How do we attain to faith?

An. The holy Ghost works it in our hearts. As Esaias testifies of the
Church, Esa. 54.13.
^aying, they shall be all taught of the Lord. ^ere. 31.33. Romans 12.3. 1. Cor.
2. Ephesians. 2.8, 6.23. Phil. 1.29. 2. These. 1.3.3.2. Heb. 2.2. 1. Job. 5.20. Job.
6.44, 45.

Qu. By what means? The necessity of the words preached.


An. By hearing the word preached: as is written, Faith is by hearing, Romans
10.17.
and hearing by the word of God.

Qu. May not this hearing be as well by reading, as by the preaching of the
word?

An. No. For it is written, How can they hear without a preacher. Romans 10.14.
Gal. 3.2.

Qu. May every one preach that list?

An. Romans 10.15.
No. For it is written, How shall they preach, except the Lord send them.

Qu. What testimony can be had of any whether he be sent of the Lord in this
office, for you know it is an easy matter to pretend a sending?

An. Besides an ordinary calling of the Church wherein he lives, he must of
necessity have Vrim and Thumin, knowledge and holiness, he must be, as it is
written, wise, righteous, holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful word
according to doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholesome
doctrine, Tit. 1.8, 9.
and improve them that say against it. 1. Tim. 3.2.3. 1. Pet. 5.3

Qu. Do you hold it convenient that every minister of the word and
Sacraments be a preacher?

An. Yea especially. For the Lord is the fullness of all wisdom, and sends
only such as by his grace have to dispatch his message, also he sending forth
his Apostles said, go preach the Gospel etc. and to show ye necessity of
preaching, he says to Peter. Feed, feed, feed, Acts, 20.28 1. Cor. 3.5. 1.
Cori. 4.1. 2. Cor. 3.6. Ephe. 3.7. Col. 1.7.1. Tim. 4.6.1. Per. 5.2.

Qu. Do you think it needful to have in every congregation a minister that
is apt to teach?

An. Yea, most needful, for it is written, where there is no preaching, the
people perish. Also the Apostles in the wisdom of the holy ghost (beyond
which we may not presume) ordained such in every Church, Acts. 14.23. Tit.
1.5.
and Paul appointed Titus to do the like.

Qu. Do you not think it sufficient that the people do hear the word preached
once in a year, or in their life. Though they have no continual preacher to
labor in the word amongst them?

An. No, in no case. For as the body can not live with such nourishment, The
great necessity of preaching ministers.
much less the soul without continual comfort from the word of God our
only spiritual food: and there be daily profitings in Gods Church whereto the
Lords ministers must carefully attend. To this effect speaks Paul to Titus,
Tit. 1.5.
saying, For this cause left I thee at Creta, that thou should continue to
redress the things that remain, etc. Also no house is buylt so soon as the
first stone of the foundation is laid, and S. Paul shows the end for
which the Lord does give his faithful servants his ministers into his
Church, namely, not only for the gathering together and for the work of the
ministry, but also for the buylding up the Lords Saints, the edification of
the body of Christ, Ephe. 4.12, 14.15.
that we might be no more children carried about with every wind of doctrine,
but that we might grow up into him which is the head, that is Christ.

Qu. Seeing you think it a matter so greatly needful that there be in every
congregation continually a godly minister apt to teach, let me (I pray you)
heart your judgment by the word of God what is required of the people
concerning them, and the word which they bring unto the^, is it in their
choice whether they will hear their preachers, and any whitte account of them,
or no?

An. No. The peoples duty to their pastors.
For as no Prince or master can bear the rejecting of his Ambassador or
servant sent forth in special message, though to his equals: so neither can
or will the Lord bear the like at our hands who be his vassals. And to this
effect, The Lords ministers must be received.
that his faithful servants his ministers might be comforted against the
unthankfulness of the world, and to set the people out of doubt how he would
have them taken, he says, He that receives you receives me, Mat. 10.40.
and he that receives me receives him that sent me. Also he adds, Luc.
10.16.
He that despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him
that sent me. And to put us out of doubt in what sort he would have us to
receive his servants sent to us for our such singular profit, as the
salvation of our whole soul and body, They must be heard and obeyed.
he does testify unto us in his word, first that we must hear and obey them.
Secondly, that we must nourish them: and thirdly, that we must esteem of them,
and lastly, that we must pray for them. For the first he says by the Apostle
S. Paul, 2. Cor. 2.9.
For this cause did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether you
would be obedient in all things. 2. These. 3.4, 14. Heb. 13.17. For the second,
They must be nourished, and provided for. Gal. 6.6.
it is thus written, Let him that is taught in the word, make him that has
taught him, partaker of al his goods. And also we beseech you brethren, that
you know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you, that you have them in singular love for their works sake. etc.
1. Tim. 5.18. 1. Cor. 9.7, 8, 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12 13. They must be esteemed 1.
Tim. 5.17.
For the third it is written thus: The Elders that rule well are worthy of
double honor, specially they which labor in the word and doctrine. 3. Job.
8. And for the last it is written thus, They must be prayed for of the
faithful. Col. 4.3.
Continue in prayer and watch in the same with thanks giving, praying also
for us, that God may open unto us the door of vtteraunce, to speak the
mystery of Christ, etc. that I may utter it as I ought to speak, etc. And
also, Brethren pray for us, 2. These. 3.1.
that the word of the Lord may have free passage and be glorified. etc.
Ephesians. 6.19.

Qu. I pray you, how are they accounted of before the Lord which do not these
duties, for I think you shall easily find many which profess the Gospel,
and yet do never one of them, but rather the contrary. So that the very
Papists and Infidels receive more readily, obey more willingly, provide for
more sufficiently, esteem more highly, and do all other things more carefully
(as our experience does approve too true) for their popish sacrificers,
idolaters, and devil worshippers, then these do, the true servants and
ministers of Jesus Christ?

An. In the Lords presence they be found to deceive them selves, The state of
such as neglect there duty to the Lords messengers. Mat. 7.21.
whose religion is but in vain words, for that the Lord lives not in them, as
in deed he does not where his glory and kingdom is not cared for. Of whom the
mouth of the Lord has spoken, that they shall never enter into the kingdom
of heaven, and they deserve to perish in extreme famine, that either reject, or
so lightly account of the sp^rituall food of their souls reached unto them of
the Lord by the hands of his Church and ministers, and their judgment
sleeps not, for the Lord him self ^arth, Who soever shall not receive you,
nor hear your words, when you depart out of that house, or out of that
city, shake of the dust of your feet. Mat. 10.14, 15.
Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and
Gomortha in the day of judgment, then for that City. Luc. 10.11, 14, 15.

Qu. Many think them selves in best case when they have a minister that cannot
labor in preaching the word of the Lord amongst them, what do you think of
their estate.

An. Men miserably blind and see it not.
First their estate is most wretched, for that as blind men without guide,
they wander in darkness, for without the word there is no light in our ways.
Psa. 119.105
Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths, and also
both the one and the other be under the judgment of God. Mat. 15.14. The
estate of the people that have an unpreaching minister.
If the blind lead the blind, does they not both fall into the ditche?

Qu. Then it seems that you tie the salvation of the people of necessity ye
to preaching of the Gospel.

An. It is most true, for without the preaching of the Gospel, there is no
ordinary mean to attain to faith, Romans 10.14, ^7.
faith comes by hearing the word of God preached. Without faith we cannot
atteine to Christ. Ioh. 6.40.
He that sees the son and believes in him has everlasting life. etc. With
out Christ is no way to pacify the fathers wrath. Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. And if the
fathers wrath be not pacified there is no hope of life, Psa. 2.12.
if his wrath be kindled yea but a little we shall perish in the way. The
necessity of preaching the Gospel, which men make light of.
So that I conclude, that without the preaching of the Gospel it is not
possible to be saved.

Qu. Do you include, infants, fools, and deaf folks within this necessity?

An. No, The wisdom of Gods spirit does lead us in the straight ways of the
Lord.
nor bind the Lord unto the mean, but in all chinges confess him to be
free, but I say, that for others, the Lord has given us no ordinary mean but
the preaching of his Gospel. Mat. 28.19.
Go preach the Gospel to all creatures, who soever believes and is baptized
shall be saved. etc. Mar. 16.13.

Qu. There be that think, that if a man have learning, Selfeliking, ignorance,
and reason that is corrupt, blindes many a one.
especially in the sciences and tongues, he can not be ignorant of the way of
life, and so will often reason for others, and persuade them selves, the one
say such be learned, they must needs know the truth, The wisdom of carnal
men is against God. The Lord when he will does use the mean, but he is not
bound to it
and the other contemn preaching, as if they were too wise for it?

An. Albeit it pleases the Lord to use the civil knowledge whereof you
speak for the furtherance of his gospel, when one where he sees it
convenient, yet is it no sure consequent that where these things he, there
also is the sure knowledge of the Lords truth, for in Ephesus were many
excellently learned in civil knowledge, As Pithagoras, Parmenides, Zeno,
Democritus, and such like. Ephesians. 1.13.
and yet wholly ignorant of the way of the Lord, and Saint Paul proves
their faith in Christ, to have commed only from the preaching of the Gospel
thorough the power of the spirit of Christ, saying. In whom ye also trusted,
after that you heard the word of truth, even the gospel of your salvation.

Qu. Then, as I take it, also you would that in teaching there should only be
used the testimony of the word it self. The manner of such as seek more to
please their cares then to profit their soul.
And yet many that go for wise men, do look that the preachers should feed
them with profane stories, and sayings of men. Also some like to spend much
time in fables, and other needless matter? How think you of it?

An. I grant you that such things may carry a wily show to the carnal man,
but in all these and a thousand more of like sort, stands not the faith of
Gods chosen, for it only rests in the word of truth, which Saint Paul
testifies in this respect, Esai. 55.11.
to be the Gospel, and when these be at the last, yet want the warrant of the
spirit to testify for them that they be the word of truth. Again, the Lord
blesses his own mean whose gospel has a blessing in it self, and never
returns empty, which all these earthly out shows want, though in some sort
ye auouching of some have their use, namely to confute them that trust in the^,
Act. 17.28. Tit. 5.1.12. 2. Tim 4.2.
as S. Paul does in the like, also they are commanded to preach the word, Mat.
28.20. 1. Pet. 4.11. Iho. 9.10.

Qu. I see then that the only way to justify us before God, is through faith
in Jesus Christ, which you prove that God works in our hearts by the
preaching of his Gospel. But by what means I pray you is this justifying
faith continued and increased in us?

An. By the self same preaching of the word. For as it is written, As newborn babes, 1. Pet. 2.2.
desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby. 1. Pet. 2.5.
1. Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.13, 14. Also the holy Sacraments are ordained for us of
the Lord to this end, The Lord by his word and Sacraments shows his
singular care for the sauegarde of his Church. Gal. 3.27.
namely to confirm the promises of his Gospel unto us, and to confirm our
faith in the same. As appears, All ye which are baptized into Jesus Christ,
have put on Christ. Act. 2.38. And, Ioh. 6.51.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever. etc.

Qu. Are there no necessary helps unto these for the increase and
confirmation of our faith?

An. Yes, and those that can not be wanting without great prejudice to the
Church of God: namely true, earnest and often prayer, and discipline according
to the word. As, for the first it is said, Ask and have, and whatsoever you
ask of the father in my name he will give it you. And for the second it is
written thus, Cor. 5 3, 4, 5.
I verily as absent in body but present in spiriie, have determined already as
though I were present, ye he that has thus done this thing, when you are
gathered together and my spirit in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
such a one, I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered to
Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus.

Qu. What is a Sacrament?

An. A Sacrament what it is.
An outward sign ordained of God for the greater assurance and strength of our
faith, being unto us sure pledges of those venesites of our salvation which we
receive in Christ to be ours. For it is written, Genesis 17.11.
Ye shall circumcize the foreskinne of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of
the covenant between me and you. Exo. 12.3, 4, 5, 6. Romans 4.11.

Qu. How many Sacraments be there in the church of Christ?

An. Two, baptism, and the Lords supper, as appears. Brethren I would not
have you ignorant, ye al your fathers were under the cloud, and al passed
through the sea, and were al baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea,
1. Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
and did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and did all drink of the same
spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and
the rock was Christ.

Qu. Who shall minister the Sacraments?

An. He in whose mouth the Lord has put his word for the people, as it is
written, Go teach al nations, baptising them in the name of the father, and the
son, and the holy ghost. Christ gave this commandment, neither to midwiues
(as they call them) or any other women, or to private men, but to those whom he
had chosen, his Apostles, and had given them warrant, and ability to teach,
Mat. 28.19. The Sacraments ministered where the word is preached.
whereby appears that the word preached and Sacraments must go together. Act.
10.47. Act. 16.32.33.

Qu. Where must it be ministered?

An. Where the word is preached, and because this Sacrament comprehends an
holy and solemn introduction, or admittance into the Church of God, Private
places be not fit for public actions. Mat. 28.19.
and is a testimony of our heavenly deliverance, it is not lawful to
minister it, but in the asse^bly of the faithful, as appears in that is said,
Go preach and baptize. etc. and. Mar. 16.15.16.

Qu. To ye strengthening of our faith, how many things do we principally learn
by baptism.

An. Especially two, First as water washes away the filthiness of the flesh: so
the blood of Christ does wash away sin from my soul, as is written. Mar. 1.4.
John did baptize in the wilderues, and preach the baptism of amendment of
life, for remission of sins Secondly I am taught to rise to newness of life.
For it is written, we are buried then with him by baptism into his death, Romans
6.4.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of his father, so
we also should walk in newness of life.

Qu. Wherein is the faith strenthened in the use of the Lords supper?

An. First as by the hand and mouth my body receives bread and wine, so by
faith, my soul feeds of the body and blod of Christ. Jesus said unto them,
Ioh. 6.35.
I am that bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirste. Secondly, all the benefits of Christ's
passion, and his righteousness, are as surely sealed to be mine, as I am sure my
body has received the bread and wine, and as if I my self had wrought them.
For it is written, He was delivered to death for our sins: Romans 4.25.
and is risen again for our justification.

Qu. Who shall be admitted to the Lords Supper?

An. A Christian choice, in admitting to the Lords Supper.
Only they that can do those things that are required of them that be partakers
thereof.

Qu. Children, fools, mad folks, and the ignorant, must not be admitted, for
they can not do this.
What must they do that be partakers thereof?

An. Examine them selves: as it is written, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat, etc.

Qu. Must every one that receives the Lords Supper, of necessity examine him
self?

An. 1. Cor. 11.28.
He must of necessity, or else he shall be guilty of a most horrible sin.

Qu, Of what sin shall he be guilty?

An. Unworthy receivers equal with the murthere^s of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.27
Of the death of Christ, and shall be equal with those murderers that slew
him: for it is written, Who soever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of
the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Qu. What is the reward of that sin?

An. Gods standing vengeance and eternal death, for it is written, he that
eats and drinks vnwortily, 1. Cor. 11.
eareth and drinks his own damnation.

Qu. Seeing the necessity of this examination is so great, as may appear by
the judgments of God, for ye want of it, Ignorant ministers and careless
people shift sin betwixt them.
which yet is greatly to be feared that very few do rightly consider of. How
many things must they especially seek for in them selves that do communicate?

An. Three. Three things to be especially considered in examination.
Namely their estate before God: their right knowledge concerning the
Sacrament: and their estate toward their brethren, or before the Church.

Qu. In seeking their estate before God what must they do?

An. First seek their estate by nature according to the law rightly
understood, where they shall find themselves in the wrath of God, as S. Paul
testifies to the Ephesians, saying, Ephesians. 2.3.
We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.

Qu. Whereto serves this, in searching their estate before God? In all our
actions we mus^^ especially ca^e for the glory of God.


An. First for the glory of God, which is not duly considered, where our
condemnation is not known. For it is written, Who cares for the Physician
that is not sick. We must not shrink to look into our sins, seem they
never so horrible, since the sight of them serves to show unto us more plainly,
the greatness of the love of God toward us, in Christ.
Secondly, for their own greater comfort, for the more they see their
condemnation by nature, so much more appears the love of God to have
abounded toward them in their deliverance by grace in Christ. As it is
written, So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son.

Qu. Then as you would have the children of God to look diligently into their
natural condemnation that is by the law, which adiudgeth every one guyltie of
eternal death that continues not in such absolute and pure obedience as the
law requires, so you would not that they should stay there?

An. We behold our sins but the better to see the grace of Christ.
No in no case for then were there no hope of deliverance, for until we atteine
to him that has conquered the law, the law still reigns over us unto death,
as it is written, whatsoever the law says, it says it to them that are under
the law. etc. which no Christian is, for Christ is not under the law.

Qu. Wherein stands the deliverance of Gods chosen from his condemnation,
that is by the law.

An. Not in the works of the Law, nor in any child of man, but only in the
free grace of God through Jesus Christ, as it is written. Romans 7.24.25.
Oh wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death. I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Qu. What is the mean of our attayning to this righteousness of Christ?

An. Faith in him: as it is written, This is the will of him that sent me, Ioh.
6.40.
that whosoever sees the son and believes in him, has everlasting life,
etc.

Qu. I remember you said, that this faith was the peculier work of the spirit
of Christ, and his ordinary mean to be only the preaching of the Gospel, but
I pray you whereupon must this faith be stayde or grounded? for a house without
a fountation will not long continue.

An. Upon the free promises of Christ. A conscience feared with the sight of
Gods judgments for sin, must not deal with the conditional promises.


Qu. Why say you, free promises?

An. Because in the gospel are promises with condition of our doing, or
perfourming which appertain to the Law.

Qu. What is the trial whether we have this faith or no? for as it is easy to
say that we have it, so are there very few or none that do not say so.

An. We must by the effects learn to know the cause which woorketh them. The
tree is known by his fruits.
This iustifiyng faith is a peculier work of the Spirit of Christ, who
lurketh no^, but renews the heart, as Christ testified to Nichodemus, Ioh.
3.3.
saying. Except a man be borne again, he can not see the kingdom of God.

He works in us first, He does not rightly hate others sins, that loves his
own. Romans 7.23.
an hatred and detestation of sin in all men, but especially in our selves.
As it is written. I see an other law in my members rebelling against the law
of my mind etc. Secondly it makes us to have our whole delight and joy The
Lords vvayes are grievous to our corruption. Romans 5.1, 2.
in those things which be agreeable to the will of God, as it is written,
being justified by faith, we have peace with God thorough Jesus Christ our
Lord, by whom also we have access into this grace wherein we stand, and
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. etc.

Thirdly it frames our lives in obedience to the word: as, There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus which walk not after the
flesh, Romans 8.1.
but after the spirit.

And fourthly it works effectually in Their imaginations are vain, who
hold their hope in huggermugger, and profess it not in the sight of men. Ioh.
15.5.
us that we express the same in our lives and conuersations: as it is written.
I am the vine and ye the vranches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit etc. Mat. 7.18. James. 2.17.

Qu. Now concerning the second part of this examination which apperteineth
the supper it self: I pray you what is the Lords supper?.

An. The Lords Supper what it is.
It is a ceremony instituted by Christ to confirm and manifest our society
and communion in his body and blood, until he come to indgement, as appears.
He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and gave to them
saying. This is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me.
Mat. 26.26, 27, 28.
Likewise also he took the cup, saying. This cup is the new testament in my
blood which is shed for you. etc. Mar. 14.27.

And as often as thou shall eat this bread and drink of this cup thou shall
show the Lords death till he come. 1. Cor. 11.26


Qu. How many things are to be considered in the supper?

An. The author, the water, and the end.

Qu. Who is the author of it?

An. The Lord Jesus Christ him self, as appears Mat. 26.26. Mat 14.27. Luke
22. etc.

Qu. What things are we taught by that knowledge, namely that Christ is the
author of it.

An. By the majesty and wisoome of the author is signified unto us, the
excellency and necessity of the thing.

Qu. Where must it be ministered?.

An. In the assembly of the faithful, where the word is preached, for it is a
public action or deamed for the Church as may appear. 1. Cor. 11.17.18.20.
Now in this that I declare, I pray you not, that you come together not with
profit but with hurt. Also when you come together into one place. etc.

Qu. How many persons are to be considered in this action?

An. Two. The pastor, and the people.

Qu. What is to be considered of both?

An. In the pastor or minister, is required, not only that he be able, but
that he do preach the word of the Lord before unto the people, Mat. 26.24.
for Christ first preached to them of his death, and the indgement of God upon
the wicked. etc. And the Apostles also did the like, as appears Act. 2.42.
and Act. 20.7. Also in the people, that they examine them selves. For when
Christ spoke unto them of the wicked fact of Judas, every one entered into his
self, and said, Master is it I? Mat. 26.25.


Qu. What is needful for every one that is willing to receive the Sacrament
aright, to consider of?

An. When in examining him self, he come to consider of the thing, and so to
deal with the word of the Lord, he is especial to beware of wrong meaning,
VVrong taking the word is cause of much mischief.
and false gloses of the word, wherein as we shall so escape two dangerous
extremities about this Sacrament, so are we well warned by a sorrowful
experience of Adam, as may appear Genesis 2.17. Genesis 3.3, 4, 5.

Qu. Which are the two extremities that may by this herdefull avoiding of
false and wrong meaning of the word be escaped?

An. Transubstantiation of the Papists, and such like: and the vile contempt
that Epicures, Atheistes, carnal Gospellers, and many ignorant, do to it.

Qu. In many places to this day (for want of the Lords good means to make the
word familiar to them, and to bring the people in obedience to be instructed
in the ways of the Lord) you shall hear many say, Those that fear the Lord
see the truth of this to their grief.
that they look to receive Christ by the act of receiving the outward signs:
and some be yet so ignorant, that if you ask them what they think so to
receive, they will answer, Their maker. I pray you what think you of it?

An. Romans 8.9.
First you know it is written, that who so has not the spirit of Christ, is
none of his. So that he that brings not Christ, or rather is not brought of
Christ to the Sacrament, may rather assure him self of the devil and
damnation, then to apply Christ and his merits to him, by the act without
faith, Mat. 26.47, 48.
as may well be seen in Judas. etc.

Qu. What say you to the state of such poor souls, as first be ignorant of
all these: secondly, have no ordinatie mean of further knowledge: and thirdly,
be straightly tied upon much bodily peril to receive it by a day. And what
hold you best for them to do?

An. First, if the Lord have set their aboade where his countenance, which is
comfortably showed by the Gospel preached and Sacraments rightly miuistred,
is not to be leene, wherein alone stands their knowledge and faith, they are
to secke to the Arc, where it is, 2. Sam. 6.11.
even to Obed Edoms house, and to hear what the Lord says to them, all
excuses set apart, Psalm. 27.8.
Seek ye my face. And concerning the rest, it is good not to run into the
danger threatened of the Lord, nor to touch the way that leads to so great
peril, before they shall have learned the Lords truth.

Qu. Whereas you said that this Sacrament must be ministered where the word is
preached, and showed cause why. I pray you, what if some one that lies at the
point of death, should desire that the minister should come to deliver him this
Sacrament, and has there one or two of his neighbors or others that will
receive it with him for company, because there must be more then one, yet that
the Papists think will serve, do you not think it good that he have it?

An. What I think it matereth not much, except my thoughts be stayed upon
the word of God rightly understood. The best thoughts of the heart of man are
vain if they want the vvarrant of Gods word. Prou. 2.1.
For all the thoughts of the heart of man are vain, and will casily vanishe
as the wind, except they be strengthened by the Lords truth, which sith it
alone must direct us in all our actions, much more in these of so great
importance. For it is written, My son, if thou will receive my words, and
hide my commandments within thee, etc. Then shall thou understand
righteousness, Pro. 2.9.
judgment, equity, and every good path. 1. Cor. 11.31. Romans 14.23. but as
for the matter of your demand it should seem that whosoever in such sort
desires the Sacrament, does neither rightly consider him self the thing he
desires, nor the end why it was ordained: and therefore needs more
instruction and information of the Lord, then the thing it self. And thus to
minister the Sacrament, causes many times the poor sick party to put his
hope and confidence in the external fact and receiving of the Sacrament, and
never to think him self sufficiently prepared to death, but when he has
received the external sign. Also no part of the Pascall Lamb was brought to
the sick, in the eating whereof, and celebrating of the Passecuer was only
regarded the Lords ordinance, whereunto was nothing added or left out, and it
was not done of any in prinate, but when the people did it together. As it is
written, Exodus 2.6.
All the multitude of the congregation shall keep it at even, etc. Number. 9.4.5.

Qu. I pray you what is the cause, why you would the sacraments not only to
be ministered where the word is preached, but when the word is preached.

An. First that we may hold proportion with the Lords people in celebrating
the the Passover, Exodus 12.6. Number. 9.5, 4.
who held them selves strait ly to all that which they had received of the
Lord. Also to glorify the Lord in yielding obedience to his word. Who said
go preach and baptize, Mat. 28.19. Mat. 26.20.
and in the institution of this sacrament he him self did the like Mark.
14.18. Luke 22.14. John. 13.21. Also the sacraments are to the church of
Christ, as seals of his promise, and what profits a seal without it be
annexed to a grant.

Qu. Do you not think it suffiseth in this behalf if the word be preached
half a year or more, or less before, and not at the same time, for whereas
you spoke of the seal to be only in his use, when it is joined to the
promise, you know that men make grantes, and seal them afterward.

An. Your reason of the vsages of men which make graunts and seal them
afterward, if it prove any thing it should seem to prove this, that the
promise may better be for a time without the seal, then the seal without the
promise, yet you know that no man will seal a grant, but at the time of
sealing, he will hear the grant, and the meaning of every particular made
plain to all that have interest or right in that action. Also the Apostles who
should be our best president in this case, next to the Lord himself, held
them selves straightly to that which they had received of the Lord, and have
not sundred those things which the Lord has joined together, as it is
written. Act. 20.7.
The disciples being gathered together to break bread, Paul preached unto
them. etc. Acts. 2.41. Acts. 8.12. Acts. 9.17.18. Act. 10.34. Act. 16.15.32.33.

Qu. What inconvenience suppose you, may follow of the Sacraments ministered
without the word preached?

An. Contempt of the Lord, and an opipion of justifying in the act, which is
common with papists, and unbelievers, and for the most part those that be
ignorant.

Qu. The papists say that in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, after the words
(of confirmation as they call them) be spoken, there remains no more bread
but the very body of Christ, A perilous proof of wrong meaning to the
word.
reallie and naturally and they say they have the word to prove it, namely,
the words of our Savior Christ to his disciples saying. This is my body. What
think you of it?

An. The Papists and unbelievers in saying that these words of our Savior are
of power to change the nature of the bread, and in the very pronunciation to
make the body of Christ, forget them selves, and in the enteraunce of their
cause commit a foul oversight. For Christ in saying, this is my body, proves
it to be his body in such sort as he meant it before the words be spoken, and
says not that after the words spoken it should be his body, which they must
confess, or else they will be found to misname the thing, and call bread flesh,
which I think they will not lay unto Christ's charge, who said, it is my
body, not, it shall be my body, or is made my body by the words that I speak.

Qu. In deed as you say, the words do plainly import that it is his body
before in such sort as he meant it (in whose mouth is no guile) This is my body.
Eut I pray you, may this their false iugling be made to appear by the word,
in any such sort as their nakedness may be seen to the simple. For as
strumpets and brothels ofttimes pretend great show of honesty, so do the
Papists and their friends pretend great matter for the mainteinaunce of
this, and set a notable face on it, and I perceive that since they mean still
to dwell in the dregs of Romish idolatry, it does much stand them upon to
lie apace for the holding up of this cursed untruth. For it is the chiefest
prop of all the rest, for away with that, and down goes their priesthood,
who, (they say) have great skill and singular dexterity to make the Lords
body when they lift?

An. There be sufficient proofs in the word (the best witness) to all them
that have not hardened their hearts and faces against the truth, as appears
that the Papists have, for it may be truly avouched of them that is written,
The deaf adder stops her ear, and will not hear the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely. And albeit I have small hope to profit them to
amendment, yet for their sakes that may be snared with their subtilties, and
to help them to one witness more of the Lords undoubted truth to their deeper
judgment, I will here set down a few, wherein I trust their falsehood shall
somewhat be seen to all that are not blind of purpose.

First, Transubstantiation proves an impossibility.
the transubstantiation which they so strain after, teaches an impossible
thing, namely the breaking of the body of Christ, for they say it is the very
natural body, and the word adds breaking unto it. So that if it be (as they
seem not unjustly to say) the very natural body of Christ, then is Christ's
body and bones broken in the celebration of the Supper, so that he is worse
used amongst his dearest friends, then he was at the hands of his greatest
enemies. For the Scripture witnesses that they brake not a bone of him. Io
19.33, 36
Also this breaking that the Apostle speaks of, does prove it to be bread
after ye words spoken, for breaking has respect to a substance, for no
accident can be broken: but there we see the accidents of the bread, as the
show and taste, and the Apostle adds breaking. Therefore it must needs be
the same after that it was before, namely bread.

Secondly, it overthrows the truth of Christ's body, for to say that the
bread is become the very natural body of Christ that was borne of the virgin,
is to say that he is in the flesh in many places at once, and it mainteineth
the error of Martion, It proves Christ's body to be phantasticali.
which said that Christ had but a fantastical body: and also the error of
Entiches, which confounded ye two natures in Christ.

Thirdly, it destroys our faith, as may appear by that definition of faith
given by the holy Ghost. Heb. 11.1. It destroys our faith.
Faith is the ground of things that are hoped for and the evidence of things
which are not seen. But if there be the natural body of Christ under the
form of bread as they say, then it can not be denied but we see it, for they
say it is not bread that we see, but ye body of Christ, The Papists under a
(...) show of (...) deliver death.
therefore this teaches that we can have no faith in this action, and if we do
it not in faith, all that we do therein is sin: as it is written, Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin.

Fourthly, It is contrary to the word of God.
it is contrary to the word of God in other places, and gives a private sense
to that place, which S. Peter says the word of God can not beace, for he says
that there is no private interpretation in the word. And it is restefied in
the word, Act. 3.
that the heavens must receive him until the time of there storing of all
things. And Christ him self says, If they shall say unto you, Lo here is
Christ, or there is Christ, believe them not.

Fifthly, It is against the articles of our faith.
it discenteth from the articles of our faith, which say, He assended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father, from whence he shall
come to judge the quick and the dead.

Sixthly it destroseth the institution of the Lords supper, It denies the
continuance of the Lords Supper.
which was commanded to be continued and used until the Lord him self should
come. If now therefore, he be really present in the body of his flesh, then
must the supper cease.

And lastly, It is against the truth of the word of God. Mat. 26.20.
it overthrows the truth of Christ's words, for he bid them do it in
remembrance of him, now a remembrance and the thing remembered be not one, so
that if Christ be really and corporally present in the Sacrament, the
remembrance is ceased, for the thing remembrance presents it self.

Also if the words and the thing mente by the words be one, then is the cup
and not the wine in the cup the testamente in Christ's blood, Luc. 22.20.
for it is written. This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed
for you. John. 13.18.

Also if the bread be turned into the natural body of Christ, Thus they
justify the wicked, and condemn the innocent.
then the wicked eat his flesh and drink his blood, but the wicked do not eat
the flesh of Christ or drink his blood, therefore it is not transubstantiate.

Qu. Why the wicked do eat the flesh of Christ, do they not?

An. No, for then should they have eternal life, as it is written, John. 6.54.
Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, etc.

Also it is bread after the words be spoken.

Qu. Now prove you that?

An. The Apostle calls it bread both before and after, 1. Cor. 11.27.
and therefore not the natural body of Christ.

Qu. They will say he calls it bread after because it was before, as Simon
the leaper and Naaman were called leapers when they were cleansed, because they
had been leprouse, Exodus 7.12,
And Moses his rod being turned into a serpent was called still a rod.

An. In these was a plain show to the senses that they were changed, but in
this it is not so, but especially ye Apostle puttes it out of doubt, adding
breaking to it, which can not agree with the body of Christ.

Also if the bread and wine be transubstantiate, and turned into the body and
blood of Christ, then was it transubstantiate at his last supper, but it was
not transubstantiation at his last supper, therefore there is no such change of
the bread and wine as they immagine.

Qu. Why was it not transubstantiate at his last supper?

An. No, for then should Christ's natural body which sat at the table, have
been also at one instant in their mouths, so that it must needs have followed
that he either had two bodies or else that his body was fantastical, and not
a true body, which can be but in one place at ouce.

Qu. But they will say that a glorified body may be every where, and
therefore both at the table and in their mouths at one instant.

An. Besides that to say that Christ glorified body may be every where, is to
speak an intolerable untruth, for the holy Ghost says, concerning his body
which he took of the virgin, he assended into heaven, and sits on the right
hand of God and from thence shall he come etc. so, if his body was not
glorified till he rose again (which I trust they will grant) then was it not
glorified at his last supper, and consequently not at the table and in their
mouths by their own reason.

Also Christ is testified to be like his brethren in all things, Heb. 2.17.
whereby we are put in some experience (in that his body was like ours, in all
things except sin, and our bodies will not be forced into such a straight
withal their coniuringes, as to be closed in a piece of bread) that Christ's
body is not changed in such sort as they imagine.

Qu. What say you to the ministering of the Lords Supper under one kind, and of
keeping the Lords cup from the people?

An. Christ did minister it in both, Once decline from the word, and there is
no stay in falling.
whose institution it is not lawful for any man to alter.

Qu. Some say, that the Church upon good consideration may alter what they
will, and as they see cause, in Rites, Ceremontes, and Sacraments. Christ's
Church is his spouse, and is obedient to the word, but the church of Rome is
a strumpet, and will rule the word.


An. The Institution of this Sacrament stands upon the order, example, and
commandment of Christ: for first be divided the bread severally from the cup,
and the cup severally from the bread. Secondly, in this he gave us example to
do the same unto the end of the world. Thirdly, besides this order taken and
example left, he added also an express commandment, saying, Do this, drink
ye all of this. Against this order, example, and commandment of the Gospel,
no Church nor counsel of man or Angel has any power or authority to
change or alter, for it is written, Gal. 1.8, 9.
If any bring unto you any other doctrine besides that which you have received,
hold him accursed.

Qu. They say further, why may not the Church as well alter the form of this
Sacrament, as the Apostles did the form of Baptism, where S. Peter says, Let
every one be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Acts. 2.38.
etc.

An. That Scripture, nor any other, proves that the Apostles used this form
of baptising, I baptize thee in the name of Christ: but they used many times
this manner of speech, to be baptized in the name of Christ, not as expressing
thereby the formable words of baptising, but as meaning that they would have
them to become members of Christ, and to be baptized as Christians, entering
into his baptism, and not only into the baptism of John: and therefore
although the Apostles thus spoke, yet notwithstanding when they baptized any
them selves, they used doubtless the form prescribed of Christ, and none
other.

Qu. What do the faithful receive in the Lords Supper then, more then only
bread and wine?

An. For our resolution in this, Contemners of the Lords mysteries profane
his truth.
we must have respect unto the mind of Christ, which is best known by his
words, who says, This is my body. Which words of Christ be most true: and
least we should be like unto strumpets, which only look to the gystes, and
never regard the mind of the giver, in a certain assurance of the undoubted
truth of the words of the Lord, I couclude that as to the outward senses it is
bread and wine, so to the soul, being received in faith, it is the body and
blood of Christ. Baptism is not only a sign of washing away of our sins,
but is, in a spiritual manner, a very washing and cleasing from sin. Ananias
said to Paul, Arise and wash away thy sins. Acts. 22.16.
So the supper is called a pertaking of the Lords body, and not a sign of the
pertaking of the Lords body.

Qu. Sith the body of Christ is in heaven as the word does witness, and we
in the earth as experience does prove, how can we communicate with his body
and blood?

An. Reason is a beast in Gods causes.
In deed to our carnal reason it is an absurd thing, and therefore the
Papists and unbelievers measuring the Lords ways by their corruption, on the
one side have blindly imagined their transubstantiation, and the Epicures and
such like, in the like measure think of the Lords mysteries profanely, as
namely in this, that in the Lords Supper is only bare bread and wine. Contrary
to both which I conclude, that supernaturally and spiritually by faith holding
fast the truth of the Lords promise, we communicate with, and are made
pertakers of the body and blood of Christ. And albeit in deed the body of
Christ is so far from our eyes and senses, and therefore from the place where
we celebrate the Supper concerning his bodily presence, as heaven is from the
earth: in so much as this action is heavenly, and our faith ascends thither,
that it may most effectual apprehende Christ, in this respect whosoever does
not grant that the flesh of Christ is most effectually present in the Supper,
makes boyde the Supper of the Lord, for Christ says, This is my body which
is given for you, Mat. 26.26.
This is my blood which is shed for you. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 10. which
words can not be restrained to the effects.

Qu. There be that think that whereas Christ then speaks of his body he,
means not his natural body, but his mistical body.

An. There can be nothing more absurd there and foolish then that, for we our
selves are the mystical body, whereof Christ is the head, and therefore
nothing can be spoken more without sense, then that we should be commanded to
eat the mystical body of Christ which was given for us, that is, that we
should eat our selves given for our selves. Also what shall be said when we
come to speak of the blood, for the Church is not called the mystical blood
of Christ. That blind imagination, therefore euerthroweth it self.

Qu. Does not the eating of the very body and drinking of the very blood of
Christ which you speak of, prove his body to be fantastical (that is, not a
true body in deed, but a body by immagination) because that many do eat it.

An. In eating the body of Christ, we must distinguish between the
spiritual eating which the Church of God uses in faith, and the carnal
eating which they that hold transubstantiation and consubstantiation do
imagine.

Qu. Christ says. The words that I speak are spirit and life, the flesh
profits nothing, it is the spirit ye quickens. How say you then, that we
must eat the very body of Christ and drink his blood?

An. The flesh of Christ profits not being eaten carnally or with the
mouth, which kind of eating the Capernites did, and the Papists do fancy,
who, because they beheld nothing in Christ more then in other men, they were
to be admonished, that the flesh of Christ was, and is to be eaten spiritually
by faith, and not to be received with the teeth.

And further, the word, eating, is not properly but by translation, and
proportion of speech, What Is me^t by this word eat, in the institution, and
use of the Lords supper.
applied to the spiritual receiving, and by a sacramental kind of speakking,
whereby that which is proper to the signs is transferred to the thing
signified. Therefore when we speak of spiritual eating, we are to understand
that this word eating, signifies nothing else, but by faith to apprehe^d, or
to join it unto our selves.

There be two euilles about the Sacrament carefully to be avoided, and we are
also taught that wisdom by the holy ghost. For least we should with the
Papists think Christ's body present, Transubstantration etc. and contempt
in or with the bread really, naturally, carnally to be received with our
bodily mothes (where there is no other presence of Christ's body then
spirituallie, and to faith in many places he keeps still the name of bread.
And least we should make to light of it, 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 11.
accounpting it but a bare sign and no better then common bread. The holy
Ghost calls it Chrstes body.

Qu. Then you seem to desire ye the Sacraments of the Lord, should be used
with all due reverence do, you not?

An. In any wise and such as fear and love the Lord, will (I am sure)
willingly condescend thereto. And to that end I wish that the Sacrament of the
Lords supper should be esteemed and called of Christians after Christ's
words, as diverse of the fathers esteemed the Sacraments after Christ's words,
and not after the outward appearaunce, as in the supper the bread Christ's
body, and the wine Christ's blood rather then other ways. Not ye I thereby
mean any other presence of Christ's body then a presence of grace, a presence
to faith a presence spiritually, not carnally, really, and naturally as the
papists do mean, for in such sort Christ's body is only in heaven, whither
our faith ascends, in the use of the Sacrament and receives whole Christ
accordingly.

Qu. Yea, but to call the Sacrament on that sort, is to give occasion of
Idolatry to the people, which will take the outward signs which they see,
simply for Christ's body, as we have too much experience already. Therefore I
take it, it were better and less dangerous to call it bread.

An. In deed great idolatry is committed in and about this Sacrament,
therefore men ought to be as beedefull as they can to avoid occasioning it, or
doing any thing that may confirm it. But in as much as the holy Ghost is wiser
then men, and did foresee the evils that might be, and yet notwithstanding does
call it Christ's body, I think we should do evil to take upon us to reform
his speech. Mat. 26.26.
If ministers did their duties in catechizing and preaching, then doubtless, to
call the Sacrament Christ's body, and to esteem it accordingly, could not give
occasion to Idolatry. Therefore, woe to them that preach not.

Qu. But to call the Sacrament Christ's body, and to make none other presence
then by grace, or spiritually to faith (which is of things hoped for, and which
appear not to the bodily senses) is to make no presence at all, or to make him
none otherwise present then he is in his word when it is preached, and
therefore what need we to receive the Sacrament, seeing that by the doctrine a
man may receive him daily in the fields as well, and as much, as in the
Church in the use of the sacrament?

An. In deed neither the Scripture, nor christian faith will give us leave to
make or allow any carnal, natural, corporal, or any such gross presence of
Christ's body, for it is in heaven, and as the scripture does witness, the
heavens must have it till his coming to judgment, Except we would deny the
humanity of Christ, and the truth of man's nature in hun. The presence
therefore which we believe and confess, is such a presence as reason knows
not, and the world can not learn, nor any that looks in this matter with
our natural eyes, The world knovveth not the Lords ways.
or hears with other ears then with the ears, and sees with the eyes of
faith. Which faith, though it be of things hoped for, and so of things absent
to the corporal senses, yet this absence is not an absence in deed, but to
reason and the old man, the nature of faith being a possession of things
hoped for, as appears Heb. 11.1. Therefore to grauut a presence to faith, is
not to make no presence at all, but to such as know no right christian faith.
Also the same meat is offered in the words of the Scripture, which is offered
in the Sacrament, so that no less is Christ's body offered by the Scriptures
then by the Sacraments, but hereof may no man gather, that therefore it needs
not to receive the Sacrament, or to affirm that a man may as much by him
self, meditating the mord in the field, receive Christ's body, as in the
church in the right use of the Sacrament. For Christ ordained nothing in vain
or superfluously, and he says, Take and eat this, and he ordeineth nothing
whereof we have not need. Again, The Lords ways be righteous.
though in the fields a man may receive Chrisles body, by faith in the
meditation of the word, yet I deny that a man does ordinarilic receive
Christ's body by the only meditation of his death or hearing of his word,
with so much sight, and by such senses be assurance, (whereof our infirmity
has great need) as by the receiving of the sacrament, not ye Christ is not so
much present in his word preached, as he is in or with his Sacrament, but
because there be mo windows open for Christ to enter into us, in the par
ticipation of the Sacrament, then by his word preached or heard. For in the
word Christ enters into our hearts only by the ears, and through hearing,
but in the sacrament is sealed the promises of God in the experience of all our
senses. Romans 4.11.


Qu. Then you say that the Sacrament rightly received is Christ's body and
blood, do you not:

An. Yea, I say yet further, that it is Christ's body broken, which joined
with eating does set another difference between us and the papists, for that we
affirm that it is not the body of Christ, before it be eat of the
faithful, Eating goes before the testimony that it is his body.
for Christ said, take eat, this is my body, so that eating does go before,
which if they had known and considered, it would easily have put an end to all
their vile and vain questions about their host (as they call it) rotting in
the pix, and of a mouse or such like eating it. Also the breaking of the body
of Christ and shedding of his blood which the scripture witnesses, gives us
to see ye present breaking thereof, and the exceeding horror of Gods just wrath
against our sins, The horror of Gods wrath for sin is much more then the
most can be persuaded of.
which could never be pacified, or cur sins done away, but by this means,
namely, by the breaking of the body and shebding of the blood of our Lord
and alone savior Jesus Christ.

Qu. What benefits have we by receiving the communion?

An. First by worthy receiving this Sacrament, we abide in Christ, and Christ
in us.

Also we atteine an heavenly and celestial life, in assurance to be cuer with
the Lord in the land of the living, for it is written he that eats my
flesh, Ion. 6.41.
and drinks my blood has cuerlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day.

And also we receiving the Lord Jesus Christ by faith with all the benefits
of his death, we receive in a certain assurance, the remission of our sins
and eternal life.

Qu. Thus be thousands of the blind multitude persuaded, which dream to
them selves they shall be well, though they never have more religion then a
horse.
Is it not sufficient to hold that we are made partakers of Christ's benefits
though we have in the mean time no communion or fellowshippe with the body of
Christ:

An. That is no less absurd, then if I should say, that one lives by that
meat which he did never eat, or recover health by that medicine which he did
never taste.

Qu. Now concerning the third matter about the Sacrament, in examination
which (as you said) was the end for which it was ordained of the Lord, and so
to be received of us, I pray you wherefore was it ordained, and to what end
shall a christian receive it.

An. The end is Gods glory, and the profit of his Church.
To preuide for his own glory, and the profit of his Church, remedying two
great and continual evils in us, namely forgetfulness of Gods benefits, and
doubtfulnesse of Gods favor toward us, and also to show forth our
profession before the Church, and and in the face of the enemy.

First that we might be holden in continual mindfulnesse of Gods benefits.
The Lords supper does put us in mind of the death of Ghrist.
The chief and principal of all other is hear presented to us, namely the
death of Christ the alone, and dear son of God, and to this end Christ
says. Do this in remembrance of me.

And to assure us of the unfeigned love of God toward us, what can be more
effectual then to be in the fellowship of bys own son, in whom the love
that he bears toward us is without end or measure, I. Cor. 11.25. It does
assure us of his love.
for his mercy endures for ever, and of this love of God toward us, we are
assured in the Sacrament: as it is written, The bread which we break is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? Is not the cup of blessing which we
bless, the partaking of the blood of Christ? So as we are set in mindfulnesse
of that which we should never forget, so also are we put in assurance of that
whereof we may not doubt.

Qu. The Papists say that a man ought not to be sure of his salvation by
Christ, A doctrine fit for papists, but not for the Lords people.
how think you of it:

An. No marvel though they teach men to doubt always of their salvation, the
ground of whose teaching is their own gain. For once let the truth take
place, that Christians be by the word and spirit of Christ assured of their
salvation by him, The Papists God is his own belly.
then down goes their Priesthood, their pardons, their trentals, their
dirgies, their chaunteries, their sencing, their singing, their Masses and
prayers for the dead, with what soever of like sort, for take away the gain,
and all these will quickly lie in the duste. But we are wartanted by the word
of the Lord, that the Lords children ought to be sure of their salvation by
Christ. Romans 11.1.
In deed carnal men that measure all by reason, see not how. But the Prophet
Esaias says, Esa. 26.
With my body shall they rise, and S. Paul says, They shall have rest with
us. 2. These. 1.
Also it is written, His spirit does certify our spirit that we are the
sons of God. Now if we be sure that we are Gods sons, we are also sure of
Gods grace and favor, and so consequently of our salvation.

Qu. Is there no other end of this Institution?

An. Yes. That he which worthily receives, should be certain of the remission
of al his sins, how many or great loeuer they be, and so labor to advance
the praise of God for his mercy: but how great this kindness of the Lord is,
They best know what sin is that feel the weight of it.
they only know who have felt the burden of sin, which of all woes in this
life is the greatest, and of all burdens the most heavy. Again, no man can
communicate with Christ's body and blood, but the same must communicate with
his spirice, He that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his, he that
has his spirit, has proof of his effects.
for Christ's body is no dead carkas. Now he that communicates with Christ's
spirit, is made partaker of Christ's righteousness, holiness, innocence, and
immortality, and of all the merits of Christ, and his whole glory. For it is
written, The glory which thou gave me, I have given them. He also is made
partaker with the Church, and all the good that ever it or any member of it,
had, has, or shall have, for there is in it a communion and fellowshippe of
Saints which we believe, and which has waiting on it always the forgiveness of
sins, the rising again, and eternal life with God.

Qu. In examining our selves, The third matter in examination.
what else must we look for?

An. Our estate before the Church, The state of the faithful before the
Church.
wherein is required not only that we forgive from our hearts those that have
offended us, that we may have an experience within our selves of Christ's
spirit, and so glorify God in our hearts, by assurance of his mercy in
forgiving us, and accepting of us in Christ. As it is written, Forgive, and you
shall be forgiven. Math. 6. But also we must seek to be reconciled to them
whom we have offended. As it is written, Mat. 5.23.
If thou offrest thy gift upon the alter, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift, and go and be reconciled first
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, and this must not only be
done of us before we come to the Sacrament, but also concerning prayer to the
Lord. For it is written, When you pray say thus: Our father, etc, Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Qu. But were it not better, first to do these things that concern Gods
glory, and then to seek reconcilement afterward, for is not this to prefer
to offices of charity before the worship of God, and to set the the second
table which cencerneth our brethren, before the first which concerns the
Lord him self?

An. As the heart of man is prone into ye way of offense even from the womb,
and has not any inclination of it self into the way of the Lord, The natural
man has an cuill heart.
so they in vain pretend to have received eternal blessings from him by his
spirit, where there is not in some measure these and the like fruits of the
same spirit. And the Lord taxes them as false pretenders to worship God,
which proudly co^temn their brethren who^ they have offended. And under one
kind, he sets down the outward exercises of ye divine worship, whereby men
often times do more cou^terfet lines, the^ truly testify it, which is ye
property of al hipocrits, as it is seen in ye pharasie.

Qu. The papists in steed of all this say, go to the priest and tell him
all thy sins, and then come at Easter and receive etc. do you think it well?

An. No, nothing of us ought to be accounted well done that is not done to the
gloric of God.

Qu. Why they will say they do it to the glory of God, and how can you prove
the contrary?

An. There is no good thing without the light of the word.
Nothing can be done to the gloric of God without obedience. There is no
obedience without the word, so that I conclude, nothing can be done to the
glory of God without the testemony of the word. But these vile immaginations
be not only without the word, which were enough to throw them withal their
good put poses and intents down to the devil in judgment, but that they may
hold their interest in a deeper and more horrible vengeance, they are directly
against the manifect testimonies of the word of the Lord. First they will
have the people to confess their sins to them. The Scripture wills us to
confess our sins to the Lord only. David says, Remember not Lord the
sins of my youth, Psalm. 25.7. Psa. 51.3, 4.
etc. And again, Against thee O Lord, have I sinned. Also Luke teaches us by
the example of the lost son, to confesle our sins to the Lord. The
Publicane said, Luc. 15.1. Luc. 18.18.
Lord be merciful to me a sinner. And where the Priests say, they must
confess all, the Prophet David says, Who can tell how often he offends.
Psalm. 19.12.
Also where as they say they can forgive sins, Sooner said then proved.
they show their fust condemnation, namely that the devil and sin reigns
in them. For if they can forgive sins, then Christ dyed in vain. But let God
be everlastingly true, and the devil and all Papists liars. I, even I am he
(says the Lord) that put away thine iniquities for mine own sake, Esa. 43.23.
and will no more remember thy sins. Psalm. 3.8. Also whereas they allow the
Sacrament to the people only at Easter, they do in that as in the rest, for as
they rob the Lord of his honor, and put an holiness in the time, so all the
other times of the year, wherein the Lord says to the whole Church (in
respect of the Supper being a public action) Take ye, ea^e ye: the Papists
say, let the Priest eat it alone, and let all the people gase and look on.
But be the Lords truth never so plain against this kind of superstitious
receiving the Lords Sacraments, yet such force has these devises of the devil
to hold the ungodly in condemnation, that you shall see many in many places,
and they not the least, even at this day, The Popes friends which profess to
ferue the Lord by seasons, come once a year to the Sacrament, more for fear of
the law then for love to the Lord.
who at Easter will come very devoutly, and all the year after never a whit, in
whom the foul stenche of the devils excrementes, in these and the like
practices of popery, has so forestalled their senses, that there is no place
in them for the sweet favor of the word of life, whose condemnation sleeps
not. And for so much as these and their Popish teachers hold up an other
doctrine then Christ has taught us, we are warranted by the Apostle to hold
them accursed.

Qu. What say you to the place of Saint James which thy allege for ear
confesseon, James. 5.16.
where he says confess your sins one to another?

An. Saint James in the wisdom of ye holy Ghost provides for the comfort
of Gods chosen in the distress of spirit thorough the conscience of sin, in
which case he adutseth the Lords people to imparte them, such grief with some
such of their brethren, as in the wisdom of Gods spirit according to the
folowwip of his, he may justly hope both for such counsel in ye warrantise of
the word, as his soul needs and also may be strengthened by his fervent
prayers to the Lord, and so the words following prove, for he says Confess
your sins one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed,
etc. Also if this gave any strength to ear confession, then must the priest
confess him to one, which they will not grant therefore they do, but ingle with
the Lords truth.

Qu. Then you will take nothing from any man's warrant, No warrant is fase but
the Loras.
namely the Papists without proof of the word of God rightly vndersteode.

An. No, for leaving the^, and their friends, we their unwritten verities.
Ioh. 4.25.5, 39 16.13. Their chopping and changing of the word, Deuteronomy.
5.2.12.32. Their holding them miufficient to deeide controversies, Psa. 19.7.
Luke 16.20. Therefore keeping them from the people. Psalm. 95.10. John. 17.3.
Their imagination of the Scriptures darkness. Psalm. 19.7. Some of the dregs
of the Popes Church
Their vain boasting of the Churches authority against the word of God.
Iero. 7.8. 1. Tim. 3.15. Their false opinion of works. Job. 9.3 Romans 3.10.
Their presumptuous opinion of the Popes supremacy, Mat. 1.28.19. John. 20.23.
Luc. 22.26. 1. Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Their ear confession, Psalm. 25.7. Their
Purgatory, Mat. 25.26. Psalm. 51.3, 4. Their praying for the dead, their
Masses, and trentals, and dirgies. 2. Sam. 12.21. Luc. 19.26. Their praying to
Samtes, Iere. 17.5. Romans 10.14. Their old customs and following of
forefathers. Mat. 15.2, 3.12.30. Their Latin service. Mat. 7.6, 7, 8. Their
Images. Exodus 20.4. Their transubstantiation. Mark. 16.19. Luc. 24.16. Act.
1.9, 10, 11. Their unpreaching priesthood. 1. Tim. 3.2. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet.
4.1. The diversities of meats for conscience sake, and a thousand mo
abhominatio^s. Mat. 6.11. Romans 14.14. 2. Tim. 4.3, 4. We rest our selves wholly
and safely in ye alone word of God, as upon a most trusty witness of all
truth, that fails not: for it is written, Heaven and earth shall perish,
Mat. 24.35.
but not one sote of the word of the Lord shall fail.

Qu. I would be most glad to participate with the Church of God in the use of
this Saccament, so often as they come together to that end: but I see it is a
thing most worthy such reverent consideration, as is commanded unto us in the
word, and I see the horror of my sins so great, The best consciences are
soonest feared with sin
and fecle in my self so little repentance and faith, that I fear I am
unworthy to receive it.

An. In deed to the worthy receiving of the Lords supper, such examination of
every one in his own conscience as the Apostle requires, is very needful.
But as for sin, which is in every one by nature, which also of it self is
deadly, even from the greatest to the least, we are to discern our estate in
that case not by the sin, but by the party, as we are taught in ye Romans 6.
where he wills that sin do not reign in us, which it does in every child of
man till the spirit of Christ be giueu unto us by the preaching of the
Gospel. As it is written, A strong man armed keeping the house, all that he
possesses be in peace, till a stronger then he come, etc. Then our sins be
deadely, Who sin deadly.
when they have the reign and dominion in us, And sin reigns when we give
over to sin, when we strive not agayust it, When sin has the masterie it
flayeth the man.
but allow of it and consent unto it. If you yield your selves to obey, his
servants you are to whom you obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obevieuce unto righteousness. And this power of sin thus reigning, does
testify that the grace of Gods spirit is wanting. But if we strive against our
sin, if our eye be single, that is, our mind upright striving into the way
of the Lord without hypocrisy or dissimulation, though sin be in us, yet our
sins are not of force to separate us from God, nor are any such things as
shall ever condemn us, but for Christ's sake (whose peculier spirit has
wrought in us this misliking of sin, as ignorance, want of feeling of the
Lords kindness, and whatsoever of like sort, with a longing alter the ways of
the Lord) they are forgiven us, and shall never be laid to our charge,
because we believe in Christ. For the distance between heaven and earth is not
so great, as is the difference between sin being in us, Romans 7.20.
and sin reigning in us, as may appear in that it is said, Gal. 5.17. If
therefore your sins do displease you, These fruits of Christ's spirit
assures us of the grace of Christ.
if you purpose to be an enemy to sin in your self and others, if you
purpose to walk al your life in the true fear of God, and in the light of his
word, if you believe in Christ Jesus for pardon of your sins, and stay your
self upon his promises: I testify unto you, that you shall be a most welcome
guest to this table of the Lord. Christ has already sealed in you that you
are dear in his sight, he has given you of his spirit, They that are least
in their own sight, are most dear with the Lord.
and you shall have fellowship with him, and with the father by him, and with
the whole Church of God. Christ will dwell in you, and you shall dwell in him
for ever, therefore measure not the Lords mercies by reason which is corrupted,
but let faith hold fast his promises, and be joyful in the Lord, and from
the ground of a pure heart give all prayle to him to whom all praise is due
for evermore.

Qu. Not the deed, but the manner of doing is al.
How many sorts be there of them which receive not the Sacrament?

An. There be two sorts, namely those that will not, and those that can not.

Qu. What is the estate of both?

An. The estate of the one, namely those that can not, is not dangerous, for
the necessity of the Sacraments extends not so far as to exclude them
from eternal life which can not enjoy the use thereof, and those that have
faith (which gives them title and right to eternal life, and power to
discern rightly of the Sacraments,) though they have not the means to be
partakers of the Sacraments, shall not be deprived nor excluded from salvation.
Their estate i^ not dangerous, which would and can not.
Also as this estate is not dangerous, so the condition of such as will not,
namely of those which contemn the Lords mysteries, is damnable. For it is
undoubtedly an act of infidelity, and worthy of damnation, Their estate is
damnable that can and will not.
for this and all wickedness proceeds from unbelief. For it is written, Take
heed brethren, that there be not in any of you an evil heart and unfaithful,
Heb. 3.12.
to depart away from the living God, etc. From which estate of men the Lord
keep all that be his for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A most godly and comfortable letter, written by by master Edward Deering to
a Christian gentlevvoman being in heaviness of spirit, very needful and
(by the grace of Christ) helpful, to such as be in any measure in the like
heaviness.
IT is true (good maistres H.) which the Spirit has spoken, and we seele it
by experience, that by many tribulations we must enter into ye kingdom of
heaven. This is a common decree which God has sanctified to be a let for all
his children. So the author and finisher of our faith, Jesus Christ himself
was made perfect. Into his similitude we are also predestinate, that we should
first die with him, and then be partakers of his glory, Let us not therefore
refuse that condition of life, in which we have ye fellowship of all the Saints
of God. But rather confess with the holy Apostle, that blessed is the man who
endures temptation. But because al afflictions are bitter for the present
time, and when the mind is shaken with sorrow, it is then most easily
thrown down of the enemy, let us learn wisely what our troubles are, and be
prepa red of remedy in the day of trial. All our afflictions are either
according to the flesh in hunger, cold, nakedness, shame, contempt, slander,
etc. or according to the spirit, in lamentations and mournings, which the
world knows not. The first euilles are easily borne, for they are all but
vanity, and in vanity there shall dye, if we see no favor in ye sight of the
Sun, that shire not hear acceptable unto us: when we have paid the debt we
owe unto death, the Lord then will deliver us from all the injuries of men. But
in this behalf let me confirm my self. God has set you free from such
afflictions your goods are unto you in a liberal portion, your life made
happy with a loving husband, your calling acceptable under a gracious and good
maistresse. In whose sight you have found favor, In this estate you shall
feel no trouble, therefore I let it pass. The other affliction, whithe is the
spiritte, and which can not be resisted with any earthly blessing, look
for it assuredly, for it will come unto you ye you may suffer with Christ and
reign with him in glory, These troubles they come many ways, eue^ accordingly
as God does lead us into life. First we are commanded to learn and know the
word of God, against this look for many tentations, the enemy will try which
way to pluck, that out of our hearts, out of the word we must learn a
precious faith, and hold that vmnouable before God, against this, what
tentations are between heaven and earth, you shall feel your portion, if any
thing possible can discourage you, with faith you must join a lively hope,
which is a longing apprehensio^ of gods glory, in this also Satan will pretermit
nothing to quench your affection, ye it may be dead and to darken your mind ye
you may see nothing, with out these you can not possibly live, and unto these
you can not possblie come, but first you shall feel what is the strength of
sin. And yet notwithstanding faint not, the Lion has over come which is of
the tribe of Judah. The force of the Serpent shall bruise our heel but it shall
not take away from us the head piece of salvation: Learn therefore, first the
word of God, this is the seed of regeneration by which we are made new
creatures, this is the bread of spiritual nourishment, by which we are grown
up into eternal life, This is the weapon of our warfare, by which we may
wound and drive away our enemies. This is the scepter of our glo rious
kingdom, by which we do know ye God does reign in us. Take this unto you, the
shield of your defense, the strength of your age, the wisdom of your heart,
and the safety of your life, commended unto you in ye word of Christ. Search
ye Scriptures, and seal it in your heart, with a good persuasion that it is
the word of God and of life, and he has graven in it an express image of
eternal truth, Let it dwell plentifully within you, and your heart is armed
with a most strong defense, all enemies shall fall before it, the wisdom of
the wise shall be brought to naught, and the counsel of the prudent shall be
made foolishnes, the ways of the adversaries shall be scattered, and the
scorners seat shall be thrown down, so true it is that the Lord has spoken,
Blessed is the man whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and whose
meditation is in it day and night. Let us then bring down the haughtiness of
our minds and receive with meekness ye word grafted in us which can save our
souls, To this desire of understanding when God has brought us, then let us
pray to be delivered from tentation, and take heed we be not spoiled of so
great a treasure, we have three especial enemies in this behalf, of which S.
Paul bids us al beware, the one is Philosophy, that is a vain and curious
searching of Gods mysteries, or measuring things revealed according to our
understanding, with which tentations whilst our fathers were overcome, they
became foolish in their own imaginations and changed the glory of God into the
likeness of a corruptible man, making images, praying to angels, immagining of
souls like little children, devising purgatory, rea soning of Gods wiseddme
above our capacity. As if we be predestinate, we may live as we list, if we
are commanded to work, if our days are numbered why seek we any safety to
our life. If the Angels do keep us in all our ways that we shall not hurt our
foot against a stone, why fear we any falling: these fantasies and worse
then these disquiet our minds and fight within us against our humble obedience
to the word of God, which all when we have overcome (and said with the Prophet
secret things are for the Lord: but things revealed for us and our children)
yet we have no peace, A second enemy rises up greater then the first, which
S. Paul calls ye traditions of men, for the heart of man which drinks in
error as the ground does drink water, is very obstinately bound with old
customs, and long continuance, measuring truth which is pure and holy, only
by time which is corrupt and evil, and not only this, but nature also has
inflamed our affections to love to much our fathers ways to like their
opinions, to esteem their judgments, to praise their doings, to commend their
rage, to talk of their names, til through many entiseme^ts we are at last
bewitched, our wisdom is stolen away, and truth is taken from us, by this
means all corruptions which have ouerflowed the earth have still wide rooms
in the hearts of many the Popes supremacy, latin service, prayer for the
dead, Masses, diriges, pardons, pilgrimages, sensing, and all popery, with the
Authors of it, Popes, Cardinals, Monks, Friars, all which have neither truth,
nor shadow of truth, not one word of them in all the gospel of Christ, only old
custom has bred it in our benes, and an opinion of our fathers has printed
it in our breasts and we will not cast it out, but the Lord be thanked who has
had mercy upon us to make, hold fast the word of truth, what soever our
fathers have vainly taught us, And yet we are not in security. But a third
enemy is in the heart of man, that the word of God may not have his perfect
honor, and that is an opinion conceived of earthly things, and planting of
holiness in corruptile creatures As in meats, drinks, days, garments,
conditions of life, places, times, Ceremonies, neither hearing our Savior
Christ, that God is a spirit, and only he is to be worshipped in spirit and
truth, neither his Apostle Paul, that the element of that world commend us
not unto God, for neither if we eat are we ever the worse, neither if we eat
not, are we ever the better. These many and great tentations stand against us
as soon as we would give our selves to the word of God, which is the
beginning of a christian life. Trow you that in the continuance of our course
and journey before we come at our savior Christ, shall we not be sifted and
tried, to see what is within us. And you (good mystresse H.) to apply this to
your self, tell me how you have learned Christ, has his gospel been
peaceable in you, from the first day til now without all contradiction? was
your mind never puffed up in vain imaginations, did the traditions and
persuasions of men never shake your thought? have you not ben tempted we
opinions of creatures, as though some were more holy, some more profane: I
know, as you long after Christ, and desire his truth in single heart: so his
grace you have not without sharp and bitter trials, and the more freely the
word of God shall possess your soul, and fill your heart full with all desire
of it, the more you shall feel what fight is against it, look for the like
in all your life, and when you approach to the true fear of God, prepare your
heart to the strongest assault. The word of God thus made known unto us, and
when we follow it with all our soul, that we may have a lively faith to
rejoice at the promises of God, to fear at his threatening, and feel a full
persuasion of a certain performance of all his words. O Lord what is the
malice of Satan, and though many temptations are against us, the long
prosperities of the wicked in which they triu^ph whiles the goodness of God
provoke the^ still to repentance, the bitter sighing of the godly in which
they mourn under many crosses, whiles God makes their faith precious before
him: these have rooted quite out of the hearts of the ungodly, the faith and
truth which they owe unto God, so that against all his judgments they have
opened their mouths and said aloude: Where is the promise of his coming, and
against all his mercies they have proclaimed war, and said, they will not
have Christ to reign over them. But these temtations Christ has overcome in
us, and given us his spirit, in which we know assuredly that the Lord
reigns, neither slacketh he his coming as many accounte slacknes, but he
will come, and his glory shall be knownen. And yet we are not in peace, but
Satan will sift us another way, He will lay our sins before us, to make us
fear that the promises of God belong not unto us, and this of all temptations
is the greatest, yet we fear not, for what belongs to all our sins which
Christ has not borne? sorrow, sickness, death, hell, condemnation, were they
not in his body, and are they not all crucified upon the Cross: Is he not
risen from them, and has he not broken the chains of death, and so is
ascended unto glory: If this be my fear because I am a sinner, rather let me
rejoice, for Christ has taken my sins upon him, and has buried them deeper
then the bottom of the sea, he has led it openly in triumph, and nailed it
upon the cross from henceforth and for evermore. It has no strength
whosoever secme to color it as red as scarlet, or make it like purple, it is
still nothing, and casts but a vayue terror before our eyes, we will never
deny this, but freely confess it, that we be miserable sinners, and not worthy
to lift up our eyes to heaven, but who will lay our sins to our charge, now
god has justified us: Or what sin can rest upon us, now Christ has washed
them away: That which once was in fight with Christ and he has overcome it,
who shall set to his hand the second time to make the victory perfect? This
is true, and everlasting truth has sealed it up, that sin is abolished for
ever and ever, howsoever we fear, or tremble, or be faint hearted, yet before
the Lord with whom our life is hid, there is no peril, no danger, no fcare,
but peace and righteousness without end. Let our sins be never so great,
neither we nor our sins can change the new testament that God is merciful
to our sins, and will blot out all our transgressions, therefore this care is
paste, that our sins be many, the more they are, the greater is his mercy who
has forgiven them. And this is the token which God has given us that we are
his, because we are grieved with our sins, for our Savior Christ overcame
sin, with pains and sufferings which belong unto it, and this is the badge
of our redemption, to be made like him in afflictions, we have sin, and
abhor it, it wounds us with fear, it sets before us condemnation, we
have a sense and feeling of Gods anger against it, and hell gnaweth upon our
souls because of transgression. O blessed state, and treasure of gladness, this
was the image of Christ when he overcame sin, a mark of my redemption in my
own flesh, that I should not faint. As the sun makes the day, and the night
darkness, so this affliction of sin is the badge and cognisaunce of our
certain forgiveness. And herein see the goodness of God, which turns all
things to the best, to those that love him. Through fear of sin the devil
fights against us: without fear of sin we could never have boldness:
through anguish of heart the devil would ouerwheline us with sorrow, without
anguish of heart we could never have joy. In feeling Gods anger the devil
would make us to despair, without feeling his threatening and trembling before
him, we could never have strength of faith that his mercies are for ever. In
all sufferings I am like to Christ, they are the marks of mine addoption that
I am his child, do we not hear the Lord: him self does speak, If we be
without correction, then are we bastardes and not sons: and to show what our
correction shall be, he says in another place, If we be planted with him into
the similitude of his death, then shall we also be partakers of his
resurrection. Who has heard so great salnation as this: Every weapon wherewith
the enemy strikes, the same armeth us to greater salvation, and every wound
that we do receive, the same confirms us to a suter life. (Then before as I
said) care not for sin, for that is abolished: so here I may add, Care not
for hell, for the nearer we feel it, the further we are from it. Let them
fear sin that feel it not, and let them be afraid of condemnation that
know not what it is, upon whom destruction shall come suddenly as an armed man.
Our eyes have be kept waking, and we have seen our sins, our hearts have
fainted before the anger of the Lord, and we have not despised his heavenly
calling, therefore in the day of trouble we shall have rest. In this
persuasion we will live and dye, and if our souls should melt for fear within
us, although the Lord should kill us, yet would we trust in him. Abraham
believed in the Lord, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness against
hope, he believed under hope, and if our hoye seemed to be taken from us, yet
would we patiently wait the Lords leisure vutill we save our hope again,
that at the least our faith might have again, the glory and truth of full
assurance. An other thing we must labor in, and in an other thing we shall
have temptation, and that is, that we may see what is the glory of God, and
immortal life herein, let us meditate in our beds, and think on this in
our secret places, in the midst of companies, let these cogitatio^s be often
in our hearts, and in all places let these be out m^ses, when we shall
apprehende with all the servants of God what is the height, the breadth, the
length, the depth, we shall know that the glory is great of immortality, and
he is only to be belecued, who shall shine in honor when this vanity is
ouerpast. His strength is great that laid the foundations of the world, and
bys brightness exceeding that made the Sun and the Moon. His treasure and
riches are above measure, who has given princes their gold and silver and
other precious stones for the honor of man, he in deed is of excellent
majesty, who is king of kings, and Lord of Lords, and his power is above all,
who makes sickness his messengers, and death his minister, till he shall
abolish them both, for his mercies are unspeakable that forgineth us all our
sins, and his goodness is great who has had regard to the children of men.
From nothing be brought us into life, he kept us from the grave, he will restore
us and make us see his glory. When I would think on this, my soul is compassed
with dulnes of flesh, that I cannot see ye fulness of his favor. When I would
consider in my heart what is his grace, darkness ouershaddoweth mine
vnderstaning, and all my thoughts do vanish in his immortality. When I would
speak of al his loving kindness, my tongue cleaves to the root of my mouth, and
my words stick fast within my lips. But this one thing in all mine infirmities
I can perceive, that his glory is exceeding great, whose glory I can not
comprehend, and the life is long, appointed unto man where his heart and mind
can see no end. If all the world were a flowing water, and every year one drop
should be deminished, the Sea should be all made dry, and the bottomes of the
deep should appear, before he shall cease to live, whom God has raised
from the dead, and this breadth and wideness between heaven and earth, if it
should be filled up, and cuerie year but one handful of earth added to the
work, yet sooner should ye great distance be closed up and the empty places
made full, then he shall cease from joy and gladness, who shall stand in the
resurrection of the just. This is the glory that has neither spot nor
blemishe, before which me thincketh, not only princess and the glory of the
world, but the Sun and Moon and all the hosts of heaven, are nothing else but
mere vanity, for death shaddoweth the glory of man, though he spread his
branches never so far, yet the grave closes up in little room the ambitious
heart which before was enlarged from East to West. And the heavens that are
high and free from death, yet are holden under the tyranny of envious and
consuming time, in which they shall be changed: only the Lord is in honor
and majesty, who has set eternity round about him, and cast out time unto
confusion. Oh Lord: where are their eyes that say not this, or their hearts
that see and regard it not: who has be witched them in the countenances of me^
to carry the hearts of beasts, and to forget the latter end: The Lord turn
them ye run astray ye they may know and see where is their glory, but the
temptations have overtaken them which are against our hope, when the Lord shall
deliver them from evil, they shall give thee thanks and rejoice with us that
they also have eyes to see. And blessed are you good mystres, H. and God has
visited you in an acceptable time, whose heart he has touched with fear, and
whose affections he has filled with hunger and thirst, that you should mourn
for the redemption that is in Christ, and be pleased with nothing but with ye
grace of his countenance. This is a schoolmystres to bring you unto him, and a
bond to tie you fast, that you shall not be separate, And accomplish I beseech
you this good work of his grace, till you love the Lord withal your heart,
and till you can say with the blessed Apostle I desire to be desolued and to be
with Christ. For this purpose we are chastised of the Lord, and when our faith
is tried at the last it shall be made strong, that we it we may quench all the
fiery darts of Sattan, and in righteousness and peace, and joy of the holy
Ghost, run the course that is set before us, till in a blessed issue of happy
days, with a good spirit we may say boldly, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, which I beseech GOD the father, of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the God of merc^, and Father of all consolation grant unto you. Amen.

Pray, pray, pray, pray, this is your best service wheresoever your duty is
most bound.

