THE SOVLES INGRAFTING into CHRIST.

By T. H.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the Bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1637.

THE SOVLES Ingrafting into CHRIST.
MAL. 3.1. Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple: even
the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in: Behold he shall come, says
the Lord of Hosts.


FOr the Preface two things are considerable. 1. What we have done. 2. What
we will do. We have finished the scope of our endeavor, which was to show how
Christ's Merits are applied to the Soul, how it stands possessed of grace here
and happiness hereafter. Now these two things must be wrought in the Soul,
before it can be made partaker of saving grace: 1. A preparation. 2. an
Implantation. A preparation there must be, is not naturally capable to receive
grace. This appears in 2. things: 1. On Gods part, he breaks the cursed
Combination betwixt Sin and the Soul, he draws us from sin to himself.
2. Something on our part touching the disposition of our hearts: and that in 2.
works. 1. Contrition, 2. Humiliation. Now there was a necessity of these two
to be in the Soul, as we then disputed, for these are the two maine
hindrances the desert of Humiliation. Egypt was a Type of a man's natural
condition, Moses a Type of the Law, Iosuah a Type of Christ, the wilderness a
Type of these two. Now the soul having passed through all these, is just upon
the Coast of Canaan. The soul is like a graft, first, it is cut off, then
pared, and then ingrafted: So Contrition cuts us off, and Humiliation pares us.
The next Point is, the ingrafting into the Lord Jesus, the heart being thus
prepared, it is implanted into the true vine, the Lord Christ.

Touching the work, we will discover these 2. things: 1. We will open it in
general. 2. We will discover the parts of it.


What it is in general, our implantation into

3. Things in the Description.

The humbled sinner, for else nothing to do Christ possesses him, and hence
he comes to be possessed, Gal. 4.9. as if he should say, It is not, how we
can perceive him, but how he will know us. Philip. 3.12. Still a man is more
passive than active, the work lies on Gods part. The child holds the father,
because the father holds him. So we hold God, because he holds us.



These two things are general in all the works of application. 1. To be
possessed of Christ: 2. To be made partaker of the Spiritual good in him.









All this is done by Gods Spirit: a graft cannot put it self into the stock,
but the same hand that cut it off, and pared it, must ingraft it, to the same
Spirit that wrought Contrition, and humiliation, comes to be the Spirit of
grace and promise. Now for the ground of our discourse, we have chosen this
Text, which is a Prophecy of John the Baptist.

Wherein observe 2. things.

The words are spoken of John the Baptist.

First, Consider the work of John the Baptist, he was the Messenger of God,
and was to prepare the way for Christ. 2. We have the Consequence, The Lord
will suddenly come into his Temple: We come to the point, but before I can
discover the several particulars, give me leave to open two words, that so the
doctrine may be undeniable.

First, what is meant by Temple. 2. What, by

First, the word Temple, besides the natural and literal sense of it, it is
also taken Mystically and Spiritually, and so it is here to be conceived, and
then it implies partly the Church of God, I mean the company of the faithful
which serve God in uprightness of heart, and as in general, all the company
of the people fearing God, are said, to be the Church of God, and his Temple,
so also in particular, every man that is faithful, is the Temple of God, 2
Cor. 6.10. Ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Look as it was in the
material Temple in Jerusalem, the text says, the Glory of the Lord fell upon
it, and the Lord said, he would abide there, and reveal himself there, so the
heart humbled and prepared is the Temple of the Lord, and the Lord takes
possession of it, and rules in it, and will provide for it for ever. Look as a
man dwells in a house prepared for him, so the Lord dwells in a humbled Soul.
Thus we have showed what is meant by Temple.



A King comes 2. ways, first he takes sovereign possession at the place where
he is; If he come to a town or to an Inn, the Guests that took up the
place, must be gone: so the Lord comes as a King, he comes to take sovereign
possession of the Soul. 2. All Kings bring furniture with them, when he comes
to a place, his own furniture must be hung up. So Christ comes these 2.
ways, he takes full possession of the soul, and provides mercifully for the
soul. Thus we have the words opened, and now the point is plain enough. The
English of the text is this: When John the Baptist, by the power of the Word
and Spirit of Contrition, and Humiliation, has laid the Souls of Gods
servants, humbled and willing to be at Gods dispose, then suddenly and
immediately, the Lord Jesus will come, and he will command as a King, and take
possession of an humble Soul, and provide graciously for it, he comes to the
naked walls, he brings his provision with him, he cares for nothing but a Soul
prepared and emptied, and he will bring provision enough of Vocation, Adoption,
Justification, and Sanctification: now we will gather the points as they lie.





The first is, that Christ cannot be hindered from coming into a Soul truly
humbled, he comes speedily, as who should say, he lays all other work
aside, as though he cared for nothing, looked after nothing, intended after
nothing, but how all might come into the heart prepared: the wicked of the
world, he will not come at them; though the rich cry, he will not hear them;
though the honorable perish, he will not look after them; but the Lord will
come suddenly into an humble Soul, nay, to speak with reverence, he leaves
all Company, he leaves Heaven and the blessed Angels, he leaves all, and only
desires to be in, and to live with an humble broken heart, it is the manner of
the Phrase; he comes suddenly, as who should say, he lets all alone, he cares
for nothing, go he must, and take possession of a broken Soul; this is the
cause that the Scripture does not content it self, in expressing the
mavelous tender respect, that the Lord has toward such a Soul, the delight
the Lord has in an humble Soul, he will lie with a broken heart, and dwell
with it, and sleep with it; he will suddenly come into his Temple, Luke 15.16.
We may see it in the father of the prodigal: the prodigal he resolved to
return to his father, and say, I have sinned against Heaven and against thee,
etc. the father he observes this, that he is content to be at his dispose, and
he lies at the door, and desires to come into his family, though his
condition were base, and he was ragged; the father he might say, go to your
Queanes, let them comfort you if they can; no, the text says, he saw him a
far off, and he ran and had compassion on him, and fell upon his neck, and
kissed him, before the prodigal could speak a word, or kneel down, he
ran, and kissed him.

Observe here four particulars: He saw him a far off, and had compassion on
him, ran to meet him, and kissed him. He never now remembers that he was
riotous, a whorer, a drunkard, that he had lavished out all his substance: all
this was forgotten: but when he sees him come humbly, and brokenly, he saw him
a far off, before the prodigal could see his father; nay he compassioned
his wretchedness, before he could confess it, nay, he ran to meet him more
speedily than he could come to him, and when the prodigal fell down before
him, he fell on his neck and kissed him, before he could speak a word; this
Scripture does not satisfy it self, it cannot tell how to express the
mavelous ready enlargement of the Lord, to give entertainment to an humbled
Soul, and it is remarkable, after the prodigal had said, Father I have
sinned, etc. Fetch out, says he, the best robe; to cover him, and put a ring
on his finger, etc. As who should say, It Is no matter for thy stubbornness and
rebelliousnesse; a prodigal thou have been, I care not for it, bring this robe
to cover him, kill the fat Calfe to feed him, and the ring to adorn him. So
Luke 15.4. A man that has an hundred sheep, and one be gone astray, he leaves
there 99. and he goes seeking for that, and when he finds the straggling
sheep, though it cannot come home, he takes it upon his shoulder and brings it
home: The lost sheep is the lost Soul, that is bee-wildred, the Lord Jesus
after all mercies vouchsafed to him, and kindness enlarged toward him; yet
the lost sheep will be straggling, the Lord leaves all now to seek him: and
mark the phrase and the degree thereof, he leaves all to seek it, and will
never leave till he find it, he does not seek hourly, but he seeks till
he has found it; when he has found it, he brings it home. The Lord will
leave all, to seek an humbled sinner; the more need thou have of Christ, the
more labor he will bestow in seeking of thee, and he will never leave seeking,
till he has found thee; and when he has found thee, though thou can not
go, he will carry thee upon his shoulders, to everlasting happiness. This is
to express the mavelous readiness and bounty of the Lord, toward a poor
humble sinner, Matthew. 13.45. This is the scope of the Parable of the Pearl;
the text says, The Kingdom of God is like unto a Pearl, which when a
Merchant had found, he seld all he had, and bought it. First, we will open the
text, then apply it to our purpose. The Pearl is nothing else but the rich
Mercy of God, and Grace, and Salvation in Christ: the Merchant man is every
poor sinful creature, that wants mercy to comfort him, and grace to pardon
him; for what is all the world, if my Soul wants mercy? well he knows where
the Pearl is; the bargain is thus, he must sell all and buy this Pearl: He
comes to Gods terms, and buyeth it at his rate, and there is no more words:
this selling of all is, when a man parts with all sins, and confidence in
himself: then he has sold all, when he will neither trust to his own worth,
nor rest in his own sufficiency, and sees himself miserable by corruptions
committed, and sees that he is unable to releeve himself out of his misery,
and then he is willing to part with all; and when he has done this, then
there is no more words to the bargain, but the Lord bids him take the Pearl,
he has bought it, and carry it away with him: so then the case is clear, if
you be good chapmen, and bid roundly, and come to Gods price, there is no more
words to the bargain. You would have sin and Christ, God and Devil; no, no,
but sell all and the pearl is yours: you may take it in your hand, and carry
it home with you: thus much for the proof.



Because the Lord Jesus was sent, for this very Matt. 15.24. And he came also
to this very purpose, Luke 19.10. Gather up the places. I am not sent, but to
the lost sheep of Israel; and in the other place, there he came to seek, and
save that which was lost, that is, lost in the sight and sense of his own
misery, lost in regard of his own ability and sufficiency to help himself:
Then lastly, willing to be disposed by another, this is the nature of a lost
man. The man that is in the wilderness, if he knew not the way out, there is
no means to succor him; therefore he is willing and contented, that any man
should direct him the way out: if a man should say, this is the path that leads
you out of the wilderness to such a place, would he not yield to his advice,
he were but a lost man; so do thou see, that thou art lost, if thou lie in
the wilderness of sin, thou art a damned man; and then lost, do thou see
that thou art unable to come out and succor thy self, art thou contented to
be informed by God, and disposed by him, then mark what the text says: The
Son of man, the Lord Jesus came to seek such sinners, and the Lord will
never leave till he find thee, and when he has found thee, he will never
leave till he has saved thee: the Lord, though thou can not seek him, he
will seek thee; and when he has sought thee, he will save thee too. Then if
the end of Christ's coming, and the scope of his sending, be to save a lost
sinner, then above all, he will attain his own end, fulfill what was
betrusted to him, he will seek and save him.

The second ground.
Because an humble broken soul, is the fittest subject to set forth the glory
of the riches of Gods grace and Salvation, that is in Christ purchased, and
through Christ conveyed to the soul: I say they are the fittest subjects for
God to work upon, for the Lord to come to and dwell in, and to set forth the
honor of the work of Redemption as it deserves, Ephesians. 2.11.12. The text
says, he works all things according to the counsel of his will, and why
so? namely, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Now observe it, there is
no soul so fit to set forth the praise of the glory of the grace of the Lord,
and the great work of Salvation, as a broken soul, and self denying heart:
for an humble soul denies all in it self, but expects all from grace, and the
free favor of God. It says, it is unworthy to receive mercy, that it needs
and beggs, and therefore an humble soul is the fittest of all to set forth the
great work of God, all the Council of God; to set forth the riches of his
grace, that all may be said to be grace, as in that of Zachary, when the
temple was built, thy cried, Grace, Grace, Grace, as who should say, grace
lays the first stone, and grace lays the last stone; all is of grace, from
beginning to ending: so an humble soul sets forth the freeness of Gods
grace abundantly, and says, I deserved nothing but hell, and if I have any
thing but hell, it is from Gods mercy. But a proud heart, he opposes the
work of God; all the workmanship of the grace of God: The proud heart will
have something of it self, and take something to it self to boast of, and
where is grace now? it is not grace, but your parts and abilities that you
attribute all to, and by that means hinder the setting forth the riches of
Gods mercy in Christ: Therefore an humble soul is the best shop, wherein the
great work of redemption, and frame of salvation may be seen: the poor soul
will say, Look what the Lord has done, and it is mavelous in our eyes, it
ought to be mavelous in our hearts. Look as it is with men; No wise man will
dwell in an house, where his credit may not be maintained, and where he may
not have all conveniences necessary, and therefore no marvel though Christ
comes into an humble heart, it is the fittest place for the credit of Christ:
Christ would work all in the soul; the humble soul is content, he shall take
notice of it. It is a school rule, there is no wise man that disposes of the
frame of a building, but if he has disposed of it, he will set it up, and
dwell in it, unless he wants power or wisdom; power, in that he has begun a
thing, and was not able to finish it; none of these can befall God: God is a
wise sufficient cause, he never disposes of a matter fully, but he brings a
frame and a form to the matter disposed: Now when the Lord has prepared a
building, and framed an humble soul to dwell in, if he will not finish his
frame, he must want power and wisdom: But these cannot be wanting, to an
almighty, and most wise God, therefore he that has fitted the heart for his
own credit, and for all conveniences, that all may be wrought by him, and all
glory may come to him, surely that powerful God, that cannot be hindered, and
that wise God, that does nothing but out of wisdom, he will rear up the
building of grace, and salvation shall be bestowed upon the soul.

The third ground.
Because now all hindrances are taken out of the way that should stop him, and
all impediments that should let him, are removed wholly, therefore the place
being for him, and he ready to come, he must of necessity come: for if there be
any hinderance, to stop the coming of Christ into the soul; it must either
lie on his part or on our part, but it shall appear that there is no hindrance
either on Gods part, or a broken souls part, therefore there is nothing can
hinder the Lord from coming: if there be any thing on our parts to hinder him,
it is either because we love our selves, or cleave to our sins: Now a broken
heart has renounced both these; an humble soul says, sin shall not rule in
me; and a self denying heart says, I cannot rule my self, and therefore
Lord guide me with thy grace, now the way is ready, the soul is divorced from
all other matches, therefore it is ready for the Lord; the humbled soul has
renounced sin, and all authority of it self, and would have Christ rule over
it: Now therefore all impediments must be on Christ's part, that which cannot
be, Revel. 3.20. Our Savior Christ is so far from being unwilling to come
into the soul, that he stands knocking at the door; he knocks at a proud
loose heart, at a base drunken heart, Forsake these sins, and entertain a
Savior: renounce these corruptions, and entertain thy own salvation: be not
under the power of corruption, that will undo thee, but submit to Christ, that
will redeem thee: He knocks and knocks again, Open my Love, my Dove, my
undefiled one: the Lord knocks thus at the door; therefore if the door be
open, he will surely come in: nay he protests himself, I stand at the door
and knock: he has stood often at the heart of many stubborn sinners, and
knocked by mercies and judgments, and knocked by the word, and all blessings
he has bestowed, and says, If any will open, I will come in and dwell with
him. Now then, he that promises, that if the door be open, he will come in,
if the door be open, that he may come, there is no unreadinesse in him to
come into the soul, but in an humbled soul, the door is open, away sin,
away self, I trust you not, let the Lord come and rule in, and take possession
of the heart of mine; the door is wide open now, and the Lord knocked before,
is glad to take the occasion, and comes speedily into the soul prepared and
humbled. So then if it be the end of the ruling and coming of Christ, if the
glory of his mercy be advanced thereby, if there be no hindrance, neither on
our parts, or on Christ's part; then the soul being thus disposed, immediately
expect our Savior, for he will come. Thus much for the proof.



Jacob awaked out of his sleep, Surely (said he) the Lord is in this place,
and I perceived it not: And so the Lord is in thy soul, and thou perceivest
him not.





1. On our part. 2. On Christ's part.
Those on our parts, are of four sorts.

Matt. 14.26. When Christ was nearest to comfort etc. they thought it had been
a spirit to terrify them. So thou say, thy sins are ugly to thee, thou
think this is not Christ, but it is: Jesus Christ is there, and thou see
it not. John 20.15.16. The poor soul of the woman longed for Christ's society,
and she thinking it had been a gardner, enquired of a Savior, for a Savior:
So a broken hearted sinner seeks a Savior; if you know how I may obtain
favor with God, counsel a poor sinner. It is Christ that gives thee the
heart to seek him, and that Christ thou seek: by the virtue of a Savior,
thou seek for a Savior, as a man looks for a candle, by the light of his
candle. John 14.9.

Thou attendest not to our Savior when he Luke 24. Why seek thou the
living among the dead. So we rub the sore daily, and think, can grace come
into such a heart: Whilst thou art thus looking on corruption, thou can not
see Christ: Why seek thou the living among the dead, why seek thou a
Savior to comfort thee, among corruptions that would condemn thee. It was not
the fault in Hagars eyes, that she saw not the fountain, but she attended
not to it; so we sit disconsolate, and Christ is in us, but we look not
after him: A man that waits for a Nobleman; if he come not at the hour
appointed, he goes into a corner and weeps, because he thinks he has taken
distaste, and this, whilst the Nobleman approaches, and is there a great
while, before he knows it; so while we go drooping under our corruptions,
the Lord Christ comes not, and we go to discouragement, and in the mean time
Christ comes, and we see him not. He that goes in a dungeon shall never see
Sunshine, though it shine never so clearly; so when this Son of
Righteousness shines, we go into the dungeon of discouragement, and so
perceive him not, though he shines most clearly.

We also are not able aright to know when should be in us: woe judge upon
false grounds; every sinner sets up a fancy in his own Imagination, that if
Christ comes, strange matters will be wrought. Now framing this fancy in his
conceit, he will take no other evidence of Christ's coming.

It was the fault of Gideon, Judges 6.13. he judges Gods presence there, upon
false grounds; for he was with him, as well to help him bear the misery, as
to deliver him from it; so it is with an humble sinner burdened with the sight
of his abominations; when the Ministers say, The Lord is with you, you broken
sinners, they reply, If the Lord be with us, why is all his befalne us: what,
say some, distempers so violent, corruptions so many, and can the Lord be here?
where are those miracles the Saints heretofore have found? Behold what God did
for David, for Elias, for Paul, they led captivity captive, and were more than
Conquerors over their corruptions, and yet we are burdened with our sins. I
answer, the Lord is as well present to help thee contend against sin, as to
make thee domineere over it. The same Apostle that was more than Conqueror at
one time, was led captive at another, Romans 7.23. And had the flesh lusting
against the Spirit, Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.17. This is your conceit; you think if
the King come, there will be no Traitors; but Traitors will follow the Court:
you think if the King come to your hearts, he must needs promote you to some
place of honor. This is the apprehension of a broken heart: Were Christ in
me, then I should have such and such sufficiency; these are desperate
mistakes, John 20.25. It is a pattern of a broken Soul that depends upon some
stirring apprehension, if I had that ability, if my heart could so break, if I
had such assurance, then Christ were come: You will not believe the King is
come, unless he hug you in his bosom. Thus we judge according to sense, not
according to the promise of Christ, who is blessed for ever: It befalls the
Soul as Jacob, Genesis 45.24. He would not believe their word; but when he saw
their Chariots, then he was persuaded of it: this is the frame of disconsolate
spirits. We have the word of God, to confirm the presence of Christ, unless
you be Charioted with that ability, as to triumph over all sins, your spirits
are not revived, you believe not that Joseph is yet alive, your Savior is with
you.

When our eyes are held, namely when the Luke 24. verse. 32. Did not our hearts
burn in us; as who should say, there was testimony enough, of a divine
presence, it was a Christ that spoke, but we were not able to see it: So when
the soul is taken up with two hurries, partly with temptation, partly with
worldly occasions, it sees not Christ, though the heart burns toward him:
this is the ground, why, when Satan lets fly, though we propound never so
many promises, always those perplexed Spirits forget what is spoken, and their
mind is only upon temptation: They attend not Christ in the promise, because
their eyes are held, though they be in their privy Chamber, and may talk with
our Savior, Psalm. 13.23.

The Lord Jesus, out of our just desert, does hide himself, Esaias 8.17. Psalm.
31.22. Now Christ hides himself in these three cases.

Chron. 15.1. He is with us, while we are with him: If then the Saints break
company, no marvel though Christ withdraw his society, John 19.21. This is the
tenure of Christ's manifestation, provided we love him; but if not, he is
gone, Psalm. 51. Create a new Spirit within me, (as who should say) all is to
begin a new. This God does so show his indignation against sin, he will not
bear nor bolster it, no not in his own, and this God does not only when they
sin foully, but when they are at truce with a distemper, though but an
Infirmity: as for example, if a Christian be overtaken ordinarily with a
choleric distemper, if a Christian be eager of the world, or grows dead in
services, it is just with God, that these men should be destitute of their
comforts.

When the Saints of God grow wanton, abusing Cant. 5.2. Psalm. 30.6.

The Lord hides himself by way of prevention, John 16.12. If there were high
sails upon a little Bark, they would drown it in stead of carrying of it: So
men proportion their sails, according to their Bark. This is one maine
ground, why God takes away the sense of his favor: The Sea is the world, the
Soul sails about, and a little gale carries it on, but if it should have
great sails, they would drown it; not that grace does this, the fault is not
in the sails, but in the boat that will not bear, etc. So the fault is not in
grace, but in the Soul, that cannot bear it: This is the reason why many men
have smoken out their days in sorrow, and at their death have great assurance:
It was the speech of a good man, that God will not always give his servants a
cup of Sack; his meaning was, he would not always comfort them; the comforts
of Gods Spirit are better than wine, now much of this comfort with a proud
heart, would cause him to trample upon every man: Therefore God keeps the cup
to the last. If while therefore God keeps us under hatches, if while he
withdrawes his hand, we do contend with the Almighty, and often say, why
should I pray, and God answers not, hear and God accepts not? if when we are
kept low, and do thus, if then we had what we would, certainly we would
turn our backs to the Almighty and say, as they in Jeremy 2.31. We will come
no more unto thee: Therefore it is good for God to do thus, we are not able
to bear this sail, else God would give it.

hearted sinners, go your ways with comfort, and the God of heaven go with
you, nay, he is with you, he will meet with you at home, nay, he will meet
with you in the midway; what ever thy sins, or miseries, or wants be, here
is consolation, yea abundant consolation, to support the heart, if thou be a
poor broken hearted sinner, it is enough, the Lord Christ will come into your
souls, and let then what will, or can come, the Lord Jesus will come, and that
suddenly. But you will say, So many are the sins that lie upon me, my
corruptions like clouds, come in upon me, all my oaths and drunkenness, all
pride, and looseness, and vanity, and earthly mindedness, all my corruptions
come in upon me, and the guilt remains, and they are not pardoned: their
horror remains, and I cannot get my soul pacified in the assurance of the
forgiveness of them: that pride, and adultery, and drunkenness, army after
army, Legion after Legion of sins, press in upon me. Are your souls thus
perplexed with miseries? why, I beseech you, consider what I say: art thou
humbled thou polluted heart? art thou oppressed with thy corruptions? does thy
soul say, it is the greatest burden I have, the greatest wound I feel; if my
heart were but rid of my sins, my soul should be quiet, and my heart
pacified; why then, If the Lord sees thee humbled, he will never see thee
corrupted, he will come suddenly: let all thy corruptions come accusing, let
all thy sins rise up at arms against thee: yet if thy heart be broken for
these, and humbled in the consideration of these, and resolved to forsake them,
the Lord will come suddenly, and then mercy will come to pardon all, to subdue
all these cursed distempers that hang upon thee: But you will say, What, will
this Lord come into my soul, this wretched soul, these mud-walls, this
abominable heart; what to me, will the Lord come to my temple? such hideous
sins have I committed, and the Lord come into such a rotten cottage, and such
a base cursed heart as mine? Aye, mark what the text says, I stand at the
door and knock; If any man will open, I will come in. He knocks at the door
of every proud person, and adulterer, and drunkard: if any adulterous person
will open, the Lord will come and sanctify him: If any unclean wretch will
open, the Lord will come and release him from all abomination: what a comfort
is this then? let Satan accuse us, and sin condemn us, if the Lord will
comfort us, who can discourage us? if the Lord will save us, who can condemn
us? Again, as this is comfort against all sins, so there is mavelous
comfort against all extremities and miseries: If thou art humbled, let miseries
come, and troubles and temptations come, and Christ will come too, into an
humble Soul, in all weaknesses, Christ will come, to strengthen in all
disgraces: and will come to honor thee, here is comfort: The favor of men
goes away, the nearer a man goes to God, the farther they go from him, he
is a stranger now to his brother, and an aliant to his mothers Son: why, let
thy wants be what they will, and let troubles come, and weakness come, though
they come, the Lord will not go away; though friends be far off, the Lord
will be near unto thee: Be therefore comforted, for even the wise man says, a
man will change honor to get a commodity, sometimes he will part with
honor, for profit, and money will supply all; whatsoever the world can do,
money can do. Therefore this quiets the rich man; I have it by me, I have
many wants, that is no matter, I have it by me in money: happily he wants a
house, that's no matter, he has it by him in money, and therefore can build
him one: he wants clothes to cloth him; but he has it in money, and that
will buy them, (thus money answers to all.) You that are broken hearted sinners
go home cheerfully, eat your bread with glad hearts: the Lord accepts you, and
how ever men will not look after you, but look aloof: go home, and the Lord
comfort you more and more, know the Lord Christ comes suddenly and answers to
all; it was the speech of Christ to his Disciples: Fear not little flock, it
is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom: You are troubled, you shall have a
Kingdom, that will quiet you: you are disgraced, you shall have a Kingdom,
that will honor you: you are in persecution, you shall have a Kingdom, that
will comfort you. Let an humble Soul go down into the Sea, and fly into the
uttermost parts of the earth, yet it will comfort thee, the Lord will come
suddenly, and bring his provision with him; wheresoever thou art, he will be
with thee, to comfort thee and cheer thee. You little ones that are humbled,
it is not your Fathers pleasure only to give you a Kingdom, but his Son and
he answers all: what though thou have many miseries? thou have a Christ that
is the God of all mercies: thou have many sins, what of that? thou have a
Christ, that is the God of all grace; where ever thou art, he will be with
thee; though thou were banished, yet he will wander up and down all the
wilderness, but he will find thee and bring thee upon his shoulders, to cheer
thee, and comfort thee here, and give the end of thy hopes hereafter: If we be
not comforted hereby, it is a shame, therefore let every sad Soul take his
part: if you have Christ, you have enough, though you never see good day after.

Now we come to the second doctrine.

Ezekiel. 16.8.









He undertakes for it, (namely) he takes upon him, to shelter it from all the
evil which it could not avoid: I told you before, the sinner sees his
vileness of sin, and desires now to be freed, but cannot deliver himself,
and therefore sues to Christ. Now our Savior steps in, and says, he will
undertake to pay all: If men be oppressed with some outrageous enemy, they
seek to some sorraigne Prince, and submit to him, if he will take the
protection of them. So when the Soul is oppressed with too many sins, with too
heavy pangs, it falls down and desires Christ to be Lord protector of it; and
then presently Christ comes and frees it from the evil. 35. Numb. 25. it was
an Injunction, that the manslayer should fly to the Cities of refuge, and they
should open the gate to him: the manslayer is the poor sinner that is
pursued, now he flies to the Lord Jesus, his refuge (as David often speaks.)
Now Christ receives and delivers him from the hand of the avenger. The dangers
of an humble heart are three, for which Christ undertakes; first, the justice
of the Father not satisfied; secondly, the temptation of Satan not conquered;
thirdly, Sin, not yet subdued: All these the Soul sinkes under, and cries,
who will deliver me: when the heart is thus, Christ is come to rescue it, and
says, be comforted: the justice of my Father I will satisfy, the malice of
Satan I will cross, the power of corruption I will cashiere.

The sinner sees a just God, that will have his therefore comforted, Christ's
word will go, he desires no other pacifier.

Temptation is subdued, sin and Satan must give way: That supreme authority
makes sin and Satan vanish. Rev. 1.18. A key is an ensign of authority, he
that has the Key, may let in and shut out whom he will. So Christ can bring
out whom he will, Ephesians. 4.8. Look how Conquerours lead captived slaves, so
Christ leads sin and death, Luke 10.18. When the Scepter of Christ was
displayed, Satan fell like lightning.

Romans 8.3. Christ condemns sin in the flesh: to condemn sin, is as much
as, when a man has cast in his cause, he lays claim to a thing, and is cast
by law. So sin lays claim to the Soul: and Christ comes and condemns
sin in the flesh: He makes the cause go against sin: for sin claims
right on this ground, every son of Adam is the child of disobedience, he is
under my power, and death is his due from me. Now Christ answers, Those for
whom the sin of Adam has been satisfied, over those sin has no possession:
but the Soul is such; does Adams sin remain? I have satisfied for it. Is
sin strong? I have led captivity captive: thus sin loses his cause, this
is to condemn sin in the flesh, Acts 26.18. First they were turned from the
power of Satan, and then followed remission of sins, and sanctification.

He disposes of the Soul for his best advantage; Ier. 4.3. overspread with
thorns. When sin and Satan rule the heart, they blind it, and the whole
entertainment on our part, as God calls, so the Soul entertaines that call:
and that appears in two things.

The sinner receives the work of grace and

The soul being emptied, and having received Psalm. 27.8. Like that of the men
of Syria 1 Kings 20.32.33. When Ahab said, my brother Benhadad, so the sinner
waits and looks, when will God have mercy, at last God says, my son, and
the Soul answers, thy Son Lord, Ier. 3.22. mark how they answer: Behold
we come, for thou art the Lord our God: The Lord says, come away, and the
Soul says, behold I come, 1. Cor. 6.17. Its the same voice that ecchos, the
same beam that reflects from the wall: So it is the same spirit that returns
the voice: and this answer of the Soul, we term faith. Now we have cut out
our work, and for the further handling, we have chosen this text, which is, to
discover this work of vocation.


