THE UNBELIEVERS PREPARING FOR CHRIST.

LVKE 1.17. To make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

By T. HOOKER

LONDON, Printed by The Cotes for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
Black Bear in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

Several Treatises of this AUTHOR.
1. THE Unbelievers preparing for Christ, out of, Revelations 22.17. 1 Corinthians.
2.14. Ezekiel 11.19. Luke 19.42. Matthew 20.3, 4, 5, 6. John 6.44.
2. The soul Preparation for Christ, or a Treatise of Contrition, on Acts
2.37. 3. The Souls Humiliation, on Luke 15. Verses 15, 16, 17, 18. 4. The
Souls Vocation, or Effectual Calling to Christ, on John 6.45. 5. The Souls
Union with Christ, 1 Cor. 6.17. 6. The Souls benefit from union with Christ,
on 1 Cor. 1.30. 7. The Souls Justification, eleven Sermons on 2 Corinthians. 5.21.
8. Sermons on I^dges 10.23. on Psalm 119.29. on Proverbs 1.28, 29. on 2 Timothy
3.5.

PREPARING FOR CHRIST.
REV. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him taste of the water of life freely.


BEfore the soul of a man can partake of the benefits of Christ, two things
are required: First, that the soul be prepared for Christ. Secondly, that the
soul be implanted into Christ. Concerning preparation, there has been two
doctrines handled out of Luke, 1.17. The first of which, That the soul of a
poor sinner must be prepared for the Lord Jesus Christ, before it can receive
him, and comfort from him. The second doctrine was, That a powerful Ministry
is the ordinary means that the Lord has appointed to prepare the soul of a
poor sinner soundly for Christ. Now we are to proceed in this preparation,
and in the handling of this general preparation, two things are to be
considered. First, the general circumstances that pertain to preparation: And
secondly, the substantial parts of preparation. For the general circumstances
which are most remarkable in preparation, they are twofold; some on Gods part,
and these are, First, the freeness of the offer of his grace. Secondly, the
universality of this offer of grace, To all. And thirdly, the easiness of the
condition whereupon he offers it, Whosoever will may receive it, and that
freely. On man's part, two things are to be considered. First, he must consider
that his own corruption does oppose this grace of God. And secondly, he must
consider, that God has appointed to work this grace in man, and to take away
man as corruption which opposes the same. So that there be five things
considerable in preparation, Five things in Prepatation.
as general circumstances thereof, before we come to the substantial parts of
it. The first is this, 1.
namely, That the offer of grace, that God propounds to his, 2.
and will work in his is free. Secondly, the condition of grace and Gods offer
is this, That a man must will to receive Christ and grace, before he can
receive Christ and grace. 3.
Thirdly, H^ that does truly will to receive Christ and grace, shall have
Christ and grace. 4.
And fourthly, That no man of himself naturally can will that he may receive
Christ. Lastly, That God will work a will in his servants to receive the Lord
Jesus Christ, 5.
and then he will bestow him upon them. And these are the five passages which
are general circumstances of preparation. And three of these points which are
the three first, we have in this text, Every man that will let him take freely
of the water of life; here is the free offer of Gods mercy and goodness. Here
also we see that a man must will Christ and grace before he can have Christ.
And thirdly, that he that does truly will Christ shall have him, and grace and
salvation by him.

We will open a word or two in the text, and so proceed. First, we must see
what is meant here by water. Secondly, what is meant by water of life. First,
what is meant by water: by water is meant here the Spiritual grace of God,
together with the immediate assistance of his holy Spirit in the working of the
same upon the soul of man.

In water here we may conclude two things, not only the grace which God does
convey to the souls of his people, but also the assistance of the Spirit
working the same in the soul; look for the truth of this, the 7. of John 38,
39. He that believes on me (says the text) as the Scripture says, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water. Now what are these waters here spoken
of; in the next verse the text says, This spoke our Savior of the Spirit,
which they that believed on him should receive from him, that is, the working
assistance of his Spirit. So that we see in this place of S. John, this phrase
is expounded, and so the 4. of John the 10. verse, the like phrase is used.
There our Savior replieth to the woman of Samaria after this manner. If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, give me to drink,
Thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. And
so in the 14 verse. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water, springing up into everlasting life. That is, he that receives the
grace of Gods Spirit, and the assistance thereof, It shall be a well of water
to him, springing up into everlasting life. Hence it is that Christ is called,
The fountain of the garden: and a well of living water, Can. 4.15. Ier. 2.14.
He is called, The fountain of living waters; My people (says the text) have
forsaken the fountain of living waters, and have hewn unto them Cisternes,
even broken Cisternes that can hold no water. So that Christ Jesus is the
fountain; the grace of God are the rivers, and the operation of the Spirit, as
the streams, which make glad the City of God: or else, Christ is the Conduit,
the graces of God the cock, and the operation of the Spirit is the drawer of
the water which comes into the souls of his servants. So that we see plainly,
that by water is meant the graces of Gods Spirit, which God is pleased to
convey and work in the souls of his servants. The second phrase in the text
is water of life: and we must see what is meant by that, it is as much as if a
man should say quickening grace: and that is said to be the water of life in two
regards, First, because it is that which begets a spiritual life in us; a man
is dead without the Lord Jesus, and the graces of his Spirit, Without me you
can do nothing, says our Savior: but look as it is with the graft which is
out of the Stock, it prospers not, nor brings forth fruit, but withers
away; So those that are not engrafted into Christ, which have not the power of
Christ to assist them, they are dead in trespasses and sins; but when this
grace and Spirit comes, it is a lively grace, and a quickening Spirit; it begets
life in the soul of a man. In the 47 of Ezech. verse. 9. the Prophet there
discovering the time of the Gospel, and the offer of salvation therein, he
says there, Every thing shall live whithersoever this river comes: The
rivers there are nothing else but the rivers of grace and salvation; when
Christ shall come, abundance of grace shall be offered and wrought in the
souls of Gods people, and wheresoever this grace comes, those that be dead
shall be quickened. Secondly, they are said to be waters of life, in regard of
the continuance of them, for wheresoever this grace is truly wrought, it never
cease; so says our Savior, Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that
I shall give him, shall never thirst. This water is not like a pit or standing
poole, that in the heat of summer is dried up, but it runs amain
continually. So that the frame of the words run thus; Whosoever will, let him
come and take living water, living and quickening grace from Jesus Christ
freely, whereby a soul may be quickened and saved: here is a proclamation,
Whoever will, let him come, and take the Lord Christ, and grace and salvation
by him freely, he will not repine at the favor he vouchsafes unto us; take
more hope, more faith, more sanctification; come, and come freely, and the more
oftener ye come, the more welcome shall you be: This is the substance of the
words in the text; wherein we have these three points formerly spoken of.
First, here we have the freeness of Gods mercy, Whoever will, let him take of
the water of life freely: as who should say, shall any man bring money with him
and buy grace? no, no, let him take the Spirit freely. Secondly, A man must
will Christ, before he can receive Christ and grace from him, and this is the
second thing in the text. The third is, That every man that does truly will
Christ and grace, shall have Christ and grace from him. Men think that they
would be saved, every man will be ready to say, I would have Christ rule in me,
but this same willing of Christ is a hard matter; whosoever does will heartily
to receive Christ, shall have him and salvation by him: but we shall find it
a hard matter to bring our hearts to this willing of Christ, as we shall here
hereafter; and thus we see the three points that arise out of the text, and by
this time we are entered into our work, let us proceed with the pursuit of
the first point, which is this, The offer of grace from God is altogether free.
There is nothing but only Gods will that moves him, nothing but his own good
pleasure that persuades him to show mercy to a poor soul, there is nothing
out of God that can move him, or purchase this favor from him, but it is from
out of the goodness of his nature, and the freeness of his will, he will have
it so. In the 21 of the Revel. 6. there is a marvelous pregnant place for this
purpose, there says the text, I will give unto him that is a thirst, of the
fountain of the water of life freely. There are three things or phrases
considerable. First, God will give him to drink, and what is freer than gift;
nay, that we may know that he will not give it us upon any consideration, he
will give it freely; nay, mark further, he will give it to every one that
thirsts: though a man desires it earnestly, even as a man that is a thirst
desires drink, though he do what he can to obtain it, though he use all
means for the procuring of it, yet God will give it him, and that freely; and
this cuts the throats of merit-mongers the Papists, that stand so much upon
their merits, and therefore it is observeable in the 4. of Zach. 7.9. in the
building of the material Temple, the text says, That Zerubbabels hands which
had laid the foundation thereof, should finish it. The same hand which laid the
first stone, so the same hand should lay the last: the meaning of the place is
this; when the poor people of Israel were to build the Temple in time of
persecution, they had no ability of themselves to do it, yet the Lord bids them
go on cheerfully, for I will dispose of all things, for the gold and silver is
mine: and hereby the Lord does quippe at a secret ^onceite of theirs; they
might think with themselves, alas, we have no gold, we have no silver, how
shall we bring this work to pass; the Lord he answers this secret objection
of theirs, and tells them the gold is mine, the silver is mine, the hands of
Zeru^babell that has laid the first stone, shall bring forth the headstone
thereof, and what is the ground of all this, the reason is rendered in the 7.
verse. All the people shall cry grace, grace; as if they had said, Grace has
sent means, grace has continued means, grace has given us hearts to use the
means, all is grace, nothing but grace and mercy has done it; thus the people
admired at Gods great goodness, that did so help them, and shouted crying,
grace, grace: And as it was thus in the material Temple, so it is here in the
building of the soul a Temple for the Lord. The beginning of grace, the
receiving of grace, the continuing of grace, all is grace grace: from the
beginning of election, to the end of glorification; from the beginning of
conversion, to the end of salvation, all is grace and mercy; nothing but grace
that does all, works all, prepares all for the good of Gods people. Gods grace
and mercy is altogether free, and the freedom of it appears in these three
particulars. It is free, First, ^nregard of the preparation of the means of
grace that God has invented; the means of salvation which God has invented
for his people being fallen in Adam, was altogether free, for when Adam had
forsaken God and hearkened to the enemy, had left the way of holiness, and went
into the way of confusion, it was free with God whither he would help him or
no; when Adam had spent the patrimony which God had given him, it was free
whether God would set him up again or no, free it was in God the Father, which
appointed the Son as the means; free it was in Christ Jesus, that took the
task upon him; and free in the holy Spirit, that wrought grace and salvation
in the hearts of Gods people; God out of his free will gave his Son to
redeem mankind, and Christ gave himself freely, and the holy Ghost does
freely work comfort in the hearts of Gods chosen: it was free with God to
appoint Christ for the means, free with Christ to be the means, free with the
Spirit to work the means.

Secondly, as it is free in regard of the appointing the means, so likewise in
regard of the Revelation of the means to any soul, it was free with God,
whether he would enlighten any man's eyes, and bring Salvation unto him; why
does God rain upon one City and not upon another? that is, why does the dew
of the Gospel rain upon one place, and not upon another? it is for nothing
but because it is Gods will it should be so; in the 4 of Luke the 25. the place
is very pregnant for this purpose, There says the text many widows were in
Israel, in the days of Elias, when the heavens were shut up three years and
six months, but to none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta a City of
Sidon, unto a woman which was a widow; and this was only out of Gods free
grace: he may take the means from one man, and give it to another, he may send
his Gospel and the means of Salvation to one poor soul, to one poor town
in a Shire or County, and not to another, according to his own good pleasure,
for his mercy is free, look into the 17 of the Acts the 30. together with the
6 of the Acts the 1. for those two places interpret one another, in the 17 of
Acts the 30. the text says, And the times of this ignorance God winked at, now
the word winked as is the sa^e with the word neglected Act. 6.1. there says
the text, There arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because
their widows were neglected in the daily ministration, the word in the
Original, signifies not to regard a thing, and the same does the word winked
at ^ignifie, in Acts 17.30. The Lord winked at this ignorance, as if he should
say, the Lord over-looked and regarded it not: the heathen they never had the
knowlede of his laws, he neglected the heathen, and had an eye only upon the
jews; he vouchsafed his grace, and ordinary means of Salvation to them only,
and why was this? it was of his free mercy, of his own good pleasure, and for
the others, the abuse of their knowledge: and as the freedom of Gods grace and
mercy appears in the appointing of the means, and in Revelation of the
means; so

Thirdly, it appears in the blessing of the means, it is in the free mercy of
God, that any means of Grace and Salvation are blessed unto men, and that they
work upon the souls of men, 1 Cor. 1.21. there says the text, after that in
the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of Preaching, to save them that believe: how comes it to pass,
that men believe and are saved? why? it is because it pleases God, it is not
because men could procure this, but it is of Gods mere good will, of his free
goodness and mercy; and this was the cause of our Savior Christ's great
thankes-giving, Math. 11.25, 26. many poor souls were converted by the
Preaching of his Apostles, and therefore says Christ, I thank thee O Father
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, even so father, for it seemed good
in thy sight; the reason why God did this, was because it was his good
pleasure; so then the point stands fair, in regard of explication; Namely
that the offer of grace is free, free in regard of the means that God has
appointed free in regard of the Revelation of the means appointed, free in
regard of the blessing of the means revealed. But you will say, what is the
reason of this? by what argument can you prove that the offer of grace is thus
free? The reasons briefly are three: First, this offer of grace musts needs
be free, because there is nothing in man that can purchase this, in the 8 of
the Acts 19.20. when Simon Magus saw that the Apostles by laying on of hands
conveyed the grace of the Spirit into men's souls, he thought to have gotten a
booty, and have done so also, and offered money, that he might receive that
gift, but mark how Saint Peter took him up with indignation, Thy money perish
with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money, thou have neither part nor lot in this matter. It was a marvelous
fearful sin, and therefore the Apostle Peter, bad him pray that if it were
possible, the thought of his heart might be forgiven him. It is a vain thing
to conceive, and a great sin to think or imagine, that grace can be
purchased from God by any thing that we have received; for there must be some
proportion between the price, and the thing that is bought in common reason,
but in the 3. of the Prove. 14, 15. Solomon says, That the Merchandise of
Wisdom (that is, of the wisdom of God, wrought by the Spirit of God) is
better than the Merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold,
she is more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire, are
not to be compared unto her. There is no proportion between any thing and this
wisdom; no, no; they that think that God loves them any whit the better,
because they are rich and learned, and honorable, let them know, that all
those things are dung in regard of the graces of Gods Spirit. If any think to
buy grace they shall perish, and their money with them; for the offer of grace
is free.

And secondly, as there is nothing that can purchase grace, so we can do
nothing that can merit grace, for some man may say; however I have no money to
purchase it, yet I can work it out, as poor men use to say to those for whom
they work, when they would have any commodity of them, they tell them they
have no money to pay them for it, but they will work it out by their handy
labor. But alas, there is nothing that can be done of the sinful son of
man, that can procure any thing from God this way, as we may see, Romans 9.16. It
is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy. It is not our willing, our working, our running, what ever we have, or
can do, is nothing for the procuring of grace in this kind; it is God alone
that shows mercy. Thus he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
compassion on whom he will have compassion, and whom he will he hardneth, Romans
9.18. If thou should mark what is done amiss, (says the Prophet David)
who could abide it. If God should enter into judgment with any poor soul
upon the earth, there were no living for him, he could expect nothing but
death, and the fierce anger of God continually to pursue him; and therefore
far it is from man to have any thing that can procure grace at the hand of
God.

Thirdly, a man naturally has no ground whereby he can challenge this by way
of promise from the Lord, no natural man has any promise in this kind, The
promises are Yea and Amen, to them that are in Christ; to them that are called,
and converted and brought home to Christ, to those they are all, yea,
confirmed; and amen, concluded; yea, made; and amen, performed: but a man by
nature can claim nothing at Gods hands but hell and damnation, and therefore
all the plagues and punishments that befall wicked men, are the fruits of their
own labors, they are their own, they have the fruit of their own tree; so
Judas is said, to go to his own place. In the 3. of Esaias, the 9. there says
the text, Woe unto the wicked, for they have rewarded evil to their own
souls, the reward of their hands shall be giver them, for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. They can challenge confusion and everlasting
destruction, this is their own; Judas went to his own, he had his own
share, and his own condem^ation, they were his own, his own sins procured
them: but as for the obtaining of Christ, and of grace and salvation, there is
nothing that can do it, it is of the free mercy and goodness of God
Godliness ^s great gain, says the Apostle, it has the promise of this life,
and of the life to come: but an ungodly man there is no promise at all made
unto him, he can challenge nothing from God by way of promise, so that by this
time we have the proof of the point; namely, That the offer of grace is
altogether free: for we have nothing can purchase grace, we can do nothing
that can procure grace, we have no right whereby we may challenge grace by
way of promise naturally, and therefore the case is clear, That we have grace
freely from the hand of God. We see the point cleared, the doctrine confirmed
and established.

The use of it is two fold, partly to the Saints of God that have received
grace: partly to those that want grace.

First, for the Saints of God that have received grace, I beseech you think of
it, it is a truth that cannot be denied, proved by reason strong, and Scripture
plain; that whatsoever we have from the beginning of conversion, to the end
of salvation, is free grace. Why, me thinks your hearts should answer, we
ought to be stirred up, the more to magnify the mercy of God, and so much the
more to be thankful unto him for this mercy which our poor souls have
received at his hands: the freer the grace of God is which he offers unto
us, the greater our thanksgiving, the greater the acknowledgement of the
goodness of the Lord ought to be: those whom God has given any assurance of
sound grace; that Christ is there, that salvation is there, they do not know
how much beholding they are to God for the same, for this proceeds altogether
of his free mercy, look up therefore unto God, and bless God for it, this is
that which did drive the Prophet Micah to a stand, Mica. 7.18, 19. there faith
he, Who is a Godlike unto our God, that pardons iniquities, and passes by
the transgression of the remnant of his people, he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy, he will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, he will ^ubdu^ our iniquities, and thou will cast all our
sins into the bottom of the sea; as who should say, here is a God indeed,
who is like our God, who has pardoned all our sins, why? because his mercy
pleased him, because he delights in goodness, no God like Jehovah, no
Redeemer like Christ, no Comforter like the Spirit, all sins pardoned, and all
iniquities cast into the bottom of the Sea; but what is the ground of all,
because his mercy pleased him; as if he had said, Men will do no good unto us
unless they see good in us, unless they expect some good and profit from us,
but who is like our God, no man is like unto him, he has passed by our
transgressions, and subdued our iniquities, and given us the graces of his
spirit, not because we pleased him, or did any thing that could deserve this
at his hands, but it was his free mercy that moved him, all our peevishness,
all our looseness, all our carelessness, all our sins subdued, and thrust
into the bottom of the Sea and pardoned, and why? because we pleased God? no,
because his mercy pleased him; this is God full of grace, full of mercy, full
of goodness and compassion, no God like our God, no mercy like this; no grace,
no goodness, no compassion, like unto this, and therefore you poor Saints
that have received any grace from the hand of the Lord, go into some secret
place, and say unto your souls, and plead with your own hearts, and provoke
your souls to thankesgiving, for Gods mercy toward you: reason with thy
heart, and provoke thy spirit to take notice of Gods mercy, and say, How is it
Lord, that many that have lived in the same town, in the same family, nay the
same man that is under the same ministry that I am, that hears the same
Sermons that I do, and sits in the same seat with me, how is it that such a
poor man or woman is still in the gall of bitterness, in the bond of
iniquity, still in the snare of death, and under the power of Satan; Father how
comes it? why is it that my mind is enlightened? why was my heart humbled? why
did thou give me any care to walk with thee, and to forsake my sins, and
abandon my former lusts and corruptions, why is this Lord, it was of thine own
free mercy Lord, for I had nothing which could purchase this at thy hands; I
could do nothing that might procure it; I could claim no promise naturally
from thee in this kind: if thou can think thus, and say thus, go thy ways
and be as thankful as thou can to such a God, that has done this for thee,
and plead with the Lord, as the Prophet David did, What is man that thou
should be so mindful of him, and what is the son of man, that thou
should regard him; why Lord? thou mindful of me when I forgot my self, when
I ran headlong into all wickedness, as profane as ever any soul was, oh!
those days which I now remember with grief of soul, when my heart rose up
against thee and thy ministers, and yet thou Lord, mindful of such a sinful
wretch as I am, that forgot my self and my own salvation, why what am I Lord,
and what is this poor soul of mine, that thou should remember me; oh! do
thus and think of this, and remember that our Savior Christ when the Apostles
Preached the Gospel, here was a poor man on one side converted, and a poor
woman on another, when the Lord Jesus saw this, why I bless thee Father says
he Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have revealed these things to the poor
of the world, and denied them to great ones; take this to your hearts, the
poor receive the Gospel, the rich they are so full and so delighted in these
earthly things, here below, that they have no room for any spiritual grace;
but you that are Saints of God, that have received any grace, think of this,
let your souls bless God, even extraordinarily, and say, I thank thee
Father, that that thou have hid these things from the wise, and from the rich,
and from the noble, and have revealed them unto babes, that thou have taught
me, a poor silly creature, that thou have wrought upon my heart, and showed me
Christ Jesus, when as most in the world have not seen him, nor salvation, many
great ones, and mighty ones thou have sent packing to hell, but me a blind
creature, out of a poor cottage, out of a corner of hell, thou have plucked
and given me salvation: Father I bless thee for this, for it was of thy free
mercy. I beseech thee to give me a free hear^ to bless thee for this thy
wonderful mercy vouchsafed unto me, and to walk worthy of thee. What, shall
thou give thy self freely for my poor soule^ and shall not I give thee a good
action freely? thus stir up your own hearts to bless God for this his great
mercy: the greater the grace is which he vouchsafes unto you, the greater your
thankfulness ought to be: and so much for this use, it should stir up every
poor soul that has received any grace, to go into a comer, and look up to
heaven, and be amazed at Gods great mercy, and say, Father I have received
grace, and why I^ there is no reason Lord for it, but because thy mercy pleased
thee.

The second use is to the wicked themselves, those that yet want this mercy, to
those that are yet in the gall of bitterness, is it so that Gods grace and
mercy is altogether free; then this may be a ground of encouragement unto them
to seek after this mercy: they may think with themselves thus, why, the offer
of grace is free, and therefore why may not I come to have some of this mercy
as well as another; though they are yet in the snare of Satan, under the power
of sin, and in the bond of iniquity, yet the freeness of Gods mercy may
encourage them to seek to God for this grace, and to sustain their hearts in
some hope that they may obtain it. Why, it is a free mercy, and therefore why
may not thou have it as well as another, it is freely given, and why may
not thou receive it as well as another, it is worth the while to seek after
grace and mercy, for there is some hope and expectation to attain it; This was
the ground why the Prophet Esaias did persuade all people to come unto the Lord
Jesus, Esaias, 55.1. Why says he, Every one that thirsts come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine
and milk without money, and without price: Come you that have no money, says
the text; the people might make a cavil, and say, Why? we want money to buy,
to what end therefore should we come; the text answers this and says, Come you
that have no money, and buy without money: What is the meaning of this, that
is, you that have no sufficiency to procure grace and salvation, though you
have no ability of your selves to purchase this, yet come and come freely, and
buy without money, as if he should say, If you will but come and take grace,
this is all God looks for, all that the Lord expects and desires, you may have
it for the taking, you may receive grace for the carrying of it away, though
your weakness be great, and your infirmities many, yet if you have but ability
to take grace and carry it away, this is enough, this is all that God requires
at your hands; and this is that which makes the Saints of God in the 14. of
Hos. 3. to go unto God, and renounce all others, there says the text, A shur
shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more
to the works of our hands, Ye are our gods; and what is the ground of all
this, for with thee, the fatherless finds mercy: so that, have thou a
desolate soul, why, be of good comfort, and be encouraged to go to God for
help, for he does not succor men because they have strength, but he helps
those that are succourlesse.

Art thou fatherless, and cast off of the world; have thou a fatherless
soul, a motherlesse soul; that is, a hopeless and a helpelesse soul, that
has no ability to procure mercy, or to purchase grace; why, with God the
fatherless finds mercy; and therefore say, Lord, with thee the fatherless
finds mercy, I am such a one, therefore Lord I expect mercy from thee. If a
great rich man should proclaim, that at such a time every one that will come,
may receive dole from him; if this dole now were to be purchased with money,
none but the rich could receive it, but when he says he will give to every one
that comes a dole freely, then the poor may have it as well as the rich, when
the dole comes not to be purchased, but only to be received, then the beggar
may have it as well as he that has money, for the dole is not to be bought,
but to be received, and therefore every one that has but a bag to put it
in, and ability to carry it away, may have it; consider this ye that God has
not called home, there is a dole of mercy to be given you from God, and God
does not intend to sell his mercy to you, but to bestow it freely upon you, and
therefore if you will but come and receive it, and carry it away, you may have
it, God requirs nothing else of you; and therefore comfort your selves and say,
Why, this mercy of God is free, others have it, and why not I Lord. Come
therefore and wait upon God in his ordinances, think with thy self that the
dole of mercy is to be given at such a place, at such a sermon, and therefore
resolve to go thither, and say, If wisdom, or goodness, or understanding,
would purchase any thing at Gods hand, then miserable creature that I were, for
I have none of those, but the mercy of God is free, there is a dole of mercy
freely to be given, and such and such have had it bestowed upon them, and
therefore why may not I have it as well as others. And therefore natural men
that are burdened with abominations, and full of sin and corruptions, let
them reason with their souls, and say, Why, did God convert Saul, call
Abraham, and humble Manasses, why? God did this freely, of his free mercy and
goodness, did he? and why then may not I receive this mercy from the hand of
the Lord also? and when your own weaknesses trouble you, and your sins and
infirmities lie sore upon you, why, then help your own souls in this kind,
and say, I can do nothing that can procure grace, no more could David, I have
nothing that can purchase favor and mercy at Gods hands, no more had Saul, and
yet God was merciful to them: why, he is as merciful now as he was then, his
goodness is not diminished, nor his mercy abated. Lord thou that shewedst
mercy to these, show mercy to me also; thou that did bless these Lord,
bless me, even me also. Lord thou bestowest thy mercy freely, I beseech thee
therefore bestow one drop upon my poor soul. Aye, but some may cavil now and
say, Gods mercy is free, and therefore he may as well deny it me as bestow it
upon me. I answer, this is true, he may deny it thee as well as give it thee,
and he may also as well give it thee as deny it thee; it is as possible that
thou may receive mercy, and therefore try all means possible to obtain it.
In the 3. of Jonah, the 9. verse. there the people of Niniveh say, Who can tell
if God will turn and repent, The Lord there had sent the Prophet Jonah, to
prophecy against Niniveh, That within forty days it should be destroyed, When
the people heard this, there was a fast proclaimed, and every man was commanded
to put on sackcloth and cry mightily to the Lord, for who can tell if God will
turn and repent, and turn away from his feirce anger, that we perish not: as
if they should say, We have deserved that this judgment should come upon us,
and our sins have procured it, but yet who can tell whither God will turn
away from his feirce anger, for the Lord is merciful, and freely merciful:
and thus do thou, and say, I confess God may confound me for my sins, but
who can tell whither God will have mercy upon me; I confess that God may
harden me, but who can tell whither he will humble me, I will therefore wait
upon him in his ordinances, and try if he will be merciful to my poor soul.

The third use is an use of Exhortation to all poor creatures, that are
burdened with the burden of their sins, and are under the power of them, as
to be encouraged to seek for mercy, and to have some hope to obtain it, so
also with patience to wait and stay the time of the Lord; this should exhort
them to come continually into the Congregation of Gods Saints, and wait
patiently when, and what God will bestow upon them, according to his good will
and pleasure. The mercy and grace which God bestows upon any, is a free gift,
and therefore if you come into the Assemblies of Gods people, to hear Gods
word; if thou wait upon God in his ordinances one day, and have not grace
granted unto you, nor mercy vouchsafed toward you, if you come the next day
and yet have it not, you must still wait and expect because it is a free gift,
and therefore as God may give it to whom he will, so also when he will, and
therefore murmr not, nor say what shall I come so often, and wait so long,
and pray so much, and yet nothing? why? aye it is a free gift, in the 3 of
Lament. 25.26. the text says, The Lord is good unto them that wait for him,
it is good that a man should both quietly hope, and wait for the salvation of
the Lord, as it is with the sea, when it ebbes the water goes back, when it
flows and is at the maine it comes again: now a man that is to take a
journey by sea, if the coming of the tide be not for his turn, and is gone
back, he must wait until it comes again; so it is with God in this
kind, there is a flow of grace and mercy with him, now sometimes God
withdraws his grace from his poor creatures, but yet let them cry still, and
pray still, and resolve so to do still; do not say, If God will not succor
me, and bestow mercy and grace upon me, now seeing I have waited so long, I
will pray no more, I will expect no longer; and will you not so? why? alas who
shall have the worst, you will be sure to have the worst of it: you that will be
so sturdy, that because God hears not, and helps not when you will, and when
you call, therefore you will pray no more, nor expect no longer; you that say,
you have waited thus long and have not had grace nor mercy vouchsafed unto you,
and therefore to what end, to what purpose should we wait any longer, or
attend any more? why if it be thus with you, you may depart if you please; who
think you, shall have the worst of it^ beggars must not be choosers, this is
not begging of mercy but commanding of mercy at Gods hands; this is not to
desire that God would give you mercy, but that he would follow you with mercy.
Some man may say, What shall I use the means so long, pray so often, and hear
Sermons so often, and still wait? aye and bless God that thou may wait,
bless God that thou have not been long since confounded, that God has not
long before this time sent thee packing to hell, but that thou have still
opportunities, that thou still have peace and the means of Salvation afforded
thee: shall thou wait? aye, and bless God that thou may wait, before thou
go hence, and he no more seen, Psalm. 69.3. Psalm. 69.3.
there says the Prophet David, I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried,
mine eyes fail while I wait for my God; as if he had said, I have looked this
day and heard thy Word, this day I have looked up to heaven in prayer and have
not ^ound thee; I wept this day, and mourned this day, I have used all means,
my eyes even fail with waiting for my God: did David wait thus that was a
King? and why may not thou wait? why may not thou stay looking for the
salvation of the Lord, shut down those proud hearts and lofty spirits of yours
which think themselves too good to wait the Lords leisure, and reason with
your own souls, and say, why is not my heart humbled? why are not my
corruptions subdued and abated, as well as others? check and subdue all those
bublings of Spirit in the beginning; see what Paul did, when his heart began to
grapple with God, why, who art thou O man, says he, that thou liftest up thy
self against God, as if he had said, Art not thou a damned creature, sinful
dust and ashes, why, who art thou O man that thou should do thus? so when
thy heart begins to rise against God, suppress those distempers, and say,
who art thou damned sinful soul, that dare thus stand against God? what if
I had gone to hell long before this? why, I had had my portion, if I had been
confounded long since, and sent roaring to hell, my sins had merited it, and
therefore well may I wait for mercy, and thank God that I may wait: down
with those proud imaginations and lofty thoughts that arise in man's heart, and
resolve with David to wait for the Salvation of the Lord, with God is the gate
of mercy, and the fountain of mercy, and this mercy is free, and therefore use
the means still though God hear not, pray still though he accept not, resolve
though thy heart fails, and thy eyes fail, yet to roll in the dust, and call
for mercy, and say Lord thy mercy is free, therefore bless me Lord even me
also.

The 2 conclusion in the text is, that not withstanding this mercy of God is
free, yet a man must have a will to receive grace and mercy, before he can have
it, for says the text, whosoever Will let him take of the water of life
freely, and here we have the reasonableness of the condition, together with
the universality of it, it is not a great thing that God calls for, but if a
man will have mercy, and grace and Salvation, he shall have it. First; a man
must will mercy before he can have mercy, and whosoever does will it shall
have it, and herein is the universality of the condition; so that the doctrine
which arises naturally out of the text, and which is the second general
circumstance of preparation is this, viz. that the soul must be willing to
receive Christ and grace, before it shall have Christ and grace; God will not
save a man against his will, Rev. 3.20. there says the text, Behold I stand at
the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come in to him, etc. the door is the heart, and the knocking is the striving
of the Lord in the use of the means, God stands this day and knocks at this and
all other the like opportunities, the Lord knockes this day, and will come and
knock again the next Sabbath, and the next, the next Lecture, and the next
opportunity, when the minister comes God comes, when he persuades God
persuades, when he threatens God threatens, when he reprooves God reprooves,
sometimes the Lord knocks at the door, sometimes he pickes the lock, thus
every way striving to come in, stands thus knocking, and entreating, exhorting,
persuading, he knocks with much patience and long suffering, if any man will
but open, here is all the Lord requires, all that he expects and looks for,
the opening of the door that is all; the door is the heart, the opening of
the door is the enlarging of the heart to entertain Christ; if any man will
but open now, here is all the Lord desires, he will come and suppe with that
man, and he with him, and in the 16. Mat. 16.24.
of Mat. 24. there says our Savior; If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and follow me; what a strange phrase is this, If he will follow
me let him, it is a pretty collection of Divines out of that place, that a man
must will to follow Christ before he can follow him, the truth is, the will
never comes after the following of God, but if a man has a heart that way, a
will to the business, then he may follow him, then all goes forward
cheerfully, this will is the great wheel that turns all, and the power of
the soul, that works all in this case, and we may observe when the Lord is
pleased to prepare a people for ruin, he then shutts up the door of their
hearts, Acts 28.27.
in the Acts 28.27. there says the text, The heart of this people is wa^^ed
gross;e, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed,
least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their e^^es, and
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them,
in the 24. verse says the text, some believed and some believed not, how comes
this to pass now, that some believed not, the reason is ^endred in the 27
verse, the heart of this people is waxen fat, or gros;s;e, least they should be
converted, and I should hedle them; if a soul will be converted, then God will
heal it, but if the heart of the people be stopped up, if the heart be fatted
up with sin and corruption, then the Lord will never heal, he will never
have mercy upon that soul; eating and sleeping makes a man naturally to be fat
and gross, so it is with the soul, when a man's heart feeds upon his
corruptions, when a man lies securely in his sins this fats the soul, and
this is the forerunner of confusion, some believed and some believed not, why
their hearts were fatted up, they had no will to receive Christ and Salvation
by him, and therefore look as it was with the cure of the Lame man John 5.6.
our Savior says unto him, John 5.6.
will thou be made whole so it is in spiritual things, the Lord will have a
man to will mercy and Salvation by Christ, before he will bestow it upon him,
and therefore in the 5 of John the 40. the text says Ye will not come to me
that you may have life, and this is the reason that they had not life, and that
they were not saved, You would not come that you might have life, as who should
say, You must will to come before you can come to have life, and when you have
once got this will, then there is hope that there is life coming; but a man
must first will life, before he can have life: so that then the point is clear
and evident, namely that a man must will to receive the Lord Jesus and grace,
before he shall have the Lord Jesus and grace, and Salvation by him: for the
further opening of the point, we must observe two passages; first, what is
meant by the will? secondly, wherein this will discovers it self, and by that
time we shall have somewhat to hold our selves unto. And first for the former,
what is meant by will in this place, we must understand that this word will, it
carries a double signification with it. And first it discovers that natural
power and faculty wherewith every man is endued to will, but this is not meant
here, viz. the very faculty and power whereby a reasonable man is enabled to
will, for then every man should have life and salvation, for every man has
this natural will, for it is with the soul, as with a clock that runs the
wrong way, and strikes false, it has the same wheels like other clocks, but
it does not strike true as other clockes do, and herein lies the difference,
so it is with the nature of man fallen from God, the wheel of his will, that
is, the power of his understanding remains still, the nature of the soul
still existeth, but the quality of it is altered, this natural faculty of the
will is not meant here, for then the devils should be saved, for they have a
natural will, and therefore in the second place, by will in Scripture, we must
understand the actions and operations, which proceed from the natural faculty
of this will which God has wrought in us, it implies any act issuing from
this faculty upon any object; by object is meant any thing that is presented to
the soul, and this discovers it self generally thus, when the face of the
soul turns it self to a thing, and opens it self to receive a thing, to
close with, and to catch up a thing, as it is with the hand of the body so it
is with the will, which is the hand of the soul, every man has hands, but if
these hands of his be bound together, he is not able to lay hold on any thing,
but as a man has a hand that he may lay hold of a thing, so he must have his
hands at liberty, and he must open them, that so he may take hold of it, or
else he cannot lay hold upon it, so it is with the hand of the soul, this will
is the hand of the soul, a man must therefore turn his will toward a thing
and open it self, the hand of the soul must be open before it can close with
and fasten upon a thing, and this is meant here; when the heart which is turned
toward grace, and when the soul opens the hand thereof to catch at grace, and
lay hold thereupon, then it wills to receive grace, when as we are unwilling to
receive a thing, we then turn away our hearts from the thing, as children use
to speak, if you press any thing upon them, which they do not like, but is
displeasing unto them, they say, they will not have it, they will not, the
soul shuts it self against that thing, it turns away from that thing, and
ca^teth out that thing which is displeasing unto it, so it is with that will of
the soul, when the soul is unwilling to receive any thing, it shuts it self
against that thing, and will by no means receive it, Exodus the 7. Chapter,
13, 14. verses, Exo. 7.13, 14.
There the Text says, The Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, that he harkened not
unto them, as the Lord had said, and the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaohs heart
is hardened, he refuses to let the people go, he hardened his heart, that is,
he shut his soul against the commandment of the Lord, and against the advice
of Mose^, and he would not let the people go, he would not take hold of the
Command of God to perform it, he clasped his heart together as it were, that
his heart might not fasten upon Gods Commandment, so that by will here is
meant, not only the bare power and faculty of the natural will, but also the
act of this power, when the soul is toward grace, when the hand of the soul
is turned toward God, when it opens it self to entertain grace; this is
meant by will in phrase of Scripture.

The second thing considerable is, how this act of the Will? how this opening
of the soul does discover it self? how a man shall come to know when he wills
grace?

I answer, that this same turning of the Soul to grace, discovers it self in
three particular passages; the first is this: A man is then said to will a
thing, when he apprehends the price of a thing, and has a high esteem of a
thing, according to the price of the thing, and the excellency which is in the
thing; for it is a rule in natural Philosophy, and reason tells us thus
much, that no man wills a thing, unless he apprehends the thing which he wills
to be good, either good indeed, or else seemingly good; for no man wills his
own hurt, for if he did nature would destroy it self, every thing therefore
desires the preservation of it self, and therefore whatsoever is suggested as
evil unto the soul of man it will not close with that evil, but turns from
this evil, if it apprehend it as an evil, hence it is that a proud heart
loves proud courses, a covetous heart covetous courses, a malicious heart
malicious courses and practices, namely because the soul apprehends these as
good though in themselves they be evil, yet the soul takes them to be best
for it, now as the soul must apprehend some good in a thing before it can will
and desire it, so it must apprehend the excellency of it before it can will it
truly, this is that which carries the will of a man unto a thing, the will
will never otherwise entertain a thing. The 2d. thing wherein the act of the
will is seen, and wherein it makes known it self is this, when the soul
sees the good which is in a thing, and apprehends the excellency thereof, so
the second thing wherein this act of the will is discovered is this, the soul
chooses that good which before it has seen, and the excellency of the thing
which it has apprehended, answerable to the nature of the good, and the
excellency thereof, the soul it chooses that good which before it has
esteemed, it takes it to it self, as who should say, I will have this thing not
another, and mark when the soul chooses any good, it makes such choice of
it, as may be answerable to the nature of the good which it esteems, as
things of greater worth, a man chooses with greater affection, things of
lesser worth, with lesser affection, he will choose the best things in the
first place, and those of less value in the second, as suppose a man choose a
woman to be his wife, if he does not choose her for her grace and for her
goodness, so much as for beauty or wealth, he does not now choose the woman upon
the point, but her beauty and wealth, because he chooses them in the first
place, and with greater affection; so that a man is then said to will a thing,
when he does not only see and apprehend a thing to be good and excellent, but
also makes choice of that thing, according to the goodness and excellency
thereof.

Thirdly, he that truly wills a thing, does not only apprehend the
goodness and the price of the thing which he wills, and chooses it
according to the price and excellency thereof, but in the third place, the
heart gives up it self unto that thing which it has chosen. A man chooses a
wife a right, he will have the woman whom he has chosen, take that possession
of his heart as becomes a wife in that case, otherwise if a man say, be
choose such a man to be king over him, and will not give up his obedience unto
him, nor suffer him to exercise authority over him, this man does not choose
him as a king, but rather as a servant; so that to gather up all, a man is then
said to will a thing, when he apprehends the goodness and excellency of the
thing, when he chooses that thing answerable to the goodness and excellency
of it. Thirdly, when the heart gives up it self to that thing; now to applyth
particulars, when is am an said to Will Christ, and grace, and Salvation by
him, a man must will grace, before he can have grace: but how shall a man come
to know when he wills grace? I answer, first when the soul of a poor
Christian sees an excellency in Christ, when he holds the Lord Jesus at a
high rate, when he has him in an high estimation, answerable to the worth of
him, when a poor soul can put a price upon the Lord Jesus, answerable to the
sufficiency that is in him, and agreeable to the grace and goodness that is in
him, then the soul does partly Will the Lord Jesus, and grace and Salvation by
him; when the soul is able to see a greater good in the Lord Jesus, and have a
greater esteem of the grace which is in him, when it can set a higher rate
upon the goodness which proceeds from him, than upon any thing else in the
world whatsoever, when he has the Lord Jesus in higher estimation than riches,
or honor, or preferment; than of riches that may advance him, or of honor
that may promote him, when he esteems Christ above any thing that the world
can afford, or the heart desire, then he partly wills Christ and grace, the
soul will never will a thing truly, but when he sees some good in the thing,
and has an high estimation of it according to the goodness thereof, Col.
3.11. Col. 3.11.
there says the text, Christ is all in all, when a soul can say that Christ
is all in all, that it desires nothing else, then this is the value of him;
many will be content to have Christ, but they do not court him worth a great
price, but they that will truly will Christ must know and apprehend the
excellency that is in Christ, and esteem him answerably thereunto, as you may
see in the third chap. of the Lament. and 24. verse, there says the text, The
Lord is my portion, therefore will I hope in him, now a man's portion is his
chiefest good, and David also says, thy Commandments have I chosen as mine
inheritance, that is, as the chiefest good that could befall me, or be received
of me: So when the soul can truly apprehend that Christ is the better part,
when the soul can say it is not necessary to be rich, it is not necessary to
be learned, it is not necessary to be honorable, nor to have pleasure or
delight, but it is necessary to have Christ, it is necessary to have grace, it
is necessary to have sins pardoned, when we can say Christ is our portion
and our inheritance, when we can see the excellency that is in him, and can set
a price upon him answerable thereunto, then we are said to will Christ in the
first place.

The second thing whereby a man may know whether he wills Christ or no, is
this, when the soul sees as the Church in the Canticles, that all
pleasantness is in Christ, when it sees that he is better than friends,
better than riches, better than health and liberty, when the soul, as it
sets an high price upon Christ: So in the second place can choose Christ
answerable to that price it sets upon him, when it can choose him above all
things; let the world go, that takes Christ to it self, let friends go, that
takes Christ to it self, that chooses Christ above all things, when the soul
can do this, then it may be said to will the Lord Jesus; the Phrases of
Scripture are very sweet in this kind, in the 37 Psalm, the Prophet David
there is troubled with the things here below, and his soul almost staggered
when he saw the wicked prosper in the world, and increase in riches, In vain
says he have I washed my hands in innocence, for the wicked they have what
they can desire, their eyes start out with fatness, and they have more than
heart can wish, but all the day long I have been plagued and chastened every
morning, but when he went into the Sanctuary, and knew their end, how God did
set them in slippery places, and did cast them down into destruction, when he
saw that his portion was better than theirs, then he cries out; Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and who is there in earth, that I desire in comparison of
thee, as who should say, take your gold give me Christ, take your pel^e give
me grace, Whom have I in heaven but thee, then the heart chooses God, when it
thinks better of God than of all other things whatsoever, Who have I in
heaven but thee, and who is there in earth as I desire in comparison of thee,
and therefore in the last verse of that Psalm he says, It is good for me to
draw nigh to God, as who should say let the covetous man have his money and
pelf, and let the ambitious man have his honors and proferments, but it is
good for my soul to draw name to the Lord, Heb. 11.24.
and therefore it is said, Heb. 11.24. that Moses when he was come to years,
he refus^d to be called the Son of Pharoahs daughter, chousing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than (...) enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season, as who should say, Let me suffer persecution, let me have
neither coat to my back, nor meat to my belly, let me dye in prison, let me
undergo any cross or calamity, give me but Christ and I care not whatsoever
becomes of me, this is to will Christ Jesus, when a man cares not what becomes
of all other things whatsoever, so he may but enjoy Christ; he wills a good
truly that wills a good in order, as if it be the chiefest good, if I will will
it truly I must will it and desire it in the first place: so when I can hold
Christ at a high value, above all things, and my soul can choose him above all
things, then I am said to will Christ, in the 10. of Luke and last verse, there
faith our Savior, Martha is troubled about many things, but Mary has chosen
the better part, she chose this and let all other things alone: he that
chooses a wise, he is not said to choose her, unless he choose her to be in
that place which best befits her, he that says he chooses a wife, and
keepesa whore, he makes not her his wife, truly so it is with the soul,
though it see an excellency in Christ, yet if it choose not Christ in rank and
order, as the chiefest good, and in the first place, it does not truly will
Christ Jesus, and this is the second thing, wherein the willing of Christ is
discovered, namely when the soul chooses Christ in the first place,
answerable to the excellency that is in him.

Thirdly, when the soul has prized Christ above all, and chosen him above
all, so in the third place, if the soul truly will Christ Jesus, it will be
carried toward Christ, to close with him, never to sever from him again, for
he is said to will a thing that closes with it, and will never part from it, as
for example, he that will buy house and land, and make it his own for ever, he
first chooses that house and land, and then he resolves to keep it for ever,
and never part with it again, and if he part from it, or sell it again, then
he is said to refuse it, as well as to choose it, and the stomach that chooses
meat, when it has such liking to any dyer, that it opens it self and
receives it, and closes with it; then we are said to will and choose Christ,
when we see the worth of Christ, and take him before all, and fasten upon him
to make him our own for ever, when we take such delight in him, that we will
not be freed from him, but desire that he may be for our souls, and our souls
for him forever, this is to will the Lord Jesus. So then to gather up all, when
the soul priseth Christ as the chiefest of all, when it chooses him above
all, when the soul answerablely gives up it self to Christ, that Christ may
take possession of it, and never sever from it, then a man does will Christ
Jesus heartily: So that by this time we see the nature of the point, and the
English of the Doctrine is thus much, the soul that sees the worth of Christ,
and chooses him above all things, and closes with him, that soul wills
Christ Jesus: But now here a question may arise, you may ask me whether a
man can will Christ and grace, thus naturally out of the power of nature? I
answer no, it is beyond the power of man, to will Christ and grace naturally,
it is the free gift of God; as it is the Lord which must give grace, so it is
the Lord that must give the will to receive grace; what avails all the water
in the Sea, if we have no vessel to receive it? what avayleth it to have
meat, if we have no stomach to digest it? what avayleth it to have the
fountain of grace set open unto us, if we have no vessels, no hearts to
receive it, if we have no stomach to digest it? all is worth nothing, and
therefore the doctrine of the Scripture is compared to rain, the rain which
falls upon a rock remains not, but presently slides off; so it is here, the
fountain of grace is set open to every one that hears the Word this day, but
if you have no vessels to receive, no wills to embrace it, no heart to
entertain it, all this mercy of God, grace of God, love of God, will fall
down at your feet, you may carry away some words in your mouths, but unless
you have a will to receive grace, it will never dwell in your hearts, it is
impossible that the soul should receive grace and Salvation by the Lord Jesus,
unless it has a will to entertain him, for common sense tells us, that
those actions that have relation one to another cannot be done one without the
other; no man can buy, unless another will sell; no man can take or receive
any thing, unless another will give it and bestow it upon him: Christ cannot
be bestowed upon us, and given unto us, unless we have a will to receive him;
there is no giving of a thing, unless there be a taking and receiving of it:
Christ will not be a guest with us, unless he be entertained by us. If a man
should come unto an Inn and ask for lodging, if the Host of the Inn tell him
that the Inn is full, and there is no room for him, and thereupon he goes
his way, this man cannot be said to be a guest unto that Inn, but that he
only offered himself to be a guest; so it is here, there is no soul that
ever can or shall receive Christ as a guest to himself, unless he be content
to make room for Christ, and be a receiver of him, Christ will never come
with salvation or comfort unto thy heart, unless thou have a will to
entertain him: if our willing of Christ be that which makes room for Christ,
then it must go before the entertaining of Christ; but the willing of Christ is
that which makes room for Christ, and therefore it must go before the
entertaining of him. So then the case is clear, and the point evident, that a
man must will to receive Christ before he shall have Christ and grace and
salvation by him.

The use of the point is threefold, the first is for reproof, must a man have
a will to receive Christ and grace, before he can receive Christ and grace,
then this condemns that carnal conceit of a company of poor deluded persons
in the world that think they may receive grace upon other conditions than the
word has revealed, upon other conditions than Christ ever made agreement with
them; this conceit it is mervailous common, it is a general fault in all
carnal professors, they think to go to heaven, nay, they make no doubt of
it, they think they have grace, and why? because they say so, and profess so,
and therefore it must needs be so; because a man can say he believes, and
would have grace, and wills to receive Christ, therefore out of all question it
must needs be so, grace must needs be given them, they cannot be without
grace, because they say they have it; and if a man press upon them, and say,
the truth is, the world knows it, that you live in base courses, a common
swearer you are, a covetous wretch, a base usurer, that loves your money more
than God; true say they, all flesh is grass, and in many things we sin, the
Lord give us of his grace, and for give us our sins, and I hope he will do
so, and this will make up the breach presently, nothing but repent, and say
Lord have mercy upon us, and then all will be well, it is true, if you can but
truly repent, all will be well indeed, your sins shall be forgiven you;
but now you talk of cost, you must do more than say so, you must do so
likewise; but thus a thousand poor souls go to hell hood-winckt after this
fashion, they have invented a shorter cut to heaven, they have invented a new
way, a back door to heaven and happiness more than the word ever discovered.
But let any soul make this conceit good in Scripture, and then I will believe
them, but if it be so that they cannot make it good by the word of God; then
know that if you continue in it, your souls will be damned. Is it thus in the
word, he that says he has grace has grace, if a man profess grace he
cannot be without grace, no, no, it is not thus in Scripture, the text says,
He that wills grace, that is he that has a heart to receive grace, he shall
have grace, not he that says and professes that he has grace, but he that
wills it: you must not bring your tongues to talk of grace, and your heads to
think of grace, but you must bring your hearts to will grace, otherwise you
never shall, you never can receive grace; and yet notwithstanding, what is that
which carries away men in the world; they are naught and wicked, reprove them
for it, they heal all, and make up all presently, they believe in Christ, and
they repent them of their sins, and shall not they be saved? They say
indeed that they do believe, and they do repent, but the text says, they
do not so, and the Lord in his word says, it is not talk, it is not wishes,
but it is the willing of Christ and grace that will obtain grace. In the 15 of
Matthew, Mat. 15.8, 9.
and the 8, and 9, verses, there says the text, In vain do these men
worship me, for they draw nigh unto me with their mouth, and honor me
with their lips, but their heart is far from me, they draw near Christ
with their lips, that is, they speak as good words as can be, they say they
are sinners, and that the Lord came to save sinners, and they are humbled for
their sins, and attend their Church diligently, and hurt no body, But their
hearts are from me, says the text, why, because that hearts are still upon
their sins; they are as proud as ever, as ignorant as ever, as vain as ever,
their hearts still run after sinful courses, and wicked practices, and
therefore away with this talk, and such vain pretenses as men make in this
case, unless your hearts go together with your words, all is worth nothing:
what a fond imagination is this, that a man should think his words should do
him good, when his heart goes against them; when their mouths profess
Christ, and their hearts oppose Christ: Thou say thou prizest Christ above
all things, and yet thou will not lose a base sin for Christ, thou will not
forsake any wicked lust or corruption for Christ; you will say you prize Christ
above all, and yet many of your profane drunkards will not lose a cup for
Christ; nay, you will not lose any base custom for Christ, you were profane
and you will be so still, you were proud and you will be so still; thy heart
and thy words do not go together, and therefore never think that thy words
will save thee: Thou say thou beleevest, but thy heart says the contrary:
thou professest thou have grace, but thy heart denies it; and therefore it is
a very sottish conceit to think thy words will do thee any good, when thy
(...) denies what thy tongue professes: go home therefore and examine your
own hearts, and think thus with your selves; I have talked much, and I have
said that I had faith and grace, but oh wretch that I am! my heart says the
contrary. What a wretch am I, do I think that God will have mercy on me,
because I say and profess that I am a sinner, and because I say that I pray
unto God for the forgiveness of my sins; no, no, those very words will
condemn me, because my heart goes not with my words, it had been far better
for these men that they never had spoke these things, for these very words will
rise up in judgment against them, nay these words will keep them from the true
willing of grace, for they think they have it already, because they say they
have it, this is a very dangerous conceit, and therefore know that words will
not carry all away, to say we repent and believe and have grace, these do us
no good at all, we must will grace before we shall have grace, but this is
not a willing but only a talking of grace.

The second use is a word of terror, to shake the hearts of all wretched
sinful creatures under heaven, those whom we may condemn out of their own
mouths, they profess they will not have grace, and therefore we may conclude
they never shall have grace, their own words will witness against them; for
when the Ministers list up their voices like a Trumpet, and cry night and day,
and call upon them, this is the good and ancient way walk in this way, in the
way of faith and repentance; what answer do men give, they openly profess
they will not do this, they will not walk in this way: The Lord tendereth
grace, happiness, and salvation unto us, and yet many do profess they will
not come, they will not attend upon God in his ordinances, they will not
embrace, nor they will not entertain Christ and grace and salvation, they will
not come to the means of grace and therefore they shall never have grace, they
never shall be made partakers of it. A man must will grace, before he can have
grace, but you will it not, you desire it not, and therefore as sure as the
Lord lives, you cannot have it.

Another generation there is, that come to the house of God, and sit as Gods
people do, and hear as Gods people do, but their hearts runs after their
covetousness; when in your souls you can say, our bodies are here indeed, but
our hearts are after our lusts and corruptions, after our profits and
pleasures; if it be thus with you, then still you resolve that your hearts
shall not will the grace of God, and therefore it is clear and evident, that
you have not yet received grace. Men resolve to do as they did in the 18 of
the Prophecy of Jeremy, verse, Ier. 18.12.
12. They said, there is no hope, but we will walk every one after our own
devices, and do the imaginations of our evil heart. When the Lord called upon
them to walk in the good way, oh they would none of that! but they would walk
after the imaginations of their hearts. And did these spirits think ye dye in
those times, are not some such now among us in these times, wherein men say,
we will not reform our families, nor we will not pray with them, we will
not keep the Sabbaths, nor we will not leave our swearing and our swaggering,
our pride and our covetousness; no, all the Ministers under heaven shall not
persuade us, we will take up our own lewd and wicked courses, we will be
profane still, and we will swear still, we will not amend our lives, nor
reform our families, in what a miserable accursed damnable estate are those
men, they will not leave and forsake their lewd practices, and therefore they
cannot will grace, and if they cannot will it, then we may certainly conclude,
they shall never obtain it. But you will say, you would leave your wicked
courses, and reform your families if you could do it, but you cannot. I
answer, is it nor in your power to pluck your children and your servants into
the Lords house on the Sabbath day, is it not in your power to use the means
whereby you may reform your lives? you can do it, but you will not do it,
you will take up your own ways, and your own practices, and therefore the
case is plain, you will not take Christ, and therefore you shall never have
him, and Salvation by him, there is also a cursed kind of Hypocrites which
profess saire, and much, they say they will do for the Lord Jesus, Ier. 24.20.
but they are like unto those in the 42. of Jeremy, the 20. verse, mark what
the text says there, Ye dissembled in your hearts, when you sent me to the
Lord our God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God, and according unto all
that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it. So
there are many that make a fair outside, and will take up holy duties, and
they will be professing, and talking of God, but there must be more than this,
there must be a willing of grace besides a professing of grace; you pretend
fair, and promise this, and purpose that, but when it comes to you, you fly
off, and you will have your own liberty, your heart is double, you say you
will reform your ways, and yet you will be idle still, and loose still, and
therefore you never yet willed Christ, you never yet prized him aright, you
never truly chose him, and therefore as sure as the Lord lives Christ is not
yours; if the condition be not performed by you, you shall never be made
partakers of that which is promised upon the performance of that condition: if
you will Christ and grace, then indeed you have Christ and grace, but you never
willed Christ, and therefore it is evident, you never had Christ. Deuteronomy. 29.4.
In the 29. of Deuteronomy. 4. verse. there says the text, The Lord has showed you
great w^nders, and discovered many mercies unto you, and you the Lord has not
given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to he^re, unto this
very day, and therefore go home and mourn for yourselves, and reason with your
souls, and say, what, after all ou^ profession, bearing, praying, talking;
after all the cost and care that God has bestowed upon us, have we not yet a
heart to will grace and desire the Lord Jesus, many mercies have been
vouchsafed unto us, many judgments removed from us, there is no nation that
God has dealt so mercifully with, as with us; we have peace yet, and the
Gospel yet, and prosperity yet, and yet for all this to this very day, God
has not given us a heart to receive grace, and the things belonging to our
everlasting peace, and therefore wives mourn for your husbands in secret, and
say, oh my husband, what has not God yet given thee a heart to fear him, and
fathers mourn for your children, that are not yet in the state of grace, and
say oh my son not yet a heart that God has given thee to sanctify a
Sabbath, and to leave off thy wick^d courses; and friends mourn you also one
for another, and say, oh my friend what not yet a heart to humble thy self,
and to fear the name of God, thus mourn in secret, and say, God has done
this and this for thee, and have thou not yet a heart, not yet a will to
entertain Christ the world carries al, pleasure carries all, profit bears all
away, malice carries away all: The promises and Commandments of God are
despised, and have thou not yell a heart to believe the promises, and prize the
Laws of ^od above liberty and peace profit and pleasure; there is nothing
wanting on Gods part, he gives peace still, and the Gospel still, and yet not
a heart all this while to fear God, and keep his Commandments; thou have a
good house and good land, and many mercies are vouchsafed unto thee and not yet
a good heart what a misery is this not yet a will to embrace Christ, and
receive grace; why what a lamentable condition is this? and therefore in the
last place it is a word of Exhortation to every soul here present, to labor
now to begin at the right end, and take a right course, and follow the path
that God has chalked out unto us, in a word, we see it is come to this pass
that all is grown to an outside, every man must be a Christian and go to
heaven, and all the argument is this, because a man can talk well of religion;
but this is not the right way, the willing of grace must go before the
receiving of grace, and therefore go home and examine your selves whether grace
be truly wrought and fashioned in you or no, and reason thus, with your own
hearts, and say, it is not enough to bring my mouth and profession to the Word
of the, Lord but heart what say thou? in the mean time, I can talk of
religion and many good matters, but will what say thou? in the mean time,
do thou prize Christ above all things, do thou choose Christ and grace
above all other things in the world whatsoever? heart what say thou? do
thou open thy self and close with him, and do thou purpose never to forsake
him? Deuteronomy. 32.42.
in the 32 of Deuteronomy. 42. there says Moses to the people, Set your hearts to all
the words which I testify among you this day, for it is not a vain thing for
you because it is your life, and through this thing you shall prolong your
days, so say I set your hearts to the word, labor to set your souls to the
word of God, for it is not a vain word, it is your life and length of your
days, it is not talking of Christ, but it is the willing of Christ, from the
heart that will obtain Christ and Salvation by him.

We have spoken already of the reasonableness of the condition, whosoever will
may receive grace, and that freely; and now we come to the universality of it,
the work of the Spirit is tendered to every one, whosoever will give way thus
unto it grace is set open to all, and proclaimed to all that will take it upon
those terms before spoken of, and therefore says the Text, Whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life, the word in the original is, every willing
man, there is no man exempted, no man debarred, no man hindered to take grace
upon those terms, if he will condescend to Gods conditions, be he what he
will be naturally, either in regard of sins and corruptions, or in regard of
poverty, or infirmities, whatsoever his natural condition be, yet if he will
but agree to Gods conditions, if he will but choose and prize Christ above all
other things, ^he shall receive him, and grace, and salvation by hi^^^ so that
the doctrine is this, Whosoever in truth does will to have Christ shall receive
him, and salvation by him, the Text does not say, Whosoever says Lord, Lord,
shall have Christ and grace, but the willing soul, he shall have him, not the
tal^eing man, nor the presuming man, nor the glorying man, but the willing man,
so that this is the point, Whosoever in good earnest and in truth will have
Christ, shall receive Christ and salvation by him, in the 10. of Luke ver. 5,
6. Luke 10. (...).
when our Savior Christ sent out his Disciples to prepare way for himself, he
says, into what house soever ye enter, say first, peace be unto this house,
and if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it, if not, it
shall turn to you again, By peace is meant here, all prosperity whatsoever,
all good, temporal and eternal, it was the manner of the ^^lutation of the
Hebrews to say, Peace be unto you, therein including all good things whatsoever,
now says the Text, if the house be worthy, that is, if the house be truly
disposed if the son of peace be there, that is, he which has a soul so
disposed toward peace, as a Son is toward his Father, that is, he that
desires peace, upon that Soul peace shall rest, a blessing shall be upon that
soul, but if the house be not worthy, that is, if the heart will not receive
the Gospel of Salvation, if the Son of peace be not there, if he be a rebel
against God, and against peace in this kind, then let your peace return to you
again, there is no footing for Salvation in the soul of that man that
refuses the Gospel, and the means of Salvation which God has tendered, and
as our Savior Christ, before he comes in does knock at the door that he may
come in, so whenever the door is opened, Reve. 3.20.
he will come in, Reve. 3.20. there says the Text, Behold I stand at the door
and knock, if any man will hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to
him, and suppe with him, and he with me. The door is the heart, if the door
be opened, if the will be opened to prize and entertain Christ, then Christ
and his Father will come into that soul, and dwell with it for ever, and
refresh it with all spiritual comfort, and in the 15. of Luke, Luke 15.17.18.
the 17, and 18, verses, when the Prodigal son was returning to his Father,
when he saw that he was in misery, and how the case stood with him, no body
succored nor releeved him, he returned to himself says the text, and
reasons thus with himself, How many hired servants in my fathers house have
bread enough and to spare, but I perish with hunger, as who should say, Now I
know what it is to be ^n a fathers family, here no man considers mee^ no man
regards me or respects me; and though I be (...) son, yet there are many in
my fathers house which are but servants, which have bread enough, ^ut I though
a son, have want of all things, and ^m ready to famish; here is the prize now
that he ^utteth upon a fathers house, he thinks now it is good to be in a
fathers house; he thinks now, oh ^he provision and love of a father! happy are
they that have it, blessed are they that do enjoy it; and when he had set
this prize upon his fathers house, Then he arises and says, I will go to my
Father, and say, Father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants.
Then the soul does put a prize upon Christ, and returns to him, when it
sees the excellency that is in him. The father of the Prodigal son, when he
saw this, that his son returned unto him, and humbled himself, and confessed
his fault, he made much of him. The Prodigal had a purpose, a will, a desire
to come to his father, And as soon as his father saw him afar off, he went
out to meet him, and fell on his neck and kissed him, and made much of him,
and commanded to bring forth the bestr^be and put it on him, and put a ring^ on
his hand, and shoes on his feet. The Prodigal is a sinner, and he that is
enlightened so far forth as to see his wretchedness, and is able to set a
prize upon the mercy of Christ; he that has run away from God, the base
sinful wretch that never made any account of the word if the Lord has awakned
his h^^rt, so far forth as that he^ can set a high prize upon the word, and
say, I wondered heretofore (...) see men run to sermons so fast, and make
such have to the house of God when the bells rnuge, woe is me I could never do
so! but oh happy are they (...) and blessed are they that did so (...) oh one
promise now is worth a world, now the assurance of the forgiveness of sins
is worth all the world besides; when the soul of a poor sinner begi^ thus to
prize Christ, and resolves to go to Christ, and expects mercy from him, then
the Lord sees this soul a far off, and is resolved to give entertainment
to it, and to afford comfort thereunto. But you will say, what is the reason of
it, that if a man wills Christ and salvation he shall have it. I answer, the
reasons hereof are three. The first is this, because the Lord requires no more
at the hands of a poor sinner, nay, the Lord Jesus is fully contented when the
soul comes to give entertainment to him, this alone will give contentment
wholly to the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the meaning of that speech of the
Wiseman, in the Prove. My son, give me thy heart: by heart in that place, is
not meant the substance of the soul as it was created of God, this is not that
which God looks for, but My son, give me thy heart, that is, let the
actions of thy heart be set upon me; prize me, and choose me, this is that
with which the Lord is contented, nay, it is the maine thing with which the
Lord is fully pleased. In the 5. of Deuteronomy. 29. Deuteronomy. 5.29.
when the people heard the voice of Moses, and were ^esolved to yield obedience
to Gods Commandments, they said, Whatsoever the Lord has spoken by thee, that
will we do: when the Lord heard that ^hey would attend and obey his word which
he ^oke by his servant Moses, these are very good words, says the Lord, But
oh that there were such a ^eart in them to fear me and keep my Commandments
always, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever.
God he took their outward profession and appearance in good part, but oh that
there were such a heart: this strikes all dead, this gives God full content,
and therefore we shall observe, that when all other things are weak in us,
though there be many failings, and many distempers in a poor soul, yet when
the heart is sound and sincere, that is that which gives the Lord full
contentment, he goes away fully satisfied, with that. In the 2. of Chron.
15.17. 2 Chronicles. 15.17
there the text says of Asa, that he did not take away the high places out of
Israel, nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his d^yes: though he
failed in many things, yet his heart was perfect and upright, and this the Lord
accepted.

Secondly, as God only requires this, namely, the willing and choosing and
prizing of Christ, so also* by this work of the soul, a poor sinner comes to
be enabled to close with God; it is the will that is the maine thing whereby
we are fitted to close and lay hold of God, and to fasten with the Lord Jesus,
for it is a rule which we have i^^^turall causes, that all good properly is the
object o^ the will of a man, truth is the object of the understanding, but the
object of the will is good; look as it is with the body of a man, it has
several senses, and those senses have several operations about which they are
exercised; as the eye, that se^th colors; the ear hears sounds, and the
tongue that relisheth the meat a man eats; now all these have several
things about which they are exercised, and they are not able to reach one unto
the work of another, as the eye cannot hear sounds, nor the ear discern of
colors, and neither of these can taste or relish any goodness in that which a
man ^ateth; but the eye that sees, and the ^are that hears, and the tongue
that only is exercised about tasting; every one of these have several
operations; so it is here, all things are made for man, the body for the soul,
the understanding for the will, and the will for God; the understanding that
sees truths, and discernes the excellency that is in God, but there is nothing
that relisheth and tastes the goodness which is in God but the will: so that,
look as the eye cannot hear, not the care see, and neither of these can
relish any goodness in the meat a man eats, but this is proper to the
tongue only, so there is nothing in a man that is able to relish and receive
the goodness or the mercy of the Lord, but the will of a man, all things are
made for man, the body for the soul, the understanding for the will, and the
will for God; the understanding is the Councell^r that sees all, but the will
is the Queen of the soul, that takes all that good which the understanding
sees and discerns, and which is offered and tendered unto it. In the 2 of
Hosea, and the beginning, this was the ground why the repentant Church came
home to God, it is in the 2 of Hos. 7. there says the text, She shall follow
after her lovers, Hosea 2.7.
but shall not overtake them, and she shall seek them, but she shall not find
them, then shall she say, I will return unto my first husband, for it was
better with me than, than it is now: she would return to her first husband,
she would give entertainment to the Lord, why, what is the reason of this? why
says she, it was better with me than, than it is now; when the soul can see
that it is better to perform the holy services which God requires, than enjoy
all the things of the world, when it can say it is better to be with God than
any where else, then it returns to Christ, and this is the reason, why a
reasonable creature only is able to receive grace and salvation, reasonable
creatures only can receive it, because they only have to receive it, so that
we see the willingness of the soul is the heart, whereby we lay hold upon the
Lord Jesus, whereby our souls are enabled to close with the graces and
goodness of God.

The third reason is this, because the want of this same willingness and heart
to receive and embrace Christ and grace, is that which breaks the match
between God and the soul; it is a point of some weighty consideration, there
is no lack on Gods part, there is no failings on Gods side which may hinder or
debar a poor soul from receiving the Lord Jesus Christ; the fault is our
own and lies at home, for God commands all to believe in Christ, nay he
beseeches and entreats them that they would receive the Lord Jesus Christ
and comfort and salvation by him; nay it cannot be, because God is just and
holy, but he must will that the soul should receive the Lord Jesus and believe
in him, and be willing to give entertainment to him in this case: So that it
is evident that there is no backwardness on Gods part, God does freely will
that every soul that hears the Word of God and has Christ offered, that
they should receive the Lord Jesus and benefit thereby, and comfort there from
to their souls; but the failing is only in our part, we have not a will to
receive Christ Jesus when he is offered, and give entertainment to him, and
this is that which breeds the jarre between God and our souls, it is not
want of obedience to the Commandments of God that will condemn, if the soul
be but contented to receive Christ and entertain the work of grace, but this
is that which breaks the match, and makes a separation between the soul
and God, because men will not entertain that grace nor embrace that faith
which should procure the forgiveness of their sins. A man may be saved
though he do not keep the Commandments of God so perfectly as God required
Adam should do, for God said unto Adam, Do this and live, but though a man
do not so now he may live, but a man cannot live unless he believe in
Christ, and have a will to receive Christ Jesus. The first covenant that God
made with Adam was do and live, because he created him after his own Image,
in righteousness and true holiness, and made him able to perform obedience
to all his commandments, but though we have never so many weaknesses, never so
many infirmities and sins, yet if we will but be content to receive Christ
Jesus and grace from him, all our weaknesses shall be strengthened, our wants
supplied, and our sins pardoned, but when a man comes to this pass that
he is naught in himself, and will not take Christ to be made better, then he
must needs perish and come unto everlasting destruction; and this is that which
breaks the match and breeds the opposition between God and the soul,
Matthew. 23.37.
Matthew. 23.37, 38. there says our Savior, O Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou which
killest the Prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would
I have gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her wings, and ye would not; Behold therefore your house is left unto
you desolate. the fault was on their parts, the Lord woed them, and strived
with them; he would have gathered them as a hen does her chickings, but they
would not, and this caused the jarre between the Lord and them, and therefore
their house was left unto them desolate. So Psalm. 81.13. there says the text,
Psalm. 81.13.
Oh that may people Israel had hearkened unto me! and had walked in my ways, I
should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries: but my people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would
none of me, so I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in
their own counsels. Israel would none of me, there was the breach. So that,
that which breaks the match between God and us, is, because we will not
receive mercy, and grace, and salvation, offered unto us, that so our sins
may be pardoned, and our persons accepted for our everlasting comfort and
salvation. Look as it is with a woman to whom a man makes love, and would
marry her; if she speak him fair, and use great complements, and bid him
welcome, and all this while resolve that she will not be married unto him;
all her other outward behavior the man regards not, but counts it as
nothing, because her heart is not with him, (and as the phrase is) if she do
not grant him her good will, all is worth nothing. In this case just so it is
here, all other outward complements and performances, God takes them as
matters of ^o conse quence or worth, if this believing in Christ, and willing
of grace be wanting. If a man shall come and hear the word of God speaking
unto him, and shall receive Christ into his family, and pray unto him, and make
a great profession of him, all this I must confess is very good; but if the
soul do not will Christ, if the heart does not prize Christ, and choose him,
and close with him, and fasten unto him, it is worth nothing. If men will
profess fair to Christ, and say, he is welcome, and all this while do not
give Christ their souls and good wills, the Lord Jesus does take himself as
despised, and counts himself as rejected in this kind, and therefore we shall
observe that God regards not any of our performances, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
if they be not done from the heart. 2 Chronicles. 25.2. there says the text of
Amaziah, He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart, and therefore what is this to the marriage in the mean time: so
that to gather up all, if it be so, that this hearty willing is that which God
requires of us, if it be that whereby we are able to close with Christ, if
the want of this breaks the match between God and the soul, then the case
is clear, that whosoever has this will shall have Christ and salvation by
him; but this willing of Christ does fully satisfy and content God, it does
enable us to fasten and lay hold upon Christ; the want of this does break the
match between Christ and the soul, and therefore he that has this will,
shall s^rely have Christ, and salvation by him. This contents God, by this we
lay hold upon God; and the want of this causes the breach between God and us,
and therefore he that has this shall have Christ.

The use of the point is threefold, it is a ground, first of instruction, here
we may see and wonder at the riches of Gods bounty and goodness in his
reasonable dealing with poor sinners, in that God does not exact every thing
at the utmost of us, he does not require every thing in the utmost rigor, he
does not take poor sinners by the throat (as he did his fellow servants)
saying, Pay me that thou owe me; there is no poor sinner, but he may send
the Devil after him to dragge him into hell, he may justly say unto every
sinful soul, I gave thee perfect righteousness and holiness and ability to
perform obedience to all my commandments, either give me that I expected
from thee, and thou owe unto me, or else to hell thou must go, where is my
service and my obedience and my righteousness that I required of thee; God may
say thus to every poor sinner, but he does not deal thus in justice with us,
but blessed be his name, he does not expect that we should have all
sufficiency in our selves; he does not say, That he that has no sin shall
be saved; let him take Christ, he that is able to perform obedience to all my
Commandments, and do whatsoever^ require, he shall have Christ and salvation
by him he does not deal with us after this manner, for then woe were it with
us, it is not exact obedience that Christ requires of us, but the condition is
this, If any poor soul will take mercy offered and receive grace tendered
unto him, he shall have mercy, he shall receive grace; as if God should say,
Thou art a poor sinful creature, many weaknesses are with thee, many
imperfections trouble thee, many corruptions do oppress thee, I require no
exaction of thee, if thou will take Christ and mercy, then Christ is thine, and
mercy is thine; is not this marvelous mercy, is not this wonderful goodness.
If there should be a poor miserable wretched creature, one that had neither
portion nor ability in any measure, nor any thing that could procure a husband,
no friends to succor her, no parents to relieve her, but were fatherless and
motherl^sse, and void of all comfort; if yet notwithstanding all this, a man of
place and ability should come and offer love unto her, though she have
nothing, but is troubled with all weaknesses and infirmities, and full of all
deformities, if this man now for all this should regard none of these things,
if he should look for nothing, nor require any thing of her, but her good
will and liking, if she would have him then, he would be married unto her;
you will say this is wonderful love, and that nothing but love prevailed with
him; surely he could see nothing in her but that which might rather make him
despise her, then show any love unto her, but it was the violence of affection
which caused him to marry her: This is our condition perfectly, nay we are not
able to express our miserable and woeful estate this way, because our
baseness and vileness and misery is great in respect of our sins than any
poor wretch can be in regard of any outward respect, and the excellency of God
also is greater, and far exceeds the dignity and excellency of any man in
the world, and yet notwithstanding though we be nothing but rags, full of
corruptions and rottenness, and deformities, though we have neither beauty,
nor portion, nor friends, nor means, but are fatherless and motherlesse, and
laden with abundance of all abominations, yet for all this, this is all that
God requires of us, though we have nothing, and can do nothing, yet if we
will but have Christ, if we will but receive grace and mercy offered, if we
will but welcome and entertain the Lord Jesus, this is all that God expects,
the match then is made up, and the business is fully ended, we shall have
Christ and abundance of love shown unto us, and this should make a soul burst
out, and say is it possible? is it credible that if this my miserable heart
would take Christ, he would direct me, if this my wretched damned soul would
give entertainment to Christ he would receive me? Oh! what wonderful love,
mercy and goodness is herein discovered, there can no better way be devised,
how God may express more love, and show greater mercy toward; us, it is the
Psalmists phrase, open thy mouth wide, and I will fill thee, lie does not say,
go and provide for your selves, and feed yourselves, no, no, the provision is
made ready, and we need only open our mouths wide, and God will fill them;
mark here the wonderful riches of Gods bounty, what greater care of provision
can be expressed or expected than this, that a man should only open his mouth,
and that wide, and it should be filled, it is not spoken of the mouth
naturally, but of the soul spiritually, do but thou open thy soul, and empty
thy heart of all other things whatsoever, do but get a heart willing to
welcome and give entertainment to the Lord Jesus Christ, and he will fill thee
full of grace here, and glory for ever hereafter; this is the bounty of the
Lord, it is the Lords mercy and goodness, and it should, it ought to be
mervailous in our eyes, as the Psalmist speaks in another case, we ought to
admire the goodness of the Lord, in that he is pleased to offer us Christ and
Salvation, upon so reasonable conditions: and this is the first use.

Secondly, the second use is a word of terror, Every man that will, let him
take of the water of life freely, let him receive mercy and grace, and
Salvation, and therefore if you have not grace, it is because you will not have
it, and therefore if you perish thank your selves, for you would not be
saved: there is never a soul this day in hell, bu^ received the fruits of his
own labor, the reward of their own works, and the desire of their own
hearts, nay they have their own will, if thou will not be recovered, and
receive mercy offered, why then thou must be damned and perish forever, he that
will not receive the Lord Jesus and entertain grace so that he may go to
heaven, it is pity but he should be damned into the lowermost pit of everlasting
ruin and destruction; when men come to this pass once, that they are not
willing to be the treasury of God, but are weary to hear the Word of God
preached unto them one hour, and notwithstanding God has revealed himself in
his Word, and that with some glimpse* yet wicked men would not be under the
power of it, because they would have their profits and pleasures, and enjoy
their lusts and coruptions, they will not forsake their lusts, and abandon
their abominations, and receive Christ and mercy; when the case stands thus
with men, it is just with God to plunge them into everlasting misery, in the 8
of Prove. 36. there says the text He that sins against me wrongeth his own
soul, Prove. 8.36.
all they that hate me love death, they that hate me says the text, that is,
they that hate wisdom love death, by wisdom there is meant the Lord Jesus,
revealing the wisdom of the Father in the Word, now he that hates this Word
of God, he that will not be informed by this Word, he that will not be directed
by it, he that will not be humbled by it, his soul takes up arms against
Gods ordinances, why he loves death both naturally and eternally, when the
wrath of God cease upon him, he has that which he loves, you loved this,
you loved death, you have it, you loved damnation, you do enjoy it, and it is
merveilous just with God, thus to deal with you, you cannot blame God for this
but your selves, wicked men are desirous to be rid of God, and freed from the
Counsel of God, that may chalk them out the way to Salvation, and they desire
nothing; the knowledge of Gods laws many wicked carnal man does not desire,
the good and Salvation of his own soul, he does not desire the preaching of
the Word, for the reformation of his life, and the humbling of his soul, and
directing of him in the ways of Gods Commandments; they say to God, now
depart from us, we care not for thy laws, we will not walk after thy
Commandments, if he at the last day say unto you, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity I know you not, then you shall have your desire, when the heavens
shall melt away with fire, and the Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, when
all flesh shall appear before the judgment seat of God, at that day men and
Angels shall hear the dreadful doom which shall pass upon you by the Lord,
you contemned my word and ordinances, and therefore away from me ye cursed into
everlasting destruction, prepared for the devil and his Angels, you desired
not to be informed, you would not be humbled, you refused to be directed by my
word when it was preached unto you, but you desired to fulfill your lusts, and
enjoy your profits and your pleasures, you did not desire to be saved, and
therefore now you shall have your desire, you shall be damned, and therefore
depart from me, I know you not. You would have your pride when you were upon
the earth, when you are in hell you may be as proud as you will, you would have
your malice, when you are in hell you may have your desire, you may have your
fill of maliciousness, in hell you may have elbow room enough to satiate your
selves in your lusts and sinful abominations, when the soul of a man does
secretly desire that the Word may not work upon him, then it is just with God
to grant that desire of his soul, it were just with God that the Word should
never work more, that the Spirit should never strive more, that mercy and
Salvation should never be offered any more, that man shall then have what he
desired, and he may blame himself for whatsoever judgment falls upon him, in
the 2 of These. 2.12. there says the text, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
that they all might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness, mark that he speaks before of those that would not
entertain the truth, and the love of it, but when God made known his will and
the way of Salvation, they did not love that niceness, they cared not for that
exactness and holiness, why what do you love then says God? upon what is
your love placed? upon what is the desire of your soul fixed? oh says the
text, They took pleasure in unrighteousness, in contemning, opposing,
hindering, and despising the good Word of God, and therefore they shall be
damned: when a man is not able to abide an admonition, when he cannot endure to
be informed or councelled, exhorted or reproved; when the ministers nor the
Word of God can have any power over men, when these poor creatures shall come
into hell, then they shall have elbow room to fulfill their lusts and
corruptions wherein they so much delighted, they took pleasure in wickedness,
they would not, they could not abide the means of grace and salvation; you
would have no reproves, you would endure no admonitions, it was well with you,
when you had no ministers to check and reproove you, but alas poor soul,
when you are gone down into the bottomless pit of everlasting perdition,
then you may have your full swing, then you shall never be reprooved more, then
you shall never be councelled more, you shall never be admonished more, you
shall then never be prayed for any more, but be damned in hell for ever, from
everlasting to everlasting; you shall then have your full pleasure in your
sins, is it not just with God, that you who would live in wickedness and
profaneness, and would not receive grace and mercy when it was offered, that
God should give you up to the hardness of your own hearts, and blindness of
your own minds, and send you into everlasting condemnation for ever? First
look as it is with a malefactor that is convicted of high treason for plotting
some wicked practice against his Prince, or for proceeding into rebellion for
the overthrow of his Country, after all the sinful passages of his be
discovered and made known, both to himself and the world, if the King after
this make the Proclamation, that if he will leave of his wicked enterprises
he shall be pardoned, nay if the King shall send message after message unto
him, secretly to tell him, that if he now will lay down arms, and take his
pardon, he shall freely be remitted and graciously received into favor, if
this Traitor shall rather fling away his pardon then his weapons, I appeal to
your own consciences in this case, if the King should ^^ife an army and
overcome him, and take him and execute him without any pity or mercy, is he
not justly rewarded, what will the world say, they will say, execution and
death is too good for him, so he had a fair offer of pardon, if he had had a
heart to receive it, he had pardon proclaimed unto him, nay the King sent
messenger after messenger, to tell him, that if he would stoop to him, he
should receive mercy and favor from him, and therefore seeing be refused and
neglected so kind an offer, he is executed justly, it is pity but
condemnation should befall him, because h^ would not take the means of
consolation, this is the condition of every poor soul under Heaven truly we
are all Rebels and Traitors against Heaven, by our ^^thes and blasphemies we
fet our mou^^ against Heaven, we have often taken up arms against God, and yet
after all our pride and stubbornenesse, and looseness, and profaneness, and
contempt of Gods Word and Ordinances, and yet the Lord is pleased to proclaim
mercy still, to every one that will receive it, all you that have dishonored
my name, all you that have profaned my Sabbaths, and contemned my Ordinances,
all you cursed wretches come, come who that will, and take pardon, let them lay
aside all their weapons, and receive it and salvation by him when it is offered
to them, and they shall have their sins forgiven, and they shall be received
to mercy, now if any soul will stand out against God and say, I will not have
Christ and Salvation, but will shift for my self, and try it out to the last,
I will walk in my own ways, and take up my own courses, I will be proud
still, I will break Gods Sabbaths still, and I will be malicious still, and
break Gods Commandments still, if any man shall be thus disposed, if then the
great God of Heaven and Earth shall come, with ten thousand thousand of
judgments, and execute them upon that man, if he shall bring a whole legion of
devils, and say, Take him devils, and torment him devils in hell forever,
because he would not have mercy when it was offered, he shall not have mercy,
because he would not have Salvation when it was tendered unto him, therefore
let him have everlasting condemntion, if God should thus deal with that man,
the Lord should be just in so doing, and he justly miserable: And this is the
second use, it is an use of terror to all those that will not receive Christ,
and grace, and salvation by him.

Thirdly, in the third place it is a word of exhortation, it should set an edge
upon your desires, and provoke your souls to give no sleep to your eyes nor
slumber to your eyelids, to give no quiet to your souls, nor contentment to
your hearts, until you have brought your souls to be willing to receive
Christ Jesus, you are the Spouse of Jesus Christ, it is good for you therefore
to consider, and think of your estate in this kind, if you will but have
Christ, that is all he cares for, if he can but get your good wills, he looks
for no more, and therefore you are to consider of it, and lie at your hearts
daily, you should daily be persuading of your souls, and never cease till you
have brought your hearts in some measure, to be willing to receive the Lord
Jesus, and bid him welcome, and give entertainment unto him, and the more to
prevail with you in this case, consider of the reasonableness of the
condition, and this may be a motive to provoke your souls hereunto, because
the offer is marveilous easy, as fair as can be, the terms of agreement are
as fair as any heart can desire, nay there is very good consideration in the
goodness which the Lord has tendered to us, and that is thus much, If we will
but receive Christ Jesus, all that he has shall be ours, the treasures of
wisdom, and grace, and salvation, they shall be all ours, if we will but
entertain the Lord Jesus, let us therefore reason with our own souls, and
commune with our own spirits concerning this gracious offer of salvation; the
soul should say, What, has the Lord offered salvation at so easy a rate,
will he notwithstanding what ever I have been heretofore, full of corruptions
and abominations, though my soul stands guilty of my sins and distempers,
though I be possessed with many weaknesses and infirmities, yet
notwithstanding all this, will the Lord be pleased to pardon all, to supply
all, to pass by all, only upon this condition, if I will welcome and
entertain him; may I have Christ for taking of him, may I receive grace for
carrying it away; why, good Lord if I will not do this for Christ and grace I
will do nothing; does God require no more, why, then if grace and mercy and
salvation be not worth this, they are worth nothing, if I will not do this, I
will do nothing for eternal life; this is that God expects, all that he
looks for; Every man that will, let him take grace and mercy, and that freely.
In the 2 of King. 5.13. the text says of Naaman the ^^^irian, 2 King. 5.13
when he came to Elisha the man of God to be healed, the Prophet sent a
messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh
shall come again to thee, and thou shall be clean. Now he being a man of
authority and of some place, he took this somewhat in disdain, that he
should send a messenger out unto him, and bid him wash seven times in Jordan,
he was wrath and went away and said, Behold, I thought he would surely come
out to me, and stand and call upon the name of the Lord his God, and stroke his
hand over the place and remoove the Leper; he did think the Prophet would
have done some great matter unto him, and therefore when he saw that he bid
him go wash seven times in Jordan, he went away in a kind of indignation; but
then his servants they came near to him in the 13. 2 King. 5 13.
verse, and said, My father if the Prophet had bid thee, etc. As who should say
if you will not do so small a matter to be cured, you will do nothing. So I
say to every soul here present, if the Lord had required a great matter of us
whereby we might attain salvation; if he had required a thousand Rams and 10.
thousand rivers of Oil; if he had required the first borne of our body for the
sin of our souls, if the Lord had enjoined every soul of us to live howling
and crying all the days of our life for mercy; if he had commanded us to go
into a Chamber secretly, and there to fall upon our knees and pray unto him
continually for mercy until our eyes had failed with looking up to heaven for
mercy, until our hands had been wearied with holding them up to heaven,
until our tongues had been hoarse with crying for mercy, and until our
hearts failed us and fainted within us; if at the very last gasp we should be
crying for mercy and did (...) then receive one drop of it* it would quit cost,
it would be worth our labor; if the Lord had required all things whatsoever of
you for one drop of mercy; if you had had your eyes about you, y^^ would have
given them, but what a wonderful goodness is this, that the Lord should
require nothing at our hands for Christ and grace and salvation, but a will to
receive them; let me press this a little further; if God had required a great
thing of you, would you not have done it to have been saved? how much more,
when it comes to this once, that it is at a lower rate then we can desire or
expect it should be, only be willing to take mercy and you shall have it, do
but carry away grace and it is your own for ever. I cannot conceive of any
easier term, whereby God might better express his wonderful goodness
toward us, will thou receive Christ and salvation by him^ why then thou may
have him, nay the Lord even forces his commodities and his favor upon us, he
does not only offer us this, but he forces it upon us in this kind, he is not
only willing that we should receive Christ if we be but willing to take him,
but the Lord himself does beseech us that we will be reconciled unto him, and
receive mercy from him, and be blessed for ever. Take notice of this
unmatchable and unconceiveable mercy of the Lord, in that he offers Christ
and the means of salvation upon so easy conditions, and at so low a rate; if
we can but will Christ we shall have Christ and salvation by him, nay we
shall not only receive Christ if we will entertain him, but the Lord himself
does beseech us to take mercy at his hands; ask your own souls therefore if
it be not equal that you should entertain the offer of Christ thus
pronounced unto you. But be ^^les as a further motive hereunto consider, that
as the terms are equal and easy, so the commodity also in the second place
is worth the price, and this may also enforce our hearts to forsake all for the
getting of, the possession of this goodness which we stand so in need of; if
the commodity were not good, though the condition were cast, and the price
reasonable, it were the^ indeed something, we could think to mend ourselves
in another place; but here as the terms are most easy, so the good is far
better than can be conceived; you cannot mend yourselves go whither you will,
use what means you will. If you will have Christ, what then, will you have as
men use to say, when a man has a commodity offered him a good penny worth, and
he knows not a good bargain^ when he has it, mark what Chapmen will say; Oh
say they, you will go further and speed worse* just so it is here, it is the
woefull^^^ thing under heaven for ^en not to know when they have a good
bargain^, and when they are we^ dealt withal* To refuse mercy and salvation
when it is offered them, and that upon so easy terms, and at so low a rate;
for what will you have if you will not have Christ, if you will nor have grace
and salvation, why, what will you have, upon what will you bestow your hearts?
you will have your sins and corruptions, and not grace and mercy, you will
have damnation, and not salvation; you will have hell, you will not have
heaven; you will be like the Jews, who refused Christ, and chose Barrabas a
murderer, for whenever a soul refuses the Lord Jesus, it is certain that
he chooses a Barrabas: if you refuse the one, you must needs receive the
other, and then consider which is best, you will not have Christ and salvation,
what will you then have, hell, damnation, confusion, and destruction; you will
not be happy, and therefore you must be miserable; and therefore this is
observeable, the Lord has sent from heaven this day, and offered salvation and
happiness to men, as freely as ever any man had any thing offered; I come this
day from the Lord to enquire how the case stands, and how the match goes
forward between Christ and you: Let me therefore go to your souls, and
answer you me unto my question; the offer of grace you see is free, the
condition is easy, the price is reasonable, whither now will you have mercy
and salvation, or no* you little ones, you young ones, that have been married
to profits and pleasures, to lusts and corruptions, the Lord Jesus is become a
great suter to you all this day, and I am Christ's spoksman to speak a good
word for him; be not, oh be not squeamish and coy, and say afterward you will
speak with him, and tell him how your mind stands: defer not the time, but
welcome him, and give entertainment unto him now presently, do not put him off
with delays, but presently embrace his kind offer, and be married unto him,
for if you will not now take him, he will come in a flaming fire hereafter, to
take vengeance of you all that now refuse and reject him, and therefore I
beseech you let (...) get your good will for this, every man that will, let him
take grace and salvation freely, tell m^^ then, will you have mercy and
salvation? oh take heed of refusing it, for if you do the time will come when
you shall never have it, though you never so earnestly desire it, if you
obtain it you are made for ever, if you enjoy it not, you are for ever damned;
return therefore I beseech you a comfortable answer to the demand which the
Lord makes, if you will receive grace and Christ and Salvation from him, then
speak to the Lord in this case, let your souls answer him cheerfully, we
will Lord, the Lord says, come unto me ye sinful sons of men, and I will
h^ale your rebellions; answer the Lord and say, we come Lord, for thou art our
God, think upon this, and work your souls hereunto, gra^nt Christ your good
wills in this kind; if you will but prize him and choose him above all things
in this world, if you be resolved to cleave only to him, and forsake all other
things in the world for him; if your souls be but willing to receive Christ, I
proclaim mercy and salvation unto you, we are as I told you before, Christ's
messengers, sent to speak a good word for Christ, and to get your good wills
for him: oh that we may have our errant from you* shall I say to the Lord
Jesus, all the poor souls that have heard the Word this day, and received the
tender of Salvation this day, I have all their hands, they have all writ down
their names, that they will have Christ, and they will have salvation offered
unto them, is it thus with you, if it be so, then I may go and return a
cheerful answer to Christ; but do not, do not I beseech you give me the
denial, do not say I cannot live by grace; I must provide for family, for
wife and children; can you not so, why? I must not take this answer from you,
let not Gods messengers go drooping to heaven, and return this uncomfortable
answer to the Lord, in this case let us not say we offered mercy, no body would
receive it, we tendered salvation, but no body regarded it; shall we return
this answer, no no, we must have another answer from you, and therefore I
beseech you work yet more upon your souls, and turn unto us a cheerful
answer in this case; for God looks for a comfortable answer, he wooeth from
heaven, and therefore never give her the denial. Deuteronomy. 5.29.
In the 5. of Deuteronomy. 29. Oh that there were such a heart in my people to fear
me and keep my Commandments, that it may go well with them, and with their
children after them, thus he writes, thus we speak, what answer shall we
have from you? that you will not have Christ, and you will not have grace and
salvation! Oh take heed of this, we come for your hearts, and we must have
your hearts, therefore shut up your doors against all other lovers, and come
and say cheerfully, we will Lord, we will cleave to thee only; go home
therefore, and whatsoever you now resolve this way, persevere in it, and take
heed that no man inveagle you and withdraw your love from the Lord Jesus; and
when you come at home, reason with your own souls, and say, Lord I have
followed ra^ties heretofore, I have had profits and pleasures do look after,
but now I care for nothing but for the Lord Jesus, if I may but have him, I
care for nothing else; I ^are not whether I ever see good day again or no: and
therefore if pleasures call, if profits entise, if lusts and corruptions
stir, then I will answer, I am married to Christ, I will have Christ, and I
will have salvation, nothing shall make me forsake him; thus cleave fast unto
Christ forever, let every soul resolve that has heard me this day, that they
will have Christ, and let them take heed that they never start back from him,
and say to your so^^es before so many witnesses in the Congregation, the Lord
called and asked whither I would have him? and I answered, I was willing, and
what shall I now break off my resolution^ no, never do it for shame; for if
you do for sake Christ, and do not keep close to your resolution; at the last
day, when the Angels of God, and a whole Congregation shall come and witness
against you, what a miserable estate will you then be in, therefore resolve to
hold f^st to Christ, and keep this resolution unto the end.

1 COR. 2.14. The natural man receives no^ the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.


WE have propounded heretofore five general circumstances of preparation.
First a man must know that the offer of grace is free. Secondly that a man must
will Christ and grace before he shall have Christ and grace. Thirdly, he that
does will Christ, shall have Christ and salvation by him; all which we have
already handled out of that place Revel. 22.17. Whosoever will let him take of
the water of life freely. And now we are come to the fourth circumstance,
which is that no man by nature can will Christ and Grace; and for this purpose
I have chosen this Text. And a little to make way for our selves, if you take
your eyes back to the beginning of the Chapter, about the 3, 4, and 5. Verses,
you may see how the holy Apostle does express his earnest desire to preach
nothing, not know any thing but Christ Jesus, and him crucified, and therefore
he looks not after the excellency of humane eloquence, or wisdom of men,
though he could have had this too; and happily expressed this also, yet he
proclaims it in the ears of the Corinthian Doctors, that he desired nothing
in that University (for Corinth was a famous University as Cambridge and Oxford
is) but to know the Lord Jesus and him crucified, and therefore his speech and
preaching was not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the spirit and of power the Corinth^an Doctors bragged of, that humane wisdom
and learning wherewith they were endued, but he tells them he desired not
this, nor never look^ after it. Now least some might cavil at the Apostles
neglecting of this elegance, whereby (...) might sugar over his doctrine that
was to be d^^^vered by him to the people, least by the nor regarding of this,
he might bring a neglect upon himself and upon his doctrine; the Apostle
therefore to remoove these filly objections and secret cavills, discovers unto
us from the fifth Verse to the end of the Chapter, the excellency of the Gospel
of the Lord, delivered in the plainness of it in the sixth Verse; there says
he, howbeit we speak wisdom among them that be perfect, yet not the wisdom
of this wo^^^, nor of the Princes of this world that come to naught, but we
speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world unto our glory, as if he had said, though you think
(O ye Corinthians) that there is no learning but humane learning, yet you must
know that we speak wisdom too, and that to those that are the perfectest
men in their own understanding. I tell you, we speak wisdom which the
world and the princes thereof, those that have the greatest parts never knew,
never obtained; you Corinthian Doctors brag much of your learning and
knowledge, but you have received it of other humane authors, but we teach unto
you the wisdom of God and of the Gospel, which eye has not seen nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, for God has
revealed them unto us by his spirit, where we may observe by the way, that he
which teaches the Gospel in the plainness of it, teaches the deepest
things that can be conceived; for here S. Paul speaks of things which the
wise of the world never heard of, never conceived. But then they might reply
further, how can you know these things, and why may not others know them as
well as you? These are the two objections that might be made against that
which the Apostle had before spoken of. How came you to know them, and why may
not others know them as well as you? The Apostle answers these two questions.
And he answers the first, how he came to know them, from the 10. Verse to the
14. God says he, has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God; now we have received not
the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God, as if he had said, The spirit of
God knows these things, and teaches a poor soul these things as far as
is convenient for him; the Spirit of God understands these things, and makes
known these things to his servants; they know not these things of themselves
but by the power of God; Spirit, the Spirit of God assisting and working
effectually in them, teaches them these secrets. But then why do not wicked
men come to understand these great matters also? To this the Apostle answers in
the Text, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit; for they are
foolishness unto him, etc. they do not know them because they cannot. A
natural man does not know these things, they are wonders and miracles unto
him, tell him how a poor soul comes to be humbled and broken, and have his
sins pardoned, and be received to mercy, why these things are wonders to a
carnal man, the Text says, he does not understand these things, because he
cannot, and the ground of this is, because they have not the spirit to teach
them; and this I take to be the scope of the Apostle in the Text; and in the
verse we are to observe only one point meet for our purpose, for as we have
said before, there are five general circumstances of preparation observable;
three we have handled, and the fourth is this, No man of himself by nature can
will to receive Christ; and this is here plainly set open in the text, and
therein manifestly expressed, it is the maine scope of the holy Ghost in the
words, a natural man receives not, nay he cannot receive the things of God;
but before we can come to gather the point, two things must be discovered unto
us. First what is meant by a natural man. Secondly what is meant by the things
of the spirit of God. First, what is meant by a natural man, the Corinthians
might have replied upon the Apostle, what are you a man of the spirit only,
what mean you by a natural man? I answer, he is a natural man, in phrase of
Scripture, which has not the work of grace soundly wrought in him, which has
not the spirit of God; whosoever he be that lies in the bosom of the Church,
whosoever he be that has a name to live and yet is dead, all carnal
Gospellers and hyppocrites, those that are colored over with the name of
Christians and religion, whosoever they be that have not that saving work of
grace, and the new frame of grace set up and reared in their souls, by the
assistance of Gods Spirit, all these how ever they may be colored over, if
they have not had the sanctifying work of Gods Spirit upon them, all these are
said according to the Phrase of the Apostle, to be natural men, and void of
the spirit, as may appear by the words going before the Text, and following
after. First compare them with the words going before in the 10. and 12.
Verses, We have received the Spirit of God, faith the Text; the natural man
and the spiritual are opposed one to another. We says the Apostle have
received the Spirit, so that he that has Gods Spirit is a spiritual man, and
therefore he that has not the Spirit of God in him, he that has not the
will of God revealed unto him by the Spirit he is a natural man. Look also in
the words after the Text, Verse. 15. He that is spiritual discerns all
things, he that has a heart truly humbled, and a soul truly sanctified; he
that is adopted, he is a spiritual man, so that he which is void of the
Spirit* he is a natural man; the phrase is excellent in this kind, Jude 19.
Jude 19. these be they says the Text, that separate themselves, sensual,
not having the Spirit; the words there interpret one another, he was speaking
before of wicked wretches, and those that lived after their own ungodly lusts;
in the 18. Verse says the Text, there shall be mockers in the last time who
shall walk after their own ungodly lusts; where we may note, that we shall
never see a mocker, one that opposes Christ and the Gospel, and is jearing at
the Saints of God, but he walks after ungodly lusts. They are sensual men,
who be those sensual men? those that have not the Spirit of God, as we may
see Verse 19. and therefore whosoever he be or whatsoever he be, be his
appearance never so good, if he be not truly sanctified by the spirit of God,
though he be a new man outwardly, if he be not sound in his conversation, he
is a natural man; he that has not the Spirit of God ruling and domineering
over his lusts, he is in a natural estate.

The second thing which is to be discovered is this, vid. what is meant by the
things of the Spirit of God, and then the point will fall fair and undeniable.
To this I answer, there are some things of God that are revealed in the
creation of the world, Romans 1.20. there says the text, Romans 1.20.
The invisible things of him (meaning God) from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead; that is, a man that looks into the frame and fabric of
the world, and sees the making of the earth, and the Sea, and all things
therein, he cannot say, but God has been here, an infinite wisdom, and an
Almighty power has been here, and framed all these things, but these are not
the things of God, which are meant in the text, but there are other things of
God which we must look after, and they cannot be discerned by the creation of
the world, and therefore, 1 Cor. 1.21. 1 Cor. 1.21.
we shall observe this, After that in the Wisdom of God, says the text, the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching, to save them that believe, mark the natural men might have known
though they would not, that there was a God, by the wisdom of God, that is by
the wisdom of God in creating of the World and by the observation of things
in the same, but they could not take notice of him as a God reconciled, as a
God that should appoint Christ as a redeemer, and as a God that should send
Christ to be a redeemer, these are the things which men could not know by the
creation of the world and by the wisdom thereof; the things of grace and of
our redemption, the favor and love that God bears toward his in Christ,
these are the things of God, the things of election, sanctification,
justification and glorification; these are the things of God which are meant
especially in the Text, as if he had said, God by the spirit can only reveal
these things, these come immediately from God by the means he has appointed;
a man may know that God has created heaven and earth, and that he has made
all, and provided for all, and yet go to hell. But he that has found Gods
love in Christ, God working graciously upon his soul, God humbling his heart
and pulling down his soul that he might be fit to receive mercy, and then
bestowing mercy upon him; when a soul sees these things, then these are the
things of God here meant; Gods spirit must only work these, the spirit only
must reveal these, and by the operation of the spirit we are made partakers
of these, these are the things of God which are to be understood in the Text;
God is said to call and to sanctify, it is the Spirit that converts, and
adopts, and humbles men's souls, as who should say, These are the works of the
Spirit, there is no seeing, there is no perceiving of these, there is no way to
be made partakers of these without the spirit, so that the doctrine now lies
open, and that is this; No man naturally is able of his own power to receive
the spiritual things of grace and salvation, no natural man, that is, he that
has not the spirit of God working in him, no man that is in his natural
estate can receive the spiritual things of grace and salvation. He does not
receive them, nay he cannot receive them says the Text, to put out all doubts,
and to cast away all cavills; the Text does not only say he does not receive
them, but that he cannot receive them, do he what he will, do he what he
can, come to a natural man; and ask him will you receive Christ and the work
of grace? why yes with all his heart, and he makes no doubt but he does so, and
he hopes he shall find the comfort of it. The Text says, God says, the
truth says, you do not, nay you cannot, you say you do, whom shall we
believe in this case, God or you; I can prove you are a natural man, you live
in base wicked courses, the Spirit of God is an holy Spirit; you live in
ungodly and unlawful courses, the Spirit of God is a wise Spirit, you are
ignorant and know not the things belonging to salvation, and therefore the
world knows, and you know that you are a natural man, and the spirit, that
says a natural man cannot receive the things of God, and yet you say you can,
whom therefore shall we believe? so that the point is plain, that a man by
nature has not power to will to receive Christ and grace and salvation by him,
and we will make good the point in four particulars, by way of explication,
That a man has not power to will to receive grace and salvation by Christ;
First to omit that which the Papists themselves confess in this case, namely
that a natural man of himself cannot find out the means of life and
Salvation, but God must give him some preventing grace, he must be enlightened,
that is, God must reveal and make known the things that concern his peace
unto him out of the Word; he must discover those things unto him, which
appertain to his peace and justification by Christ. I will omit this, and
speak only of the power which a natural man has to entertain the things
belonging to life and Salvation; and suppose it be granted that the things of
Salvation must be made known unto a natural mat in this case, or else he can
never of himself find them out, yet when these things be set open to men's
cares by the ministers of God, when grace and Salvation are offered unto men,
yet mar^^ when these are proclaimed, a natural man cannot entertain these
things, but the heart of a natural man will (...) away from these things,
which we may plainly see, if we look but into the 19 of Mat. Mat. 19.22.
22. there was a young man made some good profession, he came unto Christ, and
asked him, Master, what good thing shall I do to inherit eternal life? Christ
said unto him, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, the young
man aske^ Christ, which Commandment he should keep, our Savior answers him,
Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not commit adultery, etc. The young man
answers, All these things have I observed from my youth, what lack Iyet; Then
Christ says unto him, if thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have and
give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, but the text
says, Verse. 32. When the young man heard this, he went away sorrowful, for he
had great possessions: All the while before our Savior had not touched him to
the quick, but when he says unto him, Go thy ways sell all that thou have
and follow me, and thou shall have treasue in heaven, he then went away, why,
mark here, Christ made him a brave offer, he told him he should inherit
heaven and happiness if he would but do this, but says the text, he went
away sorrowful, the text does not say that he would dispute of it, and
consider of it, but presently as soon as he heard it, he had a secret kind of
distaste against it, and went away and with drew himself from the offer of
life and salvation. The phrase is pretty to observe in the 5 of John 40. John.
5.40.
there our Savior Christ was disputing with the Scribes and Pharisees, and
showing unto them the means of Salvation, but mark what our Savior says of
them, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life, mark that phrase; for it
is observeable in the 39 verse. the verse going before, our Savior had said
unto them, Search the Scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me; the offer was fair, if they would but
have come to Christ, they might have had life, but mark what he says of
them, of the Scribes and Pharisees, and so of all natural men, they will not
come, though mercy and salvation be offered and tendered.

But in the second place, when these things of life and salvation are set
before a natural man, and offered unto him, and he will not come to Christ,
that he may have them; yet suppose Christ come to him, imagine the Lord Jesus
comes home to the soul of a poor sinner, and knocks and rappeth at the
door of his heart, continually striving with him by his blessed Spirit, and
the use of means; although the Lord would win him, and woo him as he did
Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as a hen does her chickens under her wings, and ye would not:
Look as the hen clocketh her chickens together that so she may gather them
under her wings, and thereby prevent them from some mischance that may befall
them, so the Lord Jesus called after Jerusalem, and wept over it: Oh that thou
had known at least in this thy day the things belonging to thy peace, and yet
they would none of him; just so is the case of all natural men, God calls
after them, and kno^keth again and again, and yet notwithstanding they do not
only decline from the truth, but if the Spirit of God still strive with them,
if they cannot go away from Christ, but Christ follows them home to their
houses as it were, then they fall out with Christ, and profess they will none
of Christ and salvation, they resist and oppose the Spirit of God, they take up
arms against the Spirit in this kind. Act. 7.51. there says the text, Act.
7.51.
Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye: which of the Prophets have not
your fathers persecuted, etc. as who should say, the Lord sent his spirit in
the ministry of the Prophets (for so you must conceive of Gods Ministers,
though they be poor souls, yet Gods spirit labors through them, and when
they strive with the souls of men, and labor to plu^ke them out of their
sins, then Gods Spirit strives.) God sent his spirit among these men here,
and yet they resisted it. And so, Act. 13.46. Act. 13.46.
there says the text of Paul and Barnabas, that they waxed bold and said, It
was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you, but
seeing ye put it from you and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo we turn to the Gentiles. The text does not say, because ye have gone away
from the word, But because you have put it away from you: Thus the soul of a
natural man does put away the word of God, and opposes salvation. In this
kind, in the 22. Matt. 5. Matt. 22.5.
When the King there had prepared a great feast of fat things, when he had
killed he Oxen and his fatlings, and all things were ready, he sent forth his
harbengers about to call them that were bidden to the feast, but they (says
the text) made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to
hit merchandise, etc. Christ he sends his faithful Ministers about to invite
all people to receive life and salvation, Come ye that are hungry and thirsti^
and buy without money: but the truth is, they in the Parable spoken of, would
not come to the feast, so it is with all natural men, though our Savior
follows the^, and would persuade them to entertain the means of salvation,
yet they refuse it, and stand out against it; so that they do not only
withdraw themselves from the truth, but oppose it when they are pursued.

Thirdly, a natural man does not only withdraw himself from grace and
salvation offered, and resist this grace pressed upon him, but if the Lord
follow him yet further, and course him, and pursues him that he may give him
grace; yet considered in hi^ self, he is not capable of this grace. In the 6
of Mat. 24. there says our Savior, Ye cannot serve (...) and Mammon, Mat.
6.24.
Every man naturally has his Mammon, the proud man has his Mammon, and the
covetous man has his Mammon, and the prop^^^ man has his Mammon, now these
cannot serve God and Mammon, also to serve them both, does not imply only a
difficulty, but an impossibility also, so that we may plainly see, a natural
man is no capable of grace, but understand this wisely, I do not say, that a
man by nature is uncap^ble of grace, thus far, that he is not a fit subject
to be wrought upon, and to be made capable, but th^^ I say, that a man having
sin, and remaining in his sins, is not able to entertain grace, things so
considered for a while, as long as he continues in that estate, he is not
capable of grace, but yet God ^an make him fit, and disposed thereunto, he may
be wrought thereunto, and God by his spirit can make him able to entertain
grace, but he must first be disposed thereunto, look as it is with a vessel
that is full of puddle, there is an unpossibility now in this vessel, as long
as it is full of that pudly and filthy water, that it should receive clean and
pure water, but when it is emptied of that filthy water, then it is capable to
receive pure water, but first the durty water must be put out, before it can
receive the pure. Just so it is here, though the soul may be made a vessel
fit to receive grace, yet now being full of abominations, full of
covetousness, full of malice, full of pride, full of love of our selves, full
of hypocrisy, full of carelessenesse, looseness, and profaneness, full of
all manner of lusts, and corruptions, and concupiscence of the flesh, when the
soul is brimme full of these, it is impossible that it should receive grace,
it is impossible that grace and corruption should lodge in the same bosom, so
that God must first empty the soul of these lusts, and abominations, and
prepare him for grace, before grace can be put into him, before he can receive
grace from God, the fallow ground that has a great many thistles, and is full
of weeds, and nettles, and grass, this ground we use to say is yet arable
ground, it may be plowed and made fit to receive seed, and bear fruit, but
it must first be plowed, for all the while this trash is in it, it is not fit
for seed, though it may be made fit by tilling of it, so the soul of a sinner
is arable, God can fit it, and prepare it to receive grace and eternal life,
but he must be first plowed and made fit, he is overrunne with all corruptions,
and therefore of himself, for a while before the Lord humble him and fit him,
and prepare him to entertain Christ, and receive grace, he cannot receive it.
Ioh. 5.44.
Ioh. 5.44. There says the Text, Ho^ can you believe which receive honor one
of another, and s^eke not the honor which comes from God only. As who should
say, these things cannot stand together, that a man should be full of sin,
and at that time go to the Spirit to have his sins crucified, these thing
cannot stand so, that there is a kind of indisposition and impossibility, for
the present, Romans 6 20.
that a natural man should receive grace* Romans 6.20. There says the Text,
When you (...) servants to sin, you were free from righteousness, that is,
when a man's corruptions rule over him, when a man yields himself to be under
the power of his lusts, when sin is a man's master, insomuch that he must do
every thing which that commands him; if malice command him to hate, then he
must obey malice, and hate, and envy his brother, when covetousness is a man's
master, and, if that bids him gripe, and cheat, and cozen, he must then do
it, i^ a man be thus a servant to sin, he is free from righteousness, he cannot
be made partaker of grace and salvation so long as he remains in this estate
and condition.

Fourthly, the fourth passage is this, as the soul of a natural man declines
from grace offered and revealed, as it opposes grace, pressed so in the fourth
place it is not willing to be wrought upon, that it may be fit to receive
grace, and be made capable of it; there is no natural man under heaven that is
willing to be wrought upon, that he may be capable to receive grace, Luke
19*14.
he would not have grace and Christ, and though he might in the 19. of Luke
the 14. and 27. verses, our Savior Compares himself to a master that was to
go into a far Country to receive a kingdom, and therefore gives over his
estate into the hands of his servants, he called his ten servants and gave
them ten pounds, saying, Occupy till I come.

Now when he is gone mark what the Text says in the 14. Verse, We will not
have this man to rule over us; the Citizens hated him and sent a messenger
after him saying, We will not have this man to rule over us. Herein is employed
two things, first that God would rule over the hearts, he would inform their
judgments, and fit their souls to receive grace, but mark what they say, We
will not have him to reign over us, we will not have the Lord Jesus take
possession of our hearts, and rule and guide them in the way of grace and
salvation, and so say all natural men when the truth of God is followed and
pressed, and their consciences awakened and their minds enlightened, then they
cry out, we will not be troubled and pestered with these matters; in the 8. of
Romans 7. there says the Text the carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. A natural
man is not subject to God, he is not, nay he cannot be subject to the Law of
God, the Text does not say he does not obey the Law of God, but he is not
subject to it; for it is one thing to obey the word and Spirit of God, and
another thing to be subject unto it, as for example, suppose a master command
his servant to do something that is unjust and unlawful, and if he will not
do it, then beats him; the servant is then said to be subject to his master,
he may bear the blow and endure the stripes of his master, but if he be
honest and will not do the thing, he cannot be said to obey his master; so
likewise if it please a Prince to deal harshly with his subject, and punish
him unjustly, his subject may submit himself unto him, but he does not obey
him, but this is the madness of our sinful natures that we will not be
subject to the Word of God, we will not bear the blow, nor endure the stroke
of the Spirit, that so it may pluck us out of our corruptions, and frame us
and fashion us in this case, and make us fit to receive grace; but when the
word discovers our sins unto us, and our misery in regard of the same, the
soul beginns to swell and take up an indignation against the truth revealed,
it endeavors what it may, and labors what it can to acquit it self of the
word and to cast out the same, we profess that we will not have our hearts
informed and our minds enlightened, we will not be humbled and prepared to
receive grace and salvation offered by the Lord Jesus. If it be not thus, what
mean those swellings and bublings of heart against the word when it is
preached, sometimes a man's conscience is opened and touched by the Word of God,
and what follows? why presently he professes he will never hear that
Minister more, he says it is pity he should ever preach more, and tw'ere
good he were out of the Country, and that the kingdom were rid of him; alas,
what does the Minister this while, what does he intend all this while that you
take such distaste at him, why, you have a proud heart, he would humble it, he
would pluck you out of your corruptions that you may be prepared for grace,
but your souls say, you will not be wrought upon and framed, that you may
receive grace and salvation; however you do not profess so much with your
mouths, yet your actions testify as much, there is never a faithful Minister
of God but speaks home to the consciences of men, and tells them of their
beloved sins and bosom corruptions, and he does this to prepare way for the
Lord Jesus. He knows you must be fitted to receive grace and salvation, before
you shall be made partakers of grace and salvation; he knows that there are
many mountains to be levelled, and crooked things to be made straight, and
many rough things to be made smooth and plain, and therefore he intends
nothing but to have your souls broken and prepared for Christ, but you say you
will not be humbled and framed, and made fit to see the things that belong to
your peace here, and your salvation hereafter, and therefore you cannot receive
the things of God: so then to gather up all together, if it be so, that when
the things of grace and salvation are revealed and offered, a natural man does
turn away from them, if it be so that though the Lord striveth with a
natural man, and labors by his Spirit to win him and woo him to receive
grace, yet he resists the Spirit, and takes up arms against the offer of
grace; if it be so that when the Lord follows him with grace, yet a natural
man is not capable of grace, if it be so that the heart of a natural man is
not subject to the Word of God, and would not be wrought upon that he may be
made fit to receive grace, then it is clear, that a natural man cannot
receive the things of God if he goes away from grace offered and resists grace
pressed; if he be not capable of grace, and is unwilling to be made capable,
then the point is evident, and the doctrine undeniable, namely that a man in
his natural estate cannot receive the things of grace and salvation; and this
is a thing so clear to a gracious heart, as nothing more; we see then the
proof of the point, a natural man cannot receive the things of God, the
reasons of the point why a natural man cannot but do thus, as he does
withdraw himself from grace offered, and resist and oppose the Word of God.
The grounds of it are three, the first argument alleged is taken out of the
words of the Text, and it stands thus, a natural man cannot receive the things
of God, why? because they are spiritully discerned, what is that? the meaning
is this, he that will receive spiritual things, must have some spiritual
ability and power about him, some spiritual help vouchsafed unto him for the
performance of this work; a man that will discern spiritual things must have a
power answerable to that he would discern, a man must have spiritual help
from heaven before he can entertain spiritual graces; for spiritual graces
and the spiritual work of the Lord are only agreeable and fitting one for
another, but now no natural man has any spiritual power, these two things
are differ^nt in their kinds, namely nature and the Spirit, a natural man
has nothing of the Spirit, no spiritual ability in him, but he must have a
spiritual ability that can discern the things of the Spirit, and therefore a
natural man cannot discern spiritual things; thus I reason, no natural
faculty can put forth a supernatural work, a thing that is barely within the
compass of nature cannot put forth an action above the nature of it, because
every thing works within its compass; as the tree that grows, it cannot go
and walk as the beast does; the beast that has the sensual faculty, that
walks, and sees, and hears and feels, but it cannot reason; man he has the
reasonable faculty, and he reasons and performs such actions as belong to
him; now every one of these work within their own compass, they have their
several kinds of operations; the tree grows, the beast feels, and man
reasons, and none of these can exceed their own nature, or put forth a work
above their nature, so that then we see no natural power can perform a
supernatural work, but a natural man as he came into the world has nothing
but nature in him, and therefore he cannot discern the things of God, which is
a supernatural work wrought by the Spirit of God, for so says the Text, they
are spiritually discerned.

The second argument is this, all natural men are altogether fleshly, that is,
wholly overpowred with sin; mark that place in the third of John and sixth,
there says the Text, whatsoever is borne of the flesh is flesh, Iostn 3.6.
and that which is borne of the Spirit is spirit, but now mark all the things
of God, as first election, secondly conversion, thirdly sanctification,
fourthly justification, fifthly glorification and the like, they are nothing
else but spiritual, they are spiritual things, the grace of God is
spiritual, and the Word of God is spiritual; now mark what follows in the
fifth of Galathians the 17. Gal. 5.17.
there says the Text, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these now are contrary the one to the other, that is, a
natural corrupt heart resists and is contrary to the work of Gods Spirit,
they lust one against another, and are contrary one to another; then mark how
I reason from the former ground, if the soul of a natural man be professely
opposite and contrary to the Spirit of grace, then the soul of a natural man
will not of it self, nay it cannot receive and entertain Christ and grace,
they that oppose and would destroy one another, they will not entertain one
another; as for example, fire and water are contrary one to another, and
therefore they will not meet together and entertain one another, but
continually seek to destroy one another, so light and darkness they are
contrary, and therefore will not receive one another but seek the destruction
one of another, as when light comes darkness is gone, and when darkness
comes light that must be gone; but now mark, the heart of a natural man is
all flesh, and the things of God are all Spirit, and therefore these two are
contrary, and therefore oppose and would destroy one another; the heart of a
natural man is contrary to God and grace, and therefore cannot receive and
entertain God and grace, but seek to destroy them, and therefore it is
observeable in the 8. of Romans 7. Romans 8* 7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to the Spirit of God, it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; when the heart of a natural man
begins to feel the blow by the hand of Gods Spirit stirring and striving in
him to humble him and make him fit for grace, it flies back presently, and
will by no means be are the blow of the Spirit, it will not give way to the
work of God. Now mark how I dispute, that which will not, nay that which
cannot be subject to the Spirit of God, that will never receive grace which is
the work of the Spirit of God, but a natural man whatsoever he has, even his
wisdom is not subject to the Spirit, he will not bear, he will not away
with the work of the ministry, and therefore he cannot receive grace, and
this is the second passage. If the nature of a natural man be altogether
flesh, and is contrary to grace, and will not be subject to the Spirit, then it
cannot receive grace; but all natural men are contrary to grace, they are
altogether flesh and resist the spirit and therefore they cannot entertain
grace.

The third Argument is this, a dead man has no power to procure life unto
himself, but all men by nature are dead in trespasses and sins, and
therefore no natural man is able to procure spiritual life unto himself; for
the understanding of this argument, know thus much, that the nature of man
since his fall is stripped of all that holiness and righteousness whereby he
might be enabled to the performance of any spiritual work, and not only so,
he is not only deprived of the image of God, but is altogether overspread
with wickedness and unrighteousness, which take the possession of every poor
soul under heaven, Io^. 3.6. Whatsoever is borne of the flesh is flesh, John
3.6.
now every man naturally is altogether flesh, the will of man and the heart of
man is altogether fleshy; and therefore in the heart of man there is no good
(...) all. And consider the reason of this, why the whole soul is thus defiled
with sin, we must conceive that Adam was not only a particular person, but
he took the whole nature of mankind upon him; so that the nature of man in Adam
while he^ was in his innocence might either be carried to the obedience of
the will of God, or else wholly against the will of God, and therefore by Adams
fall man was altogether deprived of his righteousness, and carried against the
will of God. Now to press the Argument if it be so that all men's hearts are
possessed with rebellions by nature, and turned away from God; then men
naturally cannot turn unto God, but all men naturally are wholly possessed
with sin, and by rebellion, are turned from God, and therefore they cannot
naturally turn unto God. Again consider there must be some spiritual power,
some spiritual life put into a man before he can perform any good, therefore
a natural man cannot do any good, but is a dead man in respect of grace,
because be has lost that same soul of righteousness whereby he should perform
that good which God requires, and so that holiness being gone, the soul of
the will is gone, and the power to do any good or receive any good is gone. So
then the case is clear and the point evident by force of argument and
Scripture; that a natural man has no power to receive the Lord Jesus, and
grace, and salvation from him.

If this be true as has been prooved by reason plain and undeniable
arguments, that a natural man cannot receive the things of God, then every
soul may take notice of and condemn that sottish and foolish conceit that
harbors in the mind of many silly poor ignorant souls; if any of you know
such, take notice of them; there are many think that they brought grace into
the world with them, and that they had grace (...) their mothers belly; ask
them when did you receive grace, when did you receive faith, they will answer,
they believed ever since they were borne, they had faith ever since they can
remember; a great many poor ignorant souls the that grace came into the world
with them; No, no, be not deceived, faith comes by hearing, faith is the gift
of God, and repentance is the (...) of God, narrow is the way, and straight is
the (...) that leads unto life, and few there be that find (...) therefore
alas, if thou think thou broughtest (...) with thee into the world, it is an
argument that thou never had ^aith, it is an evidence that th^^ never had
grace; for if every man should bring faith and grace into the world, then all
should got to heaven, and what is hell made for then? No, no, narrow is the way
and exceeding straight is the gate; we must not think to go to heaven (...)
our hands by our sides. No, no, it is a very narrow way, and few there be that
find it. But then they will plead, though they had not grace by nature, yet
grace is within a hairs breadth of them, they have grace at command; and as it
is with a man that leaves a commodity at a man's house upon ^^king, if he like
it, if it be for his turn he may buy it, if he like it not he may refuse it;
now after (...) has lien by him a while, if it does not please him; he may
return it into the owners hand again, (...) many say, I took your commodity
upon liking, and if it would have been for my turn I would have bought it,
but it will not serve for the use I thought to put it to, and therefore I
return it to you again; So it is here, most men think that grace is left
with them upon liking, and they may let it lie by them, and after they have
lived in sin, and tired themselves in their own imaginations, and in
following the sinful desires of their own wretched hearts, if after this when
they become old, or lie upon their death beds, if then they like grace, they
may take it, if not they may let it alone and refuse it: O poor creatures, you
will perish and go to hell hoodwinkt in this kind, you think you may have
grace for calling for; hereafter when I am old then I will repent, and when I
lie upon my death bed, then I will begin to pray and humble my self before
God, then you think to have grace at your own liking; if you like the course
of grace then you will take it, if you like it not, you will refuse it; must I
pray with my family you will say? Well if I like the course happily I will do
it, if not I will neglect it; Alas, alas, I tell thee thou can as well make a
soul as convert a soul, thou can as well create thy self as repent; is it
in thy power to say, now I will have grace, now I will not? now I will repent,
and now I will not? Oh think of it, you shall find it a harder task then you
are aware of, and if God be pleased to open your eyes, you will then say, Oh
what shall I do to be saved, then you will see that something must be done
before you can be saved, then you will find it to be a hard matter to repent.
Do not think when you lie upon your death beds then you may repent if you
will; is it in your power to repent and go to heaven? no, no, all natural men
are under the power of Satan, he rules them, he commands the hearts of the
children of disobedience according to his will, and then for sin and the
power thereof look, Romans 6.16.
Romans 6.16. know ye not says the Apostle that to whom ye yield your selves
servants to obey, his servants ye are whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? every natural man is a servant to sin and a
slave to his lusts, he can do nothing but that sin will have him to do.
Take a proud man, whether art thou able to confess thy pride, to see thy
sin, and humble thy self, and renounce thy folly, art thou able to do this?
No, thou must ask thy sin leave first: So take a covetous man, art thou able
to set open thy house, if thou have wronged any man, or griped or co^ened any
man? art thou able to say, I will restore him fourefold? art thou able to do
this? No no, thou must ask thy covetousness leave first; now whether you
think that the devil will suffer you to go out of his clutches when he has
power over you, if you think sin will give you leave to forsake your lusts
when you are servants to it; I appea^e to your own consciences, and therefore
whosoever he be that is a natural man, let him not co^^n himself, he has no
power in himself to forsake finne; if heaven were laid down before him and
offered him for the leaving of one lust, he could as well make a world, as
part with one lust for heaven, and therefore every man should labor to see
this and say, Lord heretofore I have been deluded, I thought if I would have
grace at any time, I might have grace when I would, if I would not have grace I
might choose, and therefore I thought I would have profit now, and pleasures
now, and corruptions, and hereafter I will repent, hereafter I will have
Christ, but Lord I was deluded, what was it in my power then to entertain the
Lord Jesus? then it was in my power to go to heaven, to make a world, and to
create a soul also? I will assure you it is the almighty power of God that
must do this, in the first of Ephesians 19. Ephesians. 1.19.
there the Apostle gives us to understand how God works in our conversion;
What is the exceeding greatness of his power, says he, to us ward that
believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand
in the heavenly places. When the Lords body had lien in the grave three days,
the self same power that raised Christ from the dead; this is the very same
almighty power that works in the heart of a man that is converted in this
case; can thou raise Christ from the dead? if thou can do this, then thou
may repent, if not, then of thy self thou can not repent; for the very
same power that raised Christ from the dead, the same power must work
repentance in the heart of a man; be not therefore deceived, but now look to
it, ^^^ny Christians have thought that they might have grace and salvation when
they would at commend, but when God opened their eyes, O then they saw no hope
of this, they then knew that the same power that raised Christ out of the
grave, the same power must raise them out of the grave of their sinner. I
beseech you therefore to be informed, to yeel^ to, to be convinced of this
truth; the Text saith^ natural man cannot receive the things of God, you say
you can, who shall we believe now? What will you be Atheists, the Lord says,
the word says, a natural does not receive the things of God, nay he cannot,
now whether thy word, or the word of God will stand, thou will one day know it
to thy everlasting woe, and therefore now be persuaded to see your own
follies, and abandon this foolish conceit.

The second use is an use of examination, namely from the former doctrine
delivered, every soul that hears the word this day, if they will de^^
plainly with their souls may understand what their condition is; you may
read your own estates, whether you be natural men or spiritual, whether
gracious or graceless men; what would thou know then, whether thou art a
natural man (...) no? and if thou be so, woe be unto thee. The trial is
easy in this kind, observe what disposition thou have to the things of God,
observe whether thy soul be affected with them, whether thy soul can give
entertainment to them? the (...) man cannot receive the things of God, if thou
be a natural man, thou then can not receive grace nor entertain Christ
and salvation, so then can thou find that if pleasures come, then thy heart
gives way to them? if profits come, then thy heart is transported with the
love thereof? Is thy soul enlarged to these things? do thou love and desire
them? can thou swallow down all, entertain all, digest all very willingly
in this kind? never too much riches, never too much honor, never too much
profit, never too much pleasure, is thy soul thus disposed? But when the word
calls for repentance, when the Gospel calls for self denial at thy hand,
and the Lord Jesus would rule in thy heart, when the Lord would take away all
thy sins, and all thy corruptions, is it so now that thy heart is weary to
hear the se^ is it so that thou can not give way to these? then the case is
clear, thou art in a natural estate, for the Lords sake take notice of it;
natural things please thee, profits and pleasures, sins and corruptions
please thee, but thou can not away with the things of the Spirit; thou art
therefore a natural man, there is therefore no room for Christ in thy soul,
therefore there is no true grace yet wrought in thy soul. In the 8. of the
Romans 5. (...) says the Text, They that are after the flesh do mind the things
of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the Spirit. Now
observe therefore what relish thou find in the things (...) ^^^^low; can
thou relish base courses and ill ^^^^pany? is any course or advice taken that
may adduce thee unto wickedness? can thou swear with the blasphemer, and
swagger with the drunkard? can thou relish and appove of these courses? but
when the Gospel comes and when a man checkes thee for drinking and swearing,
and tells thee that these things stand not with the kingdom of God, the
kingdom of Christ consists in righteousness and joy, and peace in the holy
Ghost, and thou must deny thy self before thou can receive the Lord Jesus;
if a man shall tell thee that thou must be pure as Christ himself is pure, and
that the Lord Christ Jesus did not come into the world to make men loose and
careless, but holy and righteous, to live soberly in this present world, and
deny all ungodly and worldly lusts, to renounce and abhor these, when thou
hear that thou must become a fool that thou may (...) made wise, and that
the Lord came to refesh those only that where laden with the burden of (...)
firmes, when thou hear these things, how (...) thou take them, most men may
give this answer we think not so, we believe it not, nay we cannot be
persuaded of it; is it thus with thee why then the case is ended, the trial is
do^^ whoever does not nay cannot receive the things of God; the Gospel of God,
and the things revealed therein; why the Text says, and the Lord says, that
man is a natural man. Now many soul can say, I am not persuaded of these
things which the Gospel reveals; why then the cases clear, thou say
plainly thou can not receive the things of God, why then the Lord says, the
Text says, and God of heaven says, that thou art a natural man as thou
came into the world, and that thou have not the grace and spirit of Christ.
But then some may say if I be a natural man what then, what hurt is it? And
therefore in the fourth place it is an use of terror; I presume many that have
heard this will say we are so, and shall a man be ashamed because he is a
natural man? Therefore observe from the former doctrine a word of terror to
all natural creatures under heaven, I am almost afraid to speak of the misery
of a natural man, my tongue trembles to discover the wretched, fearful,
damned, miserable estate that every natural man is in, you think it is
nothing to be in a natuturall estate; but I tell you, did you but know what the
Lord has revealed concerning a natural man, it were enough to break the
back of a man; a natural man, why it is enough to make thee go sighing to
thy grave, though thou live a thousand years; if thou be a natural man
thou have not received Christ, nay thou art not near the things of a better
life, nay you are not only still to attain those things, but you are not able
to receive the things of the Lord Jesus, whereby you may be quickened to
entertain those things, and this is that which makes the souls of natural
men miserable, and the misery of those souls the more miserable; because they
are not only unwilling to be out of this condition, but they are unwilling to
be made willing to be out of it; they boast that still they remain in it, for
mark what natural men say, they bring a reproach upon Gods. Saints and
children, what say they, you are a man of the Spirit, you are a spiritual
professor* one of the holy brethren, are you miserable wretch, do thou
profess thy self that thou art not so, but that thou art a natural man? why
then thou art a miserable man, a natural man, why then a damned man? a
natural man why th^^ an accursed man? thou that professest thou have no part
and portion in the Lord Jesus, take heed that one day he does not profess
that he has no part in thee, Romans 8.9. If any man has (...) the Spirit of
Christ, Romans 8.9.
he is none of his; thou that do make a matter of mocking at those that do
walk uprightly before God, and that have the Spirit of God in them, thou that
proclamest to the world that thou have not the Spirit of God, the Lord
proclaims it as openly to thee, that the Lord Jesus will not own thee, he
will have nothing to do with thee, and then what shall become of thee (...)
the devil must take thee at the last day, when all flesh shall appear before
the judgment seat of God, and the book shall be opened and the actions of
men made manifest to Saints and Angels* Oh one drop of mercy then, one dram of
comfort then will be worth a world; Oh then you will wish, Oh that Christ
would save us; no, no, you that were natural men, Christ will not own you
now, you had none at all of the Spirit, you have opposed the good Spirit of God
and flouted it, these are your spiritual men, these are your holy ones, thus
you have mocked and blasphemed, you have said the Spirit of Christ is not mine,
and therefore Christ says he is none of thine; thy estate therefore here is
miserable, but thrice wretched and miserable will it be hereafter; men may
imagine great matters, and boast of themselves, of their riches, and their
wisdom, and their honor and preferment in the world, but if they be
natural, there is small good at all in them, they may have lands, and
preferments, and honors, but they have small good in them, and therefore
miserable needs must their estate be here, but far worse hereafter. Do not
think ye may climb up to heaven by your own imaginations; good Lord, how can
a man that is in a natural condition sleep quietly? with what contentment can
he walk, when a man goes into his fields to recreate and delight himself,
and then considers the means that God has offered him, whereby he might
attain unto grace and salvation, when the soul thinks with it self, I may
go into my ground to be eased and refreshed, but alas I am but a natural man,
what therefore shall become of this poor soul of mine; he considers with
himself, I am but in a natural condition, and therefore in a miserable,
damned condition, and then when he returns home, still this strikes in his
mind, I a^^ but natural, flesh and blood, and therefore never shall receive
any spiritual comfort; but when these things shall neither help me nor I be
helpefull unto them; Oh what then shall become of me? I have had no part in
Christ here, and therefore I can never look that he will own me hereafter;
it is a great evil for a man to have no good, but this is the misery of a man
that he cannot procure any good, and this is the misery of all miseries* that
he cannot desire to be out of this misery; and yet this is the condition of
every natural man, you therefore that are natural go into comers and mourn
for your selves and those that belong unto you, and for those to whom you have
relation; you husbands that have wives which be natural, and you wives who
have natural husbands, go and mourn for them and for you selves, and sigh to
heaven for mercy, and pray to God that he would be merciful unto them and
forgive them their sins, and bring them out of their natural estate, and
make them able to entertain Christ, and grace, and salvation. Parents mourn
for your children that are natural, when thou look upon thy child whom thou
dearly love, and whom perhaps has good natural parts, and is obedient unto
thee in outward respects, when thou beholdest this child of thine, and
considerest that he is in a natural estate, then this may pierce thee to the
very heart, then thou may burst out and say, woe is me that this child of
mine was ever borne, for he is in a natural condition, and therefore in a
miserable condition, he is a natural child, and herefore a child of the
devil, truly he is my son, and for ought I know if God have not mercy upon
him, the child of the devil also; a natural child is a damned child, a
natural man is an accursed man; consider this, does not the Word say this,
does not the Lord say this, that a natural man cannot receive the things of
God, and therefore deal with your own souls, and with the souls of thy
friends, as men use to do with those that are sick, have thou a child or a
husband sick of any disease, thou go to the Physician to ask his counsel
concerning the diseases, he tells the disease is not dangerous and deadly, it
may be helped, and if he be but able to receive those things which he shall
prescribe he will warrant his recovery, but now if the disease continue, and
he be not able to take any food, on receive any Physic, then the disease
cannot be helped, health cannot be procured; you that are natural men you are
sick of corruptions, the disease I must confess is not deadly, if you can but
take mercy and receive grace, which is the physic of the soul, then you may
recover, but as long as you remain in your natural estate, you can receive no
spiritual food, no spiritual physic, but cast up all, and therefore you
are gone, you are but dead men. I tell you, you have many brethren, many
friends, many children that are sick, I tell you, they are proud, and
careless, and loose, and profane; but this is their greatest misery above
all the rest, they cannot take any spiritual food, they cannot receive any
spiritual good thing, but cast up all, and vomit up all; the (...) of the
Gospel prevails not, your counsel they will not hear, the Ministers exhort,
admonish, reprove, they will not regard, they cannot away with any spiritual
physic; I tell you, this will be their death, and if God be not merciful,
their damnation also, and therefore go and mourn for your children and for
your friends if they be natural, and pray for them. When a man is sick of
some disease, if he can take no food, if no physic will stay with him, nor
work upon him, (...) he casts up all, then his wife she sits in one corner of
the house weeping, and his children in another corner mourning and lamenting,
now if one comes in and asks them how does your husband, or how does your
father, Oh then they fall^ wringing their hands, Oh my father or my husband is
but a dead man, if he could but take any thing, then there were some hope of
life, but (...) nothing will stay with him, but as soon as he takes it he
vomits it up again, and therefore now there is no expectation of his recovery,
this is the condition of many of your friends and children, they can take
nothing which should do them good, they can receive no spiritual good things;
(...) counsel can take place with them, the word of God prevails not with
them; O mourn for them therefore, they are in a miserable estate, they (...)
but dead men, they will be damned; if they could but receive the things of the
Spirit, then there were some comfort; but alas, how can a man receive
salvation? is it not by the Word? why then if the Word will not prevail with
them or take any place in them, nor work upon them, how then shall they come
to salvation, why they must therefore be damned, they must therefore perish,
they must be cast into utter confusion and destruction for evermore, Oh mourn
therefore and pray for those which belong unto you if they be in a natural
condition.

In the last place, if it be so dangerous to be in a natural condition, then
it is a word of exhortation to you all, that you would labor to get out of
this natural corruption. I entreat you for the Lord Jesus sake, as you love
your own souls whoever you be that hear this doctrine if you be natural
men, give no sleep unto your eyes, not slumber unto your eye lids, give no
rest to your souls nor contentment to your hearts, until you have studied by
all means possible to recover your selves out of your natural condition,
begin speedily and persevere constantly in the means that God has
appointed, that the Lord may bestow that power upon you whereby you may be
enabled to receive grace and salvation offered you, that so it may go well
with you for ever, John 3.27. there says the Text, John 3.27.
a man cannot receive any thing unless it be given him from heaven, so then
the case is clear, though thou of thy self can not receive grace and
salvation, yet God can give ability to receive them; away therefore from
yourselves, and look up higher, fly unto God for strength and sufficiency; I
would have such a natural man fear continually that God will cut him off, and
than he is damned for ever; Oh consider of (...) a natural man, why he may be
afraid that Gods judgments will every moment, in every place (...) upon him,
both at home and abroad, within and without, he may fear they will fall upon
him upon every occasion he meets withal, when he^ goes in the way, when he
sits still, when (...) eats, when he sleeps, what business soever he is
about, in every place, at all times, upon all occasions, he may fear that the
curse of God will fall upon him. A natural man may continually stand in fear
and consider, if God should cut (...) by death, what then would become of me,
my body must return to the ground, and my soul that (...) go into everlasting
torments in hell fire among (...) devil and his angels, where the worm never
(...) nor the fire never goes out, and therefore sure (...) estate is woeful,
and my condition miserable* (...) you will say, a natural man cannot receive
(...) good, why should he then be counseled to receive the things of God, as
grace and salvation, this is a cavil of Bellarmin and thus I answer it, we
have no spiritual ability in our selves to perform any spiritual duty, but
yet we have ability to perform some moral actions; a man has restaining and
preventing grace whereby he is able to wai^^ upon God in the means, that so he
may be enabled to receive grace, and therefore as long as the parts and members
of your bodies and the faculties of your souls continue, as long as your
understandings and memories endure, why cannot you bestow your bodies to come
to Church as well as to go to the Alehouse? why cannot you bestow your eyes as
well in reading, as in carding and dicing? God has given you liberty to use
these means, that so you might receive grace, and therefore this objection is
only a cavil of Bellarmine, God does not punish a man because he cannot get
faith, but because he will not use the means whereby he might get faith, we
may wait upon God in his ordinances, we may attend upon the means; these
things you may do and those things you have power to do; you may do natural
and civil actions, and therefore you should employ your selves in hearing the
Word, and reading, and praying; you should use the means which God ordained
for the working of grace in yours souls, when you come under the ministry of
God; hereby you may be converted, and therefore you must come, that so grace
may be wrought in your hearts, and that you may be converted.

And therefore I will advise you of three things which are in the power of
natural men to perform as directions to the use of the former means appointed
by God for the working of grace; First I would have every natural man
thoroughly convinced of the misery he is in, and informed of his own
insufficiency, Ier. 10.23. there says the Text, O Lord I know that the way of
man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to (...) his own
steps; and the Apostle Paul (...) takes it to himself, I know says he,
that (...) self there dwells no good thing, this is a (...) matter that we
presume of our selves; we (...) we can stand of our selves, though we never use
the means to have our weakness strengthened, (...) this is the reason that
we never seek to God (...) the use of the means, take therefore (...) course
of the Apostle, and say in me dwells (...) good thing, suffer your selves to
be thoroughly ^^formed and convinced of your own misery (...) weakness, and
confess this truth; I confess I am a natural and carnal man, and therefore
a my flesh there is no good at all. Secondly, (...) you have thus done, and
when your hearts are ^^^swaded of your own misery, and you co^^^^ there is no
good in you; when you can say, (...) what a stout heart have I, what a many
gra^^^^ promises and godly counsels have I had, and (...) never would receive
or give way to any of the^ and therefore there is no good in me; and (...)
thirdly, when you have done this, then conv^^^ your own hearts that there is
an All-sufficiencie in the promise that the Spirit is able to do good unto
your souls, Ezech. 11.18.
Ezech. 11.18. there says the Text, I will give them one heart, and put a new
(...) within them, I will take away their stony heart, (...) give them a heart
of flesh, so that however it is (...), that we have no sufficiency in our
selves, yet (...) Lord Jesus has enough; the spirit is able to the that for us
which we are not able to do for (...) selves; and therefore in the third
place, (...) thou art thoroughly informed of these two things, then come unto
Gods ordinances, and look up unto God, and wait upon him in the use of this
means; it is a fine passage of David, Lord says he, teach me the way of the
Spirit, as if he had said* Lord I have a naughty spirit* I have a naughty
heart, but Lord thou have a good Spirit, lead (...) by that good Spirit of
thine in the ways of uprightness; Thus do you, wait upon God in (...)
ordinances, and say, Lord thou have promised tha^ thou will put a new soul
into thy people, and create a new heart in them, and throw their sins (...)
the bottom of the sea, and that thou with (...) them to walk in thy ways.
Thou have promised to give thy Spirit to them that seek it, Lord (...) good
this thy promise unto me; take away (...) wretched sinful heart of mine, and
(...) a new heart in me, and direct me by thy Spirit to (...) in the ways of
thy Commandments. It is (...) Lord, a Leaper cannot take away his spo^^, a
Blackamoore cannot change his hew; but (...) thou can make a Blackamoore
white, (...) can cleanse the Leaper; though I be a dead (...) thou can put
life into me, though (...) thing, yet thou can do all things, I (...) more,
but thou can make me of a (...) am a Leaper, but thou can take away my
(...) I am natural and carnal, in me there (...) thing, but Lord thou eanst
make me (...) rituall things; good Lord grant that thy (...) Spirit may teach
me to know the things (...) to my everlasting peace; this do, above all take
heed that you do not defer the time; Oh defer not the waiting upon God in
the use of the means; Why? because you have no power in your selves to help
your selves, it is not in you power to receive Christ, and entertain salvation
and therefore begin speedily to attend upon (...) ordinances, that at length
the Lord may put a (...) spirit into you, and work upon you to your ever,
lasting peace and comfort. I exhort you (...) all things not to defer the
time and say, we (...) gather the flower while it is green, while (...) youth
continues we will follow our pleasures, (...) take up out sports, and when we
come to be (...) then we will turn over a new leaf, and on our death beds
then we will repent; alas, alas, (...) will thou think to do it in thine old
age, wh^ thou could never do it in thy youth? and therefore do not thus
delude thy own soul; tho^ think when thou lie on thy death bed, if (...)
do but send for a Minister, then he will (...) salvation to thee presently;
but I tell thee tho^g^ all the Ministers under heaven should preach mercy unto
thee, though all the Angels in heaven should exhort and entreat thee to
entertain salvation, though thou should have all glory and all happiness
laid down as it were upon a table before thee, if the Lord should say here is
all glory and happiness, do but believe and take it and it shall be thine,
thou shall be made partaker of if for ever; yet consider in thy natural
condition thou have no power to receive happiness and glory, thus offered; if
God should open heaven gates, and bid thee go into heaven, yet thou have no
power, if thou be a natural man to receive mercy and salvation upon those
terms which God has offered them, thou could not enter into heaven, though
God should open the gate wide, and entreat thee to enter in, what a thing is
this then, when neither Minister can persuade thee, nor Angels exhort thee, nor
Christ himself entreat thee to take mercy, yet thou should think in thy old
age or upon thy deathbed to have mercy and salvation at command; why defer
not therefore this work until the last, but make speed, begin betime and
hold on constantly to the end that at last God may take away your corruption^
and give you his spirit, and raise you out of the graver of your sins, do
this because you see it is needful to be done, it is not in your power to do
good unto your souls, or receive good, and therefore (...) ^^ginne betimes and
wait upon God in the means, that so you may have grace and salvation thereby.

EZECH. 11.19. I will take away their stony heart, and give them a heart of
flesh.


ACoording to our Order intended, and Course propounded, we have laid down
five general circumstances, and have chosen several texts answerably:
whereout we might observe the same, four of those five we have already
handled, and now we are come to the last Circumstance, which is this, Howsoever
a natural man cannot receive the Lord Jesus, yet the Lord will make all his
that belong to the election of Grace willing to receive him, and then he will
bestow Christ Jesus upon them, and grace and salvation by him: and for this
purpose I have chosen this text, and as our course is, I will not meddle with
every Doctrine in the text, which are six in number, but choose that only
which fits best for our purpose. But before I can come to lay down the point
of Doctrine, two passages must be opened: first, what is meant by heart,
secondly, what is meant by a stony heart, and what by a fleshy heart; and these
two being opened, the Doctrine will be plain and lie fair: first for the
first: a heart in Scripture, besides that which it signifies naturally; is
applied to the will of a man, or to that ability which is in a reasonable
soul, whereby he wills or rejects a thing, this is put for a heart in
Scripture, together with love, delight, joy, hatred and grief, which are
attendants upon this will; as a man will have such a thing, why? because
beloves it, and delights in it; and he again refuses such a thing and will
not have it, why? because he hates it, and because it is displeasing unto him;
and this is the meaning of that place, Mat. Mat. 15.19.
15.19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemy. Secondly, the Will is put in
phrase of Scripture, not only for ability of the soul whereby it wills, but
for the same spiritual disposition, that is, in the will and affections of a
man, in this kind the temper and frameablenesse of the Will to any action is
termed by the name of heart in Scripture; for there is somewhat in the Will,
whereby it is carried to any work: look as it is with a Bowl it runs,
because it is a round thing, but that it runs at such and such a mark, is
because it has a Bias upon it, whereby it is swayed and carried to that mark;
so it is with the heart of a man, there is not only an ability therein,
whereby a man is enabled to will, but there is a frame and a disposition in the
Will, either to good or evil, either to grace or sin, and as the will of a
man is biassed and swayed, so a man is said to will good or evil, not in
regard of the natural faculty of the Will, but in regard of the disposition of
that faculty which does carry the faculty to the performance of any work:
now a righteous man out of the disposition of his heart, is carried to yield
obedience unto Gods commandments; and a wicked man out of the frame and temper
of his heart is carried after lusts and distempers and sinful abominations;
and this is the meaning of that place, Deuteronomy. 29.4.
Deuteronomy. 29.4. The Lord has not given you a heart to perceive to this day, why?
they had a heart, for they were natural men, they had the natural faculty of
the Will and the understanding and affections, but the meaning is, they had not
the gracious disposition in their wills, whereby they might be carried and
enabled to will that which was pleasing to God, and might be comfortable unto
themselves: it is a pretty phrase, Match. 12.35.
Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings
footh evil things: there is a heart in both, and there is a treasure in both
also; but there is a good treasure in the heart of a godly man, and out of this
comes good things, so out of the treasure of a wicked man's heart, comes evil
things; there is a treasure of love and holiness, and goodness in the heart
of a gracious man, whereby he is carried to walk holily and unblameably
before God and man; good words and good actions come from the good treasure,
that is, from a good disposition of the soul; again, a wicked man has a
heart, and he has a treasure also, he has a treasure of pride, and a treasure
of covetousness, and a treasure of all manner of corruptions, and these carry
him to wicked speeches and lewd actions, he talks loosely and lives basely;
so that there is a disposition good or bad in the soul of a man, and this is
termed a will or a heart in Scripture: now in both these senses we understand
not a heart here in the Text, but in the latter only; God will give them a
heart, that is, God will give them wills and hearts disposed to that which is
good.

The second passage to be opened is this, namely, what is meant by a stony,
what by a fleshie heart; First what is meant by a stony heart; a heart is said
to be stony by way of resemblance, because it is of the nature of a stone,
look what the nature of a stone is, such is the nature of a heart compared
thereunto, a stony heart, that is, an unsensible and an incapable heart; a
stone that is insensible, it receives no impression, set a seal upon a stone
and press it down never so hard, and you may break the stone in pieces, but
it will receive no impression, it will take no print; but now set a seal upon
wax, and that will receive any impression that a man stampes upon it, so it is
with a stony, stout, sturdy heart, though God knock it in pieces it will not
be humbled, it will receive no impression, but resists and beats back the
means of grace and salvation offered and revealed unto it, if the Lord set a
stamp of humil^ation upon it that will not be humbled, it will receive no
stamp but makes it fly back and bound upward: so that a stony heart is a
hard sturdie heart capeable of no impression.

Secondly, what is meant by a heart of flesh, and that is quite contrary to a
stony heart, it is like unto flesh, soft, tender, easy, and pliable, willing
to take any impression that comes upon it; so that now a fleshie heart is
nothing else but a heart lovingly teachable, and humbly tractable to the Lord,
willing to entertain any impression that it shall please the Lord to stamp
upon it; if God commands any thing, that obeys, it God threatens, that
trembles; it is said of I^siah that he had a melting heart: look as it is with
wax, if you set a seal upon it, just as the print of the seal is, so is the
print in the wax which it leaves behind it, so it is with a fleshie, lowly,
p^^able heart, it receives any stamp that God puts upon it; when the Lord
faith fear, that trembles, when the Lord says love, that entertaines it, when
the Lord commands any thing, that ye les obedience to his commands, this is an
humble and a pliable spirit: and this is the substance of the Text, and the
intendment of the Prophet therein, is thus much: In the beginning of the
Chapter, about the seventh Verse, the Lord threatened to in^^rict many
judgments upon the people of Israel, because they had not walked in his
statutes; after the Lord had done this, yet (...) tells them in the 16. Verse,
if they would walk in his ways, he would be a Sanctuary unto them, and he
would make them better than ever they were, and he would do better for them
than ever he did, but how will he do this? Why says he, I will take away
that stony sturdy heart which is in them, and will give them a frameable heart
and a teachable heart, which shall yield to whatsoever I cammand, and then they
will be able to cast away all those evils which they have embraced, and
perform all those holy duties which they have neglected, the heart which God
takes away from them cannot be meant the heart it self, the natural faculty
of willing, and the heart which he gives them, cannot be meant the bare
faculty it self, but the rebellious disposition that was in the faculty the
Lord removes, and that same teachable, frameable disposition he puts into
the faculty, whereby their hearts should be carried to that which was pleasing
to God, and comfortable to themselves. I intend to speak of two things
concerning Gods taking away of this same stony heart, and giving a heart of
flesh unto his people: first, that God does this, that he is the Author of it;
secondly, I will speak of the circumstance of time when God does this, when he
thus works upon the hearts of his chosen, sometimes sooner sometimes later;
and this, same circumstance of time when the Lord does this is double; first in
regard of the means, the Lord does thus work upon the hearts of those which
belong to the election of grace, when he gives them the means of salvation
when they have the Sunshine of the Gospel shining in their faces: The
second circumstance of this time, is in regard of the men whom the Lord will
thus work upon, some sooner, some later, some in all ages; some in their young
and tenderage, some in their middle age, and some, though very few, in their
old age: First I will speak of the Author of this, and that is God, he takes
away the stony heart, and gives a heart of flesh to his servants. The Doctrine
out of the words is, The taking away of the indisposition of the soul to any
good duty, and the fitting, framing, and disposing of a soul to perform any
spiritual service, is the alone work of God, he removes the indisposition of
the soul, and he puts the disposition to any good into the souls of his; the
case is clear, if we reason after this manner what is a stony heart? A stony
heart is a sturdy, unteachable heart, uncapeable and indisposed to any good;
what is a heart of flesh? it is a lowly, teachable, pliable heart, wiling to
receive any impression that God stampes upon it, who takes away the one? The
Lord; who gives the other? The Lord. So that both the remooving of the stony
heart is the Lords work, and the giving of the fleshy heart is the Lords work
also, I will take away their stony heart, and I will give them a heart of
flesh. Nay the Lord does make it his chiefest prerogative to do this work for
a poor sinner; Ezekiel. 36.25.
Ezeck. 36.25. I will power clean water upon you says the Lord, and ye shall
be clean from all your ^il^hinesse, and your Idols, I will cleanse you: A new
heart also will I give you, and put a new spirit within you, I will take away
the stony heart, and I will give you a heart of flesh; and therefore we shall
take notice of it; this great work of conversion is compared with the work of
creation, God only created man, and God only converteth a man; how was it
when darkness was over the face of the earth, Let there be light said the
Lord, and there was light, the same God that created light, the same God does
shine in our hearts, nay this work of conversion is said to be one of the
greatest works of God, as if God did the best he could do for a poor sinner
when he converts him. To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, says the
Prophet Esaias, that is, to whom is the utmost power of the Almighty God
revealed, the Lord puts forth his whole strength upon poor sinners when he
converts them unto himself. The power of Gods strength, the depth of Gods
wisdom, and the riches of Gods mercy is discovered in this work of
conversion; here is power against all power, and strength above all strength;
for the Lord does not meet with the soul of a sinner in the work of
conversion, as he did in the work of creation with the world, for when he
made the world, he met with nothing to resist him, but he only spoke the
word, he commanded and it was made; but when the Lord comes to meet with
the soul of a poor sinner, to open his eyes and convert him unto himself,
and bring him home; he meets with the whole frame of all creatures opposing
and resisting him; the devil and the world without, and sin and corruption
within; when the Lord comes to convert a firmer, he meets with all these,
with sin, Satan, and the world resisting him, and therefore here must needs
be power against all strength that opposes him, here must needs be wisdom
against all policy that resists him, and here must needs be wonderful mercy
against all weakness and misery, 1 Cor. 14.24.
and therefore 1 Cor. 14.24. there says the Text, If all prophecy, and there
come in (...) that believes not, or unlearned, he is rebuked of all, and
judged of all; and so are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so he
will fall down on his face and worship God, and say plainly, God is in you
indeed, here the Text faith, when the Lord comes to speak home to a poor
sinner, a poor soul, he comes into the Congregation, and though he be simple
the word is wise and powerful and that discovers what is in his heart, man
is not able to do this, but God can do this, and then the soul will say, God
is in you in deed, as who should say, Here is God, or else I had never been
humbled, or else my sins had never been subdued, or else my soul had never
been wrought upon, the sinner that is stricken with this work, he professes
plainly, that here is the stroke of God, and power of God, and wisdom of
God, which was able to discover all things that were in my heart, and take
(...) this stubborn heart of mine, Oh this is (...) ^orle of God indeed.

The grounds of the point why it is necessary that God should be the Author
both of taking away the stony heart and giving the heart of flesh are these, if
we do but consider the nature of the stoninesse and the fleshinesse of the
heart, it will appear that God only can take away the one and give the other.
First if we consider the nature of the stony heart, and the distempers thereof,
it will appear that it must be the work of the Lord only to take it away;
and not to follow any other similituds then the Text affords; I will show the
similitude and resemblance that is between the sturdy stout heart of a sinner
and a stone, by which it shall be made manifest, that none but the Almighty
power of God is able to remoove it. Now in a stone observe three particulars,
which discover the nature of it; first the ground of all, the hardness which
is in the stone is from hence, there is a close fastening, combining, and
knitting of the parts together which is the ground of the hardness that is
therein; as for example, take a path, if it be continually plowed up, it will
be soft and loose, but if many walk upon it, if it be continually trod upon
then it will be hard; what is the reason of this, namely this hardness
proceeds from the close fastening and settling of the earth together, this it is
which makes the way hard, but if it were daily plowed, and the earth
continually loosened, it would then (...) soft, but when there is a natural
fastening and compiling of the earth together, it cannot but b^e hard.

Secondly, from this fastening of the parts of a stone together, as there comes
hardness, so also from this hardness arises a great strength in the stone,
and that is the reason that the hardest things are marvelous strong; a child
before his joints be settled is but weak, he is not come to his strength, but a
man when his parts are settled, and his joints thoroughly knit together, then we
use to say, be is come to his full strength; and so it is in metals, those
metals that are closest knit together and most nearely concocted, they are
said to be strongest mettalls, as Gold is said to be a stronger metal then
Silver, and Silver is said to be a stronger metal then Lead, because the
parts thereof are more nearely settled and more closely concocted: So it is the
nature of stones, those stones whose parts are most combined together as
Flints, they are said to be the hardest stones, and those whose parts are not
so closely knit, they are said to be more soft and of less strength.

Thirdly, from the hardness and strength of a stone, there comes a resistance
against any thing from without it, because the parts of a stone are knit
together, therefore it is hard, and from the hardness thereof proceeds
strength; and being hard and strong in the third place it resists and bea^s
back any thing that falls upon it, as if you knock against a stone with a
hammer, it resists it and makes it ^lie back by reason of the strength and
hardness of it; Even so it is with the soul of every poor sinner, of (...)
sinful creature under heaven, it has an inward secret kind of union between
sin and its self, between corruption and its own nature. The heart of a
poor sinful soul has a near combination with sin, there is a fast
closure between sin and the soul, and therefore sin in the Scripture is
termed by the name of the old man, as who should say, The sin and corruption
that is in a poor sinner, is as it were another nature in him, in so much that
the union and combination that is between sin and the soul, is far
stronger then any other bond of nature, and this is the reason of that phrase,
Luke 21.16. there says the Text, Luke 21.16.
Ye shall be betrayed also of your parents, and of your brethren and kinsmen,
and some of you shall be put to death, and ye shall be hated of men all for my
names sake, and this is the reason, because the union that is between sin
and the soul of a wicked man exceeds all other bonds of nature* as for
example, if a naughty wicked father have a godly religious child, the father
will neglect those duties to his child which even nature it self (...) him to
perform; and if a wicked lewd for the (...) a good father, he will not
discharge those (...) unto him which nature binds him unto, but the ^ather he
hates the son, and the son he hates (...) father, the mother hates the
daughter, (...) daughter hates the mother, and they break (...) bonds both, of
nature and religion; the (...) father will do any thing against his son,
before the bond that is between sin (...) soul shall be broken, before this
union (...) broken, he will not abide the presence of his sin, nay that which
is most unreasonable to consider, a wicked lewd ungracious man will lose his
life, he will spend his own heart blood before he will leave one sinful
beloved lust or corruption, and the reason of this is, because there is a
nearer (...) on, and a closer combination between sin and the soul, then
between all relation, that nature can put upon a man, insomuch that a man will
rather have his sins and his lusts then his own child; nay such is the union
between sin and the soul, that it becomes (...) God unto the soul; look
as it is with a stone, the parts thereof being closely fastened and nearely
settled together, it becomes marveilous strong and hard, so when God has
forsaken the soul, and it closes with his corruptions, this union that is
between the soul and its corruptions is marveilous strong and firm, nay so
strong and firm that there is no means under heaven, no creature in the world
that is able to break this union, and dissolve this combination that is
between sin and the soul, unless the Lord by his Almighty power come and
break this concord and conspiracy that is between sin and the soul,
against himself and the glory of his name; and for the truth hereof observe
this, all outward means are too scant, too narrow, too short to break the
union between the soul and sin, as it is with the body of a man, if there
were a great and an old distemper in a man's stomach, if a man should put a
rich doublet upon him and lay him in a Featherbed, and use all other outward
means, this would do him no good, because the disease is within, and is
become as it were another nature in him, it is an old distemper that has eaten
into his very bowels, and therefore all outward means cannot make a separation
between the disease and the body, because the disease being inward they cannot
come near it. Just so it is with the soul of a man, a man's heart will have
his sin; there is an inward combination between the soul and sin; now all
means, as the Word, and the like is outward, and can do no good in this kind,
they cannot break the union between a man's heart and his corruptions, unless
God give a blessing to these means, unless the Lord by his Almighty power and
infinite wisdom make a separation between sin and the soul, and dissolve
this union. The soul says, I will have my sin, and I will have my life, and
I will have my God, though I die for it, there is a strong league (...)
between the heart of a sinner and his lusts, (...) therefore all outward
means cannot possibly break this league; look as it is wi^h a strong
stomach, if you give it any ordinary meat the strength of the stomach is above
the meat, and turns the meat into the nature of it self, ^o it is with a
corrupt heart that has made a league (...) his lusts, all outward means and
of (...) God, a corrupt heart converts them and (...) them aside to his
everlasting destruction; the isntrumental cause is always under the (...) the
soul of a man is a sovereign commander, this way all outward means are but
isntrumental m^ses, and the heart of a man is above them, and therefore they
may as well ^arden a man as soften his heart, and humble his soul; a man can
receive no good thereby unless it please God to overpower this distemper that
is in a man, and break the near union and firm league that is between sin
and the soul.

Secondly, as there is a near union between sin and the soul, so in the
second place as from the knitting of the parts of a stone together, there comes
a strength to resist the blow; so there is a marvelous power, a sovereign
command that sin sets up, and Satan possesses in the soul; nay so
strong a power it is, for therein lies the strength of the argument, that
nothing can overpower it and overcome it, but the Almighty come it power of the
Lord, for this is the meaning of that place, ^ Cor. 15.56.
of Saint Paul, 1 Corinthians. 15.56. The sting of a eath is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law; so that a man may see so strong as the Law is, so
strong is sin, and therefore the strength there of must needs be great* I
open that place of the Apostle thus, The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law; look as it is with a King when a male factour is
apprehended and convicted of high treason, the king gives up the malefactor
into the hand of the jaylour, and gives him authority to keep him in what
prison or dungeon (...) will and tyrannize over him as he list, the jaylour now
has not power of himself only, but is armed also with authority from the
King, he has a commission from the King that he may dispose of the Traitor
as he pleases, he may keep him in what prison he will, and tyrannize over
him as he pleases and as he sees good, and the reason is, because he has
authority from the King to back him, and he has as much authority as the
King, because the King does this by him; so it is with the blessed will of God,
every poor soul rebels against him and breaks his Laws, and therefore the
Lord takes notice of it, and treason is brought against him, and he is
condemned for it, and then he delivers him up into the power of sin, and into
the hands of the devil, as who should say, Take him sin, and take him
Satan, and hale him into damnation and tyrannize over him according to your
own minds, thus God gives them authority over him; me thinks I hear the
Lord say thus; Let all occasions domineere over him, let all corruptions take
place in him, he has opposed my Laws, I will never help him more, he has
transgressed my Commandments, my Spirit shall never assist him more, take him
sin, take him Satan, and dispose of him according to your own pleasure; so
that now sin and Satan have not only their own power over this soul, but
they have power from God, and they are backed with authority from the Law; in
this kind Satan may say, This soul must (...) damned, I have Law for it, by
the virtue of the Law I prevail against him and domineere over him; God has
given me authority to tyrannize over him, thus the strength of sin in the
Law. Now he that, must come and rescue this soul, and deliver it from the
power of sin and Satan; must be able to equalize and, answer the strength of
the Law, and this none can do, the Law of God, none can bear the strength of
it, but he that is perfect God, none but the Lord Jesus Christ, none can
deliver the soul and rescue it from the power of sin and Satan but he;
this is the reason of that unconceiveable and admirable power that a man's
corruptions have over him, a man would wonder to see that a base lust or
corruption should so domineere and tyrannize over a man, and make a man such a
slave thereunto; the reason is, because the strength of sin is the Law. God
in his just judgment has given over a sinner into the hand of sin and
Satan, now the Lord Jesus only comes and takes away this power, and over
comes this strength for the rescuing of a poor soul this, way, and hereby
we may conceive that the wisdom and power of Gods mercy goes beyond the
power and wisdom of Gods justice, as I may so say; for what says the Law,
and what does the justice of God require, the Law says Do and live, justice
faith, if Adam dee obey the Commandments of God he shall be saved* if Adam
sin he shall be damned. But then the wisdom and power of Gods mercy comes
and says, a man shall not die though he does not keep all Gods Commandments;
but how is this done, namely this way, Christ which is perfect God and man,
comes and suffers for man, he comes and does that which man should have
done, and therefore though man do it not, yet he shall not be condemned, so
that our Savior by his death did satisfy for us, and gave full contentment to
the Law of God, so that now the justice of God has nothing to say to a poor
soul, and Christ by his resurrection he did overcome the power (...) and
Satan, so that now mark what follows, if any thing hinders the soul from
being saved, it is because either Gods justice is not satisfied, or else
because the power of sin and Satan is not abated, but Christ by his death did
satisfy the Law of God, and by his resurrection did overcome sin and Satan,
and therefore these cannot hinder it from salvation, and this is the ground how
it comes ^o pass that the Lord only, and no (...) can deliver a soul from
the strength of (...) power of Satan, which have the strength of the Law to
back them.

Thirdly, as in a stone there is a close setting (...) a near knitting of the
parts thereof together, (...) whence comes the hardness thereof, and secondly
as from this hardness there proceeds strength; and as in the third place from
this strength arises a resistance against the blow that is (...) upon it, so
it is with a stony heart, there is a (...) union between sin and it:
secondly, by (...) of this union sin comes to have a (...) power in the
soul, and not only so, but in the third place, there is a great resistance in
the soul against Gods Command* Look as it is with a stone, of a man strikes
a blow upon it, it resistes the blow and beats it back, so it is with the
soul, with a stony heart; the Word, the Sacraments, Admonitions, Reproves,
Counsels, Exhortations, they enter not into it, they prevail not with it, but
it resists and obpposeth all means of grace and salvation that are offered
unto it; what help soever God bestows upon it, it beats it back, it will
not be disposed, it will not be framed and fashioned according to Gods holy
Will, Zach. 7.12. there says the Text, Zach. 7.12.
They made their hearts as an adamant stone, least they should bear the l^s,
and the words which the Lord of Hosts sent by his Spirit in the Ministry of
the former Prophets; that is, they closed with their corruptions and grew
strong in their corruptions, and resisted the commandments of the Lord, and
therefore it is said of Pharaoh, that he hardened his heart, that is, he
strengthened his heart in sin, and would not obey the commandment of the
Lord, but refused to let the people of Israel go: when there comes to be a
near union between sin and the soul, then the soul does strengthen it
self in sin, and opposes the Law of God; the proud man says, he will have
his lust, let God say what he will, the covetous man he will have his
corruption, let God say what he will, and the drunkard he will have his own
way, and the adulterer he will take up his own course; let God say what he
will they grow strong in their sins, and therefore resist all means which
may be for their good, until the Lord by his almighty power does break this
fast knot that is between corruption and the soul, and removes the power and
strength of sin, and then by a strong hand takes away this resistance and
over-powers a soul in this case: so that then, to gather up all together; if
it be so that the union between sin and the soul cannot be dissolved but by
God alone, if the strength and power of sin and Satan cannot be vanquished
but only by the Lord, if the resistance that comes from sin cannot be
taken away and removed, but by the work of the Spirit of God: then the case is
clear, and the point evident, That it is God which takes away the stony heart
and gives a heart of flesh: if God alone by his almighty power does these
things, then he is the author of this work, it is his work to do this in the
soul of a poor sinful creature.

The first Use is an use of instruction; from hence we may see, that therefore
this great work of conversion, the fitting and preparing of a poor sinner to
entertain the Lord Jesus, it is a work of great weight, it is a work not of
ordinary, but of mavelous and admirable difficulty; if it be the work of the
Lord only, if nothing else can do this work but it lies upon Gods alone
almighty power, if all means fail, nay, if the wisdom of men and Angels
stand aghast and amazed at this work, then I must conclude it is the Lords
work, and is ought to be mavelous in our eyes. And from hence it is that it
is a mavelous wonder that any creature that is under the power of sin and
Satan it is a wonder it is a miracle that after all teaching, after all means
used, any soul is humbled and prepared to receive mercy from the hand of the
Lord Jesus Christ: Nay, hence it is that we see little profit come from the
work of the Ministry when we see the greatness of this work of
conversion, we may wonder how it comes to pass that any are converted and
brought home unto the Lord; the Ministers are feign to lift up their voices
like trumpets, and spend their hearts as it were, they pray again, and fast
again, and preach again, and yet all will not dee; for when is the heart of
any humbled, when is the soul of any turned and converted unto God, and
therefore away with that cursed delusion that harbors in the minds of many
men, they will repent, and they will believe when they list, why? Alas it is
not in your power, it is the almighty work of God, thou have not the work of
repentance to command at thy pleasure; it is not talking and saying, I do
repent with all my heart, and do believe that will serve the turn, this will
not do, the Lord must work effectually in thy soul by his almighty power, or
else the union that is between sin and thy soul will not be dissolved, or
else the strength of sin and power of Satan that is in thy soul will never
be vanquished, or else the resistance that is in thy soul, and which comes
from this strength against the blow of the Spirit, and all means that may fit
it, and prepare it for to receive the Lord Jesus, and mercy from him will never
be removed, a man shall sometimes find that the indisposition of his soul to
any good shall be a little abated by the power of the Word, the edge of it will
a little be blunted, but a poor soul cannot be freed altogether from this,
until it shall please the Lord by his almighty hand to remove it: and
therefore in the first of James the 18. Verse; the text says, Iam. 1.18.
Of his own will begat he us by the Word of truth, that we should be as the
first fruits of his creatures, Ioh. 1.13.
and Ioh. 1.13. To them that received him, says the Text, he gave power to be
the sons of God to them which believe in his name, which are borne not of
blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man but of God. And
therefore think of it Ministers that teach the Word, and people that hear the
Word; we must know, that unless the Lord steppeth in and does the work for
us, all our labor is lost; it must be I ^ay the Lord that must take away the
stony heart, and it must be he that must give the heart of (...); it is not
talking and making a profession that can pluck sin out of the soul of a man
in this kind, but it must be the almighty power of the Lord that must do it.

The second Use is a ground of comfort, whereby the soul of poor sinners may
be supported, and the hearts of those that have sin hunging about them may be
cheared when the soul considers that it is laden with abundance of corruptions
and abominations, then it is quite discouraged and thinks with all that it
shall never be recovered; why? though you be not able yet here is the comfort
of a poor foul, the work is the Lords, and he whose work it is, is able to
bring it to pass, what though thou be weak, yet God is strong, and
therefore quiet thy soul and content thy heart; a man may say, I have a hard
heart from within, and it will receive no good from without; the Word prevails
not, the Sacraments have no power over me, why, all the means and cost and
charges that God has bestowed upon me is lost, and my heart is not yet
humbled, my corruptions are not yet weakened: be yet comforted, though means
cannot do it, which God uses at his pleasure, though these cannot do it, yet
the Lord can do it, there is nothing hard or difficult to him that has
hardness it self at command, he is a God which has all things at command;
he can command the devil himself, and therefore he has the hardness of
thy heart at command also there is nothing hard to him that has hardness at
his command; nay, though all things be impossible to man, yet nothing is
impossible with God, God can do what man not means cannot, the Lord he
shows mercy upon us, why? because we will, no, because he wills; and though
we cannot cast away our sins, yet the Lord will remove them? Oh, then says
the soul, this is somewhat comfortable that the Lords mercy depends not upon
my will, but upon Gods will. And I would tell you somewhat by experience in
this kind, for I knew one that was over whelmed with despair a whole year
together, because he thought he had committed the sin against the holy
Ghost, and yet at last was comforted by this means, he refolved with himself,
if my conversion were in my will only, then I should be damned, but it is not
because I will, but because God will do good to my poor soul: aye but the
soul will say, I confess it is not in my will, but it is in Gods will that
he shows mercy, and this is some comfort yet, but oh my corruptions are old
sins of a long time, can those be pardoned, they are become as another nature
in me; can those therefore be removed, yes, the Lord is able to remove those
also, for says the Prophet, the Lord has laid salvation upon the mighty, so
that though thy corruptions be mighty and powerful, yet there is a mighty God
that is able to undo that cursed combination that is between thy soul and
thy corruptions, and therefore quiet thy self in the consideration hereof, and
say, I must confess, that I have many corruptions, but the mighty Lord of
hosts has promised that he will take away my stony heart, and give me a heart
of flesh, and he is able to do it also, be herein quieted and supported and
look up to heaven for comfort.

In the third place it is a word of exhortation to all those that are in the
bond of iniquity and under the power of Satan, to those which carry a stony
heart about them, it is a word of exhortation to these, see your own wants and
be exhorted in the name of the Lord Jesus, to have recourse to this great God,
and entreat him to take away your stony heart from you: look as it is with
men if there be a Physician of excellent skill that cures all diseases that are
brought unto him; why then all men will repair to him, why, so it is here, God
alone is able to do this cure for us, and herefore he should have our custom;
if a man should set up a bill upon the market post, that he would cure all that
come to him which were troubled with the stone in the reins, or any other
grievous disease, and if we should meet with many coming from him that were
healed by him, why then we would be ready to say, such a one went and he was
healed, such a one went and he was cured, and this will stir up all to
repair unto him, and every one would bring those that appertain unto them,
and were troubled with this disease unto him, that they might be cured by him:
the Lord has set up a bill this day, that he will cure all those that come
unto him of their stony heart, and all the Sons of God have found proof
hereof to the comfort of their own souls, the Lord is he that will do this,
he will take away your stony heart: you wives therefore that have husbands
which have stony hearts; and you parents that have children that are troubled
with stony hearts, go home with comfort, and tell them that you have heard
this day of a Physician that will undertake to cure them of this disease, and
exhort them therefore to repair unto him: Our Savior Christ when he had
healed many of their diseases, the Text says in the third of Matthew, That all
came unto him and brought their sick that he might heal them. In the bowels
of the Lord Jesus, be entreated you that have stony hearts to go unto the
Lord, that so you may be cured: you were better have a millstone about your
necks, then have this stony heart; we have all of us this stony heart more or
less: as it is with a man that has been cured of a disease, perhaps the
disease is much mitigated, but there will still be much weakness and some
relics of the disease remaining in him a long time after. So the Sons of
God have the strength of this stony heart somewhat lessened and abated in them,
but they are not altogether freed from it, but those that were never cured of
this disease, those that never had this stony heart in any measure removed,
they were better have a millstone about their necks, for it will sink them
into the bottomless pit of hell and destruction; if death take them away while
they carry this stony heart about them they will be surely damned; therefore
(...) them as they love their own souls be (...) and persuaded to come to
this Physician God (...) I will take away your stony hearts, and I will (...)
you hearts of flesh; come therefore and (...) selves to the hammer of God that
your stony hearts may be taken away: when you (...) this Ministers teach, then
say Lord, I beseech (...) teach thou me in the mean time; when the Minister
persuades, then say, Lord do thou over rule and persuade this sinful heart
of mine, take thou away this power of corruptions which is in my heart, and
remove thou the rebellions of my heart; go home and be exhorted to go to this
Physician, and importune the Lord in this case, put him in mind of all those
many savours, which he has vouchsafed to you, put the Lord in remembrance of
that which he has desired in his Word: Oh that people had such hearts as would
fear me and keep my Commandments always: say unto the Lord, that it is as
easy for him to create such hearts in you, as to wish you had such hearts; put
the Lord in mind of his promise, and tell him that he has promised that he
will take away their rebellions from his people, and that he will give them a
new heart, and renew a right spirit within them, and he will cause them to
walk in his ways, and entreat him for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake to make
good this promise unto you; entreat the Lord to consider what a deal of
honor shall redound unto his name, if he shall cure your poor souls, down
upon your knees, and pray to God that he would heal you of this disease, and
say unto him that thou have heard he is a merciful God, and that he will take
away the stony heart from his people, and beseech him for his mercy sake, that
he would take away thy stony heart, nay, tell him, that if he will cure thee
thou will help him to a great many patients; tell him that thou will tell thy
neighbors of it, and exhort them to come unto him that they may be healed by
him, come close to God and say, Father, have thou not desired that people had
such hearts as would fear thee, and keep thy Commandments always? Have not
thou promised that thou will power clean water upon thy people, and thou will
take away their stony hearts and give unto them fleshy hearts? Say, Lord, what
a great deal of honor thou shall have hereby, I will exhort all that have
stony hearts, to go unto thee that they may be cured, and therefore for thy
promise sake, and for the honor of thy names sake, I beseech thee to take away
my stony heart, and give me a heart of flesh. Do thus and you shall (...) a
great deal of comfort to your poor souls thereby.

LUKE 19.42. If thou (...) known as least in this thy day the things belonging
to thy (...).


ACcording to our purpose we have proceeded thus far in the point of
preparation, we have spoken of the five general circumstances thereof; the
first whereof was this, the mercy of God is free; secondly, a man must will to
receive Christ and grace before he shall have Christ and grace; thirdly, he
that does will Christ truly shall have Christ and salvation by him. These three
we have handled out of the 22. of the Revelations the 17. The fourth was that
a man by nature cannot receive Christ and grace, and that we handled out of 1
Cor. 2.14. The fifth was, howsoever a soul by nature cannot receive Christ and
salvation, yet God will bring the souls of his to prize Christ, and approve of
him, and be willing to entertain him, and then he will bestow Christ and
salvation upon them, this we handled out of Ezekiel. 11.19. and in this work of
God in the preparing of a soul for himself, there are two further
circumstances to be considered in regard of the time when God will do this,
and the first circumstance is in regard of the means, the second in regard of
the men which are to be wrought upon; and so we have a trouble consideration
in regard of the time when God will thus prepare the soul of a poor sinner
for himself; the first is in respect of the means, and that is this, when the
Gospel of life and salvation is sent and revealed to a people and continued to
a people, if ever God work upon the hearts of men, if ever he means to bring
people to the knowledge of the things belonging to their peace, it is then when
the Lord is pleased to send his faithful Ministers among them, and discover
the means of life and salvation unto them. The second circumstance is in
regard of the men that God will work upon; some sooner some later, some in
their young and tender age, some in their middle age and in their ripe years,
and some though very few in their old age, few are called when they are old,
God calls some such but very few, as we shall hear hereafter. We will handle
now the circumstance of time in regard of the means, when God does purpose
good into a man, or town, or a country, or a kingdom, namely when the Lord
sends his Gospel among them and his faithful Ministers to discover the means
of (...) unto them; and for this purpose I have this (...) Text. And first to
make way for our selves and then to press on unto the point, we must therefore
understand that our Savior Christ came in the last day of asking, as it were,
to Jerusalem, they had had many Priests to teach them, and many Prophets to
exhort them, and a great many of means of life and salvation vouchsafed unto
them; now when Christ was coming toward the city and saw it a far off, and
fo^^ saw also the desolation that should come upon it his bowels yearned
within him toward the people, and he mourned secretly within himself, Oh
these famous monuments and goodly buildings shall all be laid waste, thou have
had many Priests to advise thee, and many Prophets to instruct thee in the
ways of life, but now those days are gone and past: Nay the great Prophet of
the world Christ Jesus is now come to woe thee to receive the things belonging
to thy peace, and yet thy heart is hardened, and thou will not receive the
things belonging to thy peace, and therefore now I will turn my preaching into
mourning and sighing; Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou had known at least
in this thy day the things belonging to thy peace, but now they are hidden from
thine eyes, now those golden days are gone, and the gate of mercy is shut,
there is no more means of grace and salvation offered, the Gospel shall never
more be vouchsafed unto thee, and because thou have rejected the means of
salvation offered, they shall never more be granted: so that now here we have
the passing peale of Jerusalem by our Savior, look as it is with a man that is
carrying to be buried, his wife she weeps, and his children they mourn, and
his firiends they lament. So it is here, our Savior he follows Jerusalem to
the grave as it were, and when he could do no more for it, then he weeps
and mournes over it, Oh that thou had known in this thy day the things
belonging to thy peace; and the exhortation that here Christ presses upon
Jerusalem, depends upon three circumstances; the first is taken from the nature
of the things offered her and revealed unto her, they were not matters of
trifles, but they were things belonging to her peace, the second is in regard
of the time, at least in this thy day, as who should say, this is the last day
of asking, the last time that ever these things shall be offered unto thee,
and therefore this ought to move thee to give entertainment to the exhortation
of thy Savior. The third is in regard of the person, Christ Jesus requested
this that might have commanded it, he entreats and requests it, nay with
weeping, he does beseech thee to give way to this exhortation of his; all
means should have been embraced, all opportunities should have been
entertained, all Ministers should have been heard, and regarded, but
principally these things belonging to thy peace, especially in this thy day
(...) not to have been rejected, thy Savior above all other should not have
been refused and con^^^ned, and then he falls a weeping and then (...)
mournes; Oh that thou had known these things in this thy day, and then his
heart even break^^, (...) he weeps again, Oh but now they be hidden from
thine eyes, thou shall never receive the like favor again, the like
opportunity shall never hereafter be offered. We will first handle the fir
circumstance, but before I can come to deliver the poin: plainly and nakedly,
give me leave a little to open the meaning of this word day, kn^w therefore
thus much, that this word in phrase of Scripture discovers unto us that time,
or that percell of time which God has set out in his providence for any
particular service. As it was in the creation of the world when the Lord made
all things, the Lord turned an hour glass as it were, and set down the time
wherein every thing was made, God said, let there be light and there was
light, and the evening and the morning was the first day, then God said let
there be a firmament and there was so, and the evening and the morning were the
second day; and here is the stop and stay that God makes to the creature, as
who should say, as every thing has a day wherein it was made, so every thing
has a day wherein it works, and the Lord has limited a certain time to
every action, that every creature is able to perform and which God requires of
it, so that observe a man's day in general, is nothing but the time of his
life^ besides this, a day discovers the passages of Gods providence and that
special nicke of opportunity that God has laid out for every particular act;
as God has appointed a day wherein anguish and grief shall come upon us, and
that is said to be the day of trouble, ^all upon me in the day of trouble and
I will deliver you says the Psalmist; there is a day of trial also in the
third of Hebr. 8. harden not your hearts as in the day of trial or temptation
in the Wilderness, and there is a day of visitation also, as we may see in
this Chapter, verse 44. They shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy
children within thee, and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another,
because thou knewst not the day of thy visitation; Jerusalem was like a sick
person, as indeed all sinners are sick men; now the Lord Jesus being the
great Physician of the world, came to visit Jerusalem. When he sent his balm
from Gilead, the glad tidings of grace and salvation, then the Lord did visit
Jerusalem for the healing, comforting and saving of her, and this was Jerusalem
day: So that then the day of a man is the time of his life, together with that
parcel of time that God has allotted him for every particular wor^e; and the
day of a man which belongs to his visitation, is that particular opportunity
wherein grace is offered, and salvation tendered unto him; as there is a day of
trouble and a day of trial, so in the third place there is a day of salvation
and a day of visitation, which is that particular season wherein God sends his
faithful messengers to dispense the means of life and salvation unto a
people. O that thou had known, and. as if Christ should have said, O ye
inhabitants of Jerusalem, while the word of life lasts, and the means of
grace and salvation is continued unto you, this is your day, and this is the
meaning of the word, every man has his day more or less as Jerusalem had when
the means of salvation were discovered unto it. The doctrine with which we
will grapple is thus much, namely That while life is continued, and the means
of grace and salvation afforded to a people, that is the season wherein God
means to work upon their hearts effectually that they may receive life and
salvation. It is true when Corn fails God can send Manna from heaven; God can
use extraordinary means to bring men to life and salvation and happiness, but
men must not look now for extraordinary conversions, they must not expect to
be miraculously saved, as in former times some were, when the means of
salvation was revealed only to the people of the Jews; Rahab indeed and Job
that had not the means of salvatition so apparently revealed unto them; but
had only ^^inckling of the happiness that God had wrought for his people;
this wrought upon them and prevailed with their hearts, and by the power of the
Almighty God brought them to the knowledge of the things belonging to
salvation. But in the common course of God, if ever soul now be converted, it
must be by the ministry of the word, that is our day, that is our time, that
is the special season wherein God will vouchsafe to look upon poor sinners,
and convert them unto himself; if a man were not alive means would not profit
him, and if a man were alive and had no means, he could get no good neither;
but when both these go together, then is the time wherein God offers life
and salvation, then is the season wherein God (if ever) will work upon the
soul of a sinner to make him fit to entertain things belonging to his peace.
We must handle two parts in the point, first that a man's life is part of this
season; secondly that the means offered in that season is the making up of the
point, we will prove both parts severally, and then make uses of them both
together. First we will prove that the time of a man's life is part of the
season wherein God will work effectually upon him for his everlasting comfort,
Eccles. 9.10.
in the in the ninth of Ecclesiastes 10. there says the wise man, Whatsoever
thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go; as though
he had said, if there be any thing that God requires of thee, If there be any
duty that ought to be discharged by the labor whilst thou live to do it.
And now be careful to perform it, for when death shall close thine eyes, and
thy body returns to the grave, then there is no more teaching, no more
hearing, no more expecting of grace and mercy from God, and we shall find in
course of Scripture, that a man shall receive according tot hat he has done in
the flesh: while a man lives here he is in the time of trading, and the time
after this life is the time of enjoying, in this life is the time of laboring,
and the time to come is the time of rewarding; as our trading and laboring is
here in this life, so shall our enjoying and rewarding be hereafter in the life
to come, A^ (...) sows so shall a man reap, Gal. 6.8. if he sow to the
flesh he shall reap to the flesh, Gal. 6.8.
if he yield to the corruptions of his own nature, and gives way thereunto,
and be carried aside thereby, he shall have the wages of sin, but he that
is willing for to stoop to the Commandments of God, he that serves God here
and walks uprightly before him shall receive everlasting life, and eternal
happiness hereafter; and so much for the proof of the first Point, after this
life is once ended, there is no hope of life and salvation.

Secondly, together with our lives we must also have the means of grace
continued unto us for the making up of that season wherein God will, if ever,
fit us and prepare us for mercy, I mean by the means of grace the preaching
of the Gospel, for this was one part of Ierusalems day here spoken of; and
therefore this is the second part of every man's day, namely, when we have the
glad tidings of the Gospel vouchsafed unto us; 2 Cor. 6.2.
in 2. Cor. 6.2. the Apostle does conclude that when the means of life and
salvation is afforded, this is the time of salvation, he lays his finger, as
it were, upon the season of life and happiness, for he says, I have heard
thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee? now
some may say, when is this time of salvation? The Apostle does particularly
make this good in the words following, now says he, behold is the accepted
time, behold now is the day of salvation. Now while the Lord is pleased to
vouchsafe the means of grace and salvation to you, and to send the Doctrine of
salvation among you; why, now is the time accepted, now is the day of your
salvation, Luke 19.9.
and therefore Luke 19.9. Zacheus when he had a strong desire to see Christ,
and to meet with the Lord Jesus, and could not by reason of the prease, he
gets him out of the crowd, and came before into a Sycamore tree, that so he
might the better behold him; but before Zacheus could see Christ, Christ saw
him, and calls to him, Make haste Zacheus and come down, for to day I must
abide at thy house, and Zacheus made haste and came down joyfully; and then
the Lord Jesus when he came with him to his house said unto him, this day is
salvation come unto this house, why? because this day he was made the son of
Abraham, as we may see in the words following, this day it pleased Christ to
bring that desire of Zacheus unto some perfection; and this was the day of
Zacheus: while then the Word is revealed, and while the means of happiness is
laid open, while God makes a tender of grace and salvation to a soul, this is
the day of every man's salvation: so then we have the proof of the point
plain out of Scripture, namely, that while life and the means last, that is
the season that God has appointed and set apart to do good to the souls of
those whom he means to convert unto himself.

The next thing to be considered is the reason of this how it comes to be
thus, that the time of a man's life, and the time wherein God vouchsafes the
means, that this is the time wherein God offers salvation to a poor soul;
and we will lay down the reasons of both parts severally. First, concerning
the time of a man's life; and the reason of this is, because when this crazie
frame of ours begins to be dissolved, then comes Gods definitive sentence,
Gods definitive verdict then passes upon a man, God then passes a sentence
upon a ^an which he never means to recall; a man at the time of his death,
when death closes a man's eyes, he is then either everlastingly happy, or else
everlastingly miserable; there is then afterward no alteration to be expected,
Heb. 9.27. There, says the Text, Heb. 9 27.
it is appointed for all men once to die, but after that comes judgment; as
death leaves a man, so judgment finds a man, he does not say after death
comes amendment, after death comes repentance, after death comes Purgatory; no,
no, this is a dream of the Papists, they think that a man may after death be
in trouble a while, and be in Purgatory, and then be brought out by the
treasure of the Church: but alas, this is a vain dream to enlarge the Popes
coffers, and to make the Popes Kitchen hot, as Divines use to say, that so the
Pope may have a great deal of money: they say, if a man have le^ never so
wicked a life, if yet he will bestow such a legacy upon the Popes holiness,
though he have been in Purgatory a great while, he shall yet by the treasure
of the Church be released, but this is a fond, foolish, sottish dream, the
case is plain enough after death judgment comes next, a man shall either go
into everlasting happiness, or else into everlasting confusion; there is no
third place for a soul to go unto, but a man must either go to hell for ever
or to heaven for ever; every man that is saved, is saved by Christ, Ioh. 3.36.
Ioh. 3.36.
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him: so then now
if a man believe in Christ he is perfectly saved, if he believe not in Christ
he is p^^fectly damned, Ioh. 3.18. Ioh. 3.18.
He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not is
condemned already, that is, he has one foot in hell as it were, he is now
in the gall of bitterness, and if he lives thus, and ends his days in
this condition, he shall as surely be damned and go to hell, as if he were
there already. All that believe in Christ are fully saved, and therefore to
heaven they must go (...) if they believe not in Christ; they are as surely
damned, and therefore to hell they must go* so the^ the case is clear, the
sentence of God is fir^^ and the virdict that God passes upon a (...) sinner
at thet time of death is most certain, there is no repealing of the sentence,
there is no recalling of the verdict, and this is the reason why the time of a
man's life is the season wherein (...) man shall receive grace and salvation if
ever he receive it.

The second thing to be prooved is this, why the means of salvation makes up
the opportunity wherein God means to save poor sinners if (...) they be
converted, and we shall observe that the ground of this lies in the very
nature of a season; if we ask what makes a season of grace? I answer that it
will appear that only the revelation of the Will of God in the Gospel makes
this season; Know therefore thus much, that to make up the season for any
thing; there is not only required a continuance of time, but also a supply of
all those helps that may be useful and needful for the accomplishment of
any work in that season; As for example, imagine the days and the nights were
of an equal longth, so many hours in the one, so many hours in the other, yet
this continuance of time does not make an opportunity barely; for a man to
walk in the night though there be as many hours in the night as in the day,
because the hours do not make on opportunity for a man to walk in, but the
means that are needful for this action, for when the Sun shines so that a
man may see his way, and avoid dangers and inconveniences, this is the time
wherein a man has a fit opportunity to walk in, so says our Savior, If a
man walks in the night he stumbleth, but if he walk in the day then he
stumbl^s not, because he sees where he goes; so that the continuance of time
does no make up an opportunity, but a supply also of all helps and
sufficiency needful for the performance of any action in this time. Look as
it is with men when they go to fail, when there is wind and tide for their
purpose, this is the fittest opportunity for them to take ship in: now in a
calm day there may be as many hours, as much continuance of time as in a day
when there is wind and tide serving for their turn; but this cannot be said
to be a season for them to go to sea in, but when they have wind and weather
to carry them, and tide to convey them, this is a sit opportunity for them to
take ship in: so when the Gospel is revealed, when the means of grace is
offered to any people, then there is a powerful concurrence of all
sufficiency and help every way to procure that good which is wanting to the
soul, and which is necessary for the soul for the attaining of happiness
here and hereafter; and therefore this is the season wherein men shall be
converted and receive salvation if ever they shall be made partakers of it; and
therefore it is said of the Word, that it is able to save the souls of men,
though a man were never so weak, yet this Word of the Gospel is able to make
him strong, though he were never so proud, never so sturdie, yet this word is
able to humble him, though he were never so full of unbelief, yet this Word is
able to work faith in him, though he were a damned man, yet thus is the only
means to bring him to salvation. Now then this I reason out of the former
arguments, they that enjoy that continuance of time wherein they have all
means necessary to procure life and salvation; they have the (...) wherein
life and salvation is to be obtained; (...) they that have life continued and
the means of the Gospel revealed and vouch safed unto them, (...) have all
means and helps whereby grace and ^^^vation may be procured unto them, and
(...) they enjoy the fittest season wherein God does mean t^ do good unto
their souls. The life of the Doctrine is behind, that lies in the application
of the Point.

The uses of the Point are three, If it be so that while life is continued, and
the Gospel preached; this is the time wherein God means if ever to show mercy
to the soul of a poor sinner: then in the first place, it is a ground of
instruction to every soul here present, to teach us how thankful we ought
to be unto the Lord that enjoy yet these liberties in the land of the living,
to acknowledge Gods goodness toward us, and take notice of his merciful
dealing with us, that yet we live thorough him, and that yet we may receive
grace and mercy from him by the means of salvation that he has appointed;
it is a mervellous high and happy privilege that we may enjoy the light of
the Gospel, that a man was borne in such a time, in the last age of the world,
in such a place, in this kingdom, wherein the way of life and salvation is so
fully, so plainly, nay, so powerfully made known to the souls of men, as the
whole world enjoyes not the like, that we have the day of salvation to trade in
for the good and comfort of our souls, that we have the day before us wherein
we may walk in those ways whereby comfort may be derived unto us, that the
Sun of the Gospel shines full in our faces, and is not yet set, and that as
we live in the earth, so we enjoy the means of a better life, that so we may
be with, God, when we shall go hence and be no more seen. The ancient people
of God did observe Gods goodness herein, the Scripture says, that Abraham saw
this day a far of and rejoiced, he saw the day wherein Christ should come
into the world, and when the means of salvation should be offered and
revealed, those things were laced up in types and figures in Abraham's time, but
when God revealed the day of Christ Jesus unto Abraham, he by faith believed
it, he saw it afar of and rejoiced: nay, good old Simeon when he saw this
accomplished when he saw Christ was borne, and had him in his arms, then he
desired to live no longer, but blessed God and said, Now let thou thy
servant depart in peace according to thy Word, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation which thou have prepared before the face of all people, to be a light
to lighten the Gentiles; and the glory of thy people Israel; when he saw the
means of salvation discovered and declared, his heart was so ravished with the
delight he took therein, that he did desire to depart out of this life, that
he might be with Christ in a better life: it is true that while we live in this
world we shall have many troubles, while we continue in this vale of misery,
we shall have many vexations, but this is the comfort of a man that he has
the voice of the Gospel sounding in the ears of him, and the Spirit behind
him crying after him, This is the good and ancient way walk in it; if a man
that were to travel by night had but the Moon, or the light of the Stars to
direct him in his journey, this would be very comfortable unto him, but if he
had a lamp or a torch carried before him he would think this a mavelous
comfort, but if a man that has a journey to take, has the Sun shining
clear above him, this will greatly cheer the heart of a poor travellour,
though his journey be tedious, and the way be foul; why yet he will say it is
fair above head, and I have day enough before me, and therefore I care not:
So it ought to be with every Christian man living; we are all travelers here
below, we are all bound for heaven, though a man find rough ways and cold
weather, though a man have many troubles, many disgraces cast upon his person,
many reproaches put upon his name, yet this may be his comfort there is day
enough before a man, it is fair weather above head, the preaching of the Word
may cheer a man, and the means of life and happiness may comfort a man that
walks in the way unto salvation; in 1 Pet. 1.^0. the Te^t says, that the
ancient Prophets enquired and sought diligently when Christ should come, when
the means of salvation should be revealed, of which salvation, ^ Pet. 1.10.
says the text, the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come, etc. all the ancient Fathers before
enjoyed only the Mooneshine and the Starre-light of the Gospel, and therefore
in the 2 Pet. 1.19. The Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1.19.
We have also a more sure Word of prophecy, whereunto you do well that you
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place until the day dawne
and the day star arise in your hearts; as who should say, when Christ came,
when the Gospel was revealed, the Son of righteousness did then clearly
appear, if they that expected those things only were thankful for them,
then what should we be that enjoy these helps, for the cheering of us, helping
of us, and comforting of us in the ways of salvation; it is a speech of the
Prophet David, Give me understanding that I may live: it is an observation of
holy men out of this place, that a man does not live because he growth, a tree
does so, a man does not live because he feels and sees and hears, and has
the sensible faculty, the beasts do so, a man does not live because he
reasons, the devils do so; but give me understanding that I may live: we
live not as holy men unless we understand the ways of God, unless we know
the things belonging to our peace, here (...) hereafter; we live not because we
are wise, for the devil is wiser than any man living; but give me
understanding that I may live, that I may understand the things of God; this is
the wisdom of it Christian whereby he shall come to (...) eternal
happiness: many in the East parts of the work^ worship the devil, they never
so much as heard (...) thing of Christ Jesus, and the glad (...) Gospel, and
therefore is it not a wonder (...) that God has continued us until this time,
wherein the means of salvation are so fully re^^^led? You that are going on in
the road way (...) destruction, all you that are in a natural estate, (...)
God should pluck you out of the land of the living, what should become of your
poor souls, it is a great mercy that God does yet vouchsafe life unto you,
but that you may hear the Word, and enjoy the means of salvation, what a
comfort is this: A Plowman if he has but a fit opportunity of sowing,
plowing, or reaping, he is thankful for it, and he ought so to be, for it
is a great goodness of God to afford unto him seasonable weather to sow and
gather in the fruits of the earth; in the time here of late when by reason of
unseasonablenesse of weather, famine was feared, and yet God gave a seasonable
time afterward to ripen and gather the fruits of the earth, I appeal to your
own consciences did not this comfort you, did not this cheer you? Nay, could
not people come and be thankful to God for such blessings, and say it was a
good season God be blessed, Gods name be praised for it? Was this such a goodly
season wherein you might fill your barnes full of corn, and your purses full
of money? Why then, had we eyes to see and hearts to conceive what is that
season, that blessed season of salvation, those good days that have passed
over our heads, wherein many have enjoyed the opportunity and means of
salvation twenty, thirty, yea forty years; Oh blessed season, the Sun
never saw the like, nay the whole world wonders at this mavelous mercy that
the Lord has vouchsafed to us in this Land. Shall we enjoy all these
blessings, and yet not be thankful for them, and prise them as we ought, and
walk worthy of them as we might; Oh let it not be so with us, but you that can
be thankful for a plentiful harvest when you may gather money into your
coffers; oh be thankful, be thankful for the means of salvation vouchsafed
unto you whereby you may fill your souls full of comfort; and therefore go
your ways in secret, and be thankful to God that you live, and if you have
received grace, bless God that ever you saw that day, if you have not received
grace, yet bless God that yet you breathe, and that you may seek unto him and
wait upon him in the use of the means, that so you may receive mercy and
salvation from him: bless God that thou have the Sunshine of the Gospel
shining in thy face, that thou have the day before thee that thou may trade
therein and receive comfort thereby.

Secondly, is it so that while life lasts, and the means of salvation is
continued and vouchsafed unto us, that this is our day, that this is the season
wherein God will show mercy unto us; what use then will you make of this for
the present, what will you say, and what will you now persuade your hearts
unto, why, me thinks every man answers, and every man's soul ecchoeth again,
surely if this be the time, if this be the season, let us take it then, since
the Lord offers this, and continues this, we ought then to be entreated in
the name of the Lord Jesus to take this opportunity, and not omit any season
wherein the Lord calls upon us, that so we may obtain the end of our hopes,
the desire of our souls, even salvation hereafter; Redeem the time because
the days are evil, says the Apostle, that is, because the time is now,
therefore take the opportunity; it is the use that the Apostle makes, While
ye have time do good unto all men, then much more to our souls; if we must
do good to our neighbors, then much more to that poor soul of ours that is
miserably oppressed with sin, that is in a dainned and cursed estate. Oh but
there are many arguments whereby Satan labors to defeat this truth, and
many shifts the soul has to put off this that has been spoken; give me
leave a little to wipe away those carnal conceits and cavills. The first is
this, the soul will be ready to say, I confess it is true indeed, that when
the opportunity is we should take it, but that may be hereafter, who knows
whither this be my time or no, my opportunity or no? I answer with the Apostle
Paul, while I am speaking, and you are hearing, while we are all living, now is
the time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the season, it is in 2 Cor. 6.2. the Text says; I have heard thee in a
time accepted, and in a day of salvation have I succored thee, behold now is
the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. Whilst Ministers are calling
upon you, and you are living, though they cannot give you grace, nor you of
your selves receive grace, yet we have the promise in the accepted time God
will hear us, even now while I am speaking and you are hearing, this the very
day of salvation, and therefore let us not turn the deaf ear upon the Lord,
but while opportunity is affoorded, let us make use of it, while the Lord is
pleased to continue opportunities unto us, let us embrace them, he that never
heard, let him hear now, he that never prayed, let him pray now, it is now
high time to awake out of that cursed security wherein we have a long time
lien, the Lord is come near unto us even to the very next door, Christ Jesus
is calling, and mercy is entreating, and wisdom is even hoarse with crying
after us, there is nothing but a heart wanting, mercy is offered, we ought
therefore to entertain it, the means of salvation are revealed, therefore we
ought for to embrace them, Cant. 2.10. Cant. 2.10.
there says the Text, My beloved spoke and said unto me, Rise up my love, my
fair one and come away, for the winter is past, and the rain is over and
gone, the flowers appear on the earth, and the time of the singing of birds is
come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our Land; thus God speaks to
you this day, those words are made good to every soul that hears me this
day, God calls to every poor sinner; the Church was then in misery, and so
the Lord speaks to every poor soul, thou art in the grave of thy sins,
arise my love, my dove, the time of persecution is past, and the voice of the
turtle is yet heard, the Ministers of God are preaching to us, and wooing of
us, and saying, the Spring time of grace is now present. The Lord says unto us
as to the Church there, rise and come out of those sinful courses wherein
you are; he pluckes the adulterer out of his lewd practices, and he calls the
proud man out of his wicked courses, and the covetous man out of his counting
house, and from the things here below and bids them come unto the house of the
Lord, that he may speak comfort and consolation to their souls, the Lord does
even strive with us, and labors every way to pluck us out of our base and
sinful courses, the Lord deals with us, Ezeck. 12.3.
as he did with Israel, Ezeck. 12.3. there says the Text, Prepare thou son
of man thee stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight, and thou
shall remove from thy place to another place, it may be they will consider
though they be a rebellious people, as if he had said, it may be when all
these means are used, it may be at last they will be persuaded and perform
that which I require of them, it is a lively pattern of Gods special
providence over us in this Land, God has not dealt thus with other Nations,
he has passed by other people, and has let the Gospel abide among us, the
sound of the Gospel, an inkeling of it has been in other countries, but he
has commanded the Gospel to abide with us twenty, thirty, forty, sixty
years, we have yet the Gospel among us, we are yet in peace and prosperity,
we enjoy those liberties that thousands of our poor brethren want and would
attain unto: many have had some means, but we have had all means, we have
had famine for to affright us, the Plague to awaken us, and peace to cheer us,
nay the Gospel and means of salvation are still continued to us, the Lord
says, preach still, continue still calling, and still crying to the people of
England, that so if it be possible their proud hearts may be humbled, their
sturdy hearts may be softened, their unregenerate hearts may be converted and
their souls may be saved.

The second cavil is this, the soul may say though the opportunity be now
present, yet there is time enough, the day is long enough; for the answer
hereof I will go no further then the Text says, O that thou had known the
things belonging to thy peace in this thy day, but now they are hidden from
thine eyes. The day of a man's life is very uncertain, no man knows how long
he shall live, who knows not what our lives are, bubbles, and vapors and
flowers, how soon are the bubbles down, how soon are the vapors vanished,
how soon do the flowers fade, nay many of us are in our middle age, nay some
of us are in our old age, we have one foot already in the grave, and how
soon may these flowers wither, how soon may these men return unto the earth,
and then what will become of all their expectations. It is good says the wise
man to enjoy the present time while life and strength continue; young men will
be ready to say, I will take my own content now, and hereafter I will return
unto the Lord, I will gather the flower while it is green and while I am
young, I will not spend my days in mourning, I will not break my heart with
sighing and sorrowing for my sins, but when I grow crooked and aged, and sit
at home, then I will repent and (...) unto the Lord and become a new man; those
young men say unto repentance as Felix did to Paul, go thy ways now, I will
hear thee another time, so say they to repentance, hereafter when there comes
a convenient time I will repent, I will be holy and obedient, and turn over a
new leaf, and become a new man; but now let me make use of the treasury of my
youth, and because I am in the strength of my years, therefore I will follow
my pleasures; O fool, O fool, I say unto thee as Christ did to the rich man
in the Gospel, this night thy soul may be taken from thee, and then what will
become of thy thoughts, plots, and plojects, thy bed may become thy grave, and
then what will become of thy poor soul, the devils may drag it into hell. It
was the word of the rich man when he had filled his barnes full of goods, and
his purse full of money, then he says unto his soul, Soul take thy rest,
thou have goods laid up for many years; take thy cups says the drunkard, take
thy whore says the adulterer. Oh fool this night the devil may hale thy
soul into everlasting confusion, how know thou but that sentence may be
given upon thee which was given upon him, and then there will be no repentance
in the grave. But be it so that thy life may continue which is very
uncertain, though thy day continue, yet the day of grace happily will not
continue, that is but a minute of the particular time of thy day, if God take
away the light of the Gospel, thou may die so hunger and thirst, and never
come to the like mercies, never receive the like encouragements, thou that
heretofore have despised a faithful Minister, it may be thou shall never see
the face of a good Minister more hereafter, and then what shall become of all
thy fair hopes and goodly expectations; Oh then when the market is done thou will come too late to buy salvation, thou shall never receive those benefits
and means of grace and salvation again which thou have neglected. Nay
consider that this which I have spoken may be the case of any one in this
congregation, every man has his day, I gave her a time to repent says the
Lord of wicked Iesabel, but she would not, the Lord would have plucked her out
of her bed of down, and from the arms of her lovers into a bed of sorrow,
she has now pain for her pleasure and sorrow for her jollitie, who knows
but this may be my day and thy day, and every particular man's day. When the
word of God comes home to the soul of a man, and the Lord is pleased to knock
at the conscience of a poor sinner, he may then break out into admiration,
and say, is it thus? is the Lord so compassionate that notwithstanding all my
rebellions he is still pleased to strive with me, nay to mourn over me, as
he did over Jerusalem, O that thou had known at least in this thy day the
things belonging to thy peace, many mercies has the Lord let into my soul to
allute me, many judgments to terrify me, many promises to persuade me, and
has used all means possible to bring me to a better life, no mercy equals
this, no goodness is to be compared with this, thus take notice of the mercies
of God toward you, and go aside and make good use of those good motions that
God by his Spirit shall suggest into your souls; and if the Lord has almost
persuaded thee to be a Christian, oh then make much of those blessed motions,
and begin to be a new man presently! oh, go home and say, if God do thus
strive and struggle with me in particular, then resolve and say this is my day,
if there be any soul here present that it has pleased God thus to move, oh
know and consider that this is thy particular time, thy particular season, say
and remember that such a time thou had a fair offer, it may be he that now
moves and persuades thee, and entreats thee to come to everlasting life and
happiness, it may be he will never look after thee more. And now what
remains more, when a man resolves that this is his day, and that now the Lord
comes near unto him, but even then presently to break off all impediments,
and leap over all blocks that lie in his way, and resolve thenceforward to
bid adue to all his corruptions; he should consider with himself and say,
seeing the Lord does even mourningly strive with me for my good, then I will
never attend more to those lusts, I will never yield more to those occasions
that have gotten the mastery over me, I would wish every poor soul, to take
up this resolution, to give a bill of divorcement to his sins, and never to
see the face of his corruptions any more; to do this now will be a very hard
thing, I know it, and experience proves it, your lusts will cleave to you and
hang about you, you would be loath to part with your old corruptions, old
friends that have been of old acquaintance, for these to be shaken off on a
sudden, this will be very grievous: S. Austin speaking of his conversion
confesses this, his sins did hang about him, and he was loath to leave them,
and forsake them, he was often persuaded by the motions of Gods Spirit to
return from his wicked courses, and become a new man, but he was loath to
part with his beloved lusts, and therefore thought he might have time enough
to repent afterward, but at length he took up this resolution to break
through all impediments, and brake out into those words, Why not to day Lord,
why not to day, he had dallied too often, and deferred too long, and therefore
now he resolved to go thorough stitch in this case, he resolved to do so,
and kept his resolution. Why do, you as he did, and say, why not to day Lord,
why not to day; you could be content on your death beds to be drunk no more,
why cannot you as well to day resolve to be sober; the adulterer when he lies
upon his death bed will not endure so much as to look upon his Queen, why should
he not as well abstain from this base sin to day, we know not whether the
means may be taken from us, or we from the means, and therefore when the
Lord says, My face seek you, answer again and say, thy face Lord will we
seek.

But there are yet some shifts still behind which must be answered; the heart
will yet be ready further to reply, suppose God call and I refuse, may I not
hear this call again hereafter? I answer, take heed of that, for the text
says here, they are now hidden from thine eyes, ye are not Authors and
Patrons of this grace, ye are not givers of this mercy, it is of Gods free
love to offer mercy and salvation unto you, and therefore especially take heed
of this conceit; he that offers grace unto thee now, if thou refusest it, may
chance never to give it thee hereafter, though thou greatly desire it, and
earnestly seek after it; he that now holds out a golden Scepter to
entertain thee, may afterward have an iron rod to break thee in pieces if
thou do not accept his kind offer and come in unto him, he that now does
persuade thee to receive mercy at his hands while he offers it, that God
hereafter may seal up thy heart in stupidnesse and benummednesse for ever, if
thou do not embrace it; that Spirit which now strives with thee may never
strive more, that Spirit may never work upon thee more, and then when the gate
is shut you may knock till your heart ache, as the foolish Virgins did, and yet
never get in, you may then howl, and cry, and call, and knock, and yet with
Esa^ you shall not obtain a blessing, though you seek it even with tears;
but the Lord will answer, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you
not; it will be just with God to take away those holy motions of his blessed
Spirit which you have slighted, to take away that mercy which you have
despised, take heed that do not befall you which shall befall all despisers
of grace and salvation, Pro. 1.24. there says the text, Because I have called
and ye have refused, Pro. 1.24.
because I stretched out my hand and none would regard, but ye have despised
all my counselle, and ye would none of my correction: I will also laugh at
your destruction, and mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes
like sudden desolation, and your destruction as a whirlewind. There was a time
when the Lord called to all despisers of grace and refusers of mercy, how long
and how often, but they that would not hear, the time will come, when the Lord
will say, I will laugh at your destruction; when a poor sinful creature at
the day of judgment shall come before the Lord of glory, the devil drawing
him, and then the Lord shall laugh at him, and say, how often have I sent unto
you, and called upon you, and you would not hear nor regard me? Behold men and
Angels, this is the man, this is he that contemned my Word, and slighted the
means of salvation, and therefore laugh at him, mock at his destruction: Oh
what will become of that man then when the Lord of mercy shall not only take
mercy from him, when the God of goodness shall not only take goodness from
him, but shall laugh at his confusion, and shall rejoice when he executes his
judgments upon this man to his everlasting destruction; and therefore I
beseech you take heed of this dangerous conceit.

The fourth shift is this, if all will not work upon the soul, then it falls
upon this, is it so that grace and mercy being neglected they shall never be
obtained, why then it takes up this conclusion, if I never have grace and
mercy, then I can live without it; oh fool if there were any creature of this
distemper in this congregation, I may speak terrible things unto that soul,
when a man is brought to this pass that he cares not what becomes of his
soul, when he says what matter is it if I have not grace, is this such a
loss? When a soul is come to this, oh then he is in a miserable condition, in
a woeful lamentable estate: is it no matter to be saved, is it no matter to be
comforted, is it no matter to be glorified eternally, what matter is it to lose
grace? Nay what avails it to live frolickely here and miserably hereafter?
What matter is it to neglect grace here, and to be deprived of glory hereafter,
is this no matter? Let me say to you, as the man of God did to his servant, 2
Kings 5.26.
2 King. 5.26. Is this a time to take money and receive garments and olives,
and vineyards and sheep and oxen? So say I, is this a time to live frolickely
and merrily? Is this a time for a man to follow cursed companions, and embrace
sinful corruptions, is this a time for a man to follow the world, and the
vanities thereof, and in the mean time neglect the means of life and
salvation? No, no, know it is the day of God, the day of grace, our souls lie
at pawn, if these opportunities be omitted, woe and grief and pain, and
wormwood will be upon that man by whom they be neglected, he that despises
these means here shall live miserably hereafter, everlasting happiness and
glory depends upon this opportunity; tell not me it is a day of merchandise,
and you must provide for your families, I tell you it is a day of salvation,
have thou time to provide for thy house and family, and not for thy soul and
for thy ever lasting happiness. So then gather up all briefly and the scope
will be this, it is now the most opportune time, and therefore the fittest, it
is the day of salvation and therefore the shortest, it is the day of visitation
and therefore the greatest commodity, the opportunity is the fittest, the day
is the shortest, the commodity the greatest, and what remains now, but that
the Lord will work this upon your souls, that he which spoke this to
Jerusalem whilst he lived on earth, may speak the same to you though now in
glory, and persuade your hearts to entertain this opportunity to make use of
this day and embrace this commodity.

But if all means will not persuade men hereunto, then the last use is an use
of exhortation unto us all, to pity the case of such men, and to show remorse
for the desolation of those that neglect the means of their salvation. If we
cannot persuade you, yet give us leave to mourn for you, if our persuasions
will not take place in your souls, yet I hope you will give us leave to go in
secret, and let our eyes drop down tears for the miserable desolation that
will fall upon those that neglect the means of life and happiness: you must
not think to pass thorough Purgatory, you must not think to go to heaven
whither you will or no; me thinks I see a poor creature that slighted mercy
and salvation when it was offered unto him; me thinks I see that soul lying
upon his death bed, light is departing from his eyes, and his soul is
departing from his body, his body is a burden to him in regard of his disease,
and his conscience a hell unto him in regard of his sins, oh the name of a
Minister, of a Church, they are all as bills of inditements coming against the
soul of this man, me thinks I hear such a man say at his last gasp, the day
is gone, the gate is shut, and now it is too late to enter; and thus the soul
departs from the body, the body to the grave, and the soul to hell: Oh what
bitter and woeful lamentations will that soul make when it comes in hell! Oh
the golden time that I have seen and not regarded, oh the gracious
opportunities of salvation that my eyes have beheld, and yet I neglected! Oh
the mercy and grace and goodness of God that have been offered unto me, and I
have contemned and trampled under my feet, and therefore now must be tormented
with the devil and his angels from ever lasting to everlasting, on the Lord
give us hearts to take notice of these things. If we cannot do what good we
would to men, yet let us lament their miserable conditions; wives mourn for
your husbands, parents mourn for your children, and say the Lord has offered
the means of salvation both profitable and comfortable, yet my husband hears
not, my child receives not these means, why then mourn and lament oh my poor
husband, oh my child, thou might have had grace, but now it is taken from
thee, thou had the offer of salvation, and now perhaps it shall never again
be tendered to thee; but if mercy cannot prevail with you, nor the voice of
the Ministers take place in you, yet let the saftie and comfort of your own
souls, move you to make much of the opportunities and means of grace and
salvation. Let every master of a family go home and resolve and say, this is
my day Lord, this very day may be my day, and thy day, the last day that ever I
shall speak, the last day that you shall ever hear. If I were now breathing out
my last breath, I would breath our this legacy to all Christians which I leave
behind me, This is the accepted time, this is the day of salvation: He that
has an ear to hear, let him now hear, he that never had a heart, let him
now have a heart to embrace these things, whilst grace and salvation is offered
unto him, let him entertain this offer. It does me good to consider if the
soul of a man would but receive mercy and grace now while it is offered him
this day, what comfort he may have for ever, both here and hereafter, he might
then say, this day I received comfort, I was never humbled before, but this day
I was humbled, I could never before receive any mercy, but this day I received
it, this was a good day to me. Oh if men would but be exhorted to take the
opportunity while it lasts, and entertain the means of grace and salvation
while they are offered: Oh what comfort might men gain hereby, then at the
last day they should receive an everlasting crown of glory, they should then
receive the fruits of their labors even the salvation of their souls. Let us
all therefore as we love our own souls be exhorted, to entertain the things
of grace here, that we may obtain the things of glory hereafter.

MATTHEW. 20.3, 4, 5, 6. And he went out about the third hour and saw others
standing idle in the market place, and said unto them, Go ye also into the
vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you, and they went their way.
Again he went out about the sixth hour and ninth hour, and did likewise; and
about the eleventh hour he went out and saw others standing idle? and says
unto them; Why stand you here all the day idle? They said unto him, because no
man has hired us, he says unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and
whatsoever is right that shall ye receive.


We have heard heretofore that all men being dead in sins and trespasses are
so far from working out their own salvation from themselves, as that they
are not able to receive grace and mercy offered unto them from the Lord, for
the comforting of their hearts here, and obtaining of happiness hereafter, and
therefore the last general circumstance of preparation we did handle, was
this, That howsoever a natural man is not able to understand the things of the
Lord, yet the Lord will make all those which belong unto him able to receive
the Lord Jesus, and then he will bestow the Lord Jesus and grace and salvation
upon them. Now concerning this point, there are two circumstances of special
consideration. The first is the circumstance of time in regard of the means,
and that we have already handled out of Luke 19.42. and the point then
delivered was this; When God continues life and the means of salvation to a
people, then this is the time when God means to bestow mercy and salvation
upon them. The second circumstance concerning the time of this work is in
respect of the men upon whom God will work: and some he works upon in their
tender age, some in their riper years, and some in their old age, at all times
God does call some; and this is the circumstance we will now grapple withal,
and for this purpose I have chosen this part of the Parable; and in the
Parable, as in all other Parables, besides the outside, and letter of the
Parable, we must understand the sense and meaning thereof. When therefore we
hear in the parable of a vineyard, and of the master of the vineyard, and of
the servants that were hired to work in this vineyard, and of the several
hours wherein they are hired; these are only the outsides of the Parable, the
meaning thereof is this; by vineyard is meant the Church of God, and by the
Master of the vineyard is meant the Lord Jesus, the hiring of the servants into
the vineyard, is nothing else but the powerful calling of poor sinners by the
work of the Ministry, to the knowledge of the truth here, and happiness
hereafter, and in that he calls some at one hour, and some at another; the
meaning is, that God calls some at one time, some at another; some in their
tender years, some in their middle age, and some in their old age; some older,
some younger: but that we may understand the sense of the Spirit, in these
words, The third hour, the sixth hour, ninth hour, and the eleventh hour:
We must understand that the Jews and the Romans used to divide their days,
which consisted of twelve hours into four parts, from six to nine was one
parcel of the day, from nine to twelve was the second, from twelve to three
was the third part, and from three in the afternoon till six at night was the
last parcel of the day. Now therefore the third hour was nine of the clock,
the sixth hour was twelve of the clock, the ninth hour was three of the
clock in the afternoon, and the eleventh hour was five of the clock, an
hour before night. Now the Lord does provide some souls for himself at nine
a clock in the morning, some at three in the afternoon, and some at the last
cast, at five of the clock when the Sun beginns to set; in their old
decrepit age the Lord meant to convert some unto himself. Some understand this
parable of the calling of Ministers, good and bad, and in that it is said here,
They were hired every one for a penny; they understand by this, that some will
be Ministers for this living, some for that, some for preferment, some also
come into the Ministry for the salvation of souls: but this cannot be the
meaning of the Text here, and the reason is this. This Parable must be
understood of those men of whom the last clause in the 19. Chapter is
understood; in the 30. Verse of the 19. Chapter, the Text says, Many that are
first shall be last, and the last shall be first. Now this Parable is set down
here in the beginning of this Chapter, and brought in by the Spirit of God
merely for the manifestation of the Scripture going before; therefore it is
clear that this Parable is to be understood concerning those persons spoken of
before in the former Chapter. Of those also this Parable must be understood to
whom it is applied afterward in the 16, Verse of this Chapter, it is said also,
The last shall be first; and the first shall be last. So that the case is
clear, this Parable being brought in by the Spirit for the illustration and
discovery of the former truth, therefore who ever they be that were there
understood, and whoever they be to who^ this Parable is afterward applied, of
the same the Parable here must be understood; but it is clear, that that Verse
must be understood of those that are gracious, for the Text says in the 29.
verse of the former Chapter, Every one that have forsaken houses or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife or children, or lands for my name
sake shall receive an hundred fold, but many that are last shall be first, and
many that be first shall be last, that is, they that are first called if they
trust unto themselves shall be last rewarded, and they that are last called if
they renounce themselves and go out of themselves shall be first rewarded, and
then presently follows this parable as a manifestation of that truth, and this
is the interpretation of the words. So that now we see the meaning of the
Parable. The Doctrine is, That God can and does call in all ages, some in their
younger age, some in their riper years, and some in their old age; God calls
some in all ages, but most and most usually before their old age; this is that
we shall observe here in the Parable, the Lord calls at the third, six, and
ninth hour, but at the eleventh hour he went out occasionally not thinking to
see any standing idle at that time of the day, it was strange and unexpected to
see any then idle, no man would hire any man to work in his vineyard for one
hour, and therefore the text says, he asked them, Why stand you here idle? As
who should say, he did not once expect to see any idle at that time. For the
explaning of the Doctrine there are two parts of it, we will handle them
severally, that we may perceive our proceeding the better. The first part is
this, That God does and can call several of his servants at several times:
Secondly, That God does call most, and most usually before their old age. First
to begin with the former, That God can, does, and has called several of his
servants at several times, some in their younger age, some in their older,
some in their tender years, some in their riper age; he calls them when he
sees it most agreeable to his good pleasure; we shall observe that of Timothy
that he was called in his tender years, 2 Timothy 3.15. 2 Timothy 3.15.
There says S. Paul, Thou have known the Scriptures from a child, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation^ and therefore the Apostle tells us in
the same Epistle, that he was nourished up in the Word, that is, he was made
strong with the milk of the wholesome Scripture* So 1 King. 18.12. 1 King,
18.12.
It is said that Obadiah feared God from his youth; and 1 Samuel 12. 1 Samuel 12.
It is said of Samuel, that he carried himself so blameless from his youth
that he was without all exception. So much to prove that some are called in
their younger age; now we have examples of many also that were converted in
their middle age, as that of the Iaylor, Acts 16.37. and that of Lydia, Acts
16.14. Acts 16.37.
and the conversion of Paul, Acts 9. and of Zacheus, Acts 16.14.
Acts 19. It is very probable that all these were converted in their middle
age; for it is said of Lydia, that she was a seller of purple, and that she
got her living thereby; and the Iaylor, it is like he was in his middle age,
for he had a great charge of prisoners committed unto him; and Paul was in his
prime when he was converted, for a long time after he was converted, he
continued a great instrument to set forth Gods glory: and Zacheus he was a
tole gatherer, and had gotten a good estate by that means. By this it
appears that God did call these about their middle age. Now for old age, I
must confess it is true that there is not any pregnant example in Scripture of
Gods hand this way: Gen 12.4.
we know, Genesis 12.4. compared with Joshua 24.2. Joshua 24.2.
that Abraham the father of the faithful was an idolater, and that God called
him at 75. years old, but Abraham lived 175 years, to that Abraham was but in
his middle age when he was called; but for any pregnant example, the Scripture
is mavelous sparing this way: only that which may be observed by
probability and may be gathered, depends upon those two places Acts 2.41. Acts
2.41.
there were 3000 souls added to the Church by the preaching of Peter, and Acts
10. It is said that Cornelius had got all his kindred and acquaintance together
against Peter came, Acts 10.
whom by the commandment of God he was sent for; and the text says when Peter
came, they were all gathered together to hear the Doctrine of life and
salvation; and that while Peter was inspeaking, the holy Ghost fell upon them
all; now Divines reason thus, it is mavelous probable, that among those 3000
which were converted by Peter, some of them were aged men; and when Cornelius
had gotten all his kindred and acquaintance together, and the holy Ghost fell
upon them all: there were, it is very likely, some aged men among them whom God
was pleased to show mercy unto, we know these things may be, and there is good
probability of it, and we see it out of the Text plainly, that God may call
some in their old age; for he called some at the eleventh hour when it was
almost night, but he has reserved this power in his own hands, he has left
no pregnant example thereof in the Scripture that we may not rely upon it; so
then we see that God does, and can, and has called several of his servants,
at several times, some at the third hour, some at the sixth, some at nine, and
some, though few at the eleventh hour; and the reason of the Point is double,
why, the Lord does deal thus in this case, he does not always choose young
men that are strong, nor old men that are grave and wise; the ground of it is,
that he might express the freeness of his favor in Jesus Christ, as if he
should proclaim to the world that we could do nothing of our selves this way,
that we have nothing in us that can move God to show mercy unto us, but that it
is out of the freeness of his love in Jesus Christ; for should God call only
children, middle aged men, or old men only, then men would conceive that there
were something in the persons that moved him to this, either the weakness of
the child, or else the innocence thereof did move God to show mercy thereunto,
or else that God did delight in the strength or in the gifts and parts of a
young man, or if he should call men in their old age only, then men might
think that their experience and gravitie did move God to call them only; but
when God calls some in all ages and at all times, some young ones chosen, and
some refused, some old men called, and others cast aside; then all men may
conceive that there is nothing in the persons or parts of men, but that it
proceeds all from the freeness of Gods mercy that he deals thus with the
souls of poor sinners; it is the reason of that passage in the 15. verse of
this Chapter, there the Master of the vineyard called the laborers together,
and they received every man a penny; now they that came first and had borne the
heat of the day, when they saw that they which came last had as much as they,
they murmured against the master of the vineyard saying, These last have
wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us which have borne
the heat of the day, but then the master answered saying, Friend I do thee no
wrong, is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? as if he had
said, I called thee at the third hour, and him at the sixth hour, and this
man at the eleventh hour, it was out of my mercy that I called thee, and out
of my mercy that I called him, is it not lawful to do what I will with mine
own; mercy is mine, and love is mine, and reward is mine, it is my mercy that
I will call any at any time, and therefore I may dispose of it as I please.
Secondly as the Lord does express hereby the freeness of his grace, so the
Lord also hereby does mervelously magnify his great power and All Sufficiency
in saving the souls of poor people, that is able to do what he will in
heaven and in earth; and so likewise in the hearts of his servants, there are
many little ones that are fools and have no knowledge and yet the Lord is able
to convert them and make them understand the mysteries of salvation, there are
many strong men that snuffle up the wind like the Ass in the Wilderness, they
will not stoop, they will not be humbled, but they will do what they list,
and yet the Lord is able to over power this sturdy heart of a young and strong
man, and he is able to support the weak nature of a young one. And so men that
are weatherbeaten in their sins and screwed into their corruptions, God is
able to overpower these, and convert these also and bring them home unto
himself, if he be a weak silly child, yet God is able to inlighten him, if
he have a sturdy heart, yet God can bring him down, and if he be a
weatherbeaten and an old sinner, yet God is able to call him and convert him
also; and hereby the wonderful power of the Lord is seen, in that he is able
to work how he will, when he will, and upon whom he will in this kind; look
as it is with a Physician, when a man has a disease which lies low in his body
and breeds rottenness in his bones, insomuch that it is almost past cure,
then the Physician that can recover this man shows admirable skill, and he
shows admirable power in regard that he is able to provide such means, and
apply such means as thereby the party may be cured; by this means the skill
of the Physician and the power of him is magnified, so it is with this great
God, when all sorts of sinners are called, and all corruptions subdued, your
little ones that know nothing yet God inlightens them and supports them,
Timothy did suck the sincere milk of the Gospel on one side, as he did suck
the milk of his mothers breasts on the other side; and then there is a
stubborn heart on another side, which breaks all bonds and snappes all cords
apeeces, h^e cares for nothing, he will be ruled by no man, and then there is
your old forlorn sinner, his sins are become a rottenness in his bones, old
incanl^^ed pride and incancred covetousness and malice, God now to conquer all
these and help these, does not this show admirable power in the Lord, (...) to
work and thus to order things for the good of his people: so that we see that
God does and can call in all ages. We come now to the next passage, and that is
this, however the Lord does at several times convert several of his servants,
and there is no time allotted to him, yet most and most usually God does call
them before their old age, and that some interpreters wittily observe out of
the Text, it is said that the master of the Vineyard went out at the third,
sixth and ninth hour, and saw some standing idle, and he sent them into his
Vineyard; he went then on purpose to see and hire, and send in Laborers to
work in his Vineyard, but the Text says, he went out at the eleventh hour not
to hire any, for he did not expect to see any then idle, but he went out upon
some other occasion, and seeing some then standing idle he wondered at it and
said, Why stand ye all the day idle, as if he should say, no man will hire you
now, it is but one hour to night, it is time for men to leave working, and not
to begin to work, he went out occasionally and meeting with these
unexpected, he wondered at these and therefore they observe, that if there had
not been great mercy in the master of the Vineyard, this was no time to hire
Laborers in, so that the case is clear, some are called in their youth, some
in their middle age, some in their old age, some in their tender years, some
in their riper age, some old, some young, but this is most true than those whom
God does call it is most commonly in their middle age before they come to their
old age, this is the general course of God, he call many before, some after,
but most then, Eccles. 3.1. there the wise man observes, that there is a time
appointed for every purpose, and it appears that the middle age is the
fittest time for this purpose, it is true indeed that all things depend upon
Gods will, but yet there is wisdom in this God, and he orders things
according to wise dome, and this seems to be the fittest season wherein the
Lord should deal thus graciously in converting of a sinner; if we consider
either the nature of man, or the end of Gods giving grace, in both these
respects, first if we look to man, and regard either the constitution of his
body or the gifts and qualities of his mind, we shall see that it is most fit
for God to work upon him in his middle age, he can do it, and may do it at
another time, but that is the fittest time; and that first in regard of the
constitution of his body, for it is observed by Philosophers that a man in his
tender infancy lives the life of a tree only, he only eats and grows, and
so it is with little children in their swaddling clothes, afterward when he
comes into further years, when he comes to be ten or twelve years old, then
he lives the life of a beast, he is taken away with those objects that are
then most suitable to him; for a child to consider of the mysteries of life and
salvation is almost impossible, he is not yet come to that ripeness of
judgment, but when he comes to the ripeness of his years, from 20. years
until he come to be 40. or thereabouts, then the works of reason put forth
themselves, then his apprehension is quick to conceive a thing, and his memory
is strong and pregnant to retain a thing apprehended, and his heart is
somewhat pliable, and his heart is somewhat frameable to receive that
impression that is put upon him; now because in a man's middle years ability
of nature comes on, and reason comes on, insomuch that a man is able to
conceive and partake of the things of grace, and fadom them, and the power of
his understanding comes on whereby he is able to embrace them, therefore then
is the fittest time that God should bestow his graces upon a man, look as it
is with wax, if a man melt it, it will be too soft to hold any impression, and
when it is too hard it will receive no seal neither, but when it is neither
too soft nor too hand but in a middle temper between them both, then it is fit
and ready to receive any impression whatsoever a man stampes upon it, it must
neither be too extremely hot nor too hard, but mediatly disposed, and then it
will receive a seal, so it is with the nature of a man, in his tender years
he can hold nothing, he has such a weak understanding; tell a child of the
wonders of salvation, and it is impossible unless God works wonderfully that
he should receive them; a man's nature in his infancy is like wax that is too
soft, and the nature of an old man that also is like wax too hard, but now a
middle aged man is neither so weak as the one, nor so hard as the other, but
it is most fit for God to put a stamp upon, for his heart is then most pliable
to receive the things of grace, and his affections are then most frameable to
the mind of the Lord. Secondly, as this is the fittest time for God to work
upon a man in regard of the constitution of his body, so also in regard of
corruption, because a young man that is come to the strength of his years, his
mind will be sooner informed, and his judgment sooner convinced in regard of
those corruptions that are in him, because he has not continued long in any
base course, therefore he is most easy to be wrought upon, but when a man is
grown old in wickedness, when his soul as his body begins to buckle under
the sins of his younger years, when the heart is hardened, and the conscience
seared in wickedness, then it is desperately hard, it is a mervelous miracle
for the means of salvation to take place in such a man, we see it is
marvelous hard to drive a nail into an old knotty snarly post, especially when
it is weatherbeaten and seasoned, and clung together. It is no wonder that we
spend our hearts and can do no good, for those that have been old
weatherbeaten sinners, knotty snarly, stubborn rebellious hearts, a man were
as good speak to the seats where they sit, and to the walls as to the hearts of
them, it is marvelous hard to bring any thing home to the affections of such
men, they will not away from their old corruptions, their hearts are rivited to
their old lusts and corruptions, and therefore they will not entertain that
which may do good unto them, if a man will transplant a tree, he does not take
an old withered rotten tree, that is not fit to be transplanted, but he takes
a young tender twigge and transplants it, so it is here, those old trees, old
sinners that are withering, dying and decaying, such are of the Leapers spots,
and Blackamoores hue, they that are settled in their corruptions, and resolve to
take up their old courses; now they are too old to learn, thus long they have
lived, and if they be now stubborn they will be so ever; if they be now
peevish and malicious they will be so ever; if they be now covetous they will
be so ever, they will not entertain, they will not partake of those things
which God has appointed for their good. The third and last argument is in
regard of grace it self; it is very convenient and reasonable that God should
bestow grace upon those that are in their middle age, rather than upon those
that are in their tender years, or in their old age, if we consider the end of
the giving of grace, for what is the end of grace, and why does God give a man
grace and frame his heart so, that he may be fitted to partake of happiness,
but that the Lord hereby might receive the praise and glory of the riches of
his grace? That they which have it may express the power of God, that has
called them out of darkness into mavelous light; the Lord is pleased to
show this favor toward them, that they might show forth what God has done to
their poor souls, as the Prophet David does; now this middle age of a man is
the fittest time, wherein grace may receive most glory, and God most honor, in
regard of the giving of it; for grace when it comes to nature does not
destroy it, but perfect it, it does not take away the natural parts, as
learning, knowledge and courage, and the like, but rectifieth them and turns
them the right way: as for example, he that had a strong memory, or a sharp
wit, or a great courage, and a violent affection, God preserves and keeps
those still, but when grace comes God, turns them the right way and makes
him a fit instrument to set forth his glory, that before was a great enemy to
the same, and therefore it is said that Paul was a chosen vessel for the Lord,
and why? because Saul was a man of great learning, fiery zeal, fervent love,
and undanted courage, and therefore when he persecuted the Church, it is said
that he breathed forth persecutions; he got him a good Steed, and got letters
from Damascus, and haled all poor Christians to prison where he came, but when
grace came, the Lord did still retain the natural power of zeal, love,
courage, and learning, the Lord did retain all these; that tongue that before
spoke against God is now fitted to confute the adversary, he convinced them
mightily says the text, and that courage whereby he before was carried against
Gods Saints is, now fitted to suffer persecution, imprisonment and disgrace for
his names sake, and therefore in all reason it was fittest that the Lord should
take Paul in the middle of those years, that he might employ him to the
furtherance of his praise, that had before been a great hinderance to his
Gospel; It is said by the Apostle Paul, that the members of a godly man's body,
and the faculties of his soul, are weapons of righteousness; a gracious
tongue will speak those things which may be for Gods praise, and the good of
men; a gracious foot will be swift to run the ways of Gods Commandments:
now the wisest, workman will not choose an instrument that is broken and unfit
for service; now an old man is a broken and crazie instrument, little honor
can God have by his tongue when it faulters, little good can God have by his
understanding, and learning, and wisdom, when as in regard of his age he is
become a child again, and therefore it is mavelous reasonable that God
should take this time for the expressing of his grace; for when a man is in the
strength of nature, then grace turns all the members of his body and faculties
of his soul the right way, and a man runs as earnestly forward in a good
course, as he did before in the ways of wickedness; so then gather up the
point, if in regard of the constitution of his body, a man is then fittest to
receive the things of grace, if in regard of corruption he is not so hardened
to resist grace, if also then he is fittest to glorify God for bestowing grace
upon him; then it is reasonable, that as God can call when he will, so it is
most fit that he should call him before he is in his old declining age, when
his body is fit for nothing but to be carried upon a coffin and laid into the
grave; now we see then that it is clear, God can call at any time, but God
does most usually call most of his servants before their old age: Let us now
see what use we can make of the Point; and first observe from hence a ground of
Instruction; we must take heed that we be not too rash and giddily censorious,
in setting down a final censure upon men; see thou men running on headlong
in the ways of wickedness, yet never conclude therefore that God will never
show mercy and favor unto them, and work upon the souls of them, for we know
that God can call at the eleventh hour, and therefore be not too rash in
censuring this way, 1 Cor. 4.5.
but receive the exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.5. There says the Text,
Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, etc.

FINIS.
THE FIRST TABLE; Out of Revel. 22.17.
WHosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.

Doct. I. That the offer of grace from God is free. page 6 It is free in regard
of the preparation and the means of grace, that God has invented. p. 8.
Secondly, it is free in regard of the revelation of the means. p. 9. Thirdly,
it is free in regard of the blessing the means of grace and salvation to any
soul. p. 10 Reas. I. This offer of grace must needs be free, because there is
nothing in man to purchase this. p. 11 Reas. II. Because the creature can do
nothing to merit it. p. 12 Reas. III. Because no natural man has any promise
to challenge grace. p. 13 Use I. It is a word of advice to the Saints that have
received grace, to magnify the mercy of God. p. 15 Use II. It is to the wicked
that want this mercy, a ground of encouragement to seek after this mercy,
seeing it is free. p. 19 Use III. It is a Use of Exhortation to all poor
creatures that are burdened under the multitude of their sins, to hope for
mercy from the freeness of of it. p. 23 Doct. II. That the soul must be
willing to receive Christ and grace, before it shall have Christ and grace. p.
27. What is meant here by the will. p. 30 Quest. But how shall a man come to
know, that he wills grace and Christ. Answ. A man may know whither he will
grace or Christ by these 3. particulars, First, when the soul sees such an
excellency in Christ and grace, that he highly priseth Christ and grace. p. 35.
Secondly, whereby a man may know whether he will Christ or no, is this, when
the soul can choose Christ above all things. p. 36. Thirdly, if the soul truly
wills Christ, it will be carried toward Christ to close with him. p. 39 Use I.
It is for reproof, and condemns all those carnal Gospellers that think to
be saved, though they have no will to receive Christ. p. 41 Use II. It is a
word of terror to all sinful creatures, that do profess by their wicked
lives and conversations, they will not have Christ. p. 45 Doct. III. Whosoever
in truth does will to have Christ, shall receive him, and salvation by him. p.
51 Reas. I. Because the Lord requires no more at the hands of a poor finner.
p. 54 Reas. II. Because by this willing of Christ, the creature is made fit to
close with God. p. 56 Reas. III. Because the want of this wilingnesse to
receive, and embrace Christ, is that which breaks the match between God and
the soul. p. 58 Use I. It is a ground of instruction to wonder at the riches
of Gods bounty and goodness in his reasonable dealing with poor suitors
only to take Christ and mercy offered. p. 62 Use II. It is a word of terror
to show the just and heavy condemnation of all such as perish, as are damned
and go to hell, it is because they will be damned, they will have none of
Christ and grace. p. 65 Use III. It is an use of exhortation to stir you up
never to be quiet, until you have brought your souls to be willing to receive
Christ. p. 72
1 COR. 2.14.
Doct. NO man of himself by nature can will to receive Christ. p. 85. What is
meant by a natural man. vid. p. 85. What is meant by the things of the Spirit.
vid. p. 87. That a natural man has no power to will Christ appears in four
particulars. p. 90 Part. I. That the things of salvation must be first made
known unto a natural man, else be can never of himself find them out, yet
when these things of Christ and salvation by Christ are made known unto
natural men, they cannot entertain these spiritual truths. p. 90 Part. II.
When these things of life and salvation ^e brought home to the souls of
natural men, yet the heart cannot but resist and oppose the Spirits work. p.
92 Part. III. If the Lord follows a natural man further, that he may give
him grace, yet in himself he is not capeable of this grace. p. 94 Par. IV. The
natural man is unwilling to be wrought upon that he might be made capeable to
receive grace. p. 97 Reas. I Because a natural man cannot receive the things
of God, p. 100 Reas. II. Because all natural men are fleshly and wholely
overpowred with sin. p. 102 Reas. III. Because a dead man has no power to
procure life unto himself p. 104 Use I. It is to condemn that foolish conceit
that ^arbours in the minds of many poor ignorant souls, that they brought
grace into the world with them. p. 105. Use II. It is an use of Examination, to
try whether you are natural or spiritual. p. 111 Use III. It is of
Exhortation to labor to get out of thy natural estate. p. 119. The means. p.
121
EZECH. 11.19.
Doct. THe taking away of the indisposition of the soul to any good duty, and
the fitting of a soul to perform any spiritual service, is the alone work
of God. p. 132 The Reasons, why the Lord only can do it. vid. p. 135 Use I.
It is an use of Instruction to show you, that this work of preparing a sinner
to entertain Christ, it is a work of mavelous difficulty. p. 145 Use II.
It is a ground of comfort to support the hearts of those that are hard hearted.
p. 147 Use III. It is of exhortation to those that carry a stony heart about
them to have recourse to God. p. 149
LVKE 19.42.
Doct. THat while life is continued, and the means of grace afforded to a
people, is the season wherein God means to work the heart to receive life
and salvation. p. 160 Use I. Instruction to be thankful to the Lord for the
enjoyment of the means of salvation. p. 168 Use II. Exhortation to pity the
estate of such men that neglect the means of salvation. p. 185
MATTHEW. 20.3, 4, 5, 6.
Doct. THat God can and does call in all ages, some in their younger, some in
their riper, some in their old age. p. 192
FINIS.
PREPARING FOR CHRIST.
John 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw
him; and I will raise him up at the last day.


FOr the application of the merits and obedience of Christ Jesus to the soul
of a poor sinner, and for the enjoying of the same, there are two things
mainly observable; First, the soul must be prepared for the Lord Jesus; and
secondly, it must be ingrafted, and implanted into Christ Jesus, before it can
be made partaker of the saving grace and salvation in Christ contained, and
from Christ communicated to those that love and fear his name. Now concerning
this great work of preparation, wherein is the (...) of a Christian, for if the
heart be but prepared, the Lord will then suddenly come into his Temple (as
the Prophet Malachy speaks.) Now this preparation consists of two parts:
First, the dispensation of Gods gracious work upon the soul of a poor sinner.
Secondly, the frame and disposition that God works upon the soul, in
converting it to himself. Upon these two hangs the maine work of preparation:
and herein lies the great drift of a Christian; for the mercy of God is very
free, but we cannot make men fit to receive this mercy. And therefore in
preparation hereunto, we must apprehend two things: somewhat must prepare;
secondly, somewhat must be prepared: he that does prepare, is the Lord; he that
does receive the work, and is prepared, is the souls of those whom God has
elected to salvation: So that as I said before, something on Gods part must be
observed, something on man's part must be considered: on Gods part the
dispensation of his work, and on man's part the disposition that is wrought in
the soul. I come ^o the first thing, which is the maine thing to be (...) out
of the Text, namely, the manner (...) God works upon the soul when he
prepares (...) himself; and this discovers it self in two particulars: we
will handle them both together. (...), God does pluck a poor sinner from his
corruptions and darling sins, to which he was glued and fastened: and
secondly, as he draws the soul from sin, so he draws it to himself to
believe in him, and to receive mercy from him. First God plucks the soul from
sin: secondly he draws it to the Lord Jesus. And for this purpose we have
chosen this text, that so we may have some footing for that which we speak out
of Scripture, and my purpose, is not to handle all particulars in the Text,
which are many, but to choose those that do concern our present purpose, and
best fit us in our proceeding. And the two maine points which I mean to
discover out of the Text are these: First, that every man in his natural
condition is fastened and settled in the state of sin and corruption.
Secondly, that the Lord by a holy kind of violence plucks off the soul from
sin, and draws it to himself. These are the two things which in the Text I
aim at, but the second is the main thing I look at: and we must handle them
both, because the drawing of a thing from another implies that the thing which
is drawn was fastened to some thing from whence it is to be drawn; and
therefore when the Lord says, he will draw a poor sinner to himself, it
implies that we were stuck fast and glued to our corruptions, from whence we
must be drawn; and when this is once done, then the face is toward heaven,
toward Zion; then it is fitted to receive mercy from the Lord Jesus: and
because this drawing unto God does imply a fastening of the soul unto sin,
from whence it must be drawn, the point therefore is this; namely, that every
man's natural estate and condition is fastened, and settled, and riveted to his
sins and corruptions* a poor creature by nature is not only ingrafted into
sin, but he is rooted into the rebellions of Adam, and is grown strong with
sinful corruptions and distempers of his own soul; nay a man is not able to
express the strong combination, between sin and the soul; it is scrued
into sin, and riveted into corruptions, which have been convaied thereunto
and derived from our first parents: and that the so^^le is thus fastened, and
settled, and glued to sin, we may observe it in two particulars; Partly in
the dominion that sin and Satan has over the soul: Partly in the amity that
the soul has to sin. First then, consider the dominion that sin has over
the soul, that sovereign and uncontrollable command which sin exercises
over the soul of every poor creature under heaven, which is in a natural
estate, in the bond of iniquity and under the power of Satan; and we shall see
that the soul is fastened to sin, Acts 26.18. the text says, that they are
under the power of Satan, To open their eyes, says the text, that they may
turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God. If you ask
me how the Devil has power over poor sinners, the Apostle tells you, That
he catches them at his pleasure: the proud man must go no further than he
will, and the covetous man must do nothing but that which he list: but this is
not all neither, though this be sufficient to discover the power that Satan
has over the soul of a sinner: but when he has thus taken a poor soul,
and fettered him in this case, he then shuts him up in prison, Tim. 2.2.26.
there the next says, that the devil takes poor sinners, prisoners at his
will. Gal. 3.22. it is said, that all men by nature are under the law, shut up
under sin: it is a phrase taken from prisoners; a prisoner that is under the
hand of the jailer, and has his legs settered, and is shut up in prison, we
use to say that such a man is sure enough. And not only so; sin and Satan
have not only taken a poor prisoner, and settered him, and shut him up in
prison, but they have slain him, and taken away his life also; and therefore
now sin musts needs he fastened deep in the soul of a poor sinner. If a
thief, or a Traitor, were apprehended, and convicted, and imprisoned, and had
bolts and fetters upon him; and further, if he were condemned, and hanged,
drawn, and quartered; then though the party were never so resolute, or his
practices never so outrageous, yet ^en might say, now he is sure enough, now he
will steal no more, nor plot treason any more: just so it is with the soul of
a poor sinner, every man naturally, is so far forth under the power of sin
and Satan, that he is not only surprised and taken by Satan, but his sins are
as so many bolts, and fetters about him, nay he is shut up in prison; nay
further, sin has slain him out right; in so much that a man may as soon
pluck hell from the place where it is, as pluck a poor sinner out of his
corruptions. The devil has not only taken a poor sinner, but he has fetterd
him and imprisoned him, and taken away his life; and therefore now the devil
has him sure enough, as we may so spe^l; he is now firmly fastened unto sin.
This is the first passage, add to this the second. As the dominion of sin
over the soul is great, so also that same land of league, and close kind of
firm fastening, that same union that is between the soul and corruptions, is
mavelous great. The Scripture never enough expresses the love that is
between sin and the soul; look what love and union there is between the
husband and the wise, Romans ^.2. there faith the text, the woman which is in
subjection to a man, is bound to the man while he lives; the one must die
before the other can marry: such is the union between sin and the soul, a
poor sin is married and given over to sin, in so much that before the Lord
conquers and slays sin, the soul is never free. Nay further, look as the
members are to the body, such is sin to the soul, Collos. 3.5. mortify your
members which are on earth, says the Apostle, as fornication, uncleanness
inordinate affection, and the like: nay sin is called the old man in
Scripture, as if sin were another man in us; there is a head of sin, and an
eye of sin, and a hand of sin, and a foot of sin; in every sinful
creature it is as another man within him. Nay to go further, Matthew. 16.24.
there sin is called a man's self, there, says our Savior, let a man deny
himself and take up his cross and follow me: let him deny himself, that is,
let him deny his pride, and his other sinful distempers and abominations. I
tell you, a natural man's sins are as near unto him as his own life, he will
part with his own blood, before he will part with his corruptions; nay his
sins are himself, they are so fast and so firmly settled unto him, that you
may as easily pluck self from self as a man from his sins. So then if it be
so, that the dominion that Satan has over the soul of a sinner, is the
strongest of all other, if the union between sin and the soul be the
firmest of all other; then it is clear, that every natural man sticks fast in
sin he is bound hand and foot in sin, sin and a man makes but one man;
and therefore it musts needs be a hard thing to pluck a man from his sinful
distempers: so that then the case is clear, every man is informed of this,
that the soul is fastened and glued, and firmly settled unto sin: we will now
proceed unto the use of the point. And first for instruction, 1 Use.
we may here see that woeful servitude and base slavery, that all poor
creatures are in, if they be no better by grace than they are by nature: though
they carry it out never so bravely, and lift up their heads never so high, and
think their penny good silver, yet their servitude is of all other the worst;
and their vassalage, of all other in the world, the basest. There was never
poor soul stuck so fast in a pit of clay, wherein was no bottom, as a poor
soul sticks in his sins and corruptions. You have heard of the house of
bondage, that the Israelites were in, when they were in Aegygt, how miserably
they were afflicted and tormented by the hands of unreasonable Tyrants, how
they were forced to gather their straw, and then to scorch themselves in the
fiery furnace, to make brick. You have heard of Ie^e^^ie in the dungeon, how ho
stuck fast in the mire and (...), and could have no ease until Evil merodach
came and delivered him. You have heard of the Mill that Samson grinded in,
after the Philistims had put out his eyes; that they should then put him as a
horse to grind in the Mill. You would think it mavelous irksome and
troublesome to be thus oppressed by unreasonable men. I tell you, the house of
bondage that the Israelites were in, was a heaven, it was a Paradise, to that
slavery, that bondage, that servitude, that vassalage which every poor sinner
is in under sin and Satan: nay Samsons Mill was an excellency, it was a glory
to that slavery which every poor sinner is feign to perform, to be at Satan's
call, and to be at the devils command; if he bid; a man to be proud, then he
must be proud; if the devil command a man to be covetous, then he must obey
him, and go like an Ox to the slaughter, and a Fool to the stocks, to do
whatsoever sin and Satan bids him: what a base slavery and servitude is this?
Jeremy in the dungeon, it was a delight to be there where he might look up to
heaven, and leave the desires of his soul with God; but for a poor soul to
be in the dungeon of his sins, where his mind cannot be enlightened, ^or his
judgment informed; where he can see nothing, nor know nothing; where there is
no help, where all the men on earth, nor all the Angels of heaven, cannot help
him; what a woeful miserable wretched condition is this? Oh that God would open
men's eyes, and set open the consciences of those that look so high and brag
of their privileges: Many men boast of their base courses, and wicked
practices, as if a thief should brag of his chains and fetters; this is a
woeful misery: many creatures make this a great part of their liberty, that
they can break all bonds, and snap all cords in pieces, and cast the holy
commandments of God behind their backs, not to be persuaded, not to be
yoaked; and then they think they are the bravest men alive; they care not what
the Minister says, they care not what the word commands; oh these men think
they are in the greatest liberty of all men under the Sun, let me speak a
little to these men; did thou never see a poor prisoner look out of Newgate,
and cry bread, bread, for the Lords sake; or did thou never here of a poor
man that was fettered and cast into a filthy dark dungeon, where light never
came, where Sun never shined; if you have seen these, or heard of these, do
you think these men free and at liberty? I appeal to your own consciences in
this case. Why truly these men are free men in regard of that bondage, that
slavery, that vassallage, that those men are in, which break Gods
commandments. Thy body indeed may be at liberty, and may go from alchouse to
alehouse; but alas thou have a poor soul, that is shut up in sin, and
corruption, nay it never saw the Sun, the Sunshine of the Gospel never came
unto it, never any promise took place in thy soul, never did any counsel do
thee any good, and yet notwithstanding, these base slaves, the miserable
prisoners, those are they, that account of the poor servants of God, as if
they were the basest persons in the world: If there be any poor souls that
humble themselves, and obey his commandments, then they count those poor
sneaks, and base fellows; if God commands any thing, they obey it, if he
threatens, they tremble, and howl, and cry, and even break their hearts
because of their sins, they account this as a base thing, they count these
men of no spirits; but when no fear of man terrifieth them, when the word of
God cannot ^rule them, these are royal hearts, and the brave spirits of the
world; brave spirits, for the Lord Jesus sake think of it. Of all peasants in
the world, I tell you, they are the basest bondslaves, the most miserable
vassals that ever breathed on the face of the earth, to have sin to be a man's
commander, and the devil his jailer, and his heart a hell; and to have an ill
conscience to be his hangman that continually keeps the roap about his neck,
when there is not one hair; breadth between death and him: but if it please
God by death to tutne the ladder, then he is hanged in hell for ever: is this
freedom? are these the brave spirits of the world? the Lord deliver his from
such liberty. Should we see a malefactor arraygned, imprisoned, condemned, and
gone to the place of execution, and upon the top of the ladder, and the Hangman
having the roap about his neck, ready to turn him off, would we think this
man a free man? would we think him a man of a brave spirit, that is in this
condition? I tell thee, thy condition, if thou be in a natural estate, is
far worse. Thou art a poor soul, that have been imprisoned, and ^ettered,
thou art under the bondage of sin, and Satan, and thy evil conscience is
like a hangman, that every day has the noose about thy neck; and if the ladder
by death be but once turned, then thou art hanged in endless, and easelesse
torments for ever, never to be comforted, never to be refreshed; and yet these
brag and say, who is Lord over us? why, I tell you the devil is Lord over you
^and sin is your commander; you are in the greatest slavery of any men, under
the cope of heaven. This is the first use, to show the miserable slavery, that
all poor creatures are in.

In the second place, it is a word of exhortation. 2 Use.
Is it so, that all sinful men are in such a wretched condition, then we
ought to be persuaded, and entreated, especially the servants of God, that have
had their bolts knocked off, and have been freed from the slavery of sin,
and Satan, these ought to be exhorted, to put on the bowels of compassion, and
to pity these poor creatures, these poor prisoners, and to lend them their
helping hand, to pluck them out of the mire and clay, wherein they stuck: It is
the custom of the world, if a poor prisoner be taken and condemned, and is
going to the place of execution; why, reason persuades men thus far, to
yearne toward him, they will be ready to pity him, and say, alas poor man,
he is alive now, within this short time he will be dead; and what shall become
of his soul who knows, unless God have mercy upon him, he is like to perish
for ever. Why, do you see a company of proud persons, covetous wretches,
profane creatures in the world, alas they are going to the place of execution,
there is but one hayres breadth between them, and everlasting damnation: if God
turn the ladder once, and a natural death creep upon them, what then shall
become of their poor souls? take notice therefore of these poor souls, and
pity poor prisoners, that are in such a wretched condition. If a child that
had a farher of good ability, and of some place in the country wherein he
lived, if he should see his father for some offense, apprehended by the
officers, and committed to prison; or if he should see him go begging, from
door to door, with his fetters and his bolts about his heels, oh how it
would grieve him, oh how he would weep, and howl, and say, little had I
thought, my poor father would have come to this misery: or if a wife should
see, her husband going to the gallows, for some heinous crime committed, I
know she would have a heart to mourn for her husband in this kind, she would
be ready to say, little thought I, that my husband should have come to such an
end, it is his own folly, that has brought him to this. Can you pity those
that are overtaken with outward bonds, with outward misery, and can you mourn
for that which is fallen upon their bodies, why do thus much more, for the
soul of thy father, for the soul of thy wise, for the soul of thy child, or
thy friend, and say, little did I think that my father, or my husband, or my
child, should ever have been shut up in hell, and fettered by Satan; little did
I think that ever sin, or Satan, should be his jailer, that the devil should
hale him to the place of execution: alas he cannot speak a good word, nor
perform any good duty; he cannot pray in his family, but is shut up under pride
and covetousness, and drunkenness, and profaneness. If thou can pity and
pray, for the body of thy father, or for the body of thy husband, or friend,
why then pity and pray, much more for the soul of thy father, husband, or
friend. It is that which is observable Deuteronomy: 10.19. there says the text, you
shall deal kindly with strangers; why, because ye your selves were strangers,
in the land of Egypt: we that have been in prison, under sin and Satan, and
have been in the same condition our selves, we know what it is, to be shut up
under a hard heart, and a blind mind, and distempered affections; we know what
it is to be prentise to the devil, and therefore this should move us, to deal
pitifully with poor miserable captived creatures; we our selves were in the
same condition, we our selves lived without God in the world heretofore, as
those do now. Nay, this is that which the Apostle presses, Tit: 3, 1, 2, 3.
there says the text, Put them in mind to be subject to principalities, and
powers, and to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing
all meekness unto all men; for we our selves also, were sometimes disobedient,
foolish, deceiving, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice,
hateful, and hating one another: you that have been prisoners, and have had
your souls, pierced with bolts and fetters; why, remember your own estate, and
pity poor prisoners, that are now in that estate; that you have formerly been
in. Has the Lord opened thy eyes, and humbled thy heart, has the Lord broke
thy bonds, and knocked off thy bolts, and let thee out of prison, why then
pity poor prisoners, you were such once your selves, hating God, and hateful
one to another; and that you are not so, bless God for it. You know what it is
to be in such a condition, to be troubled with a hard heart; you that have
been in prison, and know what it is to have hard hearts, and dead souls, and
blind minds; why, pity poor prisoners that are in the same case, and cry to
heaven for help for them, entreat God to free and deliver them from the bondage
of sin and Satan: in the 12. of Matthew. 9.10. it is that our Savior presses
upon the Pharisees, there says the text, what man shall there be among you,
that shall have one sheep fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, and will not lift
it out, how much then is a man better than a sheep? so say I, if any of you
should have a child, or a father, or a husband fall into a Well, would you not
use all means possible, to lift him out? oh here one would be breathing, and
would scarce speak, there another would be hoarse with crying, help, help, for
the Lords sake, my child, my father, my husband is drowning; thus you would do,
and you do well, and mercifully: but have you care of oxen, and of the bodies
of your sons, and your fathers, and husbands, and have you no pity, no
compassion upon their souls? you that see the souls of your husbands, sunk
down into a durty pit, into a filthy dungeon, into a drunken ^rophane course;
thou that see thy wife fallen into a course of chambering, and wantonness,
if thou see this, why then call and cry for succor, and relief, and pray
for help, and labor by all means possible, to pluck out these souls out of
the gall of bitterness, and out of the bond of iniquite, labor to pluck them
out of sin here, and damnation hereafter. Look as a man deals with carriage,
if a Cart be at a stay, or at a set, in the high way, why then the Carter that
drives it, does what he can himself, he sets his shoulder to the wheel, and
labors as much as in him lies, to lift the Cart out; but if this will not
do, then he craves the help of some others, especially if there go two or
three teames together, then he gets all the other teames set to this load, to
draw it out, and especially if the load be going, then they cry, it is coming,
it is coming, and labor by all means possible, to lift it out altogether.
Do thou see the heart of thy father, or the heart of thy child, at a stand,
under pride, covetousnes, and profaneness; why, then pray thou what thou
can, and do what thou may, put thy shoulder to the wheel, and use all
means to pluck them out; but if this will not do, use all helps that can be by
the supply of others, and crave their help in this case, entreat them to help
thy father, or thy child, or thy husband at a dead lift: say, my father, or my
husband, is sunk forty fadam deep into the earth, he is buried in the world,
and in his corruptions, especially if the load be coming, if he be almost
persuaded to become a Christian, then labor earnestly and cry, one pluck for
my poor husband, one pluck for my poor father, he is coming, he is coming,
therefore pull, pull, for the Lords sake: and go further, and cry mightily unto
the Lord, that it would please him, to pluck him out of the ground, look up to
heaven, and entreat the Lord to lend his helping hand: if man cannot, nor
neighbors will not, why then look up higher unto heaven for succor, and say,
good Lord, my father is a prisoner, and a bondslave to sin and Satan,
therefore, good Lord I beseech thee, break those bonds, and knock off those
bolts of pride, and infidelity, and the like: in the 12. of the Acts when Peter
was taken prisoner, it is said that prayer was made, without ceasing of the
Church unto God for him; and the same night when Herod would have brought him
forth, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound in two chains, and the
Keepers before the door kept the prison; and the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto him, and a light shined in the prison; and he raised him up, and said,
Peter arise, and the chains fell off from him: afterward he came unto an iron
gate, that lead unto the City, and that opened of its own accord. Why, that God
that was able to knock off the bonds of Peter, and was able to make the iron
gate open of it self unto him; that God is able to break the bonds of sin
and Satan, wherewith thy father, husband, or friend are fettered; he is able to
break the brazen door of their hearts, which hinders the light of the Gospel
from shining in, and therefore cry to this God for help and succor, and mercy,
and say, good Lord, thou that were able to break off the fetters, wherewith
Peter was bound, and to make the iron door to open, good Lord I beseech thee,
do thou work upon my father, my husband, or my child, especially that he may
never be so hardened, slip the lock, and break in upon him, and humble him
here, that he may be saved hereafter; especially when you see the load is
coming, then draw, oh then draw with all your power; when you see their minds
are enlightened, and their judgments informed, why then the load is coming,
pray therefore then to God especially for help; who knows but God may humble
them, and convert them to himself, and therefore strive amayne with God, use
all means both ordinary and extraordinary for the benefit of them: and this
shall suffice for the first passage, namely, that the soul of a man by nature
is glued, and fastened to sin and corruption. The next point considerable, is
this, who it is that must deliver the soul from the bondage of sin and
Satan, and pluck it from sinne^ a man cannot do this of himself, it is the
Lords own work that must bring it to pass, for so says the text, no man
comes to me, except the father draws him; it is he that must do the deed.
The point is this, the Lord by a holy kind of violence, does pluck the hearts
of sinners from sin, unto himself, this is the scope of the text, and this
is the aim of our Savior in the versel, and this is the work, on Gods part
considerable: for as we have heard before, we must observe two things in
preparation; First Gods act upon the soul, Secondly the frame and disposition
that is wrought in the soul by God. The act of God is a drawing of the soul
by an holy kind of violence, from sin unto himself. I will not here speak of
the inability of the soul, or that God is the author of this work, for these I
have handled before, out of that place, Ezech. 11.19. it is God that takes
away the stony heart, and gives a heart of flesh: we will only now speak, of
the dispensation of the work of God, of the manner how God prepares a sinner
for himself, and the text says, he does it by drawing, he does by a holy kind
of violence, draw the soul from corruptions, and sinful courses, unto
himself; and I will handle both these together, the plucking of the soul from
finne, and drawing of it to God, because they are both made up together, by one
action and motion; as for example, look as it is with a man, that rends one
piece of wood from another, as he plucks the one piece from the other, so he
draws that which he plucks to himself, he does not only draw it from the
other, but he draws that part, nearer to himself; so that both are made up,
by one action and operation: and so it is here, the plucking of a sinner from
corruption, and drawing of him to God, both these are acted by God at once, and
therefore I will handle them both together; only observe, there must be such a
kind of thing as this is, before God will take possession of the soul, namely,
there must be a severing of the soul from sin, and a drawing of it to God;
look as it is with a man's body, if any part thereof be out of joint, or broken,
before this part can be jonted aright again, happily there is some filth, some
moist humors about it, or happily there is some dead flesh in it, now this dead
flesh must be taken away, and the filth and ill humors must be removed, before
that part can be set in its right place again; so it must be with the souls
of Gods servants, every soul by sin is unjoynted, and wholly removed from
God: the soul indeed was made for God, and should have closed with him, and
fastened upon him, but by reason of sin, the soul is quite broken; now
before the soul can be made fit for God, before it can be put into a right
frame, all that noisome corruption that is in it, and those base lusts that
hang upon it, the soul must be freed from these, before God can work upon it,
or that receive mercy and salvation from God, before it can perform any good
duty; and this is done by drawing: the Lord by a holy kind of violence, does
pluck the soul from those sins that harbor in it, and those distempers that
press upon it, and then he draws it unto himself. And for the opening of
this, we must consider three things: First, what the nature of this drawing is,
what is meant hereby. Secondly the means how, and whereby God comes to draw
a poor sinner, from sin to himself. Thirdly, the arguments why God must
thus draw with a holy kind of violence, and that God may do this without any
prejudice at all to the will. First, what the nature of this drawing is; and we
must understand, that there is a double kind of drawing in Scripture, this word
implies a double sense in the phrase of Scripture a there is first a moral
kind of drawing, it is a word used by Divines, but that I may speak to the
capacity of all, I will term it an outward or an external kind of drawing,
which is this, when a man by reasons propounded, and good things offered to the
understanding and the will, comes thereby to have his mind enlightened, and his
will moved and persuaded, to embrace and give entertaynment to the things
offered: and observe in this two things; first, that it is only outward in
regard of the subject; secondly, that it puts nothing into the heart, but
stirs up that which is in the heart already: there is nothing but objects
offered, and arguments propounded to persuade the soul to the love and liking
of the thing offered; and this is usual in Scripture, and it is said to be a
compelling of a man; it propounds arguments to the soul, and so brings on the
soul to the affecting of any thing; in the 16 of the Acts 15. it is said of
Lydia after she was converted, her soul clave to the holy man Paul, and she
besought them saying; If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, abide
in my house: and then says the text, she constrained us, she laid such hooks
upon them that she constrained them, how is this? she laid no violent hands
upon them, no, but she used arguments that were so forcible, and reasons that
were so pithy, that she persuaded the Apostle Paul and those that were with him
to yield unto her request: if you have judged me faithful come into my house;
as if she had said, if you believe that I have received the grace of God by
you, if ever you means to receive any comfort from the blessing of God upon
the work wrought in me by your means, if you think that my soul has been
made partaker of any good from you, come then in unto my house and abide with
me; now unless Paul would have denied his own work which God by his grace had
showed him, he must yield unto her, and come in, and therefore the text says,
that she constrained him, that is, she did by arguments and reasons
propounded unto him, persuade him to grant her request: so in the 22 of Matt.
it is said that the King when he had made a great feast, and those that were
bidden would not come, he bids his servants go out into the high ways, and
compel men to come in; there is nothing meant there but this moral, outward
drawing by strength of arguments, when by arguments propounded, we draw and
persuade men, to do that we would have them perform: but this is not meant
here in the text, and I prove it thus, because it is not the purpose of our
Savior Christ in the text, for Christ having taught a spiritual and an
heavenly Sermon, the Pharisees murmured and said, Is not this Jesus the son
of Joseph, whose father and mother we know, how is it then that he says, he
came down from heaven? Jesus when he perceived their murmuring, said unto them,
Why murmur you among your selves? and that he might prevent the offense that
the feeble ones might take at the example of the Pharisees, he says unto them,
No man can come unto me, except my father draws him, as though he had said,
be not you troubled, and perplexed, because these great scollers do not believe
my doctrine, and embrace it, it is not in them willing, but in me drawing; do
not you think ill of my doctrine of salvation, because your wise men and your
brave men, will not believe it; for I tell you, though these have had arguments
propounded, to persuade them to this, yet they cannot embrace my doctrine and
believe, unless my father draws them; they have had their hearts convinced
and their mouths stopped, but yet all this will not do, unless my father
draws them. Secondly, this kind of caution, except my father draws him, no
man come unto me, is employed, that if my father does draw him, he will come;
and the Papists themselves confess this, that a man may have this moral
drawing arguments, persuading, and reasons alluring to come unto God, and
receive mercy from him, and yet he may not come; but they that have this
drawing meant in the text, they will undoubtedly come; no man comes unto me,
except the father which has sent me draws him, and therefore whosoever the
father does draw, he shall come, and certainly will come, and therefore this
drawing, that is meant here, is not a moral drawing by outward persuasions:
thus much for the clearing of this point, namely that a moral and external
drawing is not to be understood in the text. This will not serve the turn,
there is more in it than so, we must therefore search further, into the nature
of this word drawing; and God is said to draw a poor sinner unto himself, in
the second place, when he is not only pleased to enlighten a man's mind, and
offer arguments to his understanding, and lay truths and propound promises unto
him, for this will not do it, this is only an outward drawing; but when the
Lord is pleased to put a new power into the soul of a sinner, and with all, to
carry the will to the object propounded, that it may embrace it; when God is
pleased, not only to offer good things to the soul, but to enable the soul
to lay hold upon the things offered, not only to offer Christ and salvation,
but to work effectually upon the heart, and make it able to give entertainment
to Christ, then the Lord is said to draw a sinner unto himself, from sin and
corruption; and this is termed an internal kind of drawing, and this is meant
here in the text, it is not only the propounding of arguments, to move and
pluck the soul, but the Lord does by his effectual power, draw the soul from
sin, and bring it unto himself. And therefore observe two things, touching
this internal drawing, namely, that there is a separation first wrought,
between sin and the soul, the union that is between finne and the soul,
is broken. Secondly, that when the soul is once severed, and broken off from
sin, then it comes to a right set, to a right frame and disposition toward
God, and then it goes no further, but here it stops; and this is that which
I call plucking and drawing of a poor sinner from his corruptions to God, in
both which actions the will of the creature is wrought upon, plucked from sin
and set toward God, and of it self it does not move at all. I express it
thus, look as it is with the wheel of a clock, or the wheel of a Jack that is
turned aside, and by some contrary poyse set the wrong way. He now that will
set this wheel right, must take away the contrary poyse, and then put the
wheel the right way, and and yet the wheel does not go all this while of it
self, but first there is a stopping of the wheel, and a taking away of the
poyse: and secondly the wheel must be turned the right way, and all this while
the wheel is only a sufferer; so it is with the soul of a man, the heart of a
man, and the will of a man, and the affections of a man, they are the wheels
of the souls of men, the Lord Jesus made them at the first to run to
heavenward, and to Godward, but when Adam sinned, then the poyse of
corruptions prevailed so far forth over them, that they drew the heart, the
mind, the will of man from God, and made it run the wrong way to the
divell-ward, and to hell-ward; now when the Lord comes to set these wheels
aright, he must take away the poyse and plummet that made them run the wrong
way, that is, the Lord by his almighty power, must overpower those sins and
corruptions which harbor in the soul, and have dominion over the soul: as
for example, if a man have a covetous heart, insomuch that the world will not
suffer him to hear, and pray, and perform any good duty, then God must pull
away that plummet, he must pluck the soul from that sin, and then he must
draw it to himself, that is, he must draw it to Godward, and to Zion-ward, and
make it to be at his command, that Gods spirit as a new plummet, may carry it
and order it, and now it does nothing all this while, God must first take away
the contrary plummet, that drew the soul aside, and then the frame of the
soul will be to Godward, it will be in a right frame and order, it will run
the right way, and all this while the will is only a sufferer, and this I take
to be the meaning of the text: That God by a holy kind of violence, rendeth the
soul of a poor sinner, and withal by his almighty power, stops the force of
a man's corruptions, and makes the soul teachable, and framable to the will of
God, it makes it to lie level, and to be at Gods command, and this is done by
a holy kind of violence; and so much for these points of speculation, without
which I could not well open the point. But now we see the bottom of the point,
namely, that God does by a holy kind of violence, pluck and draw men from their
corruptions, unto himself. The next thing to be considered is, the means
whereby God thus haleth the soul, and draws the heart of a poor sinner unto
himself: and the means are four. 1.
The first work of the Lord is this he lets in a light into the foul of a
poor sinner, and discovers unto him, that he is in a wrong way, and tells
him, there is another way that he must walk in, if ever he mean to come to
heaven, and this is the first means, when the soul of a sinner is enlightened,
and his mind informed that he is in a wrong course, and that he must take a
better course, or else he shall never come at heaven, and this the Lord does
suddenly, the sinner not perceiving of it, the Lord sets a sudden flash upon
his soul, and tells him that he is going unto hell, the soul presently
wonders at this, and marvels how it came to pass, Esaias 66.1. there says the
text, I am sought of them that asked not for me, and I am found of them that
sought me not, the Lord puts a sudden light into souls of men, which they
never dreamed of. Hypocrites if they can but go to Church, and sit in the
Church as Gods servants do, and lean on their elbowes, and hear as Gods
people do, then all is well with them, but as many of them as belong to God,
God will discover unto them that they are in a wrong way, and he will show and
reveal another way unto them, which they never dreamed of; and therefore this
is that* we shall observe, happily we shall see a man come riding into a town on
a Sabbath day, and when he comes, there he sees the people going to Church,
well, perhaps then he sets up his horse at the Inn, and goes into the Church
for a custom and for company sake, and when he is in the Church, he goes into
a seat and sets down his staff, and sits down and attends the Minister, and
never thinks of any thing, well at last the Lord sends a light into his soul,
and tells him, thou art now riding about thy own worldly business, when
thoushouldst be in sanctifying of my Sabbath: I tell thee my friend, thou art
in a wrong way, thou take a naughty course, thou do wickedly, and if thou
continuest and go on in this course, thou will never come at heaven. And
this the Lord does on a sudden, when a man never so much as thought of any such
matter. And after a man is thus enlightened, he will be ready to say, the truth
is, heretofore I went to hear the word but for customs sake, but when I least
dreamed of any such thing, it pleased the Lord, blessed be his name, to reveal
such things unto me, as I before never knew, he told me that which sticks
upon me to this present hour, he discovered that unto me, which I hope I
shall carry with me unto my grave; this is that we may observe in the 9. of the
Acts, Paul there was running on in a resolute-course, he had gotten letters at
Damascus, and purposed to make havoc of all poor Christians where he came,
now while he was in his journey the Lord met him from heaven, and cried unto
him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? as he if had said, this is not the
way to heaven, you think to persecute my poor Saints, but Saul, Saul, I tell
thee, this is not the way, thou take a wrong course: he called unto him, as a
man would call after one that is running out of his right way, into some
wilderness or dangerous place. And when Saul heard this, he presently fell off
his horse, and humbled himself and said, Lord what will thou that I do? and so
Luke 15.4. the text says, that the shepherd that had lost his sheep left his
ninty and nine, and went into the wilderness to seek that which was lost, and
if he had not gone to seek the sheep, the sheep would never have sought him:
alas the poor sheep was gone astray, and bewilderd, and if the shepherd had
not followed it and sought after it, that would never have found the
shepherd; nay to go further, many a man goes to the word, and hears it for
nothing else but to carp at the Minister, and yet the Lord has caught many
such men also, and has put such a light into their hearts, that he has made
them know that they were in a wrong way: and mark, when the Lord has let in
this light, then the soul begins to be at a stand, and thinks with himself,
surely if this be the right way, I am in the wrong, if the Minister says true,
then I am not right; but then sometimes the heart would put out this light, it
would not be informed and persuaded; if the Minister tells a man that he must
sanctify Gods Sabboths here, or else he shall never sanctify a Sabbath unto
him in heaven hereafter, when the Minister says, that unless God humble us
here, he will break us in pieces in hell hereafter; loath a man is to know
this, and be informed of this, because he would not be offended by this and
provoked to perform this, but though a sinner would shift off this, yet the
Lord will not leave him, but will still pursue him and lay reasons upon him
unanswerable; the soul would fain play tricks with the Lord in this case, and
put out this light, but God will reveal to the soul of a sinner that these
things are certainly true, God will lay hold upon the understanding of a poor
sinner, and follow him with reasons that are undeniable until his reason shall
yield, and his understanding give verdit to that which the Lord reveals,
until he says I, confess Lord, it is true, I yield full assent thereto:
Thus the Lord knocks at the door or heart of a poor sinner, and not only
so, but lifts up the latch and opens the door of a man's heart, and lets in
the light; and this is the first course that God uses. 2.
The second is this, after that the Lord has thus enlightened the mind and
let in the light of his spirit into the heart of a sinner, and though a man
would defeat the power of it, yet God still follows him with forceable
arguments until the understanding is settled, and reason answered: after the
Lord has done this, then the second cord wherewith God draws sinners unto
himself, is a cord of mercy, whereby the Lord does compass a poor sinner
about with kindness, and goodness, and compassion, Hos. 11.4. there says the
Lord, I taught Ephraim to go, taking them by the arms, I drew them with the
cords of love, and with the bonds of a man. This same cord of Gods mercy is a
cable rope, the abundant riches of Gods mercy is a great thick cable, and we
will tell you of what it is twisted, and it makes known it self in four
particulars; if the illumination that God sends into the heart will not be
able to persuade the heart, though it answers all objections and pursues it
with arguments undeniable, why then the Lord will draw us with the cord of his
mercy, and this great cable of Gods goodness is made up of four cords.

First, First Cord.
the Lord revealed himself to be ready to receive, and willing and easy to
entertayne poor sinners when they come unto him, Esaias 55.7. there says the
text, let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. The word in the original is this, the Lord
multiplyeth pardons, the Lord has not uttered all his pardons; the Popes
pardons indeed may be all sold, but Gods pardons are not at the bottom; no,
no, he has a multitude of pardons. The Lord is ready to give thee pardon for
all thy transgressions, what ever thy corruptions be, whatsoever thy
abominations be, the Lord stands to multiply mercy and pardon, and
forgiveness, that so thou may have mercy for all, and forgiveness to all
thy sins and distempers: have thou multiplied rebellion? why the Lord does
also multiply pardons, the bowels of compassion are still open, and the arms
of mercy are still spread abroad, and when the soul sees the attributes of
God in Scripture, that he pardons all poor sinners that come unto him;
stubborn Manasses, he was humbled, and resolute Paul, he was converted; when
the soul sees this, then the soul thinks, why not I Lord, why not I
pardoned also? why yes, thou may be received to mercy and pardoned also, for
the Lord does still multiply pardons: Manasses had some mercy, and Paul had
some, and yet there is mercy for thee also, and for a thousand thousand more;
the Lord is ready to pardon poor sinners, and willing to entertain them.

Secondly, Second Cord.
the Lord is not only ready to forgive when men will come unto him, but he
does also call and command them for to come, for the poor sinner when he
hears this, that God is merciful and ready to forgive, he may be amazed and
at a stand, and thinks with himself, oh but may I, shall I, dare I go unto
the Lord for mercy, may I be so bold to press in for favor at the hands of
the Lord? it is the Lord indeed that shows mercy, but may I come unto the
Lord? I have been a gievous sinner, and have heaped abomination upon
abomination, and therefore I am afraid to approach near unto the presence of
the Lord: why I ^^ll thee thou may come, and the Lord wills and commands
thee to come upon the penalty of his everlasting wrath, he charge thee to
come unto him, and entertayne that favor he has provided for thee, in the 3.
of Ier. 22. there says the Lord, come unto me ye rebellious people, and I
will heal your rebellions: you that never prayed, nor never came to hear, all
rebels come unto me and I will heal your rebellions, and then the people
answer, behold we come unto thee, for thou art our God: be not to full of
niceness in this case, do not stagger and say, I have despised Gods goodness,
and slighted Gods mercies, and therefore may I be bold to come? why I tell
you, you may go to God for mercy, come to me yea rebellious people, and I will
heal your rebellions; mercy will answer all your sins, they shall be no
impediment unto you; in the 3. of Ier. 1. it is a fine passage, there says the
text, They say, that if a man put away his wife and she go from him, and she
become another man's, will he receive her again? but thou have played the
harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord: if a man
should put away his wife for an adultresse, would he take her again, no
certainly; all the world will say, an adultresse whore, away with her; after
so many injuries and wrongs done unto her husband, there is no expectation of
mercy or kindness from him; but the Lord says, thou have played the harlot
with many lovers, yet return unto me: whatsoever we delight in more, or love
more than God, they are our lovers; now the Lord says, though thou have had
pride, and covetousness, and malice, and drunkenness, and adultery for thy
lovers, yet return unto me, notwithstanding all thy base doings and wicked
practices, yet come unto me, says the Lord: this is great encouragement to a
poor sinner, that all his sinful abominations should not hinder him from
receiving mercy; this works wonderfully upon the soul of a sinner, and he
begings to wonder and say, Lord, shall all my sins be pardoned, shall all
those oaths, and all that profaneness of mine be forgiven, after so many
mercies slighted, and so many abominations committed, yet forgiven? why aye,
says the Lord, come unto me, and you shall be forgiven; thou have played the
harlot, yet come unto me thou proud heart and be humbled, come unto me thou
stout stubborn sturdy heart and be softened, come unto me yet for all this
thou covetous heart and be sanctified; and this is the second cord of this
cable of mercy, the Lord does not only reveal unto the soul of a sinful
creature, that if he does come unto him he shall be accepted, but he commands
him to come and receive mercy from him.

Thirdly, Third Cord.
the Lord does not only command a poor sinner to come unto him, but, to go
further, it is mavelous strange to consider, when a sinner in the sight of
his unworthiness is hardly brought to go to the Lord for mercy, but says, it
is true, there is a great deal of mercy with God, but not for me; when a
sinner, thus goes away from God and flies from mercy, the Lord follows him
still, and fendeth another cord after him, and pursues him with mercy and
kindness, that so if it were possible he might win him and woo him to
receive mercy and forgiveness. It is almost impossible to conceive the
wonderful goodness of the Lord in this kind; he does not only command poor
sinners to come unto him, but he entreates and beseeches them to come and
receive mercy: and this one would think should move the heardest heart under
heaven; 2 Cor. 5.20. there says the Apostle, Now then we are ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
you reconciled unto God: the matter here we see is past all question, the Lord
does not only command you to come, but rather then you shall go away, he will
beseech you to come and take the mercy that the Lord offers to you, and you
have so much need of mercy will come and kneel down before you and beseech you
and entreat you for the Lord Jesus sake to pity your poor souls, and
receive pardon for your sins, to receive sanctification and justification
here, that you may be blessed and glorified for ever hereafter; this is that
which a sinner is not able to comprehend, but he begins to be at a stand and at
amazement. It is a great matter that God should command a sinner for to come
unto him, and that he should be accepted when he does come, but that God should
beseech and entreat a poor sinner to receive mercy, herein is discovered the
incomprehensible depth of Gods love, that the Lord should beseech us; oh that
you would receive pardon for your sins and be blessed for ever; why this is
wonderful mercy, and admirable goodness! if this Cord will not draw a man,
what will do it? this makes a poor soul to stand aghast, and amazed, and say,
good Lord is this possible that the great King of Heaven should come and
beseech such a traitor, such a rebel as I am to take pardon? if the King of
England should proclaim a pardon to some notorious Traitor that had plotted
some dangerous treason against his person, this were much; but that the King
should lay down his Crown and come creeping to him, and beseech him upon his
knees to take mercy, and not to be punished, why this is a thing beyond all
expectation, no man will do this, no man should do this: but when the soul
shall think, what a King entreat a Traitor, a Rebel; a Conqueror entreat a
slave to take mercy; what shall heaven stoop to earth, shall majesty stoop to
misery; shall the great God of heaven and earth that might have condemned my
soul, that is a God holy and just, and if I had perished and been damned,
might have took glory by my destruction; is it possible, is it credible that
this God should not only entertayne me when I come, and command me for to come,
but entreat, and beseech me to come and receive mercy from him; oh the depth of
the incomprehensible love of God! imagine you saw God the Father entreating
you, and God the Sun beseeching you, as he does this day; come now and
forsake your sins and take mercy which is prepared for you, and shall be
bestowed upon you; would not this make a soul think thus with it self, what
for a rebel, not only to have mercy offered, but to be entreated to receive
mercy and pardon; why then if I will not take it, it were pity but I should
go to hell and be damned for ever: nay I tell you, this mercy, one day, if you
refuse it, will plunge you into the bottomless pit of hell; I tell you, you
were better hear ten Sermons of judgment than one of mercy, if you do not
take the same when it is offered. The Lord he complains, why will ye die, as
I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner: the Lord takes an
oath upon it, that he desires not the death of a sinner, and calls after
sinners, turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die ye sinful sons of men? Mercy is
offered you, the Lord Jesus reaches out his hand to you to pluck the drunkard
out of the alehouse, and the adulterer out of the company of his whore; I tell
you, you had been better have been at the East Indies where you might never
have heard of mercy, than slight it when it is offered: if you do break this
cord, I know not what to say unto you, this is able to break a mountain in
pieces, shake O mountains, says the Psalmist, why, because God has redeemed
Jacob; the redemption of Jacob was enough to shake a mountain: when thou have
been a great sinner, and heaped up transgression upon transgression, and drunk
in iniquity like water, why yet after all this the Lord offers mercy unto
thee, and beseeches thee to receive it; I tell thee, if thou will not have
mercy now, it is pity but thou should go to the Devil, and if thou do
go to hell, then thank thy self, it was thy own fault; thou might have
had mercy and would not: and this is the third cord of Gods mercy, he
entreats a poor sinner to come unto him and receive mercy from him: but if the
soul be yet awke and untoward and will not come, but say, if mercy be so
free, then we will let it alone a while, and take it hereafter; if God be so
careful of us, then we will be a little careless our selves: why then there
remains but one cord more, and if thou breakest this, thou art in a miserable
condition, and that is this:

The Lord does wait and stay in long patience and suffering, Fourth Cord.
to see if at any time a sinner will turn unto him: our Savior follows poor
sinners from Alehouse to Alehouse, and says, I beseech you, you drunkards take
mercy, and have your sins pardoned; the Lord tyres himself so, and wearieth
himself with waiting one day after another, and one week after another; it
may be this day, this week, this Sabbath, this Sermon a sinner will turn
unto me, what will it never be, why are you not ashamed that the Lord Jesus
should thus wayt your leisure, and follow you from house to house, and into the
field, nay that Christ should every morning appear unto your understanding,
and every night come to your bedside and say, let this be the last night of
sinning, and the next day the first day of your repenting; oh when will you be
humbled, when will you receive mercy that it may go well with you and yours
for ever; why for shame if none of all the other will move you, yet let this
cord draw you unto the Lord: this is the last cord of Gods mercy, he stays
our leisure; the Lord will not wait always, but he waits a long time for
our amendment; he stayed above a hundred years for the old world: Ier. 13.27.
there God takes upon him the person of a traveling woman, oh Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, oh when will it once be? a woman that is in travel,
and oppressed with pain, oh how she expects and longs for her delivery, when
the thro^ comes, then she cries, when will deliverance come, and then the throb
comes the second time, and then she cries, would death would come so
deliverance would come, and thus her heart breaks almost with waiting in this
kind, for the birth of the child which is to be delivered; God the father does
take upon him, the person of a traveling woman, he is traveling even unto
death, until he can bring forth his first borne, until some soul be
converted and brought home unto him; oh Jerusalem will thou not be clean, oh
when will it once be? I have waited one year, ten year, twenty year, forty
year, why when will it once be? if a woman should be in travel forty years,
she would be accounted the wonder of the world, nay it were impossible she
should endure so long, but the Lord has traveled twenty years, yea forty for
the birth of poor sinners; and how many throbs, think we, has the Lord
endured in this time, saying, oh ye men of England, will you never be clean?
when will it once be? the Lord thus travels in patience, looking when we will
receive mercy, oh when will it once be, will it never be that those proud
hearts will be humbled, will it never be that those stubborn hearts will be
softened, will it never be that those unregenerate hearts will be sanctified,
will it never be that those profane hearts will be pure and holy, why when
will it once be? thus Christ wayteth still, and expects still, if not this
day, then the next week, if not the next week, then the next month, if not the
next month, then the next quarter, if not the next quarter, then the next
year, if not the next year, then the next score of years: you old sinners
that are grayheaded in wickedness, how long has the Lord waited upon you, for
shame let him wayt no longer, but turn unto him, that you may receive mercy
from him, and have your sins pardoned by him. This is the last cord of Gods
mercy; first, the Lord will entertain poor sinners if they come; secondly, he
does command them to come; thirdly, he does entreat and beseech them to come;
and lastly, if all this will not do, then he wayts in parience for their
amendment: and thus the Lord makes up his great cable roap of mercy; and this,
one would think, should melt the hardest heart under the Sun: but if this
will not do, if God by these cords of mercy cannot draw a sinner, then he takes
himself unto another course, and as he justly, may he lets in other cords in
the heart: you will not come with mercy, will you? very well, I tell you, the
Lord will lay hooks upon you, that shall bring you with a witness; if these
bonds of love will not prevayle with you, the Lord has iron cords that will
pluck you in pieces; and therefore the third means whereby God draws a
sinner from corruption to himself, is the cord of conscience, which God lets
down into the soul, and this same iron cord, this iron chain of conscience
has three hooks at the end of it, which are able to rend the heart of a
sinner, and pluck it in pieces, and draw the soul unto God; if the cords of
Gods mercy will not draw you, then these iron hooks of conscience will pull
you to the Lord; for this same cord of conscience has three maine hooks, that
is, there are three great works of conscience which God uses to work upon men
to draw them from sin to himself. First, conscience is a warner of the
soul, and admonishes the sinner of his ways; this conscience gives a sinner
an uncontrouleable command to come from sin, conscience gives him a
peremptory charge upon pain of the heaviest judgment that can be inflicted
upon him, not to meddle with corruption; it is conscience that does this, the
Lord stirs up conscience and arms him with authority as a Vicegerent under
him, that he may stifle those sinful lusts, and overpower those sinful
distempers that harbor in the soul, and overcome the soul: it is true, that
wicked men by reason that they live in sin, have their consciences either
blinded or asleep, their consciences oftentimes come to be seared and hardened;
wicked men have their consciences some times under them, they stifle their
conscience and stop the mouth of conscience; if conscience offer to reproove
them, they presently take him on the mouth, and make him quiet; they bind the
hands of conscience in this kind, but if a wicked man belong to God, then he
will awaken conscience in this life, but if they do not belong unto him, then
they may be sure when they are in hell to have their consciences awakened, they
carry a black dog in their bosom that will tear them with a witness, but
if God purpose good unto a man, then he will awaken his conscience in this
life, he will arm conscience with authority, and put a new commission into
the hand of conscience, insomuch, that now conscience stands upon terms, and
conscience will not put it up as he has done; howsoever it has heretofore
been stifled, yet now it gives men a peremptory command upon pain of their
everlasting torment, as they love their own souls, to take heed that they
meddle not with sin, for if they do, it will cost them everlasting life: now
when conscience has such a commanding power, then the command is mavelous
awful, terrible, and fearful, and it maks a sinner start aside and withdraw
himself from his former courses, it makes him hang down his head, and he
dares not look out of doors, he dares not run with that courage into wicked
practices as he did before: it is with conscience in this case as it is with a
Lieutenant or a Shreife of a country, happily in the Kings absence a company
of rebels join together in a conspiracy and rend the commission out of the
Lievetenants hand, and beset the Shreifes house; and the officers, because the
rebels are more in number, dare do little or nothing unto them, they may say
as David did to the sons of Serviah, ye are too strong for me, ye sons of
Serviah; and therefore he would not meddle with them: and so in some unruly
town we shall see a company of ryotous fellows, because they are more in
number than the officers, they set the Constable in stocks, when as they are
more worthy to go to the gallows than he to the stocks: just so it is with
conscience, happily wicked men in former times have stifled conscience, and took
the commission out of the hands of conscience; but when the King comes into the
country, and the officers shall complain unto the King of this conspiracy,
then he gives them a larger command, and gives them more power, he puts a new
commission into their hands, and furnishes them with greater aid, and
commands upon pain of death that there be no more such uproares made; and
when this is proclaimed upon the Market-post, then this makes those resolute
fellows to pull in their heads, and they dare not show themselves: So it is
with conscience, sometimes the Lord letts wicked men blind conscience, and
fear it; wicked men oftentimes make a mock at conscience, if a man reprooves
them for some sin, and admonishes them for conscience sake not to commit
wicked practices, then they flout at the person that speaks unto them, and
say, what your conscience will not suffer you to do as we do, you will not
drink will you? why? oh your conscience will not suffer you; you will not
commit adultery will you? your conscience will not suffer you; what you are a
man of conscience are you, and you will suffer your conscience to make a fool
of you? what care we for your conscience, or you either: thus many sinners keep
conscience under, but howsoever conscience be thus slighted and despised, the
time will come when God will awaken conscience, and put a new commission into
his hands, and sends him help from heaven, and says, go to such a man and
tell him, you have blasphemed, and you have spoken against Gods Saints, you
have broken Gods Sabbaths, and slighted Gods word, and contemned Gods
ordinances, and neglected the means of salvation; be it known therefore unto
thee, that I have a command from heaven and from God, I charge you as you will
answer it at the dreadful day of judgment, take heed of those evils and
sinful practices that heretofore you have committed, lest you damn your
souls for ever: and you must know that conscience comes not without a
commission, but he has a commission in his pocket and he shows it also; Pro.
29.1. there is one part of conscience's commission, there says the text, he
that being often reprooved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy; if you be often reprooved and will not be bettered nor
informed, then the Lord says, and conscience from the Lord tells you, be it at
your own peril, ye shall surely perish, and that without remedy; and in the 2.
of the These. 3.14. there is another part of his commission, If any man obey
not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that
he may be ashamed: he that will not obey the Gospel, he that will not stoop
thereto, nor be framed thereby, why conscience he shows his commission, and
charges men to take heed of this, and the God of heaven will take the part of
conscience, and will come in flaming fire to render vengeance to that soul
that will not obey the Gospel: But you will say, cannot a man shift and free
himself from the terror of conscience? I answer no, conscience has now a
great deal of aid from heaven; because he has been in former times so badly
dealt withal, therefore he will go no more so slenderly guarded, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
there says the text, If it come to pass, that he that hears the words of
this curse, shall bless himself in his heart and say, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst,
the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy
shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book,
shall lie upon him; and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven: and
therefore you that say, conscience may command what he pleases, yet you will
do what you list, and though you add dunkennesse unto thirst, yet you shall
have peace, and it shall go well with you: tell you, the wrath of the Lord
shall smok against your souls, and he shall blot your names out of the book of
life, the wrath of the Lord shall follow thee into all places, and upon all
occasions, whatever thou do, or whithersoever thou go, the wrath of God
shall follow thee, Gods wrath shall follow thee to the Ale house, and the
Brothel-house, and to the Tavern; God shall follow thee and pluck thee out to
thy shame here, and to thy confusion hereafter: and this is the first work of
conscience. He has been snubbed in former times, and no man cared for him, but
now he is a wakened and backed with power from the Lord, and gives a peremptory
command to the soul of a sinner; be it at your own peril if you meddle with
sin: and this makes sinful w^^^ches lie snugge for a while, they dare not
show themselves, but shut themselves under hatches; conscience perkes then upon
the crown, and this makes them hang the wing a little, and withdraw themselves
from their base courses, and abstain from the Alehouse awhile; but now when
wicked persons see that their companion is gone, and that they have lost one of
their company, they make after him amain; and then conscience plucks one way
and they pluck another way; they lay siege to the soul of a poor sinner,
conscience bids him look to himself, and take heed what he does; perhaps
conscience sees him half persuaded to yield to his old companions, and then
conscience has an eye to him, and bids him take heed unto himself, and
says; I command and charge you as you will answer it at the dreadful day of
Judgment before the Tribunal seat of God, that you run not into your former
wicked courses; but then his cursed companions they draw backward, and come
unto him and say, what is the reason that now you begin to sever your self
from us? he tells them, his conscience has troubled him, and he heard the Word
of God, he heard the commission of conscience read; that whosoever was often
reproved and not bettered thereby, should perish, and that he which obeyed not
the Gospel, should be accursed; and this makes him do as he does: when his
companions hear this, they begin to blind his judgment as much as they can,
and take off the command of conscience; you have heard, say they, many
threatenings from God, and conscience has told you, that you shall perish and
be damned if you continue in your old courses, but threatened men live long,
these words break no bones, and this breath blows no corn; there have been
many so threatened, and yet never felt any of those judgments, but have lived a
merry life to this day, and are the bravest fellows and the boonest companions
in the whole country: and thus by carnal company and cursed persuasions the
soul is drawn back again to his former wicked course, and so happily this hook
is broken and the sinner is gone; but when conscience sees this, that his first
hook is broken, and that his command is slighted, he follows fast after him,
and lays another hook upon him; and as before he was a commander over him,
so now he comes to be an accuser of him, and a witness against him, he
accuses him before God, and is a witness against him, because he has
committed those sins which he upon pain of Gods everlasting displeasure and
his own everlasting damnation commanded and charged him he should not commit;
conscience before was only Gods Herald to tell him what God commanded, but now
conscience is become a Pursevant and a Sergeant to arrest him: and therefore 2.
Sam. 24.10. David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people, conscience
he flung his actions upon him; know how-ever a man may avoid the warning of
conscience, and break the command of conscience, yet he cannot avoid the herror
and stroke of conscience, but conscience, will smite him and fling this hook
into the very heart of him; and conscience will smite the heart so much the
more heavily, because his former commands were despised: look as it was with
Gideon, Judge. 8.5. when he was pursuing after the Midi^^ites, he came unto the
men of Succoth and prayed for aid of them, he entreated them to help him, and
join sides with him, but they refused and scorned him, and said; Are Z^^^ and
Zalumna now in thy hands, that we should give bread unto thine army; as if
they had said, art thou a commander over them, art thou sure to overcome them;
no, no, we will not help thee: Mark now what answer Gid^on makes these men
of Succoth in the 7th. verse, we^^ says he, When the Lord has delivered Zeb^
and. Zalumna into mine hands, then I will tear your flesh with thorns of the
wilderness, and with briars; and in the 16. verse after the Lord had delivered
those men into his hands, he did unto them of Succoth, according as he had
threatened; He took the Elders of the City, and thorns of the ^ildernesse, and
briars; and with them he did tear the men of S^^coth, says the Text: Just so
is it with conscience, conscience before only commanded, and persuaded men, but
because he has been slighted and despised by them, because they have flouted
him, and said; what must be a servant to my conscience, must I be a slave and a
fool to my conscie^e, no, no; I will do what I list for all conscience: will
you so says conscience, well, when God gives me authority, and gives me a
commission, I will tear your flesh for this, and rend your hearts in pieces
with horror, and then conscience he surpriseth a sinner, upon every occasion in
this case he bursts into the Al^house, and into the Tavern upon him like a
Segeant, and arrests him, he follow shim to the alehouse, he persueth him home,
he takes him in his bed and arrests him in his sleep; and when he is in bed and
asleep, then conscience awakens him and terrifies him, and hales the soul
before the Tribunal seat of God, and says, lo Lord, behold this man, this is
the drunkard, this is the adulterer, this is the blasphemer that swears by thy
name, prophanes thy Sabboths, and contemnes thy word: this is he Lord, that is
an enemy to thy servants, and a hater of thy truth and a despiser of thy
ordinances, this is he Lord, this is he that has done these things, and
committed these abominations, this is he that has committed many sins in
secret, when no eye saw him, this is so Lord, at such a time, and in such a
place, in such a chamber, with such a company, then this man blasphemed thy
name and despised thy truth, and rayled on good men, this, this Lord is the
man; and when conscience has thus dragged him before God, and witnessed
against him, then, take him ^aylor, take him devil, says the Lord, and
imprison him, let vexation, and horror, and trouble, and anguish lie upon his
soul, says God, until he confess his sins and resolve to forsake them;
now this this hook sticks fast in the very heart of this man, and all his
friends and companions are not able to bail him, one comes, and another
comes, and all speak and ask him, what is the reason, what is the cause, why
are you thus discontented, and why thus disquieted? oh says the poor soul,
you see not, you know not, you conceive not, the horror that conscience has
laid upon me, and what heavy wrath and fearful vengeance God has threatened
to inflict upon me for my sins; now when his companions hear this, they
cannot all of them bail him, but unless he will see his base courses, and
confess his sins, and be humbled for them and resolve to forsake them;
conscience will not be at quiet, but will continually torment and perplex him
with horror, thus the Lord deals with the Prophet David as we may see, Psalm.
32. when I kept silence, says he, my boneswaxed old through my roaring all the
day long, for day and night thy hand was heavy upon m^e, my moisture is turned
into the drought of Summer, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
iniquity have I not hid, I confessed my transgressions unto the Lord, and then
forganest the iniquity of my sin. David he folded up his sins at first he
would not come of eleverly he would not take them to himself, and say, I have
committed adultery, and I have murdered Vri^^ and therefore his bones were
consumed, and (...) ro^red continually, when the Lord had him upon the rack, he
made him roar again, and would never leave tormenting of him, until he had
confessed his sins, but after he had confessed them, then he forgave his
iniquity, the Lord deals with the soul in this case, as a King does with a
Traitor after his conspiracy is discovered, and he attached, if he will not
confess his conspiracy, and who were his fellow traitors, then he is brought
upon the rack, and then one joint is broken, and then he roares again by
reason of the extremity of the pain, why confess then says the King; and if
he will not confess the whole conspiracy, but only some circumstances of it,
then he is hoysed upon the rack the second time, and then another joint is
broken, and then he roars again, why confess more yet then says the King,
and never leaves racking and tormenting of him, until he has discovered and
laid open the whole treason: so conscience will bring the foul of a sinner
unto the rack, and make him confess his sins and come out of it self, and
then the drunkard he cries out, oh the abominations that I have committed,
which the Sun never saw, in such a place, at such a time, I rayled upon Gods
servants and blasphemed Gods name, I profaned Gods Sabboths and contemned his
ordinances, but conscience will make him confess more yet, and the refore
forces him to the rack again^, and then he cries and r^ares for anguish of
spirit, and confesses all, and resolves to amend, he purpurposes to pray, and
hear, and sanctify Gods Sabboths, and lead a new life, and now a conscience
upon the confession of his sins, and purpose of amendment, receives some
satisfaction, and then it begi^^es to be at quiet, and give him some rest, and
this is the second hook of conscience. But when the poor sinner has gotten
some quiet by his confessing of his sins, and resolving to forsake them, when
his companions see that he is come out of that horror, and vexation wherein he
was, and that he puts his head out of doors, and is creeping abroad, then they
set upon him again, and labor with might and main by wicked persuasions, and
cursed devices to draw him to his old courses, they knew there was no meddling
with him before, but now conscience is a little quieted, and he a little eased,
then all the drunkards in the town pursue him, and all the loose mates hang
about him, and lay hooks upon him of love and ente^tainment, and mark how
they reply upon him: Why refresh, say they, your soul with some of your
ancient dalliance, you know we have been old friends, and of long
acquaintance, and what contentment have we had in our times? why, do not smoke
out your days in melancholy, I dare warrant you the worst is past: it was
only a fit of melancholy that perplexed you, and therefore now it is over
refresh yourselfe with your friends, and with those that love you. Thus the
devil by temptations on one side, and wicked men by cursed persuasions on the
other side, be leagure a poor soul; and the soul having some quiet, he
begins to listen to their persuasions, and then he begins to take up his old
course, and follow his sinnesmore violently, and with greater eagerness than
ever he did all his life time before: For mark that always, if after God has
enlightened a man's mind and awakned his conscience, he falls into his old ways
again, then he is a devil; he is twice as bad as he was before, he follows
his corruptions with such outragiousnesse, as if hell were broken loose. Very
well, he has now broken two hooks, the third hook is that which will rend him
in pieces before it will let him pass: when conscience sees that the other
two hooks are broken, when he sees that commands prevail not, that
accusations terrify not, then the Lord exercises another work of conscience
upon the heart of a poor sinner, and that is this: As conscience did before
command him, and peremptorily charge him upon the hazard of everlasting life,
not commit sin; and secondly, as it before did accuse him before God, for the
commission of that sin, whereby God was dishonourted, and his soul polluted:
so in the third place, conscience becomes his executioner, it takes the office
of an executioner upon him, conscience will bear with him no longer, but now
draggs him down to the very place of execution: he was convicted before;
conscience says unto him, thy sins were discovered, and I charged thee not
to meddle with sin any more, upon pain of Gods displeasure, and as thou
would answer it before God: afterward I became an accuser of thee before God,
and then thou did confess thy sins, and did purpose amendment, but now
since thou have slighted my commands, and not regarded my accusations, there is
therefore no remedy but thou must go to the place of execution: now there is no
way but one with thee, now conscience begins to condemn the soul; as Divines
express these three works of conscience, by a practical kind of reasoning,
and conscience reasons thus with the soul. He that being often reproved
hardens his neck, he shall perish, there is no remedic; there is the command
of conscience: but thou have often been reproved and admonished, and yet have
hardoned thy heart and have not been bettered by it, there is the work of
accusation, and therefore thou shall perish, there is no remedy; and this is
the condemning work. Suppose conscience should come thus unto the heart of a
man, he that being often reproved, hardens his heart he shall perish, says
the Lord, there is no remedy: but now let conscience go into every man's bosom,
and reason thus with him, thou art the man, woman, or child, whom counsels in
private, and reproves, exhortations, and admonitions in publque would do no
good; nothing would convince thee, nothing would inform thee; therefore thou
shall perish, man, woman, or child, there is no remedic. These are the three
works of conscience, and when conscience has done this last work, and
performed his office of execution, when he has condemned a soul, and
delivered a sinner into the hand of the executioner, then it is thus with this
sinner: after all mercies and cords of love will do no good, after the commands
and accusations will not prevail, then conscience says, come damned ghosts,
take away this drunkard, this blasphemer, this adulterer, this contemner of my
word, and throw him headlong into the pit of everlasting destruction; he would
not be amended, let him be condemned; he would not be humbled, let him
therefore be damned: Thus conscience delivers a sinner into the hands of the
jailer, into the hands of the devil, and then he is amazed and thinks himself
past hope, past help, past cure. This is that we shall observe in conscience;
look as it with a debtor that lives in prison, he was happily put in at first
for some trifle; when he is once there, then all his creditors come in, and one
lays a hundred pound to him, and another a thousand pound, and then his case
is irrecoverable, he is never like to come out again: so when conscience has
arrested a man, and cast him into prison for his pride, or for his
covetousness, or for his drunkenness, or for his adultery and the like; then
mark, Mercy, and Goodness, and Patience, and Long-suffering come all in, and
arrest him, and Mercy says, at my suit so many hundreds; Grace, that says,
at my suit so many thousands; then Patience and Long-suffering comes and
says, at my suit so many millions; and this is the wofullest plight of all.
When conscience is thus tormenting a sinner, then patience comes and pleads
against him, and mercy that sueth a bond against him. Mercy says, Lord, I have
been wronged; then comes grace and says, Lord I have been refused; then
comes patience and says, Lord I have been contemned; I have besought him,
says mercy, to be reconciled but I was slighted; I have waited for his
amendment, says patience, but I have not been regarded: I have been offered,
says grace, but yet have been neglected: Lord, all thy cost and care has
been despised; they all come before the Lord, and plead against the soul of a
sinner, justice Lord, says mercy, justice Lord says grace, justice Lord,
says patience, we have all been slighted, neglected, and contemned: and then
the Lord he condemns him, and says, take him devil, and execute vengeance
upon him, mercy was offered but he refused, he would none of it, and therefore
mercy shall never be showed unto him, let him for ever be damned: And by this
time the soul perceives it self to be in the devils hands, as it were, and
in the devils possession, and that Satan may torment him as he please: and
then the soul being thus perplexed, he cries out, the devil is there, do you
not see him, he is come for me, and I shall go and must go with him: why,
since I must go to the devil, why let me go then; nay if the soul that is
thus in the jaws of the devil, lie upon his death bed, as soon as ever he
takes a little rest, the Lord terrifieth and affrighteth him in his dreams,
and then he rises out of his bed, and the first word he speaks is this, I
must go, and I will go: then his friends that attend about him, ask him whither
he will go: they tell him he is among his friends, then he says, I am damned,
and I am going to hell, and therefore let me go; the devil is coming to
fetch me, and therefore I must be gone. I beseech you consider this, you that
make nothing of conscience, if it once lay hold on you with this hook, it will
hold you sure enough, and rear your very hearts in pieces: Now when the
Minister in sent for to come unto apoore soul in this miserable condition,
when he comes happily he tells him, there is a great deal of mercy and comfort
with the Lord, there is a great deal of grace and salvation with Christ; but
then the sinner, when he hears of mercy, is distracted and besides himself,
and says, that is my plague, that is my bane, and that in the end will be my
damnation; if I had never heard of mercy, if I had not lived under the Gospel,
and the means of salvation, oh then I had been a happy man in comparison, alas
it is mercy that I have neglected, it is the glad tidings of salvation which I
have contemned, how shall I then be saved; if the means of salvation have thus
been slighted by me; if I had never opposed grace, grace might now have helped
me; if I had not despised mercy, mercy might now have succourd me; but this
is my plague, this is my woe, all the kindness that God showed to me, and all
the mercy that God has revealed and offered, I have despised and refused: many
a knock has God given at my heart, and many a rap at my soul, the Lord has
even wept over me as he did over Jerusalem, oh that thou had known the
things belonging to thy peace: the Lord came kindly and wooed me lovingly; oh
the persuasions of the Lord, and commands of conscience that I have had, and
yet after all persuasions and horror, and commands, what yet proud still? what
yet covetous still? and profane still? why then surely there is no mercy to be
looked for, no grace to be expected, and therefore certainly to hell I must go,
and then he rises and will be gone to hell; all that are about him cannot hold
him: but then the Minister happily further replies; the truth of it is, you have
done thus: but do you think so still? would you do so still, if you were out of
this perplexity? is it good now to be drunk? is it good now to commit adultery?
is it good now to blaspheme? is it good now to contemn Gods ordinances? would
you now rail on Gods Saints, and despise Gods truth, and profane Gods
Sabbaths? would you now do these things? oh no, no, says he, I now find what
the end of those wretched courses will be the word of God could not prevayle
with me, the Minister could not persuade me, and therefore now I shall perish, I
shall be damned for these abominations which I have committed, there is no
remedy; if ever man shall be danmed, it is I; if ever man go down to hell,
surely it is I; nay, hell is too good for me; oh the good Sermons that I have
heard, the Minister has spoken home oftentimes to my conscience, the very
flames of hell have been flashed in my face, the Minister would often have
spent his blood that he might do good to my poor soul, and yet I despised
the word, and scorned the Minister, and mocked those whom conscience vexed,
saying; What, you are a man of conscience are you? you dare not sin, your
conscience will not suffer you? what are you such a fool to be ruled by your
conscience? and therefore God has justly let my conscience loose upon me, now
I know to my woe that I have a conscience, the worm that never dies gnaweth
my heart, and rends and plucks my soul in pieces: woe, woe be unto me, that
ever I snufled my conscience, that ever I put out the light of conscience, for
therefore is it that my conscience is now thus tearing of my heart, and
terrifying of my soul, here; and therefore it is that I shall for ever perish
hereafter. But then the Minister he replies, yet further; aye, the truth is,
you have done thus, but you will not yet forsake your sins, and abandon your
corruptions? will you still be drunk and riotous? will you still be proud? will
you still swear and curse and blaspheme? if you will part with these sins, and
take mercy in stead of these, why yet there is hope. Then the poor soul cries
out, now the Lord for his mercyes sake remove these sins from me; oh I never
had so much delight in my sins heretofore, as now I have woe and misery and
vexation for them: Why here is a cup for a drunkard indeed, here is a cup for a
whore indeed, here is a cup for a blasphemer indeed, if every sinners cup were
filled thus brim full of Gods wrath, never any man would take any joy in be ing
drunk more, never would any man take any deligt in chambring and wantonness
more: but then the poor soul says further, oh but it is not in my power to
help my soul, but if it will but please the Lord, to do good unto my poor
soul, let him do what he will with it. What, faith the Minister, you are then
willing and content to part with your sins a yes, yes, says the poor soul,
I will rather offend all the world than God, I had as leiffe go to hell as to
the committing of any sinful practice; well says the Minister, if it be so,
it is well, but do you speak this from your heart; yes faith the poor soul,
if it would please God to help me, I would forsake my sins with all my heart.
Why now the poor soul is coming again, and God is haling of him aside
again from his corruptions, and sinful distempers. This is that we shall
observe. Hos. 2.6. there says the text, behold I will hedge up the way with
thorns, and make a wall that she shall not find her paths, and she shall
follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them, and she shall seek
them but she shall not find them: then shall she say, I will go and return to
my first husband, for it was better with me then, than it is now. The Lord at
last tears the soul and rends the heart from sinful distempers, and then the
soul thinks, oh there is not that pleasure in sin, as I have formerly
thought there was, the soul then hates drunkenness as death, he is not able
to look upon his adulteress queen, he is not able to abide the house where he
committed the folly, and his heart begins to tremble at it. And therefore
mark the next and last cord: I should have added more to the former point out
of Psalm. 88.16. there says David, thy fierce wrath is gone over me, and thy
terrors have cut me off; thine arrows stick fast in me; how ever David
before had shook off the commands and accusations of conscience, though these
would not draw him to God; yet now the Lords arrows stuck fast in him, he
could not pluck them out, nor cast them off for his life. The last cord is the
cord of the Spirit, the Lord by the almighty power of his spirit, when the
soul is thus loosened, he then fully plucks it to himself, never again to be
sodered and closed unto corruptions; with an almighty hand he cuts the soul
off from sin, and takes it into his own hand, that it may never be mustered
by sin, and Satan any more as it was formerly. Look as it is with a graft, a
man must pluck it by force from one stock, before he can plant it upon another;
so the Lord by the spirit of power does rend the soul from sin, and
ingrafteth it into Christ, and now the soul purposes never to commit any
sin again, John 16.11. there Christ says, that he will send the spirit, the
Comforter, and he shall reprove the world of righteousness, and of sin, and
of judgment: In that it is said, he will reprove the world of judgment,
thereby is nothing else meant, but that the Lord will govern men; and why shall
the comforter convince the world of judgment? because Satan is judged, says
the text; that is, he is kept off and cannot pluck the soul to himself, the
government that Satan had over the soul, is wholly removed, and Christ has
the soul under his command, and the soul is contented to be wholly at at his
disposing. In the time that Christ lived upon the earth, when the devils did
possess the bodies of men, the Lord says unto them, I charge thee thou
unclean spirit to come out; so the Lord says now to the devil that has
taken possession of the souls of those men, which do belong to the election of
grace; after the Lord has rent a poor sinner from his corruptions, and haled
him to himself, then he says, come out of him Satan, and never rule him more,
never take place in him more; and then he takes the soul into his hands, that
he may govern him, and dispose of him according to his own good will and
pleasure. This we see the cords, whereby God draws a sinner to himself.
First he inlightens the mind, and reveals to the soul of a sinner, that he is
in a wrong way, and that he must take another course if ever he mean to come
at heaven, and then the lays the cords of mercy, and the cords of conscience
upon him, whereby he constraines and forces him to come unto him, and the last
is the cord of the Spirit, whereby he does take the soul out of the hands of
Satan, into his own possession. The next thing to be considered, is, the
reasons why the Lord by a holy kind of violence, Reasons, or Arguments.
thus draws a sinner from corruption to himself, and the arguments are three.
The first is taken from those tear me whereby the Scripture discovers this
work of God, upon the soul of a sinner, Matthew. 12.29. there says our Savior,
No man comes into a strong man's house, but first he overcomes, and binds the
strong man before he takes possession of his house, and spoils his goods: this
is the parable; the meaning is this, the house is nothing else but the heart of
a sinner, the strongman is nothing else but sin and Satan, the devil and
sin taking possession of, and ruling in the soul of a sinner; (and this is
the woeful condition of many men, that think their penny good silver, and bear
their heads aloft, howsoever they lift their heads so high, yet their souls
are nothing else but habitations for the devil,) now Satan ruling, and
overpowering the soul by sin, is the strong man, that usurps authority over
the soul, by reason of the corruptions that prevayle over the soul, (for if
there were not sin within the souls of men, there were no power that Satan
could usurp over men:) now observe it, the Lord Jesus is the stronger man, and
before he can come, and take possession of the soul, and work effectually in
the soul, he must bind Satan, and take away the weapons of Satan, and then
when he has bound him, and overcome him, then he takes possession of the
soul; this is the meaning of the parable: Now I reason thus, conquering,
binding, and slaying, imply a kind of violence; Satan will not come out by
entreaty, the devil must be commanded to go out, or else drawn out by a kind
of violence: if all the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth should
entreat Satan to come out of the soul, he would not come out, but this
implies a holy kind of violence, that Christ offers to corruptions in the
soul, when he draws the soul from sin to himself. In another place it is
said, that Christ came to destroy the works of the devil, Ioh. 3.8. those
works are the sinful corruptions, that were at first put into the soul by the
delusion of Satan, when he tempted our first parents to eat of the forbidden
fruit: Now Christ comes to destroy those works, now the works of Satan will
not destroy themselves, sin and Satan will not bind and overcome themselves,
the enemy will not come out of his hold willingly, but the work that must be
put forth for the binding, conquering, and destroying of those, must needs
imply a work of constraint, and holy violence which is offered. A man offers
violence to his enemy when he binds him, a man offers violence to his enemy,
when he overcomes him, a man offers violence to his enemy, when he flayes and
destroys him: such is the work of the Lord, when he takes possession of a
soul this way, and this is the interpretation of Divines in this case: they
say, that the Lord does take away that deadness, and stupidity of heart,
whereby it may lay hold on grace, if it resist not the good motions of the
Spirit.

The second Argument.
The second Argument: is taken from the natural union between the soul and
corruption, and then I reason thus: one contrary expells another, from a
natural subject, by constraint and compulsion; but the spirit, as a contrary,
does drive out sin from the soul, in the work of preparation, as a contrary
thereunto: and therefore must do it by constraynt and compulsion. We will open
both the parts of the Argument; I say, one contrary drives out another, by
violence and constraynt; as for example, wheresoever heat is, if it comes to
drive out cold, it does it by a certain kind of violence, for the ground of
all constraint, arises from the crossenesse and contrariety that things have
one to another; we need no constraint to to make things do that which is
natural unto them, as to make fire hot, or a Lion fierce, or a Wolf ravenous;
but he that will make a Lion become a Lamb, and he that will make a wolf
become a Kidd, he that does this, must offer a kind of violence to the nature
of the Lion, and of the Wolf, and break the combination that is between the
fierceness of the thing, and the thing it self; so that it is clear, that
one contrary drives out another, from a natural subject, by constraint and
violence; and that sin is naturally in a corrupt heart, is evident Ioh. 3.6.
whatsoever is born of the flesh, is flesh; that is, whosoever comes from
Adam, is rooted in sin: now mark, sin being thus naturally in the soul,
the Spirit of grace, and the Lord Jesus, when he comes to drive away sin
from the soul, breaks that near union that is between sin and the soul,
by a holy kind of violence; Gal. 6.17. there says the Apostle, from henceforth
let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Iesue; the
Lord Jesus breaking this natural, and near union, between sin and the
soul, must offer a kind of violence upon the soul, otherwise this union could
not be parted. To speak punctually to every ones capacity, I appeal to any
here present: is it not a violence, to pluck a branch from the tree, or an arm
from the body? every man will say, you ^^are and pluck it: the arm naturally
is knit to the body, and the branch naturally grows to the tree; our sins
are as arm to the body, and our corruptions as branches to the tree, therefore
the Lord Jesus when he comes to pluck off these arms, and cut off those
branches, must offer a kind of violence to the soul, before this union and
combination, between sin and the soul, will be parted and broken, this is
the second reason, if there be such a natural near union, between sin and
a corrupt heart, then if God will pluck corruption from the soul, and sever
this union, he must offer a kind of violence, but there is a natural near
union, and league between sin and the soul, and therefore the Lord must
dissolve this league, and break this union, by a kind of violence, and
constraint.

The third, and last argument is this: The third Argument.
As in regard of that union that is between the soul and sin, the soul
must by a holy kind of violence, be drawn from sin; so also in the second
place, if we consider that sovereign kind of power that sin has over the
soul, and prevails within the soul, (which kind of resistance and sovereign
command must be drawn away, and removed from the soul,) we shall see that
this cannot be done, unless there be an almighty hand, to work this, and offer
a kind of conquering, and constraining violence upon the soul: in this case,
the sovereign rule that sin does exercise in the soul is such, that unless
the Lord by his almighty hand, does overpower this, there is no kind of
prevailing, in the soul of a sinner in this case: now to show how the Lord
Jesus does overpower the strength of sin and corruption, observe it in two
particulars, how the Lord Jesus is pleased miraculously, to overpower that rule
which sin has over the soul; the first is this: The soul of a sinner being
wholly possessed with, and defiled by corruptions, is so far carried against
God, that it does nothing but resist against God; it is naturally so far
overwhelmed and possessed with sin in every kind, that it does nothing but
resist; nay it can do nothing but resist the work of the spirit, it beats
back the work of the spirit, that it may not work upon it, nor take place in
it, Ier. 2.31. there says the text, oh generation, see ye the word of the
Lord, have I been a wilderness unto Israel, a land of darkness, wherefore say
my people, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? as who should say, do
you think to rule us, or do you think that your commands shall take place with
us, no no, our corruptions corruptions are our Lords; we will come at you no
more, we will neither hear your words, nor obey your commands in this kind.
Secondly, when the soul does nothing but resist, when the Lord would work upon
the heart, when the soul beats back the work of the Spirit, and does
nothing, nay can do nothing, but resist the Lord Jesus, the Lord Jesus then
takes away that stony heart, he gives us a fleshy heart, whereby we may lay
hold on the means, and be fitted to receive the good motions of the Spirit.
There is an old phrase, which Saint Austin propounded in his time, and Divines
take it up with one consent in this case, and that is this, that God of an
unwilling will, does make a willing will; the word being truly interpre^ed, I
desire no more for the work in hand, which implies a holy kind of violence, to
be offered thereunto, and expressed thereupon, before the work can be brought
to pass. For the opening of the point, observe these particulars, in the
sentence before spoken of, that I may speak punctually, and precisely; first,
the soul of a man naturally, is altogether unwilling to receive grace;
secondly, that the Lord does bring willingness out of this unwillingnesse, as
light out of darkness; thirdly, that God must take away this unwillingnesse,
before he can bring willingness into the soul; lastly (wherein lies the
strength of the point) the Lord he only must do this; unwillingnesse will not
destroy it self, the soul is altogether corrupt, corruption will not destroy
it self, and therefore there is nothing else in the soul of a sinner, but
only the Almighty hand of God and his conquering power that must take away this
unwillingnesse, and put willingness into the soul: The Text says in the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4.6. that God brings light out of darkness: how must he
do this? why he must first destroy darkness, before he can bring light out of
it: for one contrary cannot make up another, both remaining, but darkness must
be destroyed before light can be brought forth: So it is with the soul, God
brings willingness out of unwillingnesse; first therefore he must destroy this
unwillingnesse, he must destroy that darkness that is in the soul before he
can bring willingness, and light to the soul; he must conquer that resistance
against the Spirit which is in the soul, before he can make it pliable and
frameable to his own will and pleasure. It is a pretty passage, Acts 9. there
Paul went into the field against Christ, and pitched a combat between Christ
and him, he had gotten letters from the Synagogue of Damascus, and he was
resolutely bent to kill and slay all poor Christians: when he came, the Lord
Jesus met him by the way, and there was a fight between the Lord and Paul, and
in all reason he was resolved to fight against God, to try it out to the last;
now the Lord met him, and the battle was fought, and the Lord Christ overcame
him, and what follows, instead of fierce resisting the Lord, he comes to
submit himself humbly to the Lord, he does not only put off the act of
resisting, but the will of resisting also, as we may see, verse. 6. there says
the text, he trembling and astonished said, Lord what will thou have me for to
do? Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, says the Lord, it is hard for thee
to kick against the pricks. Why Lord, says he, what will thou have me to do?
Paul was not willing to take up his own heart, for that was madd against the
Lord, but he did submit himself and his will unto Christ. Briefly then to
gather up the point: if it be so, that the Lord does destroy and bind, and
conquer Satan, if the Lord break that natural union and combination that is
between sin and the soul, if it be so that the Lord by his almighty power
and conquering hand does overcome the power of sin in the soul, then the
Lord by a holy kind of violence does pluck the soul from sin, and draw it to
himself; but all the former have been prooved, it is sin and Satan which
God binds and overcomes, it is that near union between sin and the soul
that God breaks, it is the power that sin has over the soul that God does
conquer, God takes away not only the act, but the power of resisting from the
souse, and therefore there must be some constraining power that must work this
in the soul. We will now proceed to the use of this point.

mercy if the Lord had only provided some means, and offered some means, and
given salvation after many troubles and much seeking, but that the Lord should
not only provide mercy and offer it, and reveal the truth, but that he should
follow us and pursue us with the means of salvation when we never thought of
it; nay that the Lord should follow us with mercy, and press it upon us, when
we refused it; that he should give us the freedom of his spirit to be
delivered from our sins; when we go into fetters, and go into prison, that
the Lord should not only set open the door for us that we might come out, but
that he should by an almighty hand draw us out of the dungeon of our
corruptions; this is mervellous mercy and admirable loving kindness: the truth
of it is, men and Angels are not able to comprehend this, nay the Angels of
Heaven desire to observe and wonder at this admirable goodness of the Lord,
the passage is observable Genesis 19.16. the text says, when Sodom was to be
destroyed, because Lot was a little wordly, and would not come off cleverly
from his profits, While he lingered, says the Text, the men laid hold on him,
the Lord being merciful unto him, and brought him forth, and set him without
the city, and it came to pass that when they had brought him forth, that they
said, escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the
plain: escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. Mark how the holy man
answers; Behold now thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and thou have
magnified the mercy which thou have showed unto me in saving my life, I cannot
escape to the mountain, lest I die, behold now this city, is it not a little
one? let me escape thither and my soul shall live. Here lies the point now,
the Lord had told Lot, that he would destroy Sodom: why now he persuades him
therefore to arise and away, lest he perish, but the poor man he dreaming
either of the profit that he might take, or else loath to part from his outward
contentment, he lingered, at length (the Lord being merciful unto him) he took
him by the hand, and by maine force carried him, and by his almighty hand
convayed him and set him without the city, and bade him fly for his life; a
great favor it was that the Lord revealed unto him the judgment that he would
execute upon the city that he might escape it, but that the Lord should pluck
him out of the fire by force, and carry him upon Eagles wings, what wonderful
goodness was this? and this Lot himself confesses, saying, thou have
magnified thy mercy which thou have showed to thy servant in saving his life,
not only to reveal favor and show mercy, but to hale and carry one out of
misery whether he will or no, what admirable mercy is this? It is my resolution
says the Lord, that whoremongers and adulterers, I will judge, those that live
wickedly shall perish everlastingly; is it not a great mercy for God now to
come to a drunkard, and say, I am resolved to overthrow all drunkards, and it
is my purpose to destroy all adulterers, but if you will abstain from these
sins, I will show mercy unto you, great goodness it is, that a man should
have his heart forewarnd of misery, that he might prevent it; but that the Lord
should by a strong hand pluck the drunkard from his cursed companions, and the
adulterer from the company of his whore, and to pluck a covetous man from the
bottom of the earth, not only to entreat him, and persuade him, but by his
almighty hand to set him free from his corruptions, and say, escape for thy
life, never be drunk more, never commit adultery more, never swear more, lest
thou perish, but go and save thy life, what a wonder is this! a poor soul
should therefore go in secret, and say, Lord herein have thou magnified mercy
toward me, for who was so naught, but I was as bad? who was so wicked, but I
was worse? oh the mercies that thou have showed me? oh the commands that have
been suggested to me, and yet I have stuck in the Alehouse, and continued in
my sins: the flashes of hell fire have sparkled in my face; I have seen one
drunkard going to hell, and the devil as it were dragging of him into
everlasting destruction, and an other adulterer plunged into eternal
damnation, and yet when I stuck fast in my sins all this while, that the Lord
should not only persuade me and entreat me to come out, but by maine force
carry me out of these flames whether I would or no, oh what wonderful
goodness is this! that yet I live to praise and magnify thy name, that yet I
live to get assurance of thy love here, that I may reign with thee for ever in
glory hereafter no mercy is like unto this, no mercy to be compared with this;
this is not mercy, but the depth of mercy; this is not compassion only, but the
bowels of compassion. Should a King come to a Peasant, and proclaim pardon
unto him after he has plotted treason against him, and if in the mean time
the traitor rebels and flings away the pardon, were it fit that the King
should yet pursue him with favor, or pursue him with judgment rather for
neglecting this mercy? that he should pursue him with favor this is more than
nature can do, or will do in this kind: but here God does not only proclaim
pardon for our sins, and reveal mercy to us, but when we contemn all, and
slight all, and trample the pardon under our feet, yet the Lord will force his
mercy upon us, and he will save us whether we will or no; that the Lord should
thus overcome us with compassion, let us walk worthy of all this riches of
Gods favor, for the Lord Christ Jesus sake (...) and let no man presume
because of this mercy and favor of the Lord, for he that has those cords and
hooks cast upon him spoken of before, he will be wearied I warrant him before
he will be made fit for mercy.

draw a sinner from corruption to himself, out of the bowels of his
compassion? what then shall we think and judge of those men, that use all
means, and all slights; that employ their wits to draw sinners from God, to
sin? is it Gods great work, his Masterpiece; the greatest good that he
intends for his people, to pluck them from their corruptions, and draw them to
himself? what then will become of those men that go professedly against God,
and oppose the work of God in this kind: if there be any such persons here, as
I doubt there are many such in the congregation; I tell you, if God be an holy
God, then thou art an unholy man; if God be merciful to poor sinners to save
them, then thou art cruel to damn them; if God be a gracious God, and would
draw poor sinners from sin unto himself, then thou art a graceless man,
and in a miserable condition, that would draw poor souls from God to hell;
and yet do no our towns swarm with such wretches? and are not our villages
pestered with such ungracious miscreants? such as the wise man in the Proverbs
speaks of, that eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the blood of
violence, and they cannot sleep unless they cause some to fall; the God of
heaven open these men's eyes, and awaken their consciences that they may see
their wretched estate; such as eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine
of violence, unless they can get such a man to be drunk with them, and such a
woman to play the whore with them, and such a fellow to cousen and cheat, their
hearts cannot be at quiet, they are not at rest, in this case their sleep
departs from their eyes, unless they cause some to fall; if the Lord let in
a light into the soul of a sinner, and discover unto him that he is in a wrong
way, and that he must take up a better course; if the Lord by the cords of
mercy seek to prevail with a sinner; nay if he lay the hooks of conscience
upon a sinner to pluck him from sin to himself, there are a company that are
mad the contrary way, and they labor to cut the cords of mercy, and breaks
the hooks of conscience, and labor to hale a poor sinner down to hell and
destruction; nay wicked men have invented cord against cord, and hook against
hook in this kind, the devil has his factors and his brokers under him, which
lay cords upon poor sinners, to withdraw them from the Lord to sin: as God
plucks heavenward, so they pluck to hell-ward; nay they have a cord for a
cord, God has not so many cords to pluck from sin to himself, but they have
as many to pluck men from God to sin, and into the paths of ungodliness,
that they may perish for ever; the Lord has mercies to allure, and they have
profits and pleasures to persuade and entice; the Lord has the hooks of
conscience to awaken, and they have base shifts this way also.

I will therefore discover these two things, first, the cunning of men in this
course; secondly, the miserable condition that they are in, which continue in
this course; I take it they are in the most woeful, and wretched estate of any
men under heaven. First, to see the cunning of sinners in this kind, they will
work upon the heart, and draw the soul, and cut Gods cords, and break Gods
bonds, that God may not draw a poor sinner from sin to himself, they have a
cord for a cord, and a hook for a hook, in this kind: First, if God let in the
light of knowledge into the understanding of a poor sinner, a young man
perhaps receives direction by the word, that he is not in the right way; the
spirit that calls after him and tells him he is wrong, and says, this is the
good ancient way, walk in it: when the Lord lets in the light thus into the
soul of a sinner, and reveals the good way to him; when the Lord thus turns
a man out of the mouth of the Lion, and paw of the Bear, then happily he goes
into a corner and mournes for his sins, and resolves to forsake them, he
will not keep company with his old companions, but seeks God always, and
prays to God continually. Now mark what hooks they apply to pull him off from
this good course, they use a company of carnal reasons to persuade him to the
contrary; when the master, father, or husband, sees that God is drawing his
wife, or his servant, or his child unto himself, why then the town is in an
uproare, as if there were some fire in the town: mark what the husband says,
my wife was wont to be careful to go about her business, but now she leaves
all at six and seven, and is so precise, that she is always praying or poring
upon a book. The child, he thinks his father distracted; his father perhaps
gives him a strict charge not to profane the Sabbath any more, no more gaming
now sir, no more sporting now, the child wonders at this, and stands amazed;
he admires what is become of his father, he was wont to suffer him to do these
things without any controulment, and because now he commands him the contrary,
he thinks his father is out of the right way. And as the child is to the
father, so is the father to the child; if the understanding of the child be
enlightened, and he be creeping to salvation; if he will not do as he did in
former times, if he will not run on in those wicked practices which he did
before, then the father thinks his son is undone, his son was wont to yield
obedience to him, and he was wont to have service from him, but now he is
grown so curious and exact, that he expects no goodness from him, he can
look for nothing to be done by him, I now give him over for lost: and as their
hearts are thus troubled, so they pluck with a kind of violence from God, as
God plucks to himself, so they labor to pluck a poor soul from God, and
they begin to chide, and taunt, and chafe, and brawle: what say they, will you
always be reading, and will you always be praying? I warrant, you think your
mother and I are not in the right way, because we do not as you do, you
thought heretofore such a man to be an honest man and your friend also, and yet
he does not do thus as you do, nor you your self were not wont to do thus in
former times neither. Thus mark what cords they lay upon a man that has been
enlightened: the child happily replyeth, alas father, when I knew no other, I
must confess, I did no better; but when the Lord has once given us the truth,
let us walk in it, I must follow the example of no man in this kind; the
Minister told me that there was no expectation of mercy unless I turned from
my sins, the text was plain, and the Minister said, that we must walk in
Gods Commandments here, if ever we mean to reign with him in glory
hereafter. Oh then says the father, I would the Minister had been far
enough off, when he put this into your head: and if he see that this will not
prevail with the child, then he sets another upon him, he sends his carnal
friends after him; he sets a carnal gospeller one that has been twice dead,
and plucked up by the roots, as Saint Jude speaks upon him, Jude 12.
and he bids him see what he can do in this case, and then he comes and closes
with him with all the carnal counsel and wicked devices that can be
invented: and mark how he sets upon him, Friend, says he, I hear you attend
upon the Ministry of the Gospel, I am very glad to hear it, but yet be wary
and wise though, too much, is too much in this case, your head is not yet gray;
if you had had the experience that I have, you would then perhaps know as much
as I know: be wise I say in this kind; but I pray understand me aright, I do
not speak against holiness all this while, I beseech you do not mistake me so,
for I am glad with all my heart that there is such a change wrought in you, and
that you take up such a good course, but this is that I say; Be religious and
wise both together; blessed be God my friend, we have a glorious Church, many
wise men, and yet they require not so much, and they perform not so much, they
will drink and be merry, and why should you exact more than these wise men?
aye but, replyeth the child, I cannot tell what wise men say, and what they do,
I must not do as they do, but as God commands; the Text says, Be ye holy, as
I am holy; and be ye pure, as Christ is pure, 1. Ioh. 3.3. can a man be more
holy than Christ, can a man be more pure than Christ in this case? I know not
what men do, but I am sure the word gives no such allowance: and now they think
the matter is past hope, when carnal counsel cannot prevail, nor cursed
devices take place, then they think the matter is past cure, and therefore they
pursue him with deadly indignation, they put such taunts upon him, and follow
him with such scoffs, that the heart of the poor creature is even wearied and
tired, and so departs from his God and all good courses, and so he falls into
wicked courses again, and runs down headlong into hell. And this is one
cord which the wicked, the devils factors lay upon a poor sinner to pluck him
from God; you that are guilty of this, you must see into these things, and be
humbled for this, or else you must look to suffer that judgment which is due
to the commission of this sin; you must know you go professely against the
Lord, and therefore you must needs be in a miserable condition. Secondly, if
this cord be broken, then the Lord has another cord, the Lord makes a sinner
apprehend the mercy of God, he hears the Minister how he speaks of Gods
wonderful love and goodness, in that he will not only accept poor sinners
and entertain them when they come, but command them to come; and not only so,
but intreates and beseeches them to come and receive mercy from him, nay he
waits for our amendment and cries out, oh when will it once be, and when a
poor sinner hears this, this even melts his heart, and he resolves never to
follow his sins more, and then he comes home and tells his father or his
master what wonderful goodness God has been pleased to make known unto
him. I, says he, could not have thought so much, I could not have conceived,
so much: what, that God should stoop to man, and majesty to misery? that God
should not only offer grace, and give a sinner leave to take grace, but that
God should follow such a wretch as I am with mercy, and entreat me to be
saved? what admirable and wonderful goodness is this! Father, or master,
shall I be so unnatural as to neglect this mercy and kindness? oh let it
never be for the Lord Jesus sake. Thus the father or the master sees his
child or his servant going away from his evil courses which he had formerly
taken up, the father feels which way the child is going, and he follows after
him amain, and labors to pluck away this cord with another, and therefore
thus he answers; It is true indeed, there is a great deal of mercy,
endless, boundless mercy with the Lord, therefore let us make use of this
mercy, son; and let us take this goodness, servant: in this case, the Lord
will not only provide for the good of our souls, but for the good of our
bodies also: as the Lord requires that we should perform service to him, so
he requires also that we should have a care of our own estates, and
therefore take heed of growing into too nice a course; be not too extreme
this way, for the Lord does not require such exactness of you, that thereby
you should impoverish your estate: beware therefore of too much preciseness I
say, lest you bring thereby disgrace to your self, and damage to your estate,
and hazard to your life: the Lord promises to prosper whatsoever we take in
hand, and therefore this nice course is not that which God requires, and by
this means the poor child or servant is daunted and deluded, and so falls off
from his good purposes and resolutions. Thus those two cords are broken: the
Lord has yet a third cord, and that is the cord of conscience, which he lays
upon a man, and that commands him to take heed of his corruptions, and tells
him, he was wont to be gibing at Gods servants, but take heed of these things,
all at the last day must be brought to light; now this makes the soul at a
stand: and then the man says, the word of God came home to my conscience, for
I have been a drunkard, and an adulterer, and a swearer; oh I saw the
fearful estate of those men; the Minister came effectually home to my
conscience, and told me what a miserable wretched condition I should be in, if
I continued in my former wicked courses. Now mark the cord that they lay to
draw this away, they lay a disgrace and contempt upon conscience; when (say
they) did you take notice of your conscience? will you be one of our tender
conscienced people? what your conscience troubled you, did it? what will you be
so simple? will you be such a fool to shake at the word of a teacher? alas,
alas, it is not conscience, it is but conceit in this case: and so at last the
poor sinner falls off again by the inticements of Satan, and carnal
counsels of wicked men, and at last the Lord lets in horror, and anguish, and
vexation into the conscience, and sets the very flashes of hell fire upon his
face, and now scoffs and scorns will not serve the turn, for the poor soul
says, Now I find that it was not conceit that troubled me, for the flashes of
hell have been in my face; and all the opposition against God and his truth,
all the taunts and scoffs against God and his servants, and all my
abominations that ever I committed, I tell you, I saw them all set before me,
and I saw hell open in conclusion, and God executing judgment upon me for my
sins. Now when his companions see him in this humor, they think a scoff
will not chase away this horror, for he tells them, it is not your scoffs
that will do it now; no, no, I am going to hell, and you will follow after me
as fast as may be, you haled me to drunkenness, and adultery, and other base
courses; you drew me to ungodly practices, and therefore you shall to hell as
well as I, do you think that I shall go to hell, and you not make haste after
me? do you think that I shall be damned, and you not be plagued? when his
companions see this, then they leave scoffing and gibing of him, and dare not
appear themselves, but the devil he transformes himself into an angel of
light; a drunkard will not now come unto him in the coat of a drunkard, but he
takes the coat of some seeming grave man upon him, and he must set upon him,
and tell him how the case stands: and this carnal man does three things to
draw away the heart from God, in this kind first he deludes conscience, and
tells him there is such a thing in fear, but nothing in deed, thou, says he,
art sinful, and God is merciful, thou have been an adulterer, so was David,
and he did nothing, but say, I have sinned, and he was forgiven: oh but says
the poor soul, David was a broken hearted man, and this broke his very bones.
Well, when he sees this will not do, then secondly, he must get him to cards,
and to dice, to sports and to plays, until his conscience be benumed and
seared, and then thirdly all goodness must be kept from him in these cases;
especially they will be sure that he does not look upon a Bible, lest by that
means he might be drawn away again. Now the Lord be merciful unto us; the
poor man by counsel on one side, and allurements on the other; whereas before
his soul was a little enlightened and his conscience awakened, now he begins to
turn a devil, he flies about as though hell were broken loose, he cares not
what he does for the dishonouring of God, and damning of his own soul, so
that by this time you see the subtilty of men in this kind: Will you now know
the condition of these men, I tell you, if there be any wretched, miserable,
woeful, accursed, damned people in the world, I cannot tell who they be,
unless these be they, and therefore observe the woefulness of their condition
in three respects; first, they are most like the devil; secondly, they are
most opposite to God; thirdly, they are the greatest enemies to men's salvation:
first, they that oppose this work o^ conversion and salvation, are as like the
devil as can be, Acts 13.8. the Text says, when Paul was to deal with
Sergius Paulus the Deputy Lieutenant of the country, the Deputy called for
Paul and Barnabas, and desired to hear the word of God, now Elymas the
sorcerer, who was with the Deputy, seeing the wind in that door; Paul he
would have drawn the Deputy to the faith, but Elymas he withstood him, seeking
to turn him away from the faith; now mark what Paul says unto him, I would
not say so, may I durst not speak it, but that the Scripture is plain; then,
says the Text, Paul being full of the holy Ghost, set his eyes on him, and
said, oh full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child of the devil, thou
enemy to all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the way of God? as
if he had said, here is the very claw and paw of the devil, he is not only
naught himself, but hinders others from doing good. Genesis 3.17. when the Lord
had committed that threatening unto Adam and Eve; that in that day that they eat
of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, they should surely
perish; so long as the woman could believe that threatening, she was well
enough; now Satan perceiving this, comes and takes away the life of the
threatening, and the power of the command, and gainsayd the word of God; what
says he, has God said that ye shall not eat of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and in that day ye eat thereof ye shall die? no,
no, says he, you shall not surely die at all, for God does know, that in that
day ye eat thereof your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil; first he takes away the edge of the command: and causes
the woman to slight the threatening* what did God say, you should die? you shall
not die at all, but be as Gods, knowing good and evil; as who should say, God
does this for his own ends, for he knows when you do this, you shall be like
unto Gods; thus the devil did in the beginning, and look what he did, that
his children do now: They that oppose this work of God, they have the tricks
of their father up and down; they are as like the devil, as if he had spued
them out of his mouth; the Lord says, he that kills, shall surely die the
death; this the truth says, and Ministers say, but they say, there is no such
matter; God is gracious and merciful, God did this to fear men, not to vex
men; and they slight that commandment of God also, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, as thy life, and as thy soul; but they say, though the
word say so, yet it is no matter whether men obey that commandment or no; the
devil did so from the beginning, and they do so now; what says the devil,
did God say that you should not eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, and in the day ye eat thereof ye should die; why you shall
not die at all; what say they, did the Minister say, that your consciences must
be awakened, and your hearts must be humbled, or else you should perish; you
shall not die, your conversation is holy enough, and you need not take so
strict a course in this kind; thus the devil did in the beginning, and thus
his children, his brokers and factors do in the end of the world, these are the
two sons of Satan, the chiefest scholars in his school, they are able to
bring many to destruction and confusion, Rev. 12.4. there the Text says, that
the Dragon stood before the woman that was to be delivered, for to devour her
child as soon as it should be borne; the woman is the Church, the Dragon is
the devil, the child to be borne is the soul that is to be converted: when
the Church does bring a soul to life, why then the Dragon watches when the
child is borne that he may devour it: if there be any that look to heaven, if
there be any whose hearts are humbled, whose minds are enlightened, and
consciences awakened, the devil watches when this soul is borne, that he
may devour it; so it is with wicked persons that bear the image and exercise
the practice of the devil, if there be any that God is pleased to work upon,
why wicked men they court them at all times and occasions that can be, all is
too good for them in this kind; niceness, and exactness, and preciseness,
and madness, and all is cast upon them to devour poor sinners, and hinder
poor Saints, to hinder the birth of the child, that the Church travelleth
withal; why would thou devour a poor creature that God in mercy would
deliver from sin here, and bring to salvation hereafter? Do thou envy him,
do thou by cursed persuasions and wicked devices endeavor to pluck from God
to sin; I tell thee, if there were ever a devil in a man, there is one in
thee; if there were ever a child of the devil, that was wicked here, and shall
be damned hereafter, thou art surely one: and this is the first thing wherein
the miserable condition of these men is discovered; they are the children of
the devil, the Lord of heaven open your eyes, and awaken your consciences, and
reveal these things to your souls, that you may forsake these base courses;
secondly, as they are most like to the devil, so also their wretched estate
appears in this, that they are the greatest and deadliest enemies to God, that
place formerly named will serve for the opening of this, Acts 13.10. there
says the Text, thou child of the devil, and enemy to all righteousness, Paul
calls Elymas the sorcerer, because he withstood him, and resisted the work of
God, not only the child of the devil, but an enemy to all righteousness; mark
that, as who should say, he that withholds a Saint of God, he that would pluck
a soul from walking uprightly before God, he is an enemy to all
righteousness, and this is a most fearful thing; for other kind of sins are
of a less nature, for a drankard is an enemy to sobriety, an unjust person is
an enemy to justice, a liar is an enemy to truth, an adulterer is an enemy to
chastity, and a malicious man is an enemy to charity; but he that is an enemy
to the saving work of Gods grace in the soul of a man, he that withstands and
resists the work of conversion, he is an enemy to all righteousness; for how
shall a man walk holily before God, or righteously before his brethren, how
shall he love God above all things, and his neighbor as himself, unless
grace be wrought in the soul of a man, and unless the word of God be placed
in the heart of a man: men ought to keep Gods Commandments that they may
receive comfort from God; now unless God bestow faith, and grace, and his
spirit upon a man, how shall he do this; but when thou say, I would not
have such a man converted, I would not have the spirit work effectually in his
heart; when thou hinderest the work of God in this kind, then thou hinderest a
man from performing obedience to Gods Commandments, and therefore thou art an
enemy to God; Gods Sabbaths can never be sanctified, the life of thy neighbor
can never be tendered, the chastity of thy neighbor can never be preserved;
thou art a drunkard, thou art an adulterer, thou are a murderer, he that
murthereth a man, is an enemy to the life of a man, but he that will not suffer
the word of God to take plane in the soul of a sinner, he is the murderer of
the soul of a man, he is an enemy to all righteousness, he cannot perform,
any service unto God; there is no duty to be performed, no sin to be
omitted, but thou art an enemy to all, for when thou do hinder a sinner from
receiving of grace, and from being made partaker thereof, thou do hinder a
sinner from honoring of God here, and receiving of comfort hereafter, and what
a woeful wretched condition is this to be an enemy to all righteousness, and
not only so, but full of all mischief, for so says the Text aforenamed; thou
enemy of all righteousness, and full of all mischief, mark the opening of
the words; full, that is, brimme full, top full, ready to run over with
wickedness, and the cause is this; its naught for a man to be wicked, and to
resolve to be no better, is worse; but for a man not only to be wicked, and
resolve to be no better, but to hinder others also from being good, this is the
very height of all impiety, this is to be an enemy to all righteousness, and
to be full of mischief. Thirdly, as they are the children of the devil, and
enemies to all righteousness, so also they are the greatest enemies to the
salvation of men's souls; they compass sea and land to make a Proselyte: I
beseech you take notice of it, thou art a drunkard and a blasphemer, and a
wretched lewd person, thou art not only bad thy self, but such a man has had
his mind enlightened and his conscience awakened, but thou by thy wicked
counsels and carnal reasons, and sinful arguments catchest him, and with,
drawest him again into his former wicked courses and base practices, and then
the end of that man is worse than the beginning, and he becomes twice a child
of the devil; well, he shall perish, and so shall thou, he shall be damned,
but the Lord shall require his blood at thy hands; and this is the maine cause
why men perish and go down to hell: namely, the wicked counsels and cursed
persuasions which sinful damned persons use to hurry poor souls down into
destruction, as though they could not go fast enough of themselves to hell, but
they must lay these base sinful cords upon them, to draw them headlong into
the bottomless pit of confusion. Well, the time will come, when these poor
creatures shall call for vengeance at the hand of God to be executed against
you; they will accuse you at the last day, and curse you, and call for
vengeance to be poured down upon your heads; you that are guilty of this,
whenever you meet with the day of death here, or with the day of judgment
hereafter, then it will go mavelous heavily with you; you have hindered the
work of conversion for being wrought in them, and you have drawn them into
wicked courses; they shall go to hell, they shall perish poor souls, but I
tell you, their blood will God require at your hands, at that day they will
appear before the Lord of glory, and call for vengeance against you; when the
heavens shall melt with fire, and when the Lord shall have ten thousand
thousand of Angels ministering unto him; when all flesh at the dreadful day of
judgment shall appear before the judgment seat of God, and render an account
of that they have done here upon earth, then here you shall see a cursed
drunkard, there a wretched adulterer, and there a profane swearer; and they
shall come and accuse those that have drawn them into the commission of these
sins, and they shall say, I confess Lord I was enlightened, my eyes were
opened, and my heart was touched, and my conscience was awakened, and I was
resolved to walk in a good course; but Lord here is the man, behold here is
the woman, that by wicked devises and cursed persuasions never left until I
fell off from this good resolution, and turned to my former wicked ways; this
is the man Lord that did this, and therefore I beseech thee though I perish, yet
let not my blood go unrevenged at this man's hands that has been the cause of
my destruction; and then this will lie heavy upon your score, at the day of
death, or the day of judgment; when these poor souls shall appear before
God; I will tell you what complaints they will make to his Majesty, they will
say, Lord I was in a good way, my eyes were opened, and my heart was humbled,
my heart did earne toward Gods truth and holy men, I would have turned over a
new leaf, and led a new life, but it was this Landlord of mine that feared
bernard and terrified me, and plucked me aside from this good course; good
Lord revenge my blood at my Landlords hand, the servant he will say; Lord,
there was a gracious fellow servant lived in the house with me, and did me much
good, I loved to hear thy word, and pray, and read, and perform good duties,
but good Lord, it was the sharp reproves and bitter taunts of my master that
discouraged me, and made me forsake my former course; and therefore now I must
go to hell, but Lord though I perish, yet I beseech thee revenge my blood at my
masters hands. Many of you have wives that lie in your bosoms, in whose hearts
the word of God has begun to take place, and they have resolved to walk
uprightly before God; they have gone and mourned in secret, and sighed to
heaven, but it is you that are their husbands which have hindered this gracious
disposition, and you thought your selves undone because your wives took this
course, and therefore you never left brawling, and bayting, and railing, until
your poor wives left all, left praying, and left reading, and left all
goodness; I tell you, those wives that now lie in your bosoms, though they
love you now, the time will come when they will curse the day that ever they
saw or knew you; what a woeful case will it be at the day of judgment, when
the wife shall come before the Lord and say, I confess Lord, I enjoyed thy
word, and it was brought home to my soul, and it wrought upon my conscience,
and I had a full purpose to become a new creature, and take a new course; I was
coming Lord, I was coming, but it was this husband of mine that drew me from
my self and thy service, from a good course, and from a good way, and
therefore require my blood at his hands; though I perish, yet good Lord, let
not my damnation be unrevenged at my husbands hands; and many of you wives if
your husbands have been enlightened and wrought upon by the word, insomuch that
they come home and say, wife, we must reform our families, and we must pray
with them, and we must be careful that both we and they keep Gods
Commandments; then you wives are untoward, and unreasonable, and the house is
not able to hold you, and your husbands live in a miserable condition, until
they have altered their former purpose: why these husbands of yours will go
down to hell, but their blood will lie heavy upon your heads, and will be
required at your hands; they will say, Lord I was once in the right way, I was
coming, I was almost persuaded to be a Christian; I do think verily if I had
had another wife, I should have led a good life upon the earth, and have been
saved hereafter, but this wife of mine, Lord, never left bayting and hayning at
me, until I turned out of the right way; they will curse the day that ever
they saw you, or that ever you met together, and they will entreat God not to
suffer them to go to hell without revenging of their blood upon your heads:
you that are such, I beseech you think of these things, you that have heard
these things, the Lord of heaven persuade your hearts to take heed of drawing
away poor sinners from God; if it were in my power, I would not only persuade
you, but overcome you in this kind; if it were in my power to save you, I would
give salvation unto you; but alas, it is not in my power, and indeed it is
pity it should; it is the Lord that must do it; you that have heard this word,
I beseech you let it not fall to the ground; but all you scorners and mockers
at Gods Saints, you that have drawn men out of the right way, and out of a
good course, for the Lords sake, and for mercies sake, and for your own poor
souls sake, be resolved never again to draw away poor sinners from that
course wherein they walk; but when you see them going on well, why then go
you along with them, and if you see any lay cords upon them to draw them away,
help them, you in this kind, and labor to draw them back again.

The fourth use, is an use of comfort and consolation to all poor souls,
mark it for the Lord Jesus sake, it is a ground of unspeakable comfort, to all
poor creatures, partly unconverted, and partly converted all from the former
truth; they may observe mavelous refreshment of heart, if they will but
attend thereunto, and be ruled thereby; you that are in the gall of
bitterness, and in a carnal condition; you that live in base gross courses,
you who are known to all the world that you live in common ordinary sins;
you that are locked up under infidelity, under a proud stubborn heart; here is
a ground of admirable joy and consolation to sustain the hearts of all such
poor creatures, in the expectation of mercy and comfort, when the floods of
iniquity beset a man on every side, when the weight of his sins lies heavy
upon his heart, and the soul complains as David did, my sins are gone over
my head, they are to heavy for me, I am not able to bear them, these mighty
corruptions I shall never be able to master them, these sins that hang upon
me, and these distempers that cleave unto me, oh I cannot be rid of them, I
see my sins more than ever I did, and yet they follow me, and still they
pursue after me, I shall never be freed from them, I shall never get dominion
over them; why there is admirable comfor: from the former point, for such a
poor soul that is thus oppressed by, and overwhelmed with corruptions; the
doctrine is this, God by a holy kind of violence does pluck men from sin and
draw them to himself; though thy sins will not part from thee, yet the Lord
will pluck those corruptions from thy soul, he will awaken thy conscience,
and humble thy heart, he will bring down thy sturdie heart; be thy sins
therefore never so great, and thy corruptions never so mighty, yet take
consolation hereby: the maine trouble of a poor soul lies in three respects;
partly in regard of the temptations of Satan, partly in regard of corruptions,
partly in regard of the opposition a man finds in a good course; these are
mavelous hindrances to a Christian, and here is mavelous comfort from the
former truth against all those; first, for temptations, when the Lord lets
Satan loose upon a poor sinner, and the devil begins to domineere over a
sinner, and trample upon a sinner, and tells a sinner that to hell he must go,
and away he must with him; it is in vain to strive, for his sins are so
strong that they shall never be removed, his corruptions will never part from
him, and therefore he wishes a sinner to put an end to his days, and so to
his sinning, for he shall never be recovered, he shall never be freed from the
guilt of his sins, and the dominion of them: this is Satan's power, and this
is like the wind that blew down Jobs house, that great and mighty tempest
which came from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of his house, and
made it fall upon his sons; so I conceive the violent whurries of temptation,
and the fierce assaults of Satan, come East and West, North and South, upon the
heart of a sinner; insomuch that the heart begins to sink, and conceives it
self almost in hell, it thinks it shall never overcome those assaults, it
thinks it shall never get out of these temptations; you that find these now,
or may find these hereafter, let it please God to speak peace unto you; you
may observe mavelous comfort from the former doctrine, the Text says, if
Satan will not come out, the Lord Jesus will bind the strong man, and overcome
him, and take his weapons away from him, and free the house of him, and then he
himself will go in and take possession: Romans 16.20. there says the Text, The
Lord of heaven shall shortly beat down Satan and trample hith under ^^eet:
however happily Satan will not down, but be proud and malicious toward you,
though you cannot conquer him, and quiet him, though you cannot command the
churlish curre, yet the master can; if there be a bandogge or a mastiffe in
the way, the passenger must seek by all fair means to appease him, and yet
happily he will not be quiet, but if tho muster comes he can command him, and
still him presently; so it is with this curre devil, he is nothing else but
Gods bandogge, Gods mastiffe, whereby he whurrieth poor sinners to make them
run to heaven for comfort; though you cannot quiet him, yet God can command
him and make him fall under your feet; and though he will not go out yet, God
will by strong hand cast him out whether he will or no, nay though there were
a legion of devils in thee, yet the Lord will force them out, Luke 8.30.
Christ met with a man which had devils a long time; and when be saw Jesus he
fell down before him, and cried with a loud vayce, what have we to do with
thee Jesus than son of the living God; and Jesus asked him what is thy name,
and they said, legion, because many devils were entered into him; I command
thee thou unclean spirit to come out of him, says Christ, and so Satan was
forced out whether he would or no, and therefore cheer thou thy soul, and
comfort thou thy heart, which find troubles in this kind, and the
temptations of Satan, if he be violent in tempting, God will be as strong in
conquering and binding of him, and he will cast him out; and this is the first
thing which hinders a man in a christian course, namely, the temptations of
Satan; and if thy heart be still manuring and perplexed, and says, the
temptations of Satan are fierce. But secondly, these corruptions of mine; oh
they are extreme; so that my sins are like a main flood which passes over
my head, one wave comes after another, wickedness after wickedness, and
iniquity after iniquity, now proud, now sturdy, now covetous, now loose, now
profane, now unfaithful: oh these secret sins of mine, and these bosom
abominations of mine, by which my heart has so long been swayed, in which my
soul has so long continued: I shall never be freed from these, I shall never
get the mastery over these, especially these beloved darlings lusts of mine;
God must break my bones before they will out, for my soul is still pursuing
these distempers, so that the poor sinner concludes as he did, 2 King. 7.2.
when there was a great famine in Samaria the Prophet Elisha came and prophesied
saying, to morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flower be sold for a
shekell, and two measures of barley for a shekell in the gates of Samaria, then
a ruler or a noble man upon whom the King leaned, says the text, answered the
man of God and said, behold, if the Lord would make windows in heaven might
this thing be? as who should say, is it possible there should be such plenty on
the sudden? no, though God make windows in heaven it cannot be. So the soul
says, is it possible these sweet lusts, these darling abominations, so long
committed, so long continued, so long practiced, can they ever be pardoned; if
the Lord should make windows of comfort and consolation, is it possible that
my soul should ever be refreshed? why yet for all this, behold a great deal
of comfort from the former point, though thy sins be never so violent to
pursue thee, though thy corruptions be never so strong to set upon thee, yet
God is more strong to conquer those sins, and more strong to subdue those
corruptions, be the union between sin and thy soul never so near, God will
break that bond, and snap those cords in sunder be the dominion that sin
has over thy soul never so great, yet the power which Christ has over those
sins is much more forcible, though thy sturdy heart will not come off, though
thou have no desire to leave thy corruptions, though thou have not put off the
will of sinning, yet God can take it away, and make way for the power of his
spirit to take place in thy heart, Acts 16.24. we shall observe this in the
Iaylor, he was a proud, sturdy dogged, cruel hearted man, when the Magistrates
commanded him to put Paul and Silas into prison, he went further than his
commission, and put them into the inner Prison, and made their feet fast in the
stocks: oh thought he, now I have gotten these nice factions fellows into my
hands, I will punish them soundly: Now at midnight Paul and Silas sang praises
unto God, and then suddenly there was an exceeding great earthquake, so that
the foundations of the prison were shaken, and immediately all the doors were
opened, and every ones bands were loosed; the doors flew open, the prison
shook, and the earth shook, God exercised his power upon the creatures and
made them shake, and yet the Iaylor stood still all this while and stirred not;
though he were a Iaylor now to the Apostles, yet the Devil was a Iaylor to him
also, he was under the jayle of his sins, his sturdy heart would not awaken
all this while, but at last the Iaylor he shook also, and seeing the prison
doors open, pulled out his sword and would have killed himself, supposing
that the prisoners had fled; but Paul cried with a loud voice saying, do thy
self no harm, for we are all here; and then he called for a light and
sprang in, says the text, and came trembling and fell down before Paul and
Silas: he now saw all that pride and stubbornness of his, whereby he handled
the Apostles so basely, and now he brought them out and said, Sirs, what must I
do to be saved? he now bathed their wounds, and set bread before them, and
dealt kindly with them: and thus we see when the Lord comes for a sinner, he
makes the prison shake, and the earth shake, and the doors shake, and the
iron bolts shake, and at last he makes the heart shake also; it is not the
door that I care for, nor the prison that I care for, nor the earth only that
I will make to shake, but it is the jailer that I will shake also, it is the
Iaylor that I come for, and the Iaylor I will have, and so he had indeed in
conclusion; thy corruptions are not so powerful, but the Lord will be more
powerful to pluck thy heart from them unto himself. The third thing that
hinders a poor sinner in this case is in respect of disgrace and other
opposition that he shall meet withal in a Christian course; I could be
content, says he, to take a better course and lead a new life, and become a
Christian, but I see how disgrace will be cast upon me and opposition be made
against me, and this knocks me off, I am not able to suffer it, and to bear
it; are you not so? the Lord will make you able to bear it before he has done
with you; you fear wildfire do you? God will make you feel hell fire before
he has done; you will go against conscience, and you will displease God,
before you will displease man, will you? well, you fear man now, and the face of
man, this is but wildfire, but God will send hell fire into your hearts one
day, he will send the horror of conscience into your souls, and then you will
say, rather disgrace here, than damnation for ever hereafter, I will rather go
to hell than to sin, I will rather offend all the world then God; gather up
your selves therefore, if God at any time has opened your eyes; though Satan
pursue you, and though corruptions press upon you, yet cheer your selves, God
in mercy will look upon you. Esa. 43.6. there when the Lord comes to gather
his people together, he says, that he will bring them from the East, and
gather them from the West, he will call to the North, give up, and to the
South, keep not back, bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the
end of the earth; he says, the earth shall give account, and yield up her
dead, the sea, that also shall yield up her dead; why God can make the devil
yield up a wretched man, as well as the earth give up a dead man; God will say,
I must have a sinner devil, and therefore deliver up thy prisoner; God will
draw thy heart out of the power of sin and dominion of Satan, though thou
can not tell how, yet God is able to give thee a will of yielding unto him,
and so much for the comfort of those that are unconverted, there is hope that
God will do you good, be your sins what they will be: now those that are
converted, and those that are in the state of grace; this is a ground of strong
comfort unto them, that they shall prevail against all sins for after times,
by the power of that God that has given them victory over their sins in
former times; they may say, did the Lord give me power over my sins when I
loved them, and will he not give me power to resist them now when I have
desire to forsake them? it cannot be, he that offered favor to thee when
thou did refuse it, he cannot but give favor to thee when thou beggest it
at his hands, and this shall suffice for that matter.

poor sinners? then do you so likewise, this is the course that God takes, and
this ought to be a copy and pattern to you in the mean time, as you are the
Elect people of God to put on the bowels of mercy and compassion toward your
brethren, if ever mercy, here it ought to be expressed and discovered, if ever
God showed mercy to thy soul, show thou the like mercy to thy brethren, did
the Lord ever show compassion unto thee, show thou the like compassion unto
them, did the Lord ever awaken thy eyes or humble thy heart, did the Lord offer
his favors to thee, still calling, still exhorting and persuading of you* you
that are the Elect people of God, if ever God showed any goodness unto you,
show the same goodness, mercy, and compassion to your fellow brethren; and
therefore as God has dealt with you, and as he does deal with sinners, let
it be your honors and your resolutions to deal answerably to God, so says
the Prophet David, I will reveal thy way to the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee; oh blessed spirit, when the Lord had showed mercy to him,
then says he, I will teach thy way to the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted, as if he should say, I will have no nay at the hands of sinners in
this kind, the proud heart shall be humbled, and the sturdy heart shall be
softened; I will exhort all sinners to come unto thee, that art a God hearing
sinners, and showing mercy unto sinners; if God be urgent, so be you, also
labor you with a holy kind of violence to draw sinners unto heaven, and to
help on this exhortation, for your help herein, labor to draw them these two
ways; labor your selves to do whatsoever in your power lies; secondly,
labor to help them by the supply of others that may do that which you cannot;
first in regard of your selves, four things are remarkable; first, set upon
the sinner with a holy kind of heavenly resolution of soul, and labor every
way to express your love toward him, for the good and benefit of him, by
sweet counsel, loving exhortations, gentle admonitions, and sharp reproves;
do to your utmost power work upon poor sinners, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one
another, says the Text, daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; but above all, that place is
remarkable for this purpose, that we should advise, and comfort, and quicken,
and every way do that which may be most advantageous for our brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. We exhort you brethren, says the Apostle, warn them that are
unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all
men, see that none render evil for evil unto any man, but ever follow that
which is good, both among your selves and to all men; the Apostle does not say,
that it is in one man's power to do this, but all ought to do it; men, brethren,
and fathers, ought to do it; every son and daughter of Adam: if there be any
weak, strengthen them; if there be any down; raise them; deal patiently and
lovingly with all, deal answerably to the necessities of all sinners, whom you
have to do withal; but you will say, am I my brothers keeper? aye that you are
your brethrens keepers, or else you are their murderers; would thou not
defend thy brother from murdering, if thou should see a company of thieves
set upon him and go about to slay him, would thou not labor by all means
possibly to succor him? and has God care of Oxen and Asses; will thou
preserve thy brother from a bodily death, and will thou not do much more for
the soul of thy brother, for the saving of him from eternal death and
damnation? do thou set a sinner whurried and teared by Satan, do thou see
the devil robbing him of all his graces, and hear him crying murder,
murder, and will thou not help him and relieve him? if you should lie in your
beds and hear one cry murder, murder, would you not rise and rescue him? why
every sinner, every proud man, every covetous man, every malicious man, every
drunkard, adulterer, blasphemer, the devil and those sins do prey upon them,
and worry their souls; oh help them mercifully, and persuade them lovingly,
rescue your child or your husband, or your friend out of the jaws of Satan,
and work every way for their good; in the 17. of Inde remember that, build up
one another, says the Text, on your most holy faith, labor to save some, and
pluck them out of the fire, and though they do not call to thee for help, yet
offer thy helping hand unto them; if thy neighbors house be on a fire, thou will not stay till thou be called, but if they that be within be dead in
sleep, then thou will break open the door upon them, and awake them and rouse
them up; so deal with the souls of poor sinners, there is one man, his soul
is set on fire with hell, it is all on a flame with devilish lust do thou see
the soul of thy neighbor all on a flame in this kind, why then break in upon
him, happily he will not entreat thy help, but that is no matter, stand not upon
complements, but with a holy kind of violence pluck him out of the fire; you
that are wise, pluck the drunkard off the Ale-bench, hale poor creatures out
of hell and corruption; did the Lord deal so with you, why then deal you so
with your fellow brethren; and if you be not able to prevail your selves, if
your own counsel be too weak, then take two or three with thee; it is
Christ's counsel, Mat. 18.16. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy brother: but if he will not hear thee, then secondly,
take to thee two or three more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be established; that is, take several neighbors wise and
holy, and so double reproves and admonitions; do not only persuade him, but
overpower him; not only reprove him, but convince him; let thy neighbor
exhort, and thou also; let thy neighbor admonish and thou too; let thy
neighbor reprove, and thou too; double your exhortations, and admonitions, and
reproves, that at last you may prevail with him. But you will say, if the
soul still staieth in his distempers, what must we then do? why if he return
to sin again, then thirdly, return you to reproves and exhortations
again, and never leave him; when thou go to his house, and meetest him in
the way, and see him in the fields, then still in all places, upon all
occasions, reprove and exhort him, and hale him from his ungodly courses, and
if the sinner yet will not hearken to thy exhortations, but scorneth thee, then
the Lord does free thee from thy counselling of him; do not cast pearls
before swines, but yet though thou needst not counsel him publicly, yet go
into thy chamber and mourn for him secretly, as Jeremy did for the people of
Jerusalem, Lam. 1.17. for these things, says he, I weep, mine eye, mine eye
runs down with water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul,
is far from me; and my children are desolate: do thou so for the soul of a
poor sinner, and pluck hard to get help from heaven for him, and entreat God
never to give quiet to his soul, until his eyes be opened, and his heart
humbled; lastly, when your selves have done what you can, and when you have
used the help of others, if after this he returns to his former course, and
then when thou fallest to reprove him and exhort him again, he then becomes a
scorner, then labor to bring him to receive what succor he may from others,
and that two ways; first, by what means you may bring him to the public
means, it was so with Cornelius, after that by Gods Commandment he had sent
for Peter, and Peter was to come, he drew all his friends and acquaintance
together, says the Text, and then he says to Peter, we are all here
present-before thee, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God; and it
was that passage, Ezech. 33.3. there the people speak one to another, saying,
Come let us go up to the house of the Lord, and hear what is the word that
comes from the Lord; mark how they call one another together, and rap at one
another door; thus do you counsel men to come unto the Lord and hear his
word, they will never come under the power of the hammer else, that they may
be stricken, hale them, and draw them to the ministry of the word, that so
what you cannot do privately, that the word may do in public, Ioh. 5.4. there
was an Angel went down at a cortaine time into the poole of Bethesda, and
troubled the waters, then whosoever first stepped in, was made whole of
whatsoever disease he had; now there lay a poor lame man at the brinke of the
waters, and because he was not able to step in, every one stepped in before
him, and no man would help him; mark how he complains in the seventh verse,
I have no man, says he, when the water is troubled to put me into the poole,
but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me; he would feign have
got in b^ could not: the word of God is like this poole of Bethesda, when the
word of God is opened, and plainly and familiarly discovered, when the spirit
moves upon the waters; why put a poor soul into the water, fling the soul
of your child, or your servant, or your friend into the poole; persuade what
you may, and compel those that are under you to come unto the word of God,
when the word of God is soundly revealed and delivered; why, put a poor soul
into the waters, such a man has a lame heart, he is lame in his practice, and
lame in his praying, and lame in the performance of holy duties, he is a
cripple from his cradle; why bring such of your neighbors and put them into
the water, and entreat the Lord to work upon them, that the Angel may move
from heaven and work conversion and salvation to the souls of them: secondly,
as you must labor to bring them under the power of the word, so secondly, when
God has made known his word to the hearts of them, follow you the blow as
much as in you lies; if there be any exhortation, settle it; if there be any
admonition, press it; if there be any reproof, apply it home unto their
souls; strike thou while the iron is hot; if thy child were touched and
enlightened by the word, when the Lord has stricken his heart, follow thou the
blow, when the Lord is pleased to smite his soul, bring thou the blow home
unto the heart of him; remember that, Deuteronomy. 6.7. there says the Text, these
words which I command thee shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy children; the word in the original is, thou shall sharpen
them, thou shall teach them, that is, thou shall sharpen them upon the souls
of thy children, and upon the souls of thy servants; the Ministers do what
they can, and you hear reproves and exhortations, and when you go out of the
Church, leave them in your stools behind you; but you should sharpen them and
bring them home to the hearts of your wives, and your children, and servants,
and they that belong unto you; you should follow the blow home; when the Lord
is pleased to exhort, exhort you; when the Lord is pleased to reprove, reprove
you; it is no great matter happily, to bring your children or servants under the
word, but when they are here, they play and sport, and talk, and run about,
as though there were no God here; and therefore you should tell your children
and servants, it is the word of the Lord child, and it is the word of the Lord
servant, it is not the word of man as you may think, but it is the word of the
Lord by which you shall one day be judged; the Minister told you that God
hates a proud man, and and a drunkard, and an adulterer, and a swearer, why
this was the word of the Lord; thus bring the word home unto their souls, and
this is the way to bring them home unto God here, that they may receive
salvation hereafter; we should use all the cords of mercy, and love, and anger,
and indignatio^n; that so if it were possible we might hale the souls of poor
sinners to God; oh blessed spirit of Saint Paul in this kind, I wonder what is
become of that love and zeal that was in him, as we may see in the 19. of the
Acts, he travells from place to place, from country to country, he goes from
house to house, and rappes at every man's door, persuading men with all
patience to be reconciled to God; he deals as the nurse does with her child,
the child cries, and shr^ikes, and wrawles, and yet the nurse bears all, so
does the Apostle Paul, he met with much opposition here, mocked there,
imprisoned there, set in the stocks and scourged, and yet he bears all with
patience, and persuades, and beseeches men to be reconciled; I say this power,
this zeal, this love is gone; if we had hearts and hands and endeavors, much
more might be done in this case, and God might work more mercifully with us,
and powerfully by us, for the conversion of poor sinners; and this does not
lie only in the Ministers hands, but, Masters, in yours; and, Officers, in
yours: and so much shall serve for this point. The next thing considerable in
the Text, is from the order, first drawing, then coming; you cannot come unto
me except my father draws you, the point is, that God must first pluck us
from sin, before we will fasten our souls upon the Lord Jesus; it is evident,
Mat. 12.29. no man comes into a strong man's house, says the Text, unless he
first bind the strong man, first there must be binding and casting out, before
there can be taking of possession* the house is the heart, and the strong man
is Satan; the Lord must bind the one, before he can take possession of the
other; the soul must be drawn before it will come to God; however for the
manner of this drawing, it be diverse, God deals with some one way, and some
another; some he draws with the cords of his mercy, and some with the hooks
of conscience; yet this is certain there must be a drawing, before there can
or will be a coming, Gal. 3.22. it is said that all men are shut up under
sin, etc. Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become
the sons of God; now before the Lord Jesus can be received, the bonds of
sin must be removed, and the lock must be opened, before the Lord Jesus can
come in and be entertained; but God does loose these locks diverse ways, as
sometimes we may see a man open some easy lock with some trifle, he slips it
happily, or opens it with a picklock; but if he come to a strong one, especially
if it be old and rusty, then he breaks it in pieces, and that with much
violence before he can open it; so deals the Lord with the souls of sinners,
he slips every lock before he comes in, but sometimes if he meet with a proud
sturdy sinner that is rivetted to his corruptions, and scrued into wickedness,
an old drunkard, or an old blasphemer, if the lock be rusty, then he knocks off
al, he breaks the lock and lifts the door off the hinges; this is true, that
all the means of God generally, partly mercy alluring, and conscience rending
the heart, both these make the soul see the vileness of his sins, and the
necessity of parting with them; and thus God does draw before a sinner will
come: there must be a kind of violence offered to the soul before any coming
can proceed from the creature, the reasons are these; I will only touch them:
first, because every man by nature is a despiser of Christ, and rebellious to
Christ, Mat. 21.38. when God sent his Son Christ among them, they said, this
is the heir, come let us kill him; when Christ came to preach the word they
did professely labor to slay the Lord Jesus, and in the end they did so, this
is the stone which the builders refused, says the Scripture: the stone was
Christ, they refused Christ, and would not build upon him, so that thus I
reason; he that is enemy to the Lord Jesus, will never of himself come unto
him and believe in him; but all are enemies to the Lord Jesus by nature,
therefore they will not come unto him, and believe in him. Secondly, every man
by nature runs from God, and therefore will not come to God, Pro. 1.30.
there says the text, they would none of my counsel, they desvised my
reproof; nay, Ier. 2.5. the text says, they are far from God, there says
the text, what iniquity have your fathers found in me that they are gone far
from me: now if a wicked man hates the word of God, and goes post haste in the
ways of wickedness, and runs far from God, he is like never to come at
him, unless God draw him by a holy kind of violence, he goes from God and
therefore of himself will never come to God.

First Use.
The first use is an use of examination; is it so, that drawing is before
coming, and that God works upon the soul to pluck it from sin before it
will depend upon the Lord Jesus? then hereby examine your souls, whether you
ever went to the Lord Jesus or no, and you shall know by this ground, that will
never ^ayle you: namely, observe how the Lord has wrought upon your souls in
this kind; have the cords of truth convinced you? have the cords of mercy
persuaded you? have the cords of conscience terrified you? have these cords
prevailed with you? if you never found this, then know, you never set foot
forward to salvation; do thou think to come to Christ without drawing? no
no: I speak this for two ends, to check the folly of some men, and reproove
the madness of other; it checks the idle dream and sottish conceit of those
that think they may have Christ at half an hours warning, that they can cast
themselves upon the Lord Jesus when they list; they make it a matter of nothing
to believe in Christ, if they can but have a little time upon their deathbeds
to consider of their sins and repent for them, then they will rest upon
Christ, and cast a good heart upon Christ in this case; this is a common and an
ordinary delusion; but people are deceived, that are of this opinion; what,
you come unto the Lord Jesus, and fling your hearts upon him without drawing?
it is all one as if we should conceive some great tree, some mighty oak to
pluck it self up by the roots from the place where it grows, and transplant
it self in another place; if this be unconceivable, the other is as
impossible; a tree cannot be plucked up from ground without a great deal of
digging and cutting, so it is with thy soul, thou art rooted into sin,
loving of them and living in them, and continuing in them; and therefore there
must be digging and hewing, and breaking and cutting off that proud sturdy
heart of thine; before that day come, it will cost thee hot water; the Lord
must come down from heaven, the master of the vineyard must come down and hew
down those trees, and cut you off from the rebellions of Adam, before you can
be implanted into Christ; never think of coming to God before you have been
drawn by God: besides, as this checks the folly of those men, so it
overthrowes the madness of some men, that content themselves, because they
never were in this condition, they were never drawn, they count this a matter
of comfort, they were never no changlings, this horror of conscience they
never saw it, and they bless the Lord that they never saw that day; oh poor
fools, is this the credit you have, and the comfort you take, that you were
never humbled and drawn unto God; it is as though a prodigal child should
bless himself, that his father loved him, because his father never cared for
him, but cast him off; you would think that that man were quite void of all
reason and understanding that would bless himself because of this condition;
if thou never had thy eyes opened, nor thy conscience awakened, thy soul
never loosened from corruptions, I tell thee, it is the sorest argument in the
world against thee; he that walks is his evil ways and is not troubled and
disquieted, take heed of it, for the Lord Jesus sake; it is one of the heaviest
arguments against thee; for the Lord says to Jerusalem, I will not punish your
daughters for committing of adultery: mark that, as if he had said, commit
adultery if thou will, and take up thy course if thou will, I will not plague
thee here, but I will punish thee for all hereafter; and it is observable, Hos.
4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone: as who should say, let him
take up his own way, and walk in the imaginations of his heart, and let him not
be disturbed; it is a sore suspicion that God never purposes to work upon
thee, when he lets thee lie in ungodly courses without any contradiction;
thou art proud, and thou may be so; thou art a drunkard, and thou may
continue so still; thy conscience gives thee way, it never troubles thee; when
God never terrifieth thee and draws thee, it is an argument that God never
means to offer any more good unto thee; and do thou content thy self in
the greatest curse that ever befell any man under the Sun? you would think
it were a mad frantic thing if a man were in a deep pit where he could not
help himself, but must needs perish; if he should glory in this case and say,
I am here in this pit, and if I get not out I shall perish, yet this is my
comfort, no body looks after me, no body will vouchsafe to help me; this is
thy condition, thou art funke down into thy sins, and let down into the
bottom of hell, thou stickest there and art like to perish there, and yet for
all this thou gloriest, and boastest, and say, the Lord will not open my
eyes, the Lord will not draw, the Lord will not persuade me, and work upon me,
and therefore thou art like to continue there and be confounded there; is this
thy glory? it is the greatest curse that ever befell any man, and therefore if
there be any whose eyes God has opened, has the Lord let in the cord of
conscience into thy soul, and let in the flashes of hell fire and brought thee
almost to despair, then blessed be the name of God, thou art drawing, go
home, be comforted, thou go in the right way, be not disquieted in this
condition, the Lord is now drawing of thee, he will anon bring thee to
himself.

Second Use.
Secondly, it is a word of direction, if there must be drawing before there can
be coming, then what are we to be advised of but this, to bless God for his
work, when we see it in our selves or others; wheresoever your see this work
wrought in your selves, or those that belong unto you, bless God for that
mercy; it is a good ground that God intends good to a man when he begins
the right way; and observe this to check that conceit, and overthrow that
cursed opinion; it is the ordinary practice of carn^ll men in the world if any
that belong to them be awakened and humbled, they count it the heaviest curse
that ever befell them, the greatest cross that ever came to their houses, the
wife, and the child, is undone; they complain the wife is so holy, and the
servants so devout, that if there be any spare time, they then go to reading
and praying; I wonder whither they will go next I trow; I tell thee, whither
they will go next, they are going now to Christ, and the next journey they
take they will go to heaven, this is the worst news, and art not thou ashamed
to complain of this: if there be any soul present that is guilty of this
crime, take notice of it; art thou content thy wife should take up her loose
adulterous courses and go to the devil, and not take up a good course and go
to the Lord Jesus Christ? when God is working upon men he is drawing of them
to himself, that they may go to the Lord Jesus, and receive mercy from the
Lord Jesus, and therefore I beseech the Lord to show men this sottish conceit,
and reform the same: when thou see God work upon a poor soul, then bless
God for the same; is thy wife that was an Adulteress before, now humbled, does
she now see her sins? then go into a corner and bless God for the same and
say, I have had an untoward wife, but now the Lord (blessed be his Name) has
humbled her; I had a loose servant that was given to drunkenness,
prophannesse, but now the Lord has opened his eyes and awakened his
conscience, and humbled his soul, and is drawing of him to himself, why
bless God for this his glorious comfort, be comforted herein, and encouraged
hereby, and bless God for the same.

FINIS.
The Table.
JOHN 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him.


Doctrine I. THat every man in his natural condition is fastened and settled in
the state of sin and corruption, Page 3. This appears in the dominion that
sin and Satan has over the soul p. 4. And secondly, in the amity that the
soul has to sin. p. 6 Use I. Instruction to in^orme our minds of the
woeful servitude and daily slavery that all men are in by nature. p. 7 Use II.
It is a word of Exhortation to all the Saints of God, to pity poor natural
creatures. p. 11 Doctrine II. The Lord by a holy kind of violence does pluck
the hearts of sinners from sin unto himself. p. 18 What is meant here by
drawing. vid. p. 20 The means whereby God draws the heart of a poor sinner
unto himself are four, Means I. The Lord lets in a light into the mind
of a poor sinner, and discovers unto him that he is in a wrong way. p. 26
Means II. The Lord does draw poor sinners unto himself with the cord of his
mercy. p. 30 This cable rope of Gods mercy is made up of four Cords. The first
Cord is this, The Lord reveals himself to be ready to receive poor sinners.
p. 31 The second Cord is this, The Lord does call and command sinners for to
come. p. 32 The third Cord is this, The Lord intreates and beseeches poor
sinners to come to receive mercy. p. 34 The fourth Cord is this, The Lord does
wait and stay in long patience and suffering, to see if at any time a sinner
will turn unto him. p. 38 Means III. The Lord draws poor sinners unto
himself by the iron cords of conscience. p. 40 These iron cords of conscience
have three maine h^^kes to pull sinners to the Lord, that is, there are three
great works of conscience, which God uses to work upon men to draw them from
sin to himself. p. 41. The first Hook of conscience is this, Conscience is
a warner to the soul, and admonishes it of sin, and to come from sin upon
pain of damnation. p. 41 The second Hook is this, Conscience accuses the
creature before God, and witnesses against him. p. 47 The third Hook is this,
Conscience at the last condemns the soul. p. 13 Means IV. The Lord draws
poor sinners unto himself by the Cord of his Spirit. p. 61 The Reasons why
the Lord does thus draw a sinner from sin to himself are three. p. 62.
Reason I. Because the strong man must first be cast out. p. 63 Reason II.
Because of that natural union between the soul and corruption. p. 64 Reason
III. Because of that sovereign kind of power that sin has over the soul,
and prevails within the soul. p. 67. Use I. It is a ground of Instruction to
teach all people to admire the inconceiveable goodness of the Lord to poor,
miserable, damned creatures. p. 70 Use II. It is a word of terror to discover
the woeful estate of all those that do set themselves against the work of
preparation. p. 74 Use III. It is a use of comfort and cons^lation to all poor
souls that are oppressed with their sins. p. 95 Use IV. It is a use of
Exhortation to all Gods people to endeavor to pluche others from sin; this
is the course God takes. p. 103 Use V. Of Examination to try your selves, how
you have been drawn to God. p. 114
FINIS

