A Medicinable Moral, that is, the two Books of Horace his Satyrs, Englyshed
according to the prescription of saint Hierome.

Episto. ad Ruffin. Quod malum est, muta.

The Wailyngs of the Prophet Hieremiah, done into English verse. Also
Epigrammes.

T. Drant.

Antidotis salutaris amaror.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Marshe. M.D.LXVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable my Lady Ba^on, and my lady Cicell, sisters, favorers
of learning and virtue.

TO THE READER.
GENTLE and Christian Reader, misery from our beginning: and tyranye of
appetyte to our ending. The one will master us by that we be borne: and the
other disquyet us to the very momente that we dye. The selynes of miserye,
should, and might be cawse in us to kill, and mortefie the appetyte: but we
make the soueraintye of our appetyte, a speedy introduction to all kind of
myserie. Appetyte is one way natural, and so far to be allowed of. Again
she is a lawles lustinge of the flesh, the which flesh is our own, so that
such appetyte, or lust, is our near allye, and in deed altogether sibbe us.
By the whith knotte of alliance she will still be acquainted, and upon long
acquaintance grow to a strong, and mighty credit with us: as, to lead, and
misleade us, and most unnaturally abuse us, her own natural kinsefolke, and
fosterers. The flesh wishes after sundry things, and that in sundry manner:
All the which lustynge, is concupiscence, or appetite: so that Appetite is
diverse, therefore her fruictes are manifold, her fruictes are sins, the
gua^don of sin is death: and because we are all loathe to dye, it were well
done we should mark some lessons auailable, and restoratiue to life. Sin is
not only fruitful in springinge, but if she be cropped, like Hydraes heads
in multiplyinge. It is therefore half a victory to beat her down: and a
tryumphante conqueste to houlde her down. Neither is she more strong then
fly, so that when she can not ouercum us by puissaunce, she will, and does
deceive us by guyle: and failinge to prevail as a tyraunte, she never fails
to play her pagiaunte as an Hypocryte. Worthilye therefore is she portrayed of
the best practysed, and most heedefull painters half cladde, and half bare.
The philophers say, the more gross part is apparent: and the more hurtefull
part covered or dissembled. So that here is wisdom There was never yet coin
so well stamped, but there has been forged diverse the like counterfeyts: and
the better coin, the more counterfeites thereof. The most clear and brighte
virtue, that has, or shall florishe was never so modeste in attire, but vice
(how drabbishe so ever she has been) has brought to pass to be compted as
demure, and matrone like. The more beautiful the virtue is the more dangerous
is her vicious counterfaite. And because each like thing tendreth his like,
therefore, semblable virtues are deceived in semblable vices. So that those
virtues (sely innocents as they be) receive for friends their enemies, for
true and very sisters, untrue and deceitful foes. Under the wings of many a
good virtue, slepeth soundly many a lewd vice. Likewise the likelyhode that
hipocrites seem to have with the best lived, is to them from time to time, a
quiet and most easefull harbor. Yea, the godly often times not so much had in
price, as their counterfaits, dissemblyng naughty packs. And how comes (think
you) to pass, this so blind and disordered a tragedy? because (as I erst
said) the more part of vice is covered. And as few or none with insyghte can
pearce through her clothes: so few or none do attempt to deuest or pluck of
her veil of hypocrisy. Horace was excellent good in his time, a much zealous
controller of sin, but chiefly one that with sharp satyrs and cutting
quippies, could well displaie and disease a gloser. The holy Prophet Jeremy
did rufully and waylingly lam^nte the deep and massy enormities of his times,
and earnestly prognosticate and forspeake the sorry and sower consequents that
came after, and sauce with tears the hard plagues that had gone before.
Therefore as it is mete for a man of god rather to weep then to jest: and not
indecent for a profane writer to be iestyng, and merry spoken: I have brought
to pass that the plaintiue Prophet Jeremy should weep at sin: and the
pleasant poet Horace should laugh at sin Not one kind of music deliteth
all passions: nor one salve for all greuances. If a man would calender in
mind the sequel of times, and whom the world dubbeth as worthies, and
culleth as her whelps, and how for shows and prattling of piety, she
proclaims fools holy, admireth fools, magnifieth fools: and how for not
pratyng of piety, or not glosyng, she misiudgeth the wise, discrediteth the
wise, prophaneth the wise: not a thousand Democrati, could suffice to laugh at
the one, nor a thousand Heracliti be enough to weep at the other. Horace
because he was not in any such time, wherein pretenced forwardness, was an
harvest to those that pretended it, and a despoiling winter blaste, to that
religion, wherefore it seemed to be pretended: he never se, yt with the view of
his eye, which his pensive translater can not but oueruew with the languishe of
his soul. Natheles such vices as were then flydge, and incident into that age,
he assaileth fearcely, and ratleth up bitterly. His eloquence is sometime to
sharp, and therefore I have blunted it, and somtymes to dull, and therefore I
have whetted it: helpyng him to ebb, and helpyng him to rife. I began this
work (a thing of small account) two years agone, or more, and have dispatched
it by piece meal, or inche meal, with small prejudice or none to my study or
profession. In the first and second Satire I have taken it a note beyond the
text: afterward plodded on much more precisely. At y^ beginning he is lofty,
but afterward wonderfully calmed. I dare not warraunt the Reader) to understand
him in all places, no more then he did me. Howbeit I have made him more
lightsom, well nie by the tone half (a small accomplishement for one of my
continuance) and if thou can not now in all points perceive him (thou must
bear with me) in soothe the default is thine own. This is a true assertion:
who so but knew the least part of Horace his satyrs, as they were before. may
now understand them all in their new English liuerey.

Deuteronomy. 21. cha.
FIRST I have done as the people of god were commanded to do with their captive
women that were hansome and beautiful: I have shaued of his hear, and pared
of his nails (that is) I have wyped away all his vanity and superfinitie of
matter. Further, I have for the most part drawn his private carpyng of this
or that man to a general mor^l. I have englished things not according to the
vain of the Latin propriety, but of our own vulgar tongue. I have interfarced
(to remove his obscurity, and sometimes to better his matter) much of mine
own deuysinge. I have peeced his reason, eekede, and mended his similitudes,
mollyfied his hardness, prolonged his cortall kind of speches, changed* and
much altered his words, but not his sentence: or at least (I dare say) not
his purpose. For short if thou canste credit me: do so. If not ask counsel
at his interpreters: and if some thing shall seem to the straunglye, or not
reasonablye done thou shalt find (I am sewer) that it came so to pass not
upon negligence but judgment. Otherwise if any will deceive him self in
mysiudgynge, he shall have much a do to make me angrye. For what so is spoken
of me sinisterlye through the speakers either evil will, or small skill, my
fashion is to be loath to hear it: but not wroth to revenge it* The poet is
thus: sometimes he wadeth very far in fetchinge out his matter, and somtymes
he is brittle, and soon broken of from his matter: So that thou must be deep
witted to begin with him and well witted to take him with thee* Thou must
(gentle reader) bring in thy self help to the understanding of him, and will
likewise to thine own amendmente. Or else it will but fall out with the
according to the tenor of this distichon.

(...)
(...).
Not he can get great lore, that skylles comes to hear,
Nor those ye never good were taught, can naught he^s bear
Priscus Grammaticus de Satyra. Satyra est carmen acerbum, instrume^tum mordax.
etc.
A Satyr, is a tarte and carpyng kind of verse,
An instrument to pynche the prankes of men,
And for as much as pynchynge instruments do perse,
Yclept it was full well a Satyr then.
A name of Arabique to it they gave:
For Satyr there, doothe signifye a glaue.
Or Satyra, of Satyrus, the mossye rude,
Unciuile god: for those that will them write
With taunting gyrds and glikes and gibes must vex the lewd,
Strain curtesy: ne reck of mortal spyte.
Shrouded in Moss, not shrynkyng for a shower
Deemyng of moss as of a regal bower.
Satyr of writhled waspyshe Saturn may be namde
The Satyrist must be a wasper in mood,
Testie and wroth with vice and hers, to see both blamde
But courteous and friendly to the good.
As Saturn cuttes of times with equal sithe:
So this man cuttes down sin, to coy and blythe.
Or Satyra of Satur thauthors must be full
Of fostred art, infarst in ballasde breast.
To teach the worldlyngs wit, whose witched brains are dull
The worste will pardie hearken to the best.
If that the Poet be not learnde in deed,
Much may he chatte, but few will mark his reed.
Lus^ll, (I wene) was parent of this nyppyng ryme:
Next hudlyng Horace, brave in Satyrs grace.
Thy praised Pamphlet (Persie) well detected crime
Sir Iuu^nall deserves the latter place.
The Satyrist loves Truth, none more then he.
An utter foe to fraud in each degree.
THE POET SPEAKS Reverently to his patron Maecenas, bytterly controlleth the
vnconstancye of men, and their chaungeable affections, that none of them will
content him with his share: and hereupon taking occasion, he does bend a
great part of his artillarye against the covetous: whose ravenous and
insatiable doings, he does egerly deteste and abhor.

RIght drad Mecenas what is the cause
that none content abide
In trayn^d trade, that whylome choice
or chance to them affyed?
But loves, and lykes, an others lote,
and novel life pursues.
Still flotes and flyts, from former fate
Ne brooks the same to use.
Thunwyldye warryer waste with toil
with grouelyng elde for spente,
O makelesse marchaunte mumbleth he
O state with bliss Yblent.
The fearful merchant he again,
When waltring wynd^s amayne
With plunging puffes, from Sothren cost
and hydiouse hissing rain,
Torments the Sea, hoistes up the waves
that does surmounte the sail,
Saunce pere does deem the souldyers guyse
for why, they tugge* they hayle
They pr^ase in plumpes on mortal iron
where eftesones either bayne
Is pressed: or gladsum trumpets clang
does blase tryumphante gain.
The counsailer for Meede, or fee
that parles, and pledes the laws
When at cocks crow, his gats are pushte
with hastinge Clyentes paws.
Then happy farmer often says he
for thou in golden sleep
Art soust: of mout or suite vndreamde
of bar thou bears no keep.
The chubbyshe gnof that toils and moyles
and delueth in the down,
If happlye he a suertie be,
so sent for into town;
Who gapes, who gawes, who pores, who pries
who proggs his mate but he?
Perfaye (says he), hers all things rise,
these people blessed be
The resydue that rests vnroulde,
the remnaunte that remain,
Of this new fanglde fickle flock,
would pose and put to pains
Fabie a common pratler.
The fabling Fabies tatling toungue:
to deskaunte and descriue
The route, and rabble, all a row
(a draughte to long to drive)
But that no tracte need trouble thee,
nor ambage breed delay,
Hark well how I will coutche this gere,
put case some god would say
Your lykings all, allowde shall be,
and thou that erste in feilde
The maces keen, the grounded sword,
the Tucke, the targe, the sheilde,
Was wunte to wild, with passage moist
shall cut the frothie plain,
A merye marchaunte shalt thou row.
and thou that didste disdain
To live and lead the Lawyers life
shall mucker in the ground.
Be trudgging hence, your trades are turnde,
why stand you still in stounde?
They will not tho, although they might
accept this blisfulle boune.
Then what is the cause that Jove thus mockd
may not condinglye soon
In irefull mode, and dyre revenge
engourge his puffed cheeks
Gaynste all this sort? and spreed no ear
to them that hensforth seeks
And suies with pratlynge prayer to chop
and change their proved plighte.
But lest some man should houlde me in hand
my tretys is to light,
To much with laughter interlasde
(albeit the gester may
Harp on a soothe, (else God for bid)
and toys may keep and stay
Sumtimes the reeder very well,
as those that teach in schools,
With buttred bread, or featusse knacks
will lewre the little fools,
To learn a pase their A. B. C.
I will be at a point
With nyfles now. I Will turn the leaf
and waightye things disiointe.
The Churl that shreds the earth, with share,
and wreakes the yeeldynge leas,
The marryner that shaues the stream
and furrouse uncouth seas:
The Tauerner that falsethe oaths
and little reckes to lie,
The souldyer that does deal the battes
and makes his foes to fly
They say the cause they travail thus,
that thus they care and carke
Is this: That when vnnimble age
has rest them of their warke:
When fumbling foot denies to meeue
when hand nil houlde or hente
That then they might suffisaunce have
lest easles need them shente.
Not much unlike the little ant
(a beast of tydye toil)
Who draws and dragges her delycates
ore wharte the hilly soil
By might of mouth, in all she may
and placed in her cell,
She stickleth, and bestirres her self
She huswyfes it right well.
She carues it fine, and mings it thick
and shroudes it under roof
As one, that of the wynters wrath
Were not to learn the proof,
Ne yet to care for after clappes.
Whereby when Ianyuere
That myrethe all the costs with slete
and saddes the ginning year.
With aspere shours does cause the clouds
and welken aye to weep
Then Lady Pismyer stirrs no where
she is claspde in closset deep.
She keeps her Chrystenmasse in cave
and there they make bone cheer.
They feed and feel the fruit of that,
which once they got yfeare:
And wyselye to, but the (alas)
not Phoebus flaminge brande,
Nor greuouse, mumming could that maks
the chillyng sen^elesse hand
Nor fearful fire, that flusheth up
and fumes to pitchye smoke:
Nor stormye seas whose oppen jaws
suppes up without all choke
The straglinge ships: nor weapon whet
Nor ought can the deter
From hunting after hurtful horde
for whilste some such there are
That swim in wealth, and the surpass
in rytches or in robes,
Thy glutton mind will never stay
still, still thy stomach crobbs.
What vayles it the so quakinglye
to grubbe and grip the moulde,
And there in hucker mucker hyde
thy Idalle God thy goulde?
If that thou spend and sparple it
no dodkin will abide:
The deuille may dance in crosslesse purse
when coin has took his tide.
And if thou snudge, and save it sound
and cofferte from the son
What show then has thy hidden hepe
what lust is therebye wonn?
Admit on flore thou haste in store
an hundredth thousand mets
Of corn dehuskde: what cums thereby?
thy belly houldes nor getts
No more then mine: as if in case
to feelde thou shouldeste fair
With scrippe on back, fulle frayghte with food
and straighte as thou cums their
The hungrye hunts must have it all,
what makes thou by this match?
As much as he that carries naught
(certes a woorthye catch.)
Or else per friendship answer this,
to him that doothe propounde
Nature his guide, and treads her steps,
what booteth him of ground
Whether an hundredth acres he
or else a thousand tills:
Thou saiste he feddes the eye the more,
that from the huge hepe fills*
Well sir no force, if that you will
but condescende to this
That our repaste does riot shun,
and reasonable is
To keep the soul and Carcas cheyn^
to stynte the pyning stynge
Of hungers gnaw, and that we have
a mean of every thing:
Why the^ what doste thou boste so much,
thy plumes why doste thou spread?
What better is thy barnes, then our
small sackes that serve our neade?
Much like for southe, as if that thou
a pot or pitcher must
With lykor lode, and mights it fille
at fountain hereby tuste,
And yet for fond affection, thou,
to please thy gredye eye,
Shouldste wend: unto the flowing stream
where greater gulfes do fly.
At which whilste some have reached far
and proferde over fast,
The ba^cke has burste, that down they lush,
and so be drente at last.
But he that leanes to temperaunce,
and anchoures on her lore,
And takes so much as serves his turn,
and gapes to grype no more,
Him needs not draw the drubbled dreggs
of fawle by durtye poole,
Nor yet for deuelishe thirste to have
(as one from virtues school
Exempted quite) fetch from the brim
and ouerwhelming waves,
Where now and then (O just reward)
in raginge surge sum taues.
The Cristalle spring shall work his will
and silver channelde wells
Shall yield enough, where lurcks no dread,
where slyme ne slabber dwells.
But out (alas) the greater part,
with sweet empoysned bate
Of welthe bewitchde do weeue their wants
abundance in each state
For monye maks and mars (say they
and coin it keeps the coil
It byndes the bear, it rules the roste
it putts all things to foil.
A man's his money and no more,
wherein confused is
An heaven of happs, a world of weeles,
an hunnye bath of bliss.
O dottrells dome, and is it so*
what guardon for these doultes
Shall we deuyse? lets suffer still
the foolish frantycke foultes
To wallowe in their wilfulnes,
whose under eating minds
Is never crainde, but prools for more
and swarues not from their kinds.
Such one we read of in old time
that dwelte in Athins town
A man in substance passinge rytche
nathlesse a niggerde cloune,
At whose scarceheade and couetyce
the world did outas make,
But all in vain, he forest it not
he sought not how to slake.
Black fame, that frisked every wheare
and bounsed at ytche ear^,
A fig for them (quod brazen face)
I force not how I hear.
They hawk, they hem, they hiss at me,
I weygh it not an hawe,
Whilste I may harbor in mine arc,
and lodge within my law.
My darlynge goulde, my leaueste gueste,
my solace and my glee,
He is the bone companion,
its he that cheares up me.
Ah simple cheer considering all,
grave Tantale in thyn heart,
His fee did feed his fatalle fall,
his mucke procured his smarte.
Whose lips as dry as any kykkes
does often assay to taste,
The licker, to allay the droughte?
that has nigh, all to waste
His intralls sterude for lack of moist,
the fluds to be his pain
They clim unto his very chinne
and then declyne again.
He catches and he snatcheth aye,
and stille he grates in teene,
And stille shall do, for panges stille spring
and freatinge sorrows grene.
I pray the now what cause haste thou
to sport and pleasaunce take?
To faune upon thy foolish goulde
which endless grief does make.
For thou induriste Tantalls fate,
and taking but his name,
This tale may well be toulde of the
thou art the very same.
Thy house, the hell, thy good the flood,
which though it do not starte,
Nor stir from the, yet has it so
in houlde thy seruyle heart,
That though in foysonne fulle thou swimmes,
and rattles in thy bags,
Yet toste thou art with dreadefulle dreams,
thy mind it waves and wagges,
And wishes after greater things,
and that, that's woorste of all,
Thou sparest it, as an hollye thing,
and doste thy self in thralle
Unto thy lowte, and cockescome like
thou doste but fille thine eye
With that, which should thy port preserve
and hoyste thine honor hye.
Thou scannes it, and thou toots vpponte
as though it were a warke
By practysde painters hand portrayde
with shadows subtle dark.
Is this the perfytte end of coin?
be these the very vayles
That money has, to serve thy syghte?
fie fie thy wisdom fayles.
Tharte miss insenste, thou canste not vste
thou wotes not what to do
Withal, by cates, bye bread bye drink,
in fine disburse it so,
That nature need not move her self,
nor with a betments scant
Distrainte, and prickd, pass forth her days
in pyne and pinchinge want.
To wake all night, with shiueringe corpse,
both night and day to quake,
To set in dread, and stand in awe
of thieves, lest they should break
Perforce thy doors, and robb thy chests,
and carue thy weasaunte pype:
Lest flickeryng fire should stroye thy den,
and sease with wastefull grype,
Upon thine house lest runagats
should pilfer ought from thee,
Be these thy gains, by rytches repde?
then this beheste to me.
O Jove betake, that I may be
deuoyde of all those gooddes
That brewes such banefull broils, or bring^
of fear such gastfull fluddes.
But if so been the pauling cold
thy limbs does ouergo.
Or else sum other worse disease
has daunte thy body so,
That down thou must, and bide in bed,
thy vauntage then is great,
At elbowe priest thou have thy friends
who will provide the meat.
And tender the even as them selves,
confections sweet or tarte
Theylle minge for the, such as best lykes
thy quasye wamblynge heart.
They Will treat the fine physician
with potions sound and sure,
By force and virtue of his skill
thy corpse for to recure,
And to restore thee to thy sons
and kyndely fryndes again.
Alas the while its no point so,
thy wife she works thy bayne,
Thy son he inlye lothes thy life,
his regreate and his plainte
Is ever fresh, because that death
does linger to attaynte
Thy hateful head, thy neighbors, and
thy chief acquaintance all
Thy sack, thy gille, thy kith, thy kin
does prosecute thy fall.
What maruayle is it, when thou have loud
thy silver as thy lord,
If none love the, whose loutishe life
deserude no louinge word?
But if thou thinckes thy alyes to link
in frindshippe and in faith,
And wenste thou maiste with small a do
from breach and folishe wrath
Keep tide the knot that nature knit:
Ah sillye manne, in vain
Thou doste surmise this fruitless fetch,
its far beyonte thy brain:
Perseueraunce in amity,
and duraunce still in love
Discordeth much from fickle man,
thou maiste as well above
The sluggishe ass a saddle couche,
with gold and perle befret,
And strain his jaws, with bridle brave
with goldsmithrye ybet,
And so to make him praunce, and plunge,
to friske, and gamballs fetch,
To chewe upon the spewinge bit,
and at his foes to retche,
With harneste house: as thou causte learn
the frail retyryng man
To tread in trace of truth outryghte
in truth as he began.
In fine, suppress thy lewd desire:
the more thou haste in store
The less pass thou for pouertye,
do travail for no more
Sense thou accomplishde haste thy will,
and purchesde wealth at ease:
O be not like Vmidius*
whose rauenouse disease.
It is not long for to discourse,
he that he might vpturne
His coumed coin, with shoules wide,
him self durst not adorn
With any weed that wealth besettes,
but like a miser right,
More ragged then a tatterde coulte
did pass the poreste wyghte
In pieces and in tatter wagges:
whylste that he had his wind,
And drew his breathe: he spent no jot,
afraid that he should find
Neade in oulde age: but (lo his wife
of greakishe dames most stout:
With grounded axe cut him in twain,
and rifted him throughoute.
What? is it best like Meuius
Couetouse.
the make away, to live? prodigal persons.
Or shall I like Nomen^anus
my gooddes to giglotts give?
A goodlye dishe, who taught the this?
Poet.
why doste thou thus compare
Extremyties? Is there no shifte,
all spend, or else all spare?
I would the not a nipfarthinge,
nor yet a niggarde have,
Will thou therefore, a drunkard be,
a dingthrifte, and a knave?
There is a difference betwixt
the gelded Eunuke ^aue:
And ^erniosus, hot as coals
that rank uncleanly swain.
A mean there is in matters all,
and certain bonds be pyghte,
On this side or beyond the which
no thing that's good can light.
But after long vagaryes fetchde,
to come to my request,
How happens it, his own estate
that no man lyketh best?
But teenes if that his neighbors goat
a bygger bag does bear
Then his, or yeeldes her milk sum deal
more flowyng and more clear:
Nor ever will compare him self
unto the greater sort,
Whose state is base, and bad as his,
who lives in mean apporte.
But roues, and shoots at further marks,
now him he does contend
To pass in coin: now him again,
and so there is no end.
For he that thincks to coat all men
and all to ouergoe,
In runnyng shall sum ritcher find
who still will bid him hoe.
Such posters may be likened well
unto the carters oulde
Of forayne world, on mount Olimpe
whose carts when they were roulde
With gyrefull sway, by course swyfters,
to win the glistring branche.
They ierted up their horse with whippes,
that forth they made them launche,
With boysterouse noise, like thunder clappes,
they made the quaueryng soil
To dindle and to shake again,
in hope of laurel spoil.
They never had respect to those
that once were cast behind,
But scourde to give the rest the slip,
with course as wyghte as wind.
Right semblablye, this carkynge kind
of men, do never eye
The route that they have ouerrun
in goods but haste, and hye
To retche the resydue and so
do aim above their strength
To prick, and pearse those marks, and whyts
that lie without their length.
Lo this is even the very ground,
this is the perfytte cause,
That most mislyke them selves so much,
and can no season pause
In blesfulnes: and this is it.
why very selde we find
A man so cloyed with the world
as he that new has dynde
Is with his meat, and that there is none
which in their extreme days
Will part from life, as full from feast
to go their homewarde ways.
To bannish all excess of talk,
let this suffyce as now,
And lest thou shouldste suppose by space
my talk might ouergrow
In bulk the bleare eyde Crispins roole
Crispine a writer against couetouse to excessive in talk.
whose tongue on pattans free
Did retchlesse run, even here I cease
not one word more of me.
THE POET STILL BLAMES ficklenes and unsteadfastness as of those, which
laboring to sail fro the yrcksom poole of avarice, do willyngly contend to
make shipwreck by the unfortunate waves of prodigalitye: he speaks against
fashions: they are thought to be noorses of pride, and follye.

The second Satyr.
THe stews, and stained house of drabbes,
thappotycaryes neat,
The beggars, and the tumbling trulle^
the horehunters, the great
And flockynge rakehell rabblement
of rags and raskals all
Be pensife, and through plungde with panges
to see the funeralle
Of Tygille, trustye frinde of theires,
who whilste he lived here,
Did carolle shrille, and trimly tune
his sonets sweet, and clear.
Their cause of greafe is sone expressde:
he was both free and francke,
They hanged on him, his purse kept them
so croustye, and so crancke.
But this man, Covetous.
clean contrary wise.
teschue, and shun the name
Of spendall, and of scatter good,
and fearyng such like blame
That does ensue outragiouse spence,
he will not give nor lend
One cross of coin, to clothe or feed
his nedie naked friend.
An other, Prodigal.
if thou question him
why that he does devour
His sire, and gransyres goods,
and turns town, and tow^^
All into naught, through greedynes
and foul delyting throat:
And why that he by gluttanye,
and stomach raging hot
Miscounsailed, does make assail
of lands, and lordshippe wide
To bye such curiouse cates, as best
will done his gullet glyde:
His answer is not far to fetch,
posthaste he will the say,
That he does thus set cock on hoope
and lauishly outlay
This mucke, and dross the world has sent,
because he would not seem
Like one of carlish abiecte mind,
so vile a thing testeme.
That answer say the never thriftes,
was given in the Cue,
Well fare his heart: the chuffes the same
with deep disprayse pursue.
Fusidius, a landed man,
a man whose fertyle feyldes,
Whose meadows fair, and glebye grounds
revenues ample yeeldes:
A man by art of vsarye,
by guyle, and treachers trade,
By fraud, and couin full of goods,
is very sore afraid
To spend amongste good company,
least on such prankes might spring
A iauall, or a ruffins name,
or sum such heynouse thing.
This Fusidie, to fille his purse,
and to enritch his store,
What soever cums by users skylle,
to get, and gender more,
He lays it to the captain heap,
whereof it rose, and grew:
He takes by year the fiftes of all,
and so he bredeth new.
And if a man through negligence,
perhapps be cast behind,
At partyng he shall pay for that
such fetches will he find.
Heild go me like a craftye coulte,
and listen every where,
To understand the names of those
that late delivered were
From government of masters sharp,
and ginnes to wear the weed,
That only manhood does beseme:
there there, he sowes his seed.
He mings deceit, he plyes the box,
he strues me such a train,
That straighte he is with them to bring,
(God wotes) unto their pain.
Thunbrydled brutes, the younckers that
are paste the cure and charge
Of Tutors grave, like lustye laddes,
do love, to roue at large,
To roiste, and revel with the best,
in suits of silks to flaunte:
The hard headed fathers they deny
such spences vain to grant:
Then cums this fox, this Fusidie,
with money priest in hand,
He byes before their fathers death
their lyueloode, and their land,
Who hearing such malingen wroughte
does not abrade, and cry,
Upon the greateste God of all,
that flings the fates from hye?
But they, the sillye fonded fools,
(such be the youthful brains)
Do feast him, for his lonesom love,
and highly praise his pains
Certes, a man should scarce believe,
how much this louelye wighte,
Whom others love, does love him self,
how he does deck, and dighte
His surlye corpse in rytche array,
what table he does keep,
Menedemus.
Almost as great as did the snudge,
whom Terence toulde to stepe,
And syncke in sorrows, and in sobbes,
for that he chaste his son
To Asie, there to pyke his crumbs,
which deed unkind ons done:
He brake up house, put myse to grass,
him self fed nothing fine,
With colewortes, and such carters cates,
often would the caytife dyne,
But here, if sum precysly ask,
what does this process mean?
It is to show, that whilste sum men
take care to keep them clean,
From blame, and blotte of one gross sin,
incontinente they are caughte,
Entangled with the contrary:
like dullerdes never taught.
A new fa^gled minion of that age.
Malkin* to make him singular,
a fashion fresh has found,
He swings and swoupes from street to street,
with gown that sweepes the ground,
And think you Malkin wants his mates?
no fie, that were a miss,
Another pleasant headed child,
in no sauce lyketh this.
To prove himself a pretye man,
and quaynte in his deuyse,
He maks his garmente to be shapde,
not of so large a syse:
For wot you what? he coortails it,
it hardlye hydes his rumpe,
Rufillus, he is perfumde with musk
Gorgom^, Sweat and fine.
smelles oath pumpe.
Mean, has no mantion in this flock,
they keep no steedy stay
In matter, and in novel shape,
they varye every day.
Sum one, or other lode star stille,
and what that he does use,
The resydue may not ne will,
for fashion sake refuse.
Fashions in all our gesterings,
fashions, in our attire,
Which (as the wise have thought) do cum,
and go in circled gyre.
Fashions, in nottynge of the hear,
in paring of the nails,
In Otho, and mustacho beardes,
thus fashions never fayles.
In the other sex, who would rehearse
their fashions, as they be,
Might even as well by augrisme tell,
the gravel of the Sea.
Those curiouse croustinge courtly dames,
whose spangled vestures sheene,
With stones and pearls, of pride, and pryse,
and emrades heavenly green,
Does give the glimmeringe, gloriouse show,
that feeds the gasers eyes,
And da^les quyte the simple lokes,
with leames, that from them flies:
The world perchance does think them gay,
and in a chief degree:
They be no better creatures,
then other people be:
Noe outward thing does better us,
no not our noble kind:
Not pearls, or gold: but pearlesse gifts
be praised in Godly mind.
All else is toys, and all is vain,
and all when they have tryde,
Will once confess these things to be,
but nutriments of pride.
HE REPREHENDETH those* who be sharp accusers of others vices, and can be
content, either not to see, or dissemble their own. He dispraiseth the
Stoickes discipline, who thought, all sins to be a like, and equallye to be
punished: merylye after his manner, he begins with the ministrel Tygill, and
disaloweth of his mutabilitie of life.

The third Satyr.
IT is a fault, a common fault,
that all our minstrels use:
The more you seem to crave a song,
the more they will refuse.
Request them not they never cease:
right so would Tygille fair,
A singer of Sardinia,
though Caesar should not spare,
For his, and for his fathers sake
sum musyke to require.
Yet would his humble suite often times
cum short of his desire.
He might have forsde him thereunto:
but Tygille, if it had
Cumde in his brain, would of him self,
take on, as he were mad.
He, Bacchus ballets would record
sumtymes the trible part
Sum times, the quauerynge deskantdur^
sumtymes, to vaunte his art,
A boysterouse basse he bounsed out,
and iumbled on his stringes,
No dram he had of constancy:
so fickle in his things.
Often times, he ran, as fled from foe
oftetymes in solemn pace
He would proceade, as though he were
in serving Iunos grace.
Sumtymes, an hundredth waiting men,
sumtymes he kept but ten:
Sumtymes he spoke of potentats,
and on his honor then
Was all his talk: sumtymes, let me
one dishe well dighted have,
(Thus would he say), and one course gown
my corpse from could to save.
To this good husband, that could be
with pittance small content,
If sum good friendly man, of hope
ten hundred crowns had lent.
Within five days, no groate he had,
in purse, ne yet in cheste:
All night he wakde, whilste morning came,
all day he took his rest.
Was never man so little stayde.
but sum, will say to me,
And what are you, sum selye saint?
nay, half as ill as he:
One Meuius, did frumpe and floute
at Neuie, then away:
A friend of his, a stander by,
what serray what I say?
(Quod he): doste thou not know thy self,
nor think that we the know?
Meuius.
My self, yes, I wincke at my self:
Po.
Po therefore, a wincking dawe.
This is, a wicked, witless, love,
not to be wincked at:
Since, thou doste know, and see thy sin,
and use to wyncke at that:
What meaneste thou, in others faults,
so pearsantly to prye
With Egles syghte, or Epidaurs
Epidaure taken for all kind of serpents.
that subtle serpents eye?
But if in case, an other carpe
sum crime, he sees in thee,
He is too rash, and indiscreet,
and no good fellow he.
A sheep, a verey gestynge stock,
he treades his shoe awrye,
His gown sitts slack, his head vnkempte,
vnciuyle, by and by.
But he his good, and godly to,
and one that wills the well,
And though his body be not brave,
great wit may in him dwell.
Well, ryfle thou thy conscience,
and look thou be not led
With any vice, which nature has,
or custom in the bred.
"In feildes vnforowde fruit is none,
for brakes all over grows:
To blow retreat, and to return
from whence my matter flows:
If we do strongly love a thing,
and like verey much,
Though faults in it be euidente,
Yet we will see none such.
I would, in race of amytye
such dotage we might use,
And that virtue, by honest name,
such curtsye would excuse.
For as the father for ill shape,"
his son does not disdain:"
So friends, at times, must bear with friends,"
though faults in them remain."
The son he squynts, Systphus.
the father says
he has a pincking eye,
His legs misshapde, the father says,
his leg but stands awrye.
The parents pleasure much, to praise,
and prattle to the ladde,
Thy foot is verey great (says he)
thy foot is swelde to badde.
Haste thou, a friend, that dyets hard?
Well, call him thriftye than:"
Haste thou, a friend, a bragging lout?"
call him a follye man:"
The king of fellows, amongste friends,"
for him no better name."
Haste thou, a friend, with face of brass,"
that bragges without all shame?"
Compte him, of stearne, and haughtye heart,
that, well dare speak his mind:"
That will not flatter, nor yet fear,
how soever blows the wind.
If, he be subtle, call him sage,"
if wylye, call him wise:
This, this is it, that winnes thy friends,
and wun, in friendship ties.
But we, full ill construction,
of virtue self, do make
And eftsoon, do eclipps the praise
that's due for virtues sake.
For, if with us be conuersaunte
sum humble, lowly soul
We call him goose, and disarde doulte,
and fowlye fatted nowle.
And, if a man deal warylye,
and bear him self v^pryghte,
Amongste such folk, as fos^er fraud,
and practice slylye sleighte,
For name of skillful, wyttye man,
and one that takes good heed
He is a deep dissemblyng man,
and craftye for his meede.
If, that a man can not conceal,
but tell his verdicte free,
(As I Maecenas patron mine)
have done full often to thee:
If, that he speak to one that's whishte,
or looks on his book,
Or talk not all in printe or tune,
(say we) this coddes head, (look)
This ass, does want his common sense.
woes me, and out, (alas)
How do we aggrauate such laws,
as gainste our selves does pass?
For, faultlesse (doubtless) borne is none,
and he, is even the best,
Whose, life sincere admits few,
and with the least is priest.
A frindly man, (as meet it is)
the good, with bad will wey,
If much be bad, and more be good,
let soulderde friendship stay.
Let us, in equal ballaunce paise,
and do as we would have:
Wouldste thou thine own offenses cloak?
in others faults not rave.
It is but right, that mum, should mum,
and perdon, perdon crave.
For short, in that, the vice of wrath
will be our tenaunte still,
And brutishe part of moodie mind,
will lodge fections ill:
Why do we not, by reasons rule,
and by proportion just,
Deem of the crime, as it is done,
and mulcte it as we must?
If, that the master bid his man,
from board to take a dishe,
The man, does sipple up the brothe,
or feed on broken fish:
His master, hangs him straighte vpponte:
who will not houlde him mad
As Labec? Lab^o a lauishe toungu^d lo set. who still was barkyng at Auguste.
and why not thou
as frantyke, and as bad?
Thy friend offendes, and graunts his guilt,
thou, wilt him not forgive,
What art thou then? a testye churl,
great pittye thou shouldste live.
If thou him hate, and shun his syghte,
(as Drusos detters do)
Thou shalt be dresde, like Drusos self,
he, A creditours
for to lend to more,
Does sheare, and shave and powle, and press,
well, when his audit cums,
When he most hopes of best recepte
and to surue we his sums.
Then, gawlye words (for fear of strypes)
(when he his coumpts has red)
He does put up, with cap, and knee,
at those which from him fled.
A good fellow.
Euander cums unto my house,
perhapps, he drincks to much,
Or breaks a judge, or stains my gown,
or, eats my dyat, such,
As was preparde, and plasde for me,
is he, the less for this,
A merry grigge, a iocande friend,
for every sillye miss?
Should I, go baull a main^at him,
as he had pickte my purse,
Or me discryde, his pledge denied
or done sum thing, that's worse?
Who, almost has at any time
thought faltes of equal weyghte?
Philosophers, (that bookish brood)
may, teach the thing by sleighte
But skille, and practyse counterplea,
and profit it denies,
Justice rather by profit then nature.
Profyt, the nurse of just, and right,
as time, and sequel tryes.
When man, abandon first the earth,
and scraulde out of the moulde,
(A dum vnwyldye creature)
through hunger, and through could,
For food, and harbor began they fray:
at first, with tooth, and nail,
And then, with clubbes, and then with swor^
which use, had taught tassayle:
Whilste words, ambasdors of the heart
(for to bewray the mind)
Were put in ure: and names applied,
then, to conserve their kind,
They seaste from wars: made rear up walls:
and poundinge laws did make,
That none should filche, nor any rob,
that none should wedlock brake.
For, or that cytyes had their walls,
or, Helen, came to Troy,
Have women, bathde the world in blood,
(the cause of dyre annoye)
But, of the slain was no record.
they raunged, in eatche where,
No spousailes known, more brute, then beasts,
the make; knew not his fear.
The mightieste man, like Bulle in herd,
did wreake, the meaner sort:
Thus, grant you must, that fear of wrong,
set lady law in forte.
If, thou will calender in mind,
the consequents of tides,
By notinge, long dyssente of time,
in what effect, it glydes:
Well maiste thou see, that nature felth,
What like, what leave, we must,
Yet, nature, has no pollycye,
to sever wrong, from just.
But reason, bearing stroke in that,
for profit patrons right
If, reason reele, the^, profytte paynts,
reason, saues both, by might,
And, as she does: so, will not she,
use argument, that he,
Which stealthe from hedge, and stealthe from church,
in like offense should be,
Let, discipline alleuied be,
in measure, to the vice,
When, light correction may take place,
fare not, in tyraunts wise:
Ne yet, when great outrage, is wroughte,
with ferule, do not stryke.
Where justice slakes, there fear decays,
when, thou makste all faults like,
As purloyninge, with burglarye,
or robbinge by the way,
Trespass, with crime, does not thy doume,
fordome to us, and say?
That, thou, indede, in like effect,
wouldste execute, the thing*
If choice, by voice, had hoyste the up,
invested, once a King:
A king, each stoicke, is king,
for, stoics all, be wise:
And, wisdom, is it self, a wealth:
through wealth, do princes rise:
Wysedom, is all: but, thou art wise:
then, safelye, be of cheer,
Thou art fair, strong, and eke, a king,
a cobbler, though thou were.
What, will thou more? Sto: yes, Chrysip says,
the wise man, mends no moyle,
Nor, soles no shoes: Poe: lo, thus, thou weanes,
to turn me, to a toil.
The wise man, though, he leave the act,
reteynes the art, as how?
Hermogines, sings not, at all:
Yet, musyke, he does know.
Alphenus, made away, his tools,
broke, shop up, long a go,
Is he, not, an artyficer,
or not, a crafts man, thoe?
The wise knows most, who, knows most,
must, bear away the name
Of facultye: de bar, them not,
but, let them, have the same:
To rule a realm, is facultye,
which, none, but wise, can tell:
If they can rule, though, they rule not,
Kings, are they, by this spell.
The stoicke, wise: the wise, can rule:
to can, is, full as much,
As, though he did: a Realm, he can:
then, let his name, be such.
Can rule, is rule: none can, but wise:
the stoicke, only wise:
The stoicke, therefore, only king,
by this, so strayte a rise.
Yea, Wit alone insufficiaun^e in regalitie, if it be bereft of other solemn
and laudable appertinente.
stoicke, art, thou create king,
then, must thou, mainteyne port:
Else, wagges, in streets, will twitche, thy bearde*
and make, at the, a sport.
Except, thou take the, to thy hands,
and fence the, with a stick:
Theille, make the braste, for agonye,
in crowding, the so thick.
And, thou, a wise, wit puisaunte king,
that, houlde thy crown, by wit:
Shalt, be enforste, to howl, and cry,
(for such a state, unfit.)
In brief, when, thou, a king, at meals,
doste rise, or, sit thee down,
So, sore precyse, thou art, that, none
will bide thee, Cryspine.
but, sum clown.
But, if, that I, miscarye ought,
my friends, will make, the best,
So, I, to them, so, they, to me,
and this, ingendreth rest.
Thus, do I pass, my pleasant days,
and fear, no stormye thing,
This private life, I would not change,
with the, pretensed king.
HE DEFENDS HIM self, against those who had reported him to have been
slaunderouse, sharp, and corrosiue: He touches Lusilius not to condemn his
doings, but to have the^ amended. He professes to speak against no man,
upon superfluity or disease of the brain, but upon a mere francknesse, and
liberty of the mind: specially, he rebukes them, which will kycke and
resist when they should be cured.

The fourth Satyr.
THe Poet Aristophanes
Eupolis, and Cratyne,
And ancients more, whose interludes,
are sauste, with sayings fine,
If any person were mislyude,
in theft, or leachers lore,
Or were a roisting quareller,
they would display him sore,
Hence, Lusill boroud all his vain,
those presidents, he took
The matter sharp, the feet, but chaungde,
the form, full sleke, did look.
In deed, the sence^ was too to tarte,
within an hours space,
Two hundredth verses he would make,
thought he, a gift of grace.
And would not move his foot withal,
But, huddle he would roll,
To half, might wellbene scummed of
an idle chatting soul.
A milk sop long to pen a work,
much more to pen it well,
The length is not material,
the scapes he must expel.
Crispinus, that great length lover
with finger, does me call,
And darreins combats, if I dare,
should Crispine me appall?
Nay, there is my glove, give velom here,
give judges time and place,
Lets see which one can more indyte,
and with a better grace.
Well have the godds appointed me,
of no corragious wit,
And speaking seelde that I ne should,
confound the foul with it.
But thou (sir Crispine) in thy mind,
assembles fansyes often,
As bellows sup and beltch out wyndes,
to make the iron soffe.
O learn not so to puff and blow,
saint Fannie follow well, Fannie an arche Ass or blockheade in whose
memorial was erected a block.

That thou bestowde in surlye tomb
thy statues here may dwell
As for my works oblivion.
will raze them out of mind:
A few or none that will, or dare,
behoulde them can I find.
Wot you not why? corrosyue style,
is corsey to the eye."
They dream a thing that blamed here,
their counterfette should lie.
They dream a truth for find me one,
amongste the sons of men:
But love of goods, or love of rule,
does fond him now and then.
Sum, live catesnd in cupids chains,
and sum love blasinge gold,
And sum a sum of silver white,
or curraunte metal would.
Sum, keep exchange, from East, to Weste,
and sore upon the Seas:
Toste and retoste, (like wherlywynde duste)
ekynge their own disease,
For mainteynaunce, of gotten stock,
or else to make it more.
All these do stand in awe, of rymes,
and hate the Poets sore.
The Poets proyne, beware (say they)
that they may ieste their fill,
They spare no speech, they spare no friend
fools lauishe, and to ill.
And if their toys, in letters lymde
be printed once in book:
Then all the world must take the vewe
and all sorts on them look.
If this be true: then hark again,
I am no Poet, I.
No Poet, such as is discryude,
am not I so? and why?
Not he a Poet, that can make
an haltinge hudlynge verse:
Nor he in paltrye daily talk
that can his tale rehearse.
Him Poet dub, whose wit is sharp,
whose mind does mount on hye
Whose throat is shyrle in trumpet wise,
to coutche men's ads in sky.
Therefore demand has once been made,
if comedies might be
A poecye, sythence in them
the spirit puffes not free.
No gorgiouse sound in word or sense,
save that in verse it runs:
From prose in differs but by foot,
but (lo) the father burns
In pelting chafe, for that his son
on wantons madded is,
And leaves a spouse of noble dowre
this breeds a tempeste, this.
And that with torche in twylightinge
he treades the romye streets.
How say you have not comedies
their vigors, and their spreets.
Old Pomponie, Pomponius an impacient nygard.
if he had lyude,
what stir now would he keep,
(Thing comicall because his son,
is drente in debte so deep?
And what though father ^ompon^e,
should grate his gaul in twain,
Affection makes no poecye,
but lustye, loftye vain.
Its not enough to pen a verse,
in vernishde words and pure,
Each word alone, must have his sound,
and seem not to demure.
Those simple words, playmakers use,
those use Lusille and I.
So nyse, so neat, so numberouse,
that alls not worth a fly.
Disorder but the glydinge gate,
the words appe^reth tame,
No gloss there is of majesty,
not such as in this same.
Foul moodie Mars broke brazen bars,
bare boulstred boulwarkes back.
These words transposde, yet each one has
of Poesye a smacke:
And thus much now an other time
if rymes allowde may be.
But now, why should this kind of style,
be so suspecte in me.
Promoters seek, and pere each where,
and use to work much woe,
Accusynge and molestyng men,
wheresoever they do go.
Feared, and much addrad of thieves,
and losels loose of life,
Not fearde, of those that pilfer not,
nor broche no brabling strife
Birrus and C^lius, for all naughty packes.
Admit, thou warte a naughty pack,
as diverse other be,
I am not one that does promote,
why art thou frayde of me?
My verses give no gase from walls,
ne yet in tauernes fly,
Not ^^gille nor such alecunners
my works do ouerprye.
I show them but to very friends,
and at their great request:
Not to each hobb, nor every where.
sum be that think it best,
Their quaynte deuyses to proclaim,
in market fair, and mart:
To read them grave, and sound them brave,
and to unfold their art.
Such pleasure, have pride practisers,
who do it not to mende,
Nor learn a decency in things,
for no such honest end.
A malliperte, a merchaunte I
of mallyce (thou will say)
I use this talk: whence issude this,
gainste me that thou doste lay:
Or which of my companions
has this instilde to the?
Who pincheth at his friend not priest,
or if he burdned be.
Does not alleuyate his blame,"
who scoffs to make men smyle,
Who plyes for to be plausible,"
and does his flowtinge file.
Who can inuente things never mente,"
who nothing can conceal:
Such one is naughtes, beware of him,
and naught to him reveal."
Sumtymes, at table thou shalt see,
a dosen more or less,
Each seekynge each, ort wharte the thums,
with tauntes and terms to dress.
Their host they spare, for manner sake,
till Bacchus tide be up:
Then out must all mine host, mine host
is scande at every cup.
Railing thou hates, yet doste thou coumpte
raylers but merry men,
Good fellows, francke and free of speech,
If I have iested then,
A Rufills taste, Gorgonies smell,
(two paragons of pride)
I am no freatinge ghost therefore,
nor slaundrouse: all things tryde.
If chance we talk of Petills pranckes
how he from tower stole,
A massye piece of bullion gold,
(to twyne thy tale in hole)
Thou shapes it thus: (as is thy trade)
Petille I know him well,
I have sum cause, to speak for him,
for he and I did dwell
Of childerne little, in one house,
my fellow and my friend,
Much has he done, for me at times,
I found him ever kind.
And yet I maruayle how he could
rub out this trespass so.
Logille a fish white without and black within.
(Lo) here a craftye postles part,
lo here a Logille lo
Ha, false malignaunte wreaking mind,
this vice I do expel,
As cancre freate, from heart and book,
most true it is I tell,
For certainty I like it not,
then license me the more,
To guess aloufe, not hard to scratche
but clawe about the sore.
My father, he did usually,
dehorte me from this sin,
By manifold examples, which,
through talk, he would bring in.
Still warning me not to ingrate,
nor seek not much to live
But thryftylie contentedly
Old Horace his talk.

I^bie and Barns Scattergooddes.


enjoy that he would give.
Maiste thou not see young Alba now
how he is cumde to naught,
Backbyting Bar most begge^like*
Ingrayle them in thy thought.
Two presidents, that thou ne shouldste,
thy fathers good mispende,
But when he would dehorte from love,
his talk was to this end.
Dissemblable to Sectans sort,
Sectan wanton and amou^ouse. So Trebon.
no brothelmonger be,
Keep wedlock chaste, let Trebons name,
be warninge unto thee.
The wise men with their moralls sage,
by reason could the guide,
Suffyseth me that I can give,
such counsel as I tryde.
And if my sawes, in time take place,
for teacher haste thou none,
When grows, and years shall make the man,
youths shipwreck, will be gone.
Thus would he turn my plyant youth,
and what he wild in word,
For pattern, he would bid me mark,
the life of sum good Lord.
So, if he would inhibit me,
this is no godly deed
My son (says he): and here upon,
sum foul report will breed.
For even like, as when neighbors dye,
the sickmans changing lust,
For fear does stay, and is content,"
to cum to diet just:
So skillesse youth to see defame,"
of others, may take heed,
And slip not into vices snare,"
nor listen to her reed.
Hereby I stayed my tempting age,"
and did no haynouse sin
In easy crimes, and venial
I have been trapped in.
And these, (no doubt) will wayne away
and ebb as they did rise,
By help of years, by friends reproof,
and by mine own aduyce.
As I lie in my bed sumtymes,
on matters thus I muse,
Thrifte, would do thus, right does diswade.
that I should thus me use.
Thus could I make my cheerful friends:
this was a foolish part:
Was I so fondlye ouerseene?
a fool sone flings his darte
Thus do I mutter in my mind,
Ere while at cards I play,
(A fault, amongste the meaner faults)
forgive me. Thou saieste nay.
Then Poets all, preas on, preas on
help at a pinche: no dreede,
We be so ryotouse a route,
who says but we shall speed?
The multitude can not be sed from their fan^ses, no not for truths sake.
As Jews do measure all by might,
that none dare them forsake:
So we by number will men force.
in league with us to take.
THE FIFTE SATIRE, which the Poet had written of his iorneying to and fro,
wholye altered by the translator.
Friend Horace though you may me use
as to translate your verse,
Yet your exployte I do refues,
at this time ^o rehearse.
Not every trick, nor every toye,
that flows from your brain,
Are incident into my p^n,
nor worthy of my pain.
(If all be true that sum surmyse)
for diverse think it good,
To have discriude the clatteringe broils,
of Mauors raging wood:
Or for to know the climats hye,
to clym unto the skies:
To view the stars, their placing eeke
and how they set and rise.
Or for to read the quiddityes
and queerks of logique dark,
To hear the babblinge sophisters,
how they for naught can bark.
Or for to write things natural,
things mystical and geason:
The harmony of elements
how they accord by reason.
To sterte up in astrology
the casuals of men
To limit, and forlote by art,
to show by whom and when,
Things were conueyde: and to erecte
through what aspecte and why,
Pompey abroad, Caesar at home,
were fortuned to dye.
To tell how man a creature,
of reasonable mind
Is sociable, apt, and fit,
to company by kind.
To read the sacred histories,
of man how he began:
How first he f^ll, through whom he fell,
what of him self he can.
To learn the helps of holy tongue
the doctors to peruse:
To course the schoolmen, as they ^ye
and Horace to refuse.
Those cacklinge pyes, that use to prate,
so much against humanytye,
Are commonly the lewdest dawes,
and skillesse in divinity.
The antique fathers used it much,
thapostle does the same:
Now all must down, in pullinge down
that fools may get a name.
Some innovation must be made
or change of used things,
Needs must there be: when all would pass
and all would needs be kings.
Moses in writing his five books
confearde with profane time
Yet few or none, that I have hard,
appeached him of crime.
From Egipte, we may borow still,
it never was forbed,
So it be for the weal of man
and glory of our God.
To read sole scriptures, is I grant
a thing of lesser pains,
And those that feign would have it so
would have it so for gains:
Unable for to get of toungues.
or scyences a skyll
Then cry they soul diuinitye,
as though the rest were ill.
Divinity is gloriouse
and they but idle praters
Gainste whose outrage, a man might well
write forty godly Satyrs.
The wise can read humanitye
and beautifye their wit,
whileste fools sit tatlyng to and fro
in talkinge against it.
A good divine might the translate
(Horace) I can it prove:
Who so denies, I do not doubt
to cast him down my glove.
And yet such is the matter now
whereon thou doste indyte,
That I must play the Poet needs,
and wots not what to write.
Thy laurel green betake to me,
thy gown of scarlet read,
And prove a nouice how I can
in after steps I tread.
Feign me to have a Poets art,
a natyue Poets brain:
A very Poet, saving that
I use not for to feign.
Dames of Pernas, of Helicon,
whence Pegas horse did fly:
(If yours it be) grant this to me,
in process not to lie.
Nay, thou O truth, both God and man,
of whom I stand in awe:
Rule ore my words, that I ^e pass
the compass of thy law.
What should I write gaynst wickedness
how sin has all the hyre:
How wyghtes are wed to wretchedness,
captives to their desire?
The Prophets have bewailed that,
and he whose voice so shryll:
Both heaven and earth with plaintiff tune,
and dolours deep did fill.
The truth himself when he was here,
did truly things foretell:
And wept to see the sorry plagues,
that afterward befell.
If they moude few, if few would mark
the words of such like men:
How may the silly Satyrists,
hope for amendment then.
In vain for me to stir or keep
a racket with my rymes:
The sons of men, will still be men
and plyaunt to the times.
What should I write gaynst wickedness?
the world by her aduyce,
Has brought to pass, that most believe,
there is no kind of vice.
For couetyse is colored,
and though the Prophet king
Damn usurers, yet still we see
more practice of the thing.
Dame Gluttony is too to hye:
she keeps in ^ately halls,
And gurmundyse is fellowshyp,
for so the world it calls.
So lust is now a lordly thing,
and swearyng has a gra^e,
For swearynge couerde under zeal,
(alas) the cursed case.
What should one write, dissemblyng dawes
(a wondrous tale to tell)
The better birds of noble price,
by creakyng would expel.
The Popish dawes, whom all men knows,
To be still black of hue:
Do swear them selves best protestants,
and birds that's only true.
What should I write? by color all
true tytles they do steal,
And cover thousand trecheries,
under pretensed zeal.
To know the matter perfectly,
to understand it well:
Mark here what precise Commod^s,
to Pertinax doothe tell.
Think Commodus to be such one,
as covertly in heart,
Doothe worship all Idolatry,
and minds not to convert.
And yet through show of godly zeal,
our church would quite deface,
To help the popyshe kingdom up,
and to reteyne his place.
Think Pertinax a penyshe impe,
an impe of popyshe line.
Who still will be a Catholic,
(though all the books) divine,
Do prove his church an heretic.)
Sir Commodus kepes still
In England for commodity:
Sir Pertinax he will
To Louayne, to the mother church,
but how they both have sped,
Perceive that by their proper talks,
and what lives they have led.
The hunger waxes sharp and kene,
in Flemmyshe bareyn land,
And Pertinax bet home with pyne,
takes Commodus by the hand.
God save you gentle Commodus, Pertinax.

how have you fared long?
Na, Commodus.
verily even as you see,
well lykyng, fat, and strong,
Of credit never better I:
what urgent cause doothe make
You at this time from sacred soil,
your journey for to take?
When we went to the holy town, Pertinax.

from English flock infe^^te,
Our want was wealth, and coin at will,
we were an happy sect.
But our long stay, was our decay,
men grudgde to give us more:
And Sarum with his subtle book,
has cropte our credit sore.
Before, we gave a countenance,
to all the world so wide:
That our intent was wholly ^ent,
to have our quarrel tryde.
Such cautels had we to bear of,
that who against us did write,
We swore he was fallen from the Church,
of gyddynesse or spyte.
We bare them down that they were naught,
rash, raylyng, and ill spoken,
Lewd, and vnlearnde, but now^ our stythe
of forgery is broken.
Sarum has walkde so waryly,
(it greuthe me to name him)
That most of men do see his truth,
we wot not why to blame him.
Now they despair our prostrate cause,
and of our safe return:
And suffer us in beggary,
(Ah silly case) to mourn.
Commodus.
Ah silly case, nay silly fools,
you might have lived here,
In wealth and bliss, and even as there,
have kept your conscience clear.
Pertinax.
In deed your letter writ to me,
did signifye n^ less:
But how that you can use it so,
I would you should express.
Since I came last into the realm,
it was toulde me of truth,
That you above the rest of men,
use to be freattynge wroth
With ceremonies, is it so?
Jesus, what should one hope?
They say that you do cast them of,
as brought in by the Pope.
Can you speak so precisely here:
and bear us so in hand?
You are no doubt no Catholic
as now the case does stand.
No Catholyke: Common.
Ah Pertinax
thou art a merry man.
I speak, I grant against the pope
and speak the worste I can.
And profitte him yet more then you.
(perhaps ye gin to muse)
But hark to me and listen well
what practice I do use.
When you did cut the salt sea some,
with framed timbre board,
And yeade to Louaine there to hear,
the Latin Romish word,
Then stormynge in my thoughtfull breasts,
and sharp beset with cares,
In mortal waves I wandered still,
in maze of my affairs.
Fear cast in all extremities
what should I do thought I?
To sanctuary of papists
to Louaine should I fly?
That were a way to beggar me
to bring me unto need:
And in so doing, I should work,
the mother church small meede.
Aeneas came into my mind,
that feynde him self a greek,
And by that means made many souls,
Lord Dyt^s hall to seek.
He can not hurt his foe the most
that kepes the furste away:
I was resolude to keep me close,
and see a further stay.
I said my wounded conscience
did prickle more and more,
And wyshed after some of skyll
to remedy my sore.
I said my doubt was dangerous,
and therefore feign would have
Some clarkly man of eyensyght deep,
within the same to rave.
This was the tenor of my tale,
that I would common feign,
If some learnde man on the other side,
would take on him the pain.
The Protestants be merciful,
and glad to win us all:
In brefe the chief would me at length
to common with them call.
Their reasonyng was to and fro,
to win me if they could:
And I began as debonayre,
to render up the houlde.
Now hearken (oulde friend Pertinax)
what was the spedy key:
To open the lock of credits forte,
for me to bear a swey.
He that was counted too to fearse
and angry with the Pope,
I went to him, and prayde him often
my conscience for to grope.
Parted from him, I would proteste,
and openly would say:
That such one was the greatest clarke
that was on live this day.
He that was holden most of zeal,
and to the world the best:
Him would I praise above the son,
and so I purchased rest.
No more demand made of my faith.
I faynde me very ^elous:
Of other men, and said they were
drawebackes, and nothing zealous.
And still I praysde my confessors,
and made them so to swell,
Such pulpit hornetts by my means,
That none durst with them mell.
And what that they to feed their mind,
Or color else would speak:
I mayntaynde it with toothe and nail,
in all that I could creake.
Then was I dubde as true precise,
and faithful by and by,
And none was compted hoate enough,
save he and he and I.
I whysperde to and fro a pare,
and playde my part so free:
That quarells stepped up fal^e and fast,
A noble game to see.
And that the rest might learn to stoop,
and I might grow up still:
An other fetch by peecemeale, I
into them did instyll.
My masters lysten well (quod I)
take keep what I shall say.
Me thynks this church, this english church,
is clogged at this day,
With ceremonies more then needs,
to tell you at a word,
I would have all things just as they
were left us by the Lord.
This knew I was the deyntye dyshe,
that so their passions fed:
I am not now to learn I trow,
to bring a babe to bed.
Now, whether for true conscience,
or else that they might seem
Sole gospellers, and that the world,
might so of them esteem:
Or else through our suggestions,
they gnawed so this bone,
That O good God, I would to God
they had been let alone.
Nay trust me truly Pertinax
men would have been full feign,
To thruste out all those gospellers,
and send for you again.
How say you, was not this a drifte,
and that a drifte of hope?
Am I not now, as lege as you,
to our good lord the pope?
If there were talk of gospels grace,
of francknesse of our liberty,
Then would I whet my tongue to speak,
against the gift of pollyci^.
And that our service was consumde,
only in adoration:
Whereas the pryme church, used one prayer,
the rest in exhortation.
That ministers, why should they not?
might go even like the rest
In suits of silk, in sheynes of gold,
apparelde with the best.
That ministers might take and leave
their orders when they would:
I went about to make all naught
by all the means I could.
This was my greateste anchoure hold,
I ever cast it thus:
The worse it fared with their church,
the better much for us.
Untowarde case, unlucky case
Ah Pertinax I say
(As erst I said) a trumpe a trumpe,
was cast down in our way.
And he that cast it, has surueyde,
and markde our cards so well,
That all our driftes is now fordone,
and you abroad must dwell.
As for my self, who but my self
I never felt like ease:
Not stoutest of the protestants
dare me in ought displease.
I made my match I trow with such,
as dare not but vpbeare me:
What if I know their guilty prankes
and there upon they fear me?
Those wring and wreste the meaner sort,
whose minds and tongues are free,
And so imbecill all their strength,
that they are naught to me.
I now can dubbe a protestant,
and eke disdubbe again:
And make a Papiste graduate,
if he will quite my pain.
Liuinges are mine, geuynges are mine,
the countenance is mine:
Promotions come to me alone,
or where I will assygne.
Yea Pertinax if thou will come,
of Laberinth ne dreede.
I can conducte thee safe and sound,
by virtue of a threede.
I know who plays the catte, and how
her ioly krttles mouses,
I and my patrons leave small lore,
in some right famous houses.
And if there be not speedy healpe.
against me and my fools.
I Will drive their Gospel from the church,
and learning from the Schools.
In deed I study hard my self,
but to what end or why?
That I might get the greatest fee,
and put all others by.
As now I am, I could not wyshe
almost a better stay:
If the precyse crepe up again,
I know my wonted play.
In the mean time I tell them plain
they are the greatest clerks,
And that for their great constancy,
the total world them marks.
Yea I can tell them clawyngly
(but that is in their ear.)
That those which have deposde them thus,
are persecuters clear.
And if that some by policy,
in time do not prevent them,
I Will egg them on to speak some thing,
which spoken may repent them.
Well if that those get up again,
I keep my jolly stay:
And if sir Pertinax you come,
I will not go away.
So that come papist, or precyse,
or formal conformable,
The precisde Papist kepes his room,
like promontorie stable.
And yet, if thou as palpable,
my conscience could grope,
Shaklo^kes profession.
Of honesty, I am full true,
unto my lord the Pope.
May happs when I have filde my purse,
with taking all this pain.
I will go turn from Commodus
to Pertinax again.
What Commodus thou turns thy self Pertinax.

as one should turn the groate
Turn round, or else thou will be spyde
in turninge often thy coat.
Becawse, you talked of gropinge erste,
how chauncde it heretofore,
That you against the blessed pope,
so solemnlye have swore.
Speak out man, are you in a dumpe?
how durst you so far go?
Iuraui lingus, Commodus.
sed mentem
non iuratam gero.
I told them then, I spoke with tongue,
but never mente it so.
Why do you hear their service still, Pertinax.

a thing of such abusion?
I could not else abide with them, Commodus.

to help them to confusion.
What say you to the precyse stock, Pertinax.

are they resolude that way?
Sum part of them is like my self, Commodus.

the conformable say
That half of those which busylye
against those orders clatter,
Are Papists rank: as those may see
which will survey the matter.
Why do they make so strait account
of things that be but mean? Pertinax.

Pythagoras, why did he put Commodus.

man's soul within a bean?
What if your self for not wearyng Pertinax.

hereafter may be wrounge?
Tushe man I made them long ago, Commodus.

a verey Aesops tongue.
Pertinax.
Since you against these churchly rites
so long and sore did wynche,
How could you now resume again
so bucksome at a pynche?
Commodus.
I said (as often I use to say)
that I was very poor,
Nathlesse would give tone half I had
that I might wear no more.
Pertinax.
I go to healpe a papist now,
that ginnes for to recant,
Commodus.
And I go now, for to moleste
a silly protestant.
O noble force of flattery,
Farewell old fellow mine,
But so farewell that you keep close
and come to me to dyne.
Translatour.
Farewell a pair of hellyshe impes
of cankred Satan's race:
For you are enmies unto God,
And his in every place.
The true precise, none do despise,
but all men know it well,
That they in learning and good life,
most commonly excel.
Not one of us, but wylls them well
to keep their godly name.
Nor ever thought to prejudice,
or to eclips the same.
Some be so wise by Papists guile,
they can not be abusde:
Yet Commodus has fonded some,
it can not be excusde.
If I should write of Commodus
the crafts of such like men,
The trickling tears for hearty grief
would overlode my pen.
But none will look to Commodus,
he bears the bell away,
Some guardon due for his deserte,
The Lord will send one day.
The world is blearde with duskyng shoes,
and daselde with a gloss:
But I appeal unto the wise,
and crave redress of those.
Come what can come, how much can come,
I am at stay in mind:
Their net of zeal, wherewith they steal,
for ever to vnwynde.
Since God and our liege Sovereign
bulwarks to Truth do stand:
We fear not Commodus his craft,
nor Pertinax his hand.
THE POET REBVKETH those which d^co^mend vices in the nobility* and do judge
such worthy to bear rule, as also those which think, that none base borne
ought to have any access to promotion. He speaks to Mecenas, and commends
him as one which has respect only to virtue and godly qualities.

The sixte Satyr.
NOt due descent from haughty house,
nor thine Hetrurie land,
(Mine own good Lord) do the cause thy name,
and honor still to stand.
Not fathers sire, not mothers sire
to cheu^tant in field:
(About whose banners such a route
of lustye bloods bare shield.)
Induce thee to be insolent,
(as most of gentry be)
To make a mock of meaner men,
for thou acceptest me.
Whose mother was infranchised,
and sayste, it does not skyll
Of petigree, so that our own
demeanor be not ill.
Of this full well thou art resolude
Tullus a sorpressor of virtue.
before king Tullie began
So tyrannous a monarchy
imbecelyng freedom than
By virtues spray, the basest borne
might be the noblest man.
Leuynus agreate gentleman hated of the people for his naughtynes
notwithstanding the great admyration they have to gentry.
Leuinus, he whose ancestors
king Tarquine drove away:
Through life corrupt, and rainlesse youth
did work his fames decay.
Neglected of the commoners,
who only do admyre,
Nobility, and none but them
to honors would aspyre.
If it be so that lawless prankes
Yea nobles, discommendeth:
Who will praise us of baser blood
except our life amendeth?
For what if Leuyn were estemde
and Decie were not so?
Decius base borne.
Leuyn a lowte, and Decie stout,
Yet Leuins kyndred tho,
Might be induction to the rude,
to deem of him so well.
If that the counsayles President,
Appius.
perchance should me expel,
From Senate house, for vulgar stock,
This color would he make,
That base must bide in baser room
for civil profits sake.
But glitterynge glory rauysheth"
the poor and princely state:
And pleasurs not a jot at length:"
let Tullie spell his fate.
He might have past, his time in peace"
declinyng lordly life,
His royal robes rasde rancour up,
and rancoure termelesse strife."
Such is the world, who bears the swey
assuredly is scande,
How he came up, what parentage,"
what was his fathers land.
For, as the younger that would seem"
most hansome and most brave,
Does make the mo to mark the more"
if he such features have:
So, who so thinks to rule in realms,"
and aufull swey to bear,
To place, displace, to dubbe disdubbe,"
to keep the costs in fear:
The riflyng of his petigree,"
must think erewhyle to hear.
Durst thou (say they) a beggars brat,
in such outtakyng rage,
Take on thee thus, to head the pear,
to hang and draw the page?
Nouie, Nouie a pety sobber Paulus et Mass^la.
would be a counsayler
in law I pass him far.
Though not like some of fyled tongue
to parle a case at bar,
But, he can set a face of it,
with his forpenned tail,
In solemn syghtes, he thunders so,
that fauters never fail.
Let me speak well, speak what I can,
They laugh me still to scorn:
He is to base to rule say they,
in deed to basely borne.
Now grudge they me, because I am
becomde your household guest:
Before, because in war and f^ewe
my rule was next the best.
Things much unlike: for be it so,
that honors enuyde be,
As fortunes gifts, yet may I well
be suppliaunt to the:
Which art by choice of ponderyng wit,
of friends provided (lo)
Not roumerakers, nor rent rackers,
nor staynde with vices mo.
I dare not say that fortune could
have wrought me such a bliss,
Not loreles chance, but Uirgils lore,
did help me up to this.
First Uirgils voice, then Uaries praise,
your presence did procure:
At mine income, I lowted law,
And muttred full demure.
For bashefull shame did still my voice
and much abridge my talk:
Therefore in blasing of my blood,
my tongue it does not walk.
Nor how that I do mount on mule,
in country gawyshe games:
I platly power out my mind,
thou answer also frames.
In bri^fe and few, such is thy wont
and after certain days:
Thou calls me home, and calls my friend,
and this my grief alayes.
A joy, to have Mecene my friend,
who good from bad does part,
Not by dissente, but life well led,
and ballaste breast with art.
For if with slender single sins
and those but very few,
My upright nature be infecte,"
(as if in cumlye hue
A warte or twain be euidente)
it is not much to rue.
If gamegroper or muckmunger,
I can not prove it be,
Nor spente my youth in daliaunce,
the case is well with me.
And be in charitable life,
withal and every friend:
I thancke my father for this gere,
he sent me to this end.
Flauio^^.
He sent me not to lawyers shop:
to learn accoumpte to cast,
To be recorder, auditor,
to know to fetch in fast.
Nor as the gentles send their sons,
to chatter in a plea,
Professing law, learn lawless life,
and sail in read Sea.
But like the babes of noble birthe,
to Rome I was conducted
With lordly arts, that might be seen,
the best I was instructed.
My garments such, retynue such
that most men did believe,
My gransyres goodds, did stay the route,
that hangde upon my sleue.
My master grave, well studied,
and much unlike a sort,
Who dissolute at each small suite,
do let their youth, go sport.
For few, (as tip of all good name)
he taught me shamfastnes,
That shendful shame through word or (...)
did never me oppress
Not fearing, though I went to la^e,
on him I should complain,
Nor do: I can him hartye thancke,
and praise him, for his pain.
Except I mad, I may be glad,
eke, of my parente base,
And do milyke such kind of skuse
which sum use in this case.
Pardie (say they) not our fault is,
our parage is so mean:
Pardye, say I, my voice and heart
does go against that clean^.
For, if that nature would and could
reclayme my dulcet days,
And bid me pick my parents out,
among those, that bears the swayes,
Sum would no doubt bid me take one,
that liftes the loftye mace,
And praunceth in the purple throne,
contented with my place.
I would^ not change: the most of men,
will think me straughte of wit,
But you, can wey the weighty state,
and i udge a right of it.
For, as authority is great,
so substance must be great^
My viaundes great my charges great,
my friends I must, entreat,
Some, one, or other, must I have
where so that I be gone,
To town or country far or near,
a shame to be alone.
My many much, my train of men,
my geldings fat and fair,
My wagons, coches, horselitters,
for cost I must not spare.
In cytte, I must set upon
my gold bespangled mule,
In deeper way, a traunsinge steed,
whom uneath ought can rule.
Else sum will check me for my thryfte,
Lord Tullus so would thrive,
Who Praetor would ride through the streets,
his train no more but five.
Five peltinge laddes, (good senator)
at least must wait on the,
And I may rome my mastership,
wheresoever lyketh me.
My self alone can chepen things,
and make my market well,
At even and morn in fair or mart
from thence to where I dwell:
So such pore cates, as I well like,
my supper reddie set,
A pot of drink, a glass of oil
my household stuff not great.
From that to bed not crampte with care,
of that which may betyde,
Nor bente to go a pilgremage,
for my great strife or pride.
I rise at ease walk forth at ease, Nou^^

and then a cast at book,
All secretly, (a joy of joys
at it to sit and look)
For weryed with my bookishe gase,
I noynte with supple oil,
My loytrous limbs, and when six Phebe
with brande begins to broyle:
I wash my corpse in cooly shade,
my dyat small and thin,
Of pretty pittaunce, not so much,
as stomach would let in.
I calculate the coursinge stars,
how each does run, and rain,
When noysom dog does flame in rage,
I cum not at the bayne,
But sytt at home: this is the life,
so iollye, and so free,
That cherishes, and ^heareth up,
and so recumforts me.
As though my father grandfather,
and uncle erste had been,
Lords treasurers, and left me knighte,
and rich in chyldhood grene.
A DERISION OF CHIDING and brawling. The strife is betwixt Rupilius king of
Pryneste, and one Persius: a wonderful vndecente thing, for a noble man to be a
scoulder.

The seventh Satyr.
THe fellone tongue of Rupilie,
that traitor mungrill king,
How Persius has dreste in kind,
it is no novel thing.
As common as the carts way that.
This Persie for the most,
Did make his bode at Ginnia:
with Rupilie at host.
With gybes, and glickes, and taunting strife
a brawler sharp and sore
Rash, arrogante, and by use had
of ribaldrye such store:
That from a dosen cacklinge drabbes,
the bell he might have bore
Well, to the king, like dog, and catte,
these two did then agree,
Like champions fell, their toylesum tongues
they used as weapons free.
For each man seeks to noy his foe,
(the old said saw does tell,
With prowes, and those martial feats,
wherein he does excel.
Twixte Priams hautie Hector, and
corragiouse Achill,
So keen and mortal was their wrath,
that he did Hector kill.
And for no other cause I trow,
but that, in those same twain,
Like force in principallitie,
and parfytnesse did rain.
D^sterds will quickly part them selves,
unequal if they be,
(As Glaucus was to Diomede)
the weaker shrinketh, he
Departs in peace, as recreante,
his ransom maks him free.
Lord Brutus was lyeutenaunte, then
of Asia the less,
When Rupilie, and Persius,
to combat do address.
Like as two masters of the fence,
vn^hathe their blades of might,
So, these same two, tongue puisaunte knyghts,
with scoulding, ginn the fight.
The auditorye numberouse,
the Persye onset gave,
The people laugh, he praises Brute,
and his retenue brave.
Duke Brute, the son of As^a,
his men, he calls the stars,
Balde Rupilie, he rattles up,
to combat, if he darres.
He calde him hurtefull hateful dog,
to earth, a greenouse sine,
Flowte.
Like pleasant stream beset with wood,
so flows his talk divine.
Then Rupilie let issue out,
his well ycouched words,
Through seasonde, as the drubled lakes,
that keeps aye in fordes.
So perfyt and exact a scoulde,
that women might give place,
Whose tatling tongues, had won a wispe,
to stand before their face.
The Persie see, his foe so fell,
and how he did him snape,
^rayl^rs to^g i^supportable, therefore not to be answered by words, but
repressed by ri^or of the maiestrate.
Thought impossible to resist,
ne wiste he how to escape.
Lord Brute (quod he) my liege lord Brute,
for all the gods above,
Thou, that art wont to hauerd all,
to win, thy countries love,
To wringe the maces forth their hands,
to daunte the dukes a down,
Be wrekde, be wrekde (thy only praise)
upon this doggishe clown.
THE GARDINGE GOD Priapus being erected as a watch to drive away birds and
thieves, complains him self to be sore scarred of the old witch Canadie,
her fellow sorcerers Sagana, and such like. He partlye touches the manner of
their practisynge.

The eight Satyr.
I Was sumtimes a very block,
the body of a tree,
The wryghte uncertain what to make,
a stool or God of me,
His pleasure was to make me God,
mine office is to fray,
Both birds and thieves that would cum filtche
our fruit from hence away.
As images (most commonly)
the woorkemen use to make,
To purchase ease or wealth to men,
and for their lucre sake.
This orcharde was a sepulcher
indeed, a public grave,
For Nomentane and Pantoble,
and every rascal slave.
The plat of ground, was broad and square,
and of a mighty length,
Sum tombs there were right beautiful,
and of a during strength.
This place that was a dampishe soil,
and white, with dead men's bones,
Is now a pleasant paradise,
to walk in for the nones.
The velvet grass, the holsom herbs,
the trees, in motley lyuerie,
Both art and nature have bestowde,
abundantlye their tapestrye.
I am molested very much
with fowls, and cleekynge thieves,
Yet most these charmynge sorcerers,
undoubtedly me greues.
Who do with poison, and with spells,
bereue men of their wits
I can not stay these mother mabbes,
but they will charm by fyttes.
When as the moon begins to show
her young and cumlye face,
They cum to gather, dead men's bones,
and hurtefull herbs a pace.
I saw my self old Canadie,
Canadie a witch.
about twelve of the clock,
Bare foot, her locks about her head,
Ytuckde in pukishe frocke.
She howled with an other hagge,
a color sallow wan
Made them to look, like gastefull goosts,
(good for to curse and ban)
These two with teeth, did rent in twain
a lamb of blackithe hue
The blood resorted to an hole,
purple, and smoking new.
Thence did they scyte, the damned souls,
from Plutos palace large:
The souls, that al things should expound,
as it was given in charge.
Stood statues two, the great of wull,
of wax was made the less,
The greater gurnde with visage grim,
as though he would oppress
The less which lowred lowtishlye,
dispairinge all redress.
The one she calde of Heccatye,
King Plutos chamber fear,
The other calde Tisephonie,
that has in spite no pear,
Fyndes, serpents, furyes, hellish impes.
the moon inflamde to read,
Thou mightes have seen, the witches couch
behind the tombs of dead.
For being spyde, If that I lie,
the dawes defyle my noule,
And all the thieves of Rome cum in,
and of my fruit take toule.
What should I show particulers?
by course how they did speak,
The witch and goosts how they did houle,
again how they did squeake,
How they enterred in the ground,
a speakled serpents hyde:
And hare of woolfes, and by and by,
a flame there out did glyde.
And as the flame did grow in bulk,
and began for to increase:
So did the waxen image (lo.)
by small and small decrease.
I markte the drabbishe sorcerers
and hard their dismal spell
The matter, went so hard with me,
(there was no other boot)
I let a escape? Dame Cannadie
she moude her aged foot,
And trotteth on her way so hard,
that all her teethe out fall:
The other trot lost her read hyue,
she did her bushe with all.
There mightes thou find their coniurde herbs,
their threades and knackes of art*
And, for to see the beldoms scarde,
have laughed out thy part.
IN GENERAL HE CONtrowleth people inquisitiue, and importunable tatlers. That
he does dialogue wise, and yet without naming of any person.

The nynthe Satyr.
I Chanced, to room me in the streets,
(as often I use to do)
Musing, I wate not, of what toys,
but scanninge to and froe.
Runs, unto me a certain man,
whom erste I uneath see.
Embracing me, oh pleasant lad,
how mightes thou fare (quod he?)
Well at this time, and wish to the,
Horace,
all that thou canste require.
When as I see him haunte me still,
I askde him his desire.
Str.
Why pardye, sir, know you not me?
I am a great lernde man.
Horace:
If it be so, I deem of you,
so much the better than.
Lives feign, I would have le^te him there,
and hereuppon, I went
Now swifte, now slow and told my boy,
tryfles to none intent.
In faith I was through bathde in sweat,
and thought them in good ^ase,
That were well in their chambers set,
or in sum secret place.
When he would praise, the town, or street^,
I answerde naught again.
I see, (quod he you would, that we
were parted very feign.
But all for naught, it may not be,
I Will wait upon you now.
(Quod I) sir, spare your coortesie,
I have no need of you.
I must go see, a friend of mine
whom you did never know,
Nigh Cesars Orchardes, yonde Tyber,
he dwells far below.
No busnes I, needs must I walk,
have with you for this day, Strange.

Then, (like the heuye lodened ass)
mine ears down did I lay. Horace.

Sir, if you knew my qualityes,
there is no reason, why, Str.

Or Uiske, or Uarus should be more,
enteire to you then I. Uiske, and U^rus: woe ioly^ Poets.

For who, for number or for grace,
dare mell with me in ryme?
Or who can dance so footinglye,
observing tune and time?
I can singe so melodiouslye,
that very Hermogene,
Would envy me or if he hard
would yield to me I wene
I thought to interchaunge a word,
thy mother lives she,
Or any of thy kynsfolke else, Ho.

that stands need of the? Str.

In good time they are brought to stay,
and I remain alone,
Dispatch thou me, so it must be:
for many years a gone,
Sabella aProphetes.
Sabella, (I a very child)
did reed, my drerye fate,
In following form, with tender hand,
pressed upon my pate.
Not poison keen, nor emnies sword,
this babe away shall draw,
Not stitch or coughe, or knobbyng gowte,
that makes the patiente slaw,
A prater shall become his death,
therefore, let him always
If he be wise shun iangling iacks,
after his youthefull days.
We came to Lady Uestas church.
the fourth part of the day
Whilste language passed to and fro,
was passed clean away.
He stood in bonds, (as he toulde me)
in court for to apeare,
Or sentence else definitive,
should pass against him clear.
If thou doste love me friend (quod he)
to tharches with me draw,
Horace:
Nor can I stand, upon my feet,
nor know the cyuile law.
Str:
I doubt if I should leave my cause,
or else thy frendlye company.
I pray the me, not yet (quod he
Horace,
before me, by and by
He preseth on: my victor guide
I did succeade a pace,
How does your lord Mecenas now,
Str.
how stand you in his grace?
It is a rare and wyt^ye part,
in friendship long to dwell,
Horace, I tell the as a friend,
thou haste used fortune well,
If that thou woldste plant me in once,
(in forfitte of my head)
Thou shouldste no doubt, have me a friend,
would stand the in good stead.
Within a months space or twain,
Mecenas I would claw
That all the reaste might blow their nails,
or go to shough the dawe.
We live not so, as thou doste think, Horace.

no house, more pure then this,
Nor none, that from those mischeues vile,
more clean and spotles is.
His, riches, or his learning is,
no prejudice to me:
There is a place accordingly,
for each in his degree.
A thing thou tells incredible. Str.

I tell a ^othefaste tale. Hor.

Thou makes me glow feign would I cum Str.

to be of his counsel.
If that you will, you have a grace, Hor.

his favor for to win
The first assault is very hard,
by suite thou maiste get in.
I will not fail, brybes shall corrupt,
his cheefist seruinge men Str.

Though once or twyce the gats be shut
I will not cease yet then
*I Will wait my opportunity,
to meet him in the way.
To lead him home, to curtsey,
and cap him when he stays.
There is no good for to be done,
whilste we are living here:
Except we lie, ^aune flatter, face,
cap, kneel ducke, crouche smile, flere.
He prattling thus, a friend of mine
one Fuscus Arisie,
Met me, who knew this chatting sir
almost as well as I.
Stock stille we stand, he askde me whence,
or whether, that I would,
I halde him back, and by the hand,
of friendship did him houlde.
Squintinge his eyes, he began to nod,
to call me thence away,
And yet dissemblingly he thought,
to dally and to play.
My heart in choler perboylde was,
I wis my friend (quod I)
You said, that you a matter had
to tell me secretly.
An other time. I must go see
Fuscus.
the circumcised Iues
In keeping of their Sabot ^ay,
what holy rytes they use.
Horace.
I love not that religion.
Fuscus.
I, of infirmity
Am scrupulouse: and therefore sir,
I pray the bear with me.
Hereafter I will be your man,
both when and where you will,
This day dismis me to go room,
throughout the streets my fill.
Hor.
The churl departes, and left me still^
to feel my sharp distress.
By chance there cums this fellows ^o^,
who, now had got redress,
At him by law: varlet, (quod he)
I charge the for to stay,
And pray you (Horace) give me leave,
my mind to him to say.
C^ntente, (quod I), you may be boulde,
to work your will for me,
My troublesum companion
arested then I see.
Both parties cry, the croude grows great^
through great Appollos grace,
It was my luck for to escape,
so comberouse a case.
SOME HAD EVIL SPOKEN of Horace, for reprehendynge Lu^ille. He protests that
he by no means, means to desame the person, but to have his, or their
doings bettred. Pretye other conceits and notes of versefyinge.

The tenthe Satyr.
Forsooth, I said, (Lusill) I said,
your verses run not round.
Does any love Lusill so well,
to praise his Iarringe sound?
But he, through ticklinge up the town,
with mirth, has wun a name:
And yet this does not prove him lernde,
though I should grant the same.
So might our minstrell Laberie,
be coumpted learned then, Laberie dele^ table in minstrelsey, and ye^ not
learned.

If merye mirthe and only mirthe,
could make a learned man.
To make the render laughe a pace,
is not a Poets part:
I mean not all: though therein be,"
a pretty piece of art.
He must be quic^ to make his pause,"
and sentence, fall in time
^ls tra^ing long, to weryed ears,
will make a lothesum ryme.
His treatice interchaungeable:
now merye and now sad,
In Poets puff and now again,
in Retorique florishe clad.
Sumtimes, a fable trymlye toulde,
does work in better force,
Then if the plaintiff Poet should
besing his musies horce.
Sumtime to spare his eloquence,
and speak not what he can:
Such were the ancient interludes,
so were they lyked than.
And so far to be imitate,
but neither Hermogen,
Demetrius.
Nor other, who would seem to be,
so gay deuysinge men,
Did ever read (I dare make good)
those lettred Poets works,
Save Cafull, and Caluus, whereas
such paltrye baggage lurkes.
Tush, now I glaunce, and blame ami^
for Lusill has devised,
A tricksye work in Lattin coat,
and greakishe gardes comprysed.
An auntrus ^^e, I promise you,
O thou that knows not much*
Cease to admire a man for that
the matter is not such,
As it is thought, to sprincle here,
and there a word of greek,
Sum a^^ehead doultes in baggish style,
of greek are not to seek.
Except thou think that diverse tongues,
are better when they meet
A^ mixed wynes, (what else:) become
more wholesome and pure sweet.
Well, in thy verse use Greek at will
beware, that when at bar
Thou pleadest for thy clyent, Petillus.
there
thou go not ouerfarre.
I mean as if some passing man
should stand in plea thy foe, Poblicula or Coruinus.

And sweat again to grauayle thee,
and work thy clyent woo.
Use not thy two tongude phrases then,
like one of Canues town, Canues, a town where was spoken both greek and
Laten.

Thou may perchance become nonesuite,
thou and thy cause borne down.
Once on a time, a Greek poem
I dreamed to indite,
(A Romayne I disioynde by sea,
vnured so to write)
Lord Romulus did bid me stinte,
in pitchye silent night,
At mydnyght, when such vysions
are coumpted most of might.
In grekyshe tongue (says he) to write
write upon writing still,
Is as to power on fatted sow,
more draffe drink and more swill.
Therefore whylst Alphin shriketh out Alphin, a tragical Port.

the murdered Memnons bayne
And reign descriues I leauyng Greek
am of my Satyr feign.
Which neither shall in Guyld hall once,
be judged of the Mayre:
Nor feed the eye on stately stage,
to make a meyny stare.
Fundanus may at his good lust, Fundanus, a Comical poet.

of nyncetie fynceties write,
(I say) of harlots he^^full guyle
of Dau^s what a spyte,
He wrought to Chremes by his craft,
That faculty therefore
I leave to him as captain
in scoffyng comyke lore.
And Polleo, the princely iestes,
in lofty Iambiques may
By virtue of that gracious verse,
in tragike wise displaye:
So ^arie makes his Elegies,
of quick and lively might,
And Uirgile, well in rural ryme,
His gamesome ^use can dight,
A Satyr I, more sauerly,
and with more luck attempted
That Uarro, and a number such,
(all arrogance exempted.)
I do not say, before my time,
But Lusille did deuyse,
Nor ever meant to prejudice
his crown in any wise
Laurel Crown.
But now and then outtakyngly.
he will be ouerseene,
And bring such stuff, whereof the most^
omitted might have been.
I pray you (Lusille) say me soothe,
nor be you not offended,
Has not your wisdom said or now,
that Homer might be mended?
And has not ioly Lusill to,
Actius.
the doleful Actie changed?
And for to car^e him for his phrase
E^ilus.
all over Ennie raunged.
Yet, when he speaks of himself,
He speaks not, as he were
A better ^larke, then those he blamde.
Why may not we inquyre
In way of talk? if his hard style,
a matter good has marde:
Or if the matter to untoward,
has made his style to hard.
If that a man think it enough,
and for a poet mete,
Twixt meal and meal, two hundre^h rimes,
to rear up on their fete:
Like Casse, whose lauyshe eloquence, Cassus burned for his tou^he books.

was rushyng as the streams:
Therefore were burnt, his corpse, his books,
(his hastye trauaylde dreams.)
If this be good, Lusill is good,
in such respect may he,
Of pleasant head, and deep device,
and clarkly judgment be.
He may be thought to have enritchde
Grease, with his Satyr verse,
Much better then an elder sort,
which I could now rehearse.
Kyght happy Lusill, that dydst see
so plausible a time:
If he had been in these our days,
he must have razde his ryme."
And parde of all that was not trym,"
and so have bent his brain:
That both he should have scratchde his head^"
and bitte his thombes for pain.
For now, who looks to bear the bell,"
his doyngs he must cull,
At home with ^ym, and better add,"
then he did erste out pull. Horace.

Contented, to have pleased the wise,"
let go the skyllesse hobbes,
Who would esteem the clappyng of
a flock of luskyshe lobbes.
(Not I in soothe: the judgment of
one worthy personage,
In learning ripe, in virtue just,
in verdite sharp and sage:
Give me before a thousand low^es,
and all their loud suffrage.
Tygille he kepes a prattlynge stylle,
his pages do me pynche:
Prate what they can, the worste they can,
I mind not once to wynche.
Such careless, brainlesse, senseless shrubbs,
such sucklyng maultwormes, who,
Does take their words, but as of course,
and so can let them go?
The lord Mecenas and Uirgill,
The wise clerks of that age.
Plotie, and Uarius,
Ualgie, and our drad sovereign
the great O^auius,
And Polle^ (I fawn not now,
not flatter, thanks to pyke)
Fuscus, and eke the Uiscie both,
I would they should me like,
Thou Messala, thy brother to,
You Bubilie also,
You Seruie, and thou Furnius,
both you and such like mo,
Friendly and learnde, which now for have
unnamed I let go,
Your praise I say, feign would I have
full sorry and full sad:
If I ne can fulfill the hope,
which of my self I had.
Sir Tygill, and sir Demetrie,
Your dumpishe domes in schools,
You may bestow where as you list,
emongst your flock of fools.
As for the wise, they wynke at them,
nor will not on them look:
Go boy, go note these sayings well,
and put them in a book.
Q. HORACE FLACCVS HIS SECOND BOOK of Satyrs.
THE POET IS AT ALTERcation with him self, and reasons if he should any
further proceed, in indityng of Satyrs, since he was thought of some envious
persons to be sharp spoken, and in deed a backbyter. He demands counsel
of the lawyer Trebatius: he de^endeth his own deed, and conuinceth his
misiudgers.

The fi^ste Satyr.
SOme think my satyrs too to tarte,
to keep no constant law,
And some have thought it lously pen^e
what so of mine they saw.
And weane a thousand such like rimes,
one might within a day,
Write and dispatch: (old friend Trebate)
what should I do? a way
To me prescribe, you bid me rest,
my Mustes to appall.
Na, trust me truly by my thryfte,
that were the best of all.
But I must needs be doing still,
you bid me, I know not what,
To swymme in Tyber all the day
at night to keep a chat.
To drink for life, to quasse carouse,
to l^ade my tottye noule,
And by such means restrain my pen,
and to surcharge my soul.
Or if I have such urgent lust,
and lykyng to indite,
That then I should of Cesars fraies
and passing triumphs write.
For that would fetch us in the pence,
and healpe me for to live.
Alas (God knows) full feign would I^
my courage will not give
Me so to do. Not every man
the warlyke troops so gaye,
To morishe pykes, and brochyng spears*
the frenchemen slain in fray,
The puissaunt Percie pluckte from horse,
praise worthy can display.
Why might I not just S^ipio,
thy martial feats have praised,
As learned Lusille once tofore,
such bloody bankets blased?
I will assay, as time shall serve,
Unless I wait my time,
It is in vain, to exhibit,
to Caesar any ryme.
Whom, if a man attempt to clawe,
inflexible he stands,
Yet, better were so to presume,
then, for to fyle our hands.
With bankroute slave Pantobolus,
and Nomentanus prankes.
Sith causeles all mystrust them selves,
and cannes me little thanks.
What way for me? they say that I,
am subject unto drink,
And shotishely upon excess,
lay out what so I think:
Like dronken folk that hoppe and skippe,
when lickour lodes their brain,
And when through ^ll affected eye, Pollux and Castor, Iuptter and Le^^ their
sons brethren to ^elena.

one candell seems twain.
Borne of one egg, Pollux on foot,
and Castor loves to ride,
Each man his mind. In studyinge
how many ways be tryde*
I keep one stay of writing (they say)
in melancholy mood,
Like Lusill, saving that my wit,
is not all out so good.
Lusill, as to his very friend,
so would he to his book,
His secrets good or bad bewray,
look on them, who would look.
Him follow I in Lucanie,
or bred in Appulie
I wot not: Uenu^^n^n, just be^wene Lucanie, and ^ppulie, the^ was the post
borne.
For Uenuce my town
betwixt them both does lie.
They Romans Uenucine possess,
so sen^e into that place,
Lest people nygh aborderyng,
might win the same in space.
And thereby noy the Romyshe wealth,
what so my country is:
What so my wit, my bitter style,
strikes not a whytte amiss.
It may be lykened to a sword,
In sheathe for my defense.
Since no false lofels hurt me then,
why do I draw it thence?
O king, O father Jupiter,
Would God the times were so,
That ruste might well devour this sword,
that none would work me woe.
But work they do, but who so does,
though he be diuelyshe fell,
I blason far and nere his arms,
and wanton touches tell.
He may go howl land pule for woe,
the citizens will scorn him,
And cause him wyshe full many a^tyme,
his damme had never borne him.
The Lawyer when that he is chaft,
will threaten judgment fell:
So Canadie our sorceresse
with poison will us quell:
Each officer does menace eke,
the worste that they can do:
All brag of that, which is their best,
and therewith fear their foe.
And that nature allows of this
mark thou these notes with me:
The wolf with toothe, the bull with horn
and how this same might b^,
Dame Nature teaches inwardly.
thou doste again replye,
Strong Sheua, would not with his sword,
his mother cause to dye,
Though she had wrought him much mischief
No marvel, for the ox
Strikes not with tooth, nor wolf with hele,
strong poison used this fore.
So he and they, the good and lewd
their weapons have by kind,
And use the same to work their weal:
The gifts therefore of mind
Shall be my be^te artilleri^:
For whether quiet age,
Abides me, or black wyngde death
encompasse me in rage,
Come wealth or want, at home, or else
perchance an exilde man,
I will not fail, to write my state,
if possibly I can.
My son, if that thou write to sharp, Tre^tte.

no doubt thou shalt not live,
Some one or other, will to thee
Thy fatal wound ygeue.
Why? Lusill lyude, who ever used, Horace.

all fayners to detect,
With satyrs sharp, and quippies round,
of death he never reckt.
But blamed those, which outwardly
do g^ue a shynynge shoe,
And inwardly are chargde with sin,
that uneaths they can go.
Good Lelie did not hate his wit,
nor he that got renown
For policy, and pruice too,
For beatyng Carthage down.
I say they were not myscontent,
That lewd Metellus once,
And lowtishe Lupus were reformde, Metellus and Lupus noble men, yet
reprehended for ^yce. ^c^pi^ and L^lius no^ repyning.

with Satyrs for the nonce.
He would not spare the officers,
nor private men to blame.
A friend to none save honesty,
and those that used the same.
With doughtie stout duke Scipio,
and Lelie learnde and wise,
He would test very iocundly, One point of wysedom, not to be merp^
among^ste amultitude.

and frankly in his guyse,
At meals, when he sequestered was
from the unlettered sort.
What so I am, though far I wot,
from Lusils wit and port.
Yet envy self can not deny,
but I have led my life,
Amongst the best, though some men think
me dedicate to strife:
Me thynks my ground, is good and sure,
except you friend Trebat,
By law, do disalowe of it,
I will pursue my state.
Trebu^*
Beware, beware, the warinde may live,
be circumspect and slawe,
Lest you by words undo your self,
through ignorance of law.
For who that writes slaundrously,
we lawyers must amend him:
Horace.
And who that writes true and well,
our Caesar must ^efende him,
If that a man speak of a zeal,
And blame the bad alone,
Dispatche your rowles, there is no gain,
the Lawyer may be gone.
UNDER THE PERSON AGE of the Stoike Ofellus, he controlleth the gluttonous and
riottous: he shows the variety of meats them selves, not to be so
dilectable, as they are so made by abstinence, and sharp appetite. He
commends much frugalitie, which is chiefly in sparynge and thryftie diete.

The second Satyr.
How good it is, and laudable,
to live but with a small:
It passes me for to discriue,
Ofellus fold it all.
A rudesb^e, and unruly, wise,
and yet unlucky man,
Who never could bring to an end,
The thing which he began.
Learn abstinence, O learn of me
not when your paunche is full,
Or when with gross vpflyngyng fumes,
Your sight is ma^de and dull:
Or when your lust leanes to the worst,
and will not brook the best,
Come soberly, not ouerchargde,
With intrayls all at rest.
Some thing to say: the wastefull womb,
does plague and kill the brain;
As that judge does his country hurt,
who gapeth after gain.
When thou doste trace the hastyng hare,
or tame the Iennet wild,
Or fight in field, like Romayn stout,
(unlike a Grekyshe child.)
Or when thou do at footeball play,
or tennice for pastyme:
Whylste love of game does ease thy toil,
and help away the time:
Or when thou slyngest in the air:
with might avoid the stone:
What so thou doste, do earnestly,
and when thy toil is gone,
Thou shall have stomach quick and sharp,
that when thou comes to dyne,
It will not look for sweet conceytes,
or fragrant friskyng wine.
If that the rude and ugly sea,
do let the fyshers art,
If food do fail, of bread and salt,
to take and eat thy part.
Thou will be glad. Why is it thus?
^o^e sounds this with reason?
The smell of hoate and smokyng roast,
though it be dear and geason,
Does not delight of it own self:
thou makes the culleis good.
Thy sweat and pyne, makes sweet and fine,
and savors all thy food.
What taste is there, if thou beiste gordgde*
ne can it well endue,
In lampre, or in leueret,
or choppyn oysters new.
Nathelesse, I can not thee persuade,
but if they both be dreste,
The Pecocke, and the pubble hen,
the Pecocke tastes best.
Begyled with apparances:
because her costly sail
Is rare: and that a circled pride
She bears in her tail.
As though that were material:
her feathers doste thou eat,
So gaye to thee? or is she else,
in brothe the better meat?
The flesh of both is much alike:
thou loves the pecocke, tho,
Because of gallant gawyshe plumes:
well, let it then be so.
The Dog fyshe, that from Tyber cums,
Tulcus, a^ street in Rome, nere to a creke of the sea.
or stream in Tuscus street,
Why is it worse, then that, from sea
where wrastlynge waves do meet?
O dotyng world, above the rest,
they love the Hullet great,
And yet do mynce her small and small
before they do her eat.
Thus may we see, the sight is all:
If sight make things excel,
Great Porposes, should be in price:
na, sothely I can tell
Why they be not: this porpose fyshe,
with us is every where:
A mullet for the mincyng dames,
for that is rare and dear. Far sought far brought dear bought good for
Ladies.

The temperate will little eat
and feed of simple chere.
Some gluttons would eat greater fyshe,
to satisfye their mawes,
(Like hellyshe Harpies) from a pan,
with gredie gnawyng jaws.
But you, you wastefull southern wyndes,
corrupt their viandes all:
It needs not much: for bore or brytte,
does taste to them as galle.
When to much havoc has them cloyde,
then gyn they sore to long
For rapes, and Helicampane root,
and do the beggars wrong.
So kings (to have their courses just)
Reject not pore men's cates,
As eggs, and oil, with such the like
receyude and used of states.
The heraulde Gallo for a dyshe The dish^, was a fish cawl^d ^^c^penser a
while usual y^a and no^le, afterward co^temptible.

Pr^torie, ^ friend to the kychin.



He used upon a day,
Was ill rebukde. But they to blame:
for brittes few durst assay.
The Britte did scope abroad in seas,
The Storke did keep her neste,
Before paunche pampryng Pretorie,
told how they should be dreste.
If some, the roasted cormoraunt,
delytefull would report,
Our youth (soon taught to naughtynesse)
would try it for a sport.
The covetous and sparynge man
we must not note for one,
(As Ofell says) if thou, percase
from one sin wouldste be gone,
And thereby hap into a worse,
that were a bootlesse case.
Canis a couetouse myser.
Canis, in whom for his deserte,
that name may well take place,
Old olyues.
Old olives, and the dogtree frui^te,
and lees of changed wine,
And vile unpleasant greasye oil,
to lothesome for a swyne.
(If he did feast his friend at home,
or keep his native day,
One good note of a churl to be liberal o^ that which is naught.

Demand.


Or solemnise the time by chance,
in surly rich array.)
Abundance of such corrupt stuff,
Among his, he would outlaye.
What diet shall the wise man then,
twixte two contraries use?
Shall he the trade of couetyse,
or prodigal refuse?
Replye.
Unspotted he, that kepes him free,
and leanes to neither side.
Albutye.
He shall not be like Albutye,
who, when he does deuyde,
His household charge, emongst his men,
himself will nothing do:
Neuye.
Nor yet like Neuie wait at boorde,
for that is foolyshe too.
Now lysten well, how great the fruicts,
of sparyng di^te be:
First good for health, for this thou must,
persuade thy self with me:
That many things annnoyeth man,
And meats do much offend,
Though they be pleasant, yea and good,
yet, when thou doste them blende,
As, fyshe with foul, roste meats with boylde,
to choler goes the sweet:
The moist to fleume, for stomach fleume
a guest is most unmeet.
Again, the corpse chargde with excess,
does ouercharge the mind,
Abandonyng to earthly things,
the soul of heavenly kind.
The temperate may soon dispose
his members to their rest,
And rise again delyuerly,
to labor quick and priest.
He shall be in the better plyte,
In time that happen may,
As when the year by compaste course,
shall bring the pagiaunt day.
Or if he take confortatiues
to help him at his need:
For years will come, and crasye age* Worthy fruttes of temperance.

who d^yntily must feed.
In age, or sycknesse, what shall be,
delityng unto thee?
Who haste prevented in thy youth
such pleasure as might be?
The rammyshe Bore, they wont to praise,
not that they had no nose
To feel him smell, but to this end,
that he which did repose
Him self with them, might egerly
fall to, and eat his meat:
Because they would not gluttonlyke,
their whole provision eat.
In those days, I would have been borne,
in such an honest time:
I love well hospitality,
If riot cause not crime.
If thou doste stan^e in awe of verse,
or force a rymers reed:
Take heed such sorts and subtilties
of cates will make thee need.
Both shame and harm they will procure,
again, add to this same,
Thy kynsmen wroth, thy friends made foes,
thy self foe to thy name.
Wyshyng for death, and shall not dye,
but live to wayle and moan
Thy wanton wealth, thy beggars plight
thy treasures that be gone.
Tracie.
(Says tauntyng Tracy) may not I
lay out my coin at will?
My rentes come to me thick and thick,
my want is foyson still,
Not three kings can dispende with me,
who says, I may not spend?
^o^t^.
Therefore, the surplus of thy goods
apply to better end.
Why want the silly needy souls
refreshyng at thy hand?
Why do the temples of the godds,
without repayryng stand?
Thou corsye carle, thy country dear,
from hougie substance, such
Shall she have naught? wylt only thou
devour alone so much?
O ieste, unto thy very foes,
For, whether may have more,
(If fortune frown, and grefes grow on)
esperance to his store?
Thou: which was married to thy mucke,
and fresh in gay attire,
Or he: that dreading chance to cum,
a little does desire
And keeps it well, and warylye
to help in hopeless tide,
Like as the wise, in golden peace
for stormye war provide.
For more belief in this behalf,
I then a little boy
Can now report, that Ofellus,
put not so great a joy.
Nor pleasured so, in his chief wealth, Ofels talk in prosperytie.

as in his worste decay.
This was a common talk of his
when he bare greateste sway.
Als one to me: on woorkyday
I never could be taken
With better meat, in feelde or town,
then roots or chimnye bacon.
I, and my sons, keep thus in fe^lde,
our cattle seelde forsaken. Horace. ^ more honest kind of liberalitye.

But if old acquaintance cum,
Who has been long away
Or sum good honest neighbor else,
through sleetie drisling day,
Do cease from work, we merry make
not with such costly fyshe,
But with a chicken, or a kyd,
and grapes our second dishe,
A nutte, or else sum kind of fig,
the table tayne away
We drink about, and afterward
for Ceres gifts we pray.
So, fly away the freating cares,
that bring the wimpled age.
Let fur;ouse fortune frown and fume,
and roste her self in rage,
She can not much empire our cates:
my servant have not found.
Their cheer much worse sense Umbrenus
Umbrenus a soldier who had ye ground given him by Augustus.
has got away our ground.
It matters not for nature gave
not me this proper land,
At first, nor him, nor any else.
he chaste us forth with hand,
His beastelynes will chase him out,
or sum expulsive law,
Or else his heir that shall survive,
when he must couche full law.
Now Umbrens ground, of late Ofells
(a thing not very stable)
Now mine, now thine, so must we take,
the world as variable.
Let nothing cause your courage quayle,
in care be constante stille,
And bend your breasts to bear the blawes
of fortune that be ille.
THE POET SHOWS a great skill or workmanship in this Satyr, especially,
in that he earnestlye studying to make others good, is himself partly
contented to be controwled by the stoicke Damasip, as a sluggarde and
pretermitter of duetifull occasions. The stoicke proves sin to be a certain
kind of madness.

The third Satyr.
YOu write so seldom unto me, Damas^y.

that four times in a year
Scarce cums a pen within your hand,
perusinge written gear.
Half angry with your self I weane,
that drente in wine and sleep,
You spendinge time in sylente pause,
of Satyrs beres no keep.
Perform thy promis once at length,
go too, what shall we have?
Thou coms from Saturnes feast I trow,
from drink thy self to save.
Will nothing be? You blame your muse,
so do you Poets all,
Accuse your pen, when to your mind,
your sentence will not fall.
When thou camste to the country town,
to live a part from strife,
Thy visage gave, as though thou wouldste
have written books for life.
Menander, and dan Platos works,
why do they on you wait?
Why brought you Cupolis to town,
and Archilog his mate?
You mean for fear of spytefull folk,
all virtue to disclame,
Thou ca^^ife shalt cum to co^tempte,
shun idle joys for shame:
Or else surrender all such praise,
as thou haste got before:
By work of wit, in full intent
to mell with it no more. The Poet ^onte^^^^ t^ be reprou^d but not at such^ a
p^uishe ^a^c^a^nte ^^.

For this sage counsel, (Damasipe)
the heavenly gods I pray,
this stoicke damasip.
To send a barber speedelye,
to wype your berds away.
Horace.
In deed, and know you me so well,
how cums it so to pass?
Damasip.
I sufferde shipwreck of my gooddes,
whilste I a merchaunte was.
And therefore now can spare an eye,
the world to ouervewe.
Then was I plunged in affairs,
as they me drove and drew,
To know what vauntage by exchange,
to clippe and wash my goulde,
By subtilties in mineralles,
my state for to vphoulde.
By such like sort came I to have,
an ample wealthy share
To purchasse orchardes for mine ease,
and bowers bryghte and fair.
My wit so deep so sore to deal,
such luck, to win or save,
That me a Mercurialiste,
to surname then they gave.
I know it well and marvel much,
Horace.
If that be rid and gone:
Except thou haste sum worse diseas
which needs will rain alone.
As Phisikes cure from head to breast,
diseases can convey,
As by excess of much madness,
drive lythergie away.
Perchance you setting fraud a part,
the mad man's part will play.
Dama.
Friend Horace, you are mad likewise.
And so is every fool,
If stoicke Stertin taught us once,
true doctrine in his school.
Of whom, I learnde this trade of life,
no trewande in my lore,
He dubde me then a stoic sage,
and bad me morn no more.
Though all the world should go to wrack,
(for from a bridge I mente
All headlonge to have horlde my self
so things against me went.)
Approchinge nygh. O do not so,
friend Damasip (quod he)
What thirlinge throws does twitche thy harte^
what shame confounds the? The stoicke. Startine supplyeth with his talk
almost all the satyr folowinge.

The people cawle the giddishe mad,
why, all the world is so:
If thou be mad, and thou alone:
be drounde: I let the go.
But what is madness to defyne?
Crysip, that noble clarke,
Calls all fools mad, and all whose minds,
are duskde with errors dark.
This rule, makes mad a noumberouse swarm,
of subjects and of kings,
And none exemptes, save those in whom,
the well of wisdom springes.
Now lean thine ears, and listen well,
perceive how all be mad,
Yea those who earste to make the worse,
such mockeryes have had.
Admit there be through darkesum wood,"
a speedy footepathe way,
On right side same, on left side sum:"
and all do go a stray.
Through wilsumnes of wilderness:
the error is all one,
Though through miswandringe diversely,
they diuers^ye have gone.
Thou may he mad, (friend Damasip)
A reason to prove ^^ man, which tread not in one tru^ footepathe of wisdom.
thou maiste be much unwise,
Thy mockers staringe mad also,
though in an other guyse.
One manner frenzy is, to fear
when nothing is a miss,
As hills on plains, or seas on mountes,
this kind of buggor this:
An other like a desperate,
nothing at all to fear,
To trudge through deep, high, hoate, and could,
to prease upon a spear.
His friends reclames his sister dear,
his parents and his wife,
Theirs rocks, theirs Seas great drea^ (say they)
sweet kinseman save your life.
He will not hear, for all their cry,
no more then Fusie could,
When he through force of drowsy drink,
was fallen in slumber could.
He should recyte the drunkards part,
he druncke his part away,
The people egde him for to speak,
he wiste not what to say.
One way or other all are mad,
as Damasip, which oulde
Pictures did bye, was mad, and he,
that lent to him the goulde.
Most mad is he, that takes a trust,
not having hope to pay:
Most mad is he, which may make boulde
and dare not his assay.
Assay (quod you) but who would trust,
for now the world is such,
That lend a man, a thousand crowns,
or more, or nigh so much,
And take a bill of his hand wryt,
an obligation make,
So lawyer like, so clarklie drawn,
that none could it mistake,
And bind him strayte, to keep a day,
in pain of marks and pounds,
Show witness write, and what thou canste,
or lowse, or shake thy grounds
The one will he do: like Proteus,
to shapes ychaunged, he
Sometime a bore, a bird, a stone,
and when he list a tree.
No doubt he will attempt all shifts,
to shifte him self from the.
If wise men use for to do well,
and fools for to do ill,
What say you to our creditor,
our usurer Petill? Petill usurer

Is he not mad? who when he lendes,
for increase asks more,
Then the pore debtor can perform,
though he should swelt therefore.
Ye lecherouse, luxuriou^e,
ye supersticiouse:
Ye shottishe, dotishe, doultishe dawes,
that nothing can discuss.
Draw on my Clyents one by one,
be not agreiste ne sad,
Stand still in stounde; keep whishte (I say)
whilste I do prove you mad.
I charge you, you ambitious,
and you that mucker good,
To gerde your gowns, to sytt and harcke,
whilste I do prove you wood.
The couetouse, of Helibore
the greater part must have,
One part of a mad man, to seek, vain glory after his death.
Or rather all the pills, for the head
as they which most do rave.
The executours of Staberie,
engraylde on his grave,
What were his ample legaces,
and what to them he gave.
For so he bad in testament,
and if they would not so,
That then to maintain sword players
most of his gooddes should go.
Areus superuisor of ye will.
Arrey did superuise this will,
who should give them in wheat,
To preserve sport, as much as half
a country could well eat.
Staberie.
What though I did (misiudge me not,
Stoicke.
I had a witty meaning.
No doubt you had, to this intent,
was all his gylefull gleaninge.
To have his heirs, entayle in stones
his honnorable will:
Neade was to him a wickedness,
yea an ungodly ill.
Therefore in deed full dreedefullie,
he wayed it as gods curse:
If at his death, then in his life,
one dodkin he were worse.
For all and every thing (quod he)
virtue, renoumne, and fame,
The corpse, the ghost, does crouche to coin,
and serve unto the same.
Which who so has all at his lust,
him needs no further thing,
He may be famous, stonte, and just,
a wyseman and a king.
And this is even as good as if
by virtue he up grue:
But Staberie or Aristippe, Aristippe a Philosopher that flattered Alexander.

of lykely, judge not true.
Who trauaylinge in Lybie cost
his gold cast away,
Because it did from iorneyinge,
his men a little stay.
Which is the madder of the twain?
but we ne can, ne will
Sample, against example bring,
to samples that be ill.
If that a man bye instruments,
and horde them in a place,
Him self not weyinge of the sound,
nor forcinge musikes grace:
If that a man should bye him stuff,
and tools to set up shop:
Or bye him sails to hang in ship
to hale her by the top:
And never mean to practice ought,
is he not staringe mad?
Why is not this our couetouse
as much in frensye clad?
Who hoordes his monye, and his gould,
and uneath dare auouche it,
Because it is so preciouse,
to peep at it, or touch it.
If that a man an hudge heap
of corn should ever keep,
With stretched arm, and club in hand,
for fear berefte of sleep,
And being owner, durst not take,
one grain, (misdreadinge waste),
Eatinge most bitter roots and leaves,
vnmilde unto the taste:
If, one have many vessels full,
a thousand fun of wine,
And drink nothing but vinaiger,
vntastie and vnfyne:
Go to, if one of five score years
do lie on couche of ground,
And have his down, and fetherbeddes,
(where he might sleep full sound)
Stufte up in chestes, for worms and mothes:
sum will not houlde them mad,
Because the most of wealthy men,
be now as vile and bad.
O hateful head, forlorn to God,
spares thou for time to cum?
Na, na, thou spares that thy lewd child
may spend the total sum.
Each day will spend sum portion,
(thou thinckes) if thou do spend
Oil to annointe, oil for thy board,
mongste thy meats to blende.
Further, thou sayste, it is the best,
to live upon a small
Why doste thou then forswear thy self,
and filtche in places all?
Testie anger a kind of madness.
Haste thou the wits, that beats thy men,
because nothing can please the?
Which thou with purse, haste purcheste dear,
to aid the and to ease the.
When thou doste poison thy parents,
and strangle up thy wife,
Art thou not mad, though in Arge town,
thou drove not out her life
Nor yet with sword as Dreste did,
or do not it inacte?
Yes, if for hope of gain thou haste,
but thought upon thy fact.
A man is mad at the first co^cept of mischief.
Was he not mad before his blade
had brusde his mothers baine?
Or forthwith, as this cruel fit,
Was exepte into his brain?
Since that Orestes has been clepte
giddie and mad by name,
After the crime, he has not done,
a fact, of haynouse blame.
His sister dear, nor Pylades,
he never stroke with sword.
To him, and her sumtimes he gave,
a foul untoward word.
Her feende him worse, as him to speak,
his pearsinge choler would:
But thou in heart kilste all thy friends,
that thou mightes have their goulde.
The penyfather Opimie, Opimie.

who had so much in store,
Who holyday and workyngday,
did toil whilste he were sore,
Was troubled so with lythergie,
for sleep he could not stere,
His heir went round about the chestes,
with blythe and iocaunte cheer:
A frendlye quick Physician,
to make, Opymie starte,
Contriude it thus: he bad them bring,
a board into the place
A sort, eeke to unseal the bags,
and tell the coin a pace.
He rearde the sickman from his bed,
Sir (quod he) houlde it fast
Or else no doubt, those will have all,
and sparple all at last.
In my life time? Phi. awake betime, Opimie.

be lively then in deed
What shall I do? Ph. fall to thy meat, Opimie.

there is no way but feed.
Eis, will thy spirits be for faynte,
thy vigor fall away,
Thy stomach weak and languishinge,
will bring the to decay.
Op.
You give me naught. Ph. drink up forthewith,
this Ptysande made of ryce.
Op.
What shall I pay? Ph. a small Op. how much.
Ph. Two pence. Op. alack, the price.
Such costs is worse, then sword or thief,
cum death I will not rise.
Damasip.
Now who is mad? Sto. Each foolish man,
what is the couetouse?
Dam. St.
A fool^ and mad. Dam. what if a man
be nothing rauenouse,
Eftsoon shall be coumpted sound?
no: Dam. Stoicke tell me why?
Sto.
Put case the restless paciente,
full ill at ease should lie,
His pulse does show, he has no stitche,
nor straininge at his heart:
Is that enough to warraunte him,
forth of his coutche to starte?
Sharp panges may twitch him in the reins,
and twitche him in the side:
So, though one be not couetouse,
yet may he swell with pride.
"They neade no salve, to say a sooth.
that use not for to lie,
"Nathelesse the testie may take pills,
to purge melancolye.
"Almost as ill to hoorde thy goods,
that they give no relief,
As if thou shouldste bestow them on,
an arraunte pilferinge thief.
Oppidie.
Old Oppidie two manors kept
of long in Cauufe town
Entas^de to him by due descente
who sick, and lyinge down,
On dead bed then calde for his sons,
(which were no more but twain)
And thus to speak unto them both,
the parente would him pain. A pretty note for parents.

Aulus, my son, when thou in youth,
counters in purse didste bear,
And frankly on thy playfeers wouldste,
bestow them here and theare
Tyber my son when thou thy nuttes
wouldste tell and tell again,
By this I gatherd, that in you,
two diverse sins would rain:
That Aulus would be ryotouse,
that Tyber naught would spend,
Wherefore, for gods own love dear son
unto my lore attend.
Aulus, look thou diminishe not,
not Tyber thou increase.
That, which your father thought enough
to mantayne you in peace.
And, that which nature lymiteth:
Lest, ticklinge glory may
Incense your hearts, take here an oath,
before I pass away:
That which of you shall sewe in Rome,
for room or for degree,
Shall take him self, as most deteste,
and quyte accurste of me.
Alas, Aulus (mine elder child)
to give the gifts of price,
So deal amongste the Citizens;
that they gainste the may rise
That thou maiste walk in pomp and port, Like Ag^ippa.

thy statues stand in brass,
What vayleth that? when all is gone
what vayleth that (alas.
Except to win a princes fame,
and plausible estate,
Esop^ his ^oxe.
Like fox: thou wear a lions skin
to seem a lions mate.
Insolence noted in princes in Agamemnons person^g^.
What, though thou warte a prince in deed? in pride thou might offend,
As Agamemnon, in whose words
most princes words are pende.
Tucer.
Sir king, why may not Ajax be enterred in his grave?
Agamemnon.
I am a king, my lusts a law,
your answer (lo you have.
Tucer.
Most puissaunt prince, my suite is just,
if any can say nay,
Without all stop, or ieoperdie,
his sentence let him say.
God grant, your noble majesty,
to see your natyue soil.
Leege prince, take pause a space, and then,
my pore demand assoyle.
Agam.
Demand at once? Tew: shall duke Ajax,
the next to fearse Achill,
Who famous was, by sauinge greakes,
vntombed tarrye still?
That Priame, and his folk may joy,
to see him lack his grave:
By whom their Troiane younkers stayne,
no country toumbe could have?
Agamem^^^.
A thousand sheep, he slew in rage,
the famous Vlixes
Menelaus and me with sword
he thought he did disease.
Tucer.
When thou in Auled for a cow,
didste slay thy loving child,
And salt her head on alter stone,
waste thou then mad or mylde?
In what degree did Ajax rage?
what did he? stay the sheep.
From lemans bayne, and daughters baine,
his blade he could ykeepe
Perchance he curste and band at large,
the, and thy brother to:
With me, nor Vlixes his foe,
he never had to do.
The lingering ships, that they might sail,
from haven where they stood, Agamemnon.

Of purpose good, I pacifyed,
the wrothefull gods with blood.
With blood of thine, thou mad king, thou, Tucer. Agam. Stock.

with mine, but I not mad.
Who does confound things good and ill
(as you) is even as bad.
To follow shows, and vttershapes,
to guess but at the good
Is folly leude: as is the deed,
that coms of angry mood.
Ajax he slew the silly lambs,
therefore, distraughte of wit:
And thou for tytles, and renoume,
fell murder doste commit.
Mast thou thy wits? or art thou good,
all swelled up with pride?
If in a couche, a fine fleesde lamb,
a king should cause to ride,
And give it rayments neat, and gay,
and give it maids and goulde,
And call it pugges and pretye peate,
and make as though he would,
In worthy wedlock it bestow:
the praetor would fordoe it,
And make his friends look to his wit,
for fear he should forgo it:
What if a king, for a doumbe sheep,
his daughter sacrifice,
I wene the king will grant himself,
not to be very wise.
"Fondness is madness, so is sin,
and who that huntes for name
"Is like Bellona chasinge dame, Bellons goddess of war.

that loves to see a mame:
"Who scales fames forte often times does see,
dyre feats and use the same.
Against the riotouse, as he promised.
But now a crashe at Nomentane
to reuellers a while,
No reason is this foultishe flock
from madness to exile.
The prodigal, by wit word has
ten talentes: in his heat,
He biddes the costerdmongers, and
thappothycaries neat.
Foulers, fishers, sculls, poding wrightes,
the trulls of Tuscus streate,
All cooks and all the shambles eeke,
to morrow him to meat
At home. How are they occupyde
when they are met in one?
The baude (as spokes man for the rest)
its thine (says he alone,
What so all those or I, possess,
at home or any wheare,
Demand it (master when you will.
now sir, unto this gear,
Hark, how our younker frames his tale,
Ah trusty friends (says he)
The fouler wades through froste and snow
that he may banquet me.
The fysher draws the wyntrye seas,
whylste I do sytte at ease,
In faith, good fellows, feign would I,
your great turmoylyng please:
Take thou some thing, take ten times m^^^,
take thou as much again,
And thou threfolde, because with me,
your wife has taken pain.
Young Aesope, snatchde a ryng away,
from madame Metells ear: Betells, a lady of Rome.

The pearl well worth five hundredth crowns,
He drunk in vinigeare:
He as much besides him self
as braynlesse in this case,
As if he had it drent in flood
or in some vyler place.
The brood of Quinctus Arius, Arius, a noble man of Rome.

the famous brethren twain.
Through lewd conceits, and babysh pranks
do make their stomach feign
And lively with the lynnets flesh,
that be of costly price.
Be these men, wene you, well in wit?
be these men mad or wise?
To build an house of chippes and cards,
to watch the trappe for myse:
To play at even and odd, to ride
cockhorse in chyldyshe guyse:
If these should please a bearded sire,
the fool might have a hood,
Much more, to haunte an harlots house,
does prove an old man wood.
An old man, for to spyll his tears,
to please a woman's mind,
Is as an old man should in duste,
go taue, and toys out find:
I would have all these naughty packes
Palamon.
to do like Palamon:
As he for shame upon a time,
A ^ondlinge known by his ensigns.
With drink all ouergon,
The badges of a fondlynge, as,
brave napkyns, braceletts, rings,
He laid away, and went to school,
to learn more sober things.
Command a child, to eat a pear,
he will not eat a byt:
Command him, not to eat the pear,
the child will long for yt.
So fares it, with our fondlyng (lo)
though he desires to go,
And would this coyishe paramour,
vnbodden wend unto.
Phedria.
Yea when she daygnes to send for him,
then mammeryng he does doubt,
What should I go, as suppliaunt?
or bear my sorrows stout?
She shut me out, she sendes for me,
should I come there again?
No, though she should upon her knees,
Pray me, to take the pain.
Stoike.
Me thynkes the servant Parmeno.
has much the better brain.
Parmeno.
The thing master, that has in^ it
no measure, nor advice,
"By reason, can not well be ruled:
Love has in it much vice.
"There Is stormy war, and caulmie peace,
which (passing as a blaste,
"And flotynge on, in blind success)
Who seeks to make fast,
"Shall take in hand, an hard attempt,
miraculous, and geason:
As if he would at once be mad,
and have his perfect reason.
A man that faultreth in his speech," Stoicke.

for age, and yet is glad,
To play at quoytes, or spancounter,"
may well be counted mad:
A man, that faultreth in his speech,"
and will by sword and might,
Obtain his love, or murder her"
in cruel blooddy plyght:
As Marrius slew Hilade," Marius a known Roman: esprisede with the love of
H^lade.

Ouide dotage mere madness. Supersticion proved madness.



and slew himself also,
Because she sought by godly means,"
his dotage to undo.
This perturbation may be calde,"
a wodnesse of the mind:
Such wyckednes and madness, have"
no diverse names by kind.
An old man late enfraunchised,
in dawning of the day,
With hands fair washed, would walk the streets
and most deuoutlye pray.
The more deal was to this effect:
O Godds above, (for you
Can do the thing) let me ylyue
in earth where I am now:
This man was sound enoughe in corpse,
in mind I think him mad,
Except his master like not that, In old time, if any sold ^ servant, who
afterward proved mad, it turned to the sellers endamage.

who soulde him of a ladde.
Such folk, so supersticious,
Chrysip doothe greatly charge,
And pleades by right, that they should sail
in madame Madness barge.
O Jove, which both can eke and ease,
all dolor and all teene,
Rue on my child (the mother cries)
who now five weeks has been,
With fever quartayne, felly toste,
if thou will heal my son,
Bid me to fast, what day thou wylt,
thy great will shall be done:
My son likewise recouerde once,
in Tyber flood shall stand,
If thou wylt send him help by chance,
or by physicians hand.
And so she will (to keep her vow)
her child in Tyber set:
The boy through chille benummednesse,
his ague worse shall get.
This woman maddeth of her self,
or by the will of God.
Damasip.
Thus Stertin theyght wise man of Greece,
taught me, and gave a nod:
As to his friend, at knittynge up:
this armor he me gave:
If any man be busye now,
his guardon he shall have.
Who so that calls me wood or mad,
may learn his propre lack,
And know the ferdle of his faults,
that hang behind his back.
Stoicke.
Friend Damasip, though you have los^e
your traffic and your ware:
Yet may you gain, for some will give
that you their faults may spare.
Damasip.
Because there is many kinds of mad,
in what sort do I dote?
Yet to my self I seem not mad,
nor from my wit a jot.
Stoicke.
No more seemed Agaue to her self,
when she of doleful child,
The head detrunde did bear about,
she thought her self full mylde.
If soothe it be, that I am mad,
yet stoicke tell me this,
What vice is it, through which I seem
so much to do amys?
Thou art a very little man, Stoicke.

scarce three small cubits hye,
And yet thou buyldes a hautie house,
and makes it threate the sky.
Thou laughste at Turbo sword player, Turbo.

a little dandie prat,
To see him stout: thou less, and stout:
I deem thee mad for that.
Thynks thou, to buyld like lord Maecene,
to do, what he shall do?
A match unmeet betwixt you twain,
and ill appointed too.
The mother frogge upon a time
abroad to feed, or play:
A Calfe kylde all her young, with foot,
but one, that scapde away:
Which brought the tidings to her damme,
how such a myghtie beast,
Had slain her noble progeny,
(to tell a blouddie feast.)
Canste thou with swellyng make thy self,
(quod tholde) as bygge as he?
The young assayde, The ^^xte applies the willing rather to the old frogge but
it skillech not so resumption be eschue^d in old and young.
it would not prove
(quod tholde) so let it be.
Now moralize this fable, and
iwys it touches thee,
That still will swell, and make thy match
above thine own degree.
Besides, thy pratlynge Poemes to,
be matter plain and clear,
To prove thee mad, in poemes mad,
if ever any were.
It is a madness, thee thy coin,
so frankly to disburse.
(Friend Damasip, abate thy spence,
be counsailde by thy purse.
Damasip.
Well Stoicke, thou haste taught us plain,
that most of men be wood:
As not to prove me so, again,
I pray thee be so good.
THE POET COMMONETH with the Epicure Catius, who reueleth unto him a great
company of scholetrickes of that sect. The poet nyppeth him floutyngly, as he
did else where the precisde Stoike, and such the like fondlynges.

The fourth Satyr.
Horace. Catius.
FRom whence, and whether Catius?
I have no time, farewell,
To teach a school of new precepts,
not such as do excelle,
Pythagoras, or Socrates,
or lettred Dan Plato.
I grant my gylte, at ill aspecte,
Hor.
to speak unto you so:
Nathelesse, I hope your maystershyppe,
Will bear with me this ones,
Some dayntie doctrine of your sect,
and novel for the nones
Propounde, of nature, or of art,
for you in both do pass.
Cati.
Yea sir, to speak of matters all,
that aye my coming was:
And for to speak accordyngly,
of rude and homely matter.
A Romayne, Horace.
nor an Alyen,
that taught you so to clatter?
I will disclose his mysteries, Catius.

but not bewray his name:
Least some, myslykyng his precepts,
the author self might blame. The Epicure his school.

Eggs long and white, be nutritive
much better then the round:
Eggs roasted hard, be costiue, yea
unwholesome and unsound.
The gardeyne herbs be not so sweet,
As those on mountains be:
The watrye soil, the virtue slakes,
that it is not so free.
The moushrom that does spring in meades,
or in a supple ground:
Is best, for such as grow else where,
most noisome have been found.
If guestes come to thee at unawares,
in water myxte with wine,
Souse thou thy hen, she will become,
short, tender, neshe, and fine.
Who after meat, eats Mulberies,
soon ryped of the son:
Shall live in health and iolytie,
whylste many summers run.
Aufidius, Aufidius, a^ ill scholar for the Epicur^ ^is dyete.
myxt heddy wine,
and honey all in one,
No craftesman he: for simple wynes
do breed a force alone,
A lovely force in simple wynes:
Meathe, urine doothe provoke,
The Muge f^she, and the Muscles cheap,
In purgynge bear a stroke.
So Coos wine, with sorell meynt,
has virtue to expel.
Shelfyshe, in growing of the moon,
is best to eat or sell:
Not every sea, has fyshe a like:
Pelore in Lucrin grows,
The Murer fish from Baiae cums,
whence purple color flows
From Circes choppynge oysters new,
From Micen vrchen fish,
Of sealed Scalop, Tarento
bragges, as her proper dyshe.
To furnyshe well a feast, is hard,
a thing not learnde in haste:
He that would do it gorgious,
must have a practisde taste.
Its not enough to freight the boorde
with sea fyshe out of measure:
There must be brothe for squaymous folk,
and spices all of pleasure.
In Vmbria the maste fed bores,
do charge the vessels great:
Uessells, which have not in them borne,
the common sorts of meat.
The bore is ill in Laurente soil,
that feeds on reakes and reeds,
Somtymes, from goodly pleasant vine,
a sower tendrell speedes.
Who lykes to eat the fruitful hare,
The Epicure a Benefactor to the Ca^at.
her forepartes are the best,
The choice and use of fyshe and flesh
by me first were expreste.
I made them so delicious,
so welcome to the taste:
Some can vouchesafe their wits and pains
in pastrye for to waste.
It is not much commendable,
to know a knacke or twain:
As if in brewinge spyced wynes,
thou should bestow much pain:
And sauce thy meat with foystie oils,
thy guess wooulde the disdain.
If thou will purge mounteflascon wynes,
and make them pure and clear,
Set them abroad in open air,
when many stars appear.
The greuouse smell, by force of air,
will pass and fade away:
Through streyning of them through a clothe,
the good smell would decay.
To mingle in thine egg at meals,
a little sack and saulte,
Does mende the yelke or white thereof,
if it have any fault.
With Afric cocles or with shrimpes,
he that is cloyed may,
Be fresh again: in stomach sharp,
the lettise it does play.
The strong may eat good looshiouse meat,
in kytchins which be dreste,
The kitchen physic, is for them,
simplye, the very best.
It is behouable to know,
of sauce a double kind,
The one, of simple olyue oil,
as we in art do find.
The compounde has that goes thereto,
Constantinoble bryne,
Herbs shred, and minced very thick,
some kind of compounde wine:
An oil from Uenefratuum brought,
(Lo) that is passinge fine.
Most commonly, that fruit is best,
that lyketh best the eye.
Some grapes may be conserude by means,
some pressed by and by,
I taught the way, to keep them green,
without all ylde or fault,
To eat hearryng with juice of grapes,
white pepper, and black saulte.
All those I badde, for to be borne,
In vessels of great pride.
A fair broad fish must aye be borne,
in vessels large and wide.
To lashe out all, is not the best,
it can not be denyde.
Much thing does hurt the stomach much,
as if thy boy or maid
The Epicure cannot find in his heart to eat with a poor man nor to have him
eat or drink in his company.
Has eat in syghte, or have thy cup,
With slauyshe hand assayde.
Or in some creuysse motes do stycke,
unmoved to or fro:
Therefore broomes, napkyns, must be bought,
With many trinkets mo,
It is a ^ilthy ouersyghte,
if all things be not clean:
To rub things with thy purple cloths,
I wis it would them steane.
To have such necessary things
is hansome, and less dear,
Seclude neatenesse, and then no waste,
Can make delitefull cheer.
Poet.
Sir Catius, for Gods dear love
and mine, my prayer is,
An other time, to lead me, where
I may hear more of this.
Though well I wot, you could for skille,
have played the masters part,
Yet nothing like the Epicure,
the father of the art.
Besides his grave and mode^te looks,
and reverent attire,
Would make one hear him much the more,
with zeal, and great desire.
Whom you perchance esteem the less,
because you happy stille,
Enjoy His sight: but I do wish
to go unto my fill,
The crystal fountaynes hard to find,
and there from virtues rife,
To take and practice perfect rules,
of pure and blessed life.
ULYSSES AT HIS HOME coming, being brought to great extremity and misery
asks the counsel of Tyretias, a prophet in hell, how he may be rich
again. In Ulysses consider the state of pou^rtie, in Tyretias talk the
ungodly counsel, of the devil, and the privy suggestions of the world, and
her practices.

The fyfte Satyr.
TYretia, Ulysses.
at my request,
tell me a little more,
How may I be, so rich a man,
as I was once before?
By what means, or what policy?
(prophet) why doste thou smyle?
O suttill pate, art thou not well,
from shypwracke, and exile,
To have escapde, thy household gods,
and Ithacke Isles to see? Ulysses.

O prophet soothefaste in thy speech,
alas) but see thou me,
How bare and beggarly I cum,
into my native land?
(Thou having so foretoulde my fate)
nothing in plyghte does stand:
The wooers spend up all my gooddes,
and howses do defyle.
My stock and virtue, without gooddes,
are thought as things most vile.
To cut of talk, since poverty
thou doste abhor in heart,
Now harken how from deep distress,
a witty man may starte.
By sending, pretty presents still,
be sewer thy gifts to give,
Unto the wealthy rich man's house,
that is not like to live.
The turtle dove, the orcharde fruit,
the honors of the feelde,
The rich must have before gods self,
what so thy ground does yield.
Who though he be a periurde man,
of currishe kyndred borne,
All gored in his brothers blood,
a runagate forlorn:
Yet coortsye him, and woorship him,
and if he would it so,
Thou maiste not stay to wait on him,
in place where he shall go.
Vlixes^.
Can I becum a page to slaves,
to get a silly catch,
Who, erste in Troy, even with the best,
was wont to make my match?
Tire.
Therefore, still poor. Apply the world,
and bear it as it is,
Vlixes.
Yes, I have borne, and can abide,
things waightier then this.
(Good wysarde) tell a speedy way,
and drive me of no more:
How may I fill my pouches full,
as they were heretofore?
I said, Tyre^
and eftsoons say to thee,
be pregnaunt aye in guyle,
Thou must be forgynge old men's wylles,
And if that in thy wyle,
Thou art perceyude, if none will byte,
but all from hook do fly:
Though ones deceyude, despair not tho,
persyste thine art to try.
If there be in arbiterment,
a matter great or small,
Inquyre upon the parties both,
and circumstances all.
If the one be rich, and chyldrenles,
though all the grounde^ of strife
Proceed of him, set thou in foot,
and plead his cause of life.
The other, if he have a wife,
or hope of progenye,
Though all the world proclaym him good
let thou his quarrel lie.
Do clepe the other, by his names,
(fair words with fools take place:)
Right worshipful, your virtues (say)
has made me plead your case.
I have some practice in the law,
to parle and maynteyne plea,
In faith, I rather would mine eyes
were drenched in the sea,
Then any of these fyled tongues,
Your worship should abuse:
Or spend your goods. Well go you home,
and cease you thus to muse.
Pluck up your heart, leave all to me,
try what a friend can do.
In heat or cold, I am your own
to ride or else to go.
Assay the consequence hereof,
some one or other will,
Name thee, an hearty friendly man
a man of wit and skyll.
Thy hunger shall be great excess,
thy want much wealth at ease,
The Tunnye and the whale will be,
scarce presents thee to please,
But here a caution for the, least
some should replye again,
That thou do good to sole old men,
as gapyng after gain.
If thou can spy a wealthy man,
that has a wearyshe child,
There, show thy self officious,
much debonaire and mylde:
And cast out talk as though thou could*
prove thee, his second son,
Then plye the old man, so to say
perchance, when he has done,
The child may dye, then, who but thou?
make entry on thy right,
Such loose begynnynges, oftentimes,
grow up to force and might.
If, that the old man offer thee
his testament to read,
Make, as thou could not, for great grese,
put it away with speed:
But take a superficial sight,
if thou must all possess:
Or diverse mo cooparteners:
them thou with craft must dress.
By threatenings or by flattery,
by smothe talk get thou all,
As Esops fox allurde the dawe,
to let her break fast fall.
As Corauus with such like sort,
deceived Scipio.
Why art thou mad, or mockst for nonce,
for doomyng hard things so? Vlixes.

Laertes son, Tire.
what so I say,
must be, or else not be,
For great Apollo has bestowde.
a prophets gift of me.
Unfolde this fable unto me,
this mystery bewraye. Vlixes.

What time this young man, fear of Parths,
begynnes to bear a swaye, Tire

( Augustus Prince) by line extract
from duke Aeneas race,
When he shall bear the countenance,
and welde the wreakefull mace,
A noble dame to Corauus,
shall Scipio the bold
Dispouse, and yet for couetyse
her dowry large withholde,
Corauus shall a feoffement force,
and eke the writing seal,
A cuttyng writ for Scipio,
which he ne shall repeal.
I give thee furthermore in charge,
if any dotynge syer,
Be ruled by his maid or man,
thralled to their desire,
Acquainte thy self, forthwith with them,
Praise them, that thee away,
With grateful praise, and like for like,
they may again repaye.
A worldly rule to seek acquaintance at or better: A safe rule Cum aequali
aequale tibi uis erit.
But what of them? seek ever to
the chiefest, and the best,
Praise him, laud him, so shalt thou be,
in time a welcome gueste.
In case the carle be leacherous,
his byddyng do not bide:
Bring him thy chaste Penelope,
to whom thou waste affyde.
Penelope, so temperate,
Vlix.
so continent a dame,
Whom such a route of reuellers,
could never stayne with shame.
Those younkers came not for to give,
Tyr. Prostitution practiced for couetise.
but hunger for to staunche,
They came for lucre, not for love,
to paumper up the paunche.
But this (lo) were a present wase,
for her and thee to live.
Loss made your dame, so temperate,
Her truth to none to give.
I (being then well elderly)
at Thebes, there was a wife,
Who charged strayghtly her assigns,
whylste she was yet in life,
That they should noynte, and hold her fast,
if she could wraste away,
That then their hope should want his hyre,
and mis his wyshed pray.
These show to thee, that he that would,
rise up by dead men's bones,
Must play the bawd, the slave, and loute,
and paynfull for the nones.
Bear well thy self, serve in such sort,
that naught may be amended:
The testie, tethye, waspishe churl,
with pratlynge is offended.
Yet sumtymes that thou merely,
like Dauus in the play,
Abate thy looks, as though the man
with presence did the fray.
Be ever duckinge down to him:
if all things be not warm,
Beseech him thou, to keep him close,
lest happily cum sum harm.
Be stille, and whishte, whilste he speaks ought,
stretch out thy listninge ear,
And never cease to magnifye,
whatsoever thou doste hear.
In case he will be blasoned,
sound and resounde his praise
Forge and deuyse, puff up his heart
by any kind of ways.
What time the wretch draws to his end,
releasinge the of pain,
Then will he say, give Vlixes,
a quarter of my gain:
Of all my substance of this world.
which voice, then thou doste hear,
Alas (say thou) Dama my friend,
shall he no more appear?
O Dama friend, will thou be gone?
how may I have so good,
So trusty true and steadfast friend?
howl, cry as thou werte wood.
Weep, if thou canste, a little crashe,
dissemble all thy joy,
Upon his toumbe, an hansom cost,
and labor eeke employ,
That neighbors may commend thy fade,
and yet, a further note:
If one of thy cooparteners gin,
to rutle in the throat,
Take him aside, and salve him fair,
and tell him if he please,
He shall by house, an land of you,
for use, or for his ease.
Much more (as thou doste like of this)
to the I could have said
But, I must to my hellishe task
perforce my toungue is stayde,
Proserpina. our tyraunte Queen,
so vengefull, and so fell,
Does hayle me hence, to bide the smarte,
with smouldred souls in hell.
Ye, worldlinges make such shifts as those,
adieu, and fare you well.
MODERAT AND SPARING Living highlye commended the Country much Preferred
before the City: the pleasure of the one, and the trouble of the other.

The sixte Satyr.
THis, was the thing, I wished for,
an hansum room of ground,
An orcharde place, a fountain bryghte,
with stones empounded round.
Sum trees, to over shade the same,
the gods, this good beheste
Have granted me: they have fulfilde,
and betterde my request.
Content. Grant this, frend^ Mercury,
(for nothing else I crave)
Grant this good god, for term of life,
this lyuelod I may have.
If I got not my goods by fraud,
nor poor man did oppress.
Nor thorough riot, on negligence,
do mean to make it less?
And, do not use to wish, so vain,
as foolish worldlings do. Uain wishe^ proper to fools.

O that yond piece of ground, were mine
it mames mine orcharde so.
O that it were mine happy chance,
to find a pot of goulde,
To purchesse fearmes, such worthy fermes
as now are to be soulde.
As some have done, as he to whom,
God hercules did bring,
A gubbe of goulde, who sense has bought,
a worthy wealthy thing.
A manor, here and now does till
his ground, and cherelie singe.
If god have lent me any thing,
I thank him much for that.
And pray him, for to make my sheep,
and cattle very fat.
And, for to fatten all I have,
except my wit alone:
If that be fat, adieu good lord,
our musies may be gone.
Since I am cumde from cyty now,
into the country town,
What shall be done (my ryming muse?)
shall I in satyrs frown?
Not lewd ambition vexethe here,
nor washye southern wind:
Nor fruitless harueste, burninge time
unto the feeldes unkind.
Thou father of the morninge tide
god James, by thy name,
In whom, men take in hand their works
and set upon the same:
O Ianus, help thou on my verse,
thou knows the cruel coil
In City kept, as eeke the eases
of quiet country soil.
In Rome, I needs must rise bytime,
to be some surety,
To speak to him, and him for them
they still do call on me.
Though whiskinge wyndes, do shave the earth,
and though the snawishe day,
Be short, and sharp, I must abroad
they will not let me stay.
If that I speak not pleasinglye,
but vprighte in my mind,
Then sure I am in places all,
enough of foes to find.
I must be crowded in the throng,
and stay, when I would walk,
What ayls this fool? how shoues he on?
such is their angry talk.
Or if we to Mecenas walk
(for that is all in all,)
That makes our great unquietness
to seem to us so small.
(I make no lie) as soon as I
draw near the Palace place,
An hundredth suitors call to me,
to speak unto his grace.
One calls on me, at two a clock,
to moute hall for to go.
The scribes pray me, for maine affairs
to haste the moute hal fro.
If there be any grauntes drawn out,
that tarrye for the seal,
They cry on me, unto my lord
the thing for to reveal.
A seven, or eight years, now it is,
since that Mecene my lord,
Did dub me his, and bad me cum
aye welcome to his board.
Not to debate of graunde affairs:
in waggen, for to ride,
To tell, or hear sum tryfled thing,
I placed by his side.
As thus, how that the day does spend,
in maygames, and in play
The Tracian, or the Serian,
which bare the pryse away.
And of the season of the year,
and how the morning could,
Did nip the fool, in summer tide,
that look to nothing would.
Such talk, as into ears of drabbes,
safelye man might power.
Through this, mine hatred, quickened firsts
and kyndled every hour.
For if in case the noble duke,
did solace him abroad,
(Lo) yonder (said they) fortunes whelpe,
and mokde me where I rode.
If from the preeuie council cum,
sum muttring of the war,
Then, who that meets me, questions me,
and greetes me fair from far.
Good master, People.
(you do know those gods
because of near access)
Must we to war on Dasia,
our selves in armoure dress?
I hard it not. Horace.
Peo. By gisse, (Horace)
you will not leave your mockinge:
Then on my head (in stiddie wise,)
let all the gods be knocking. Hor.

Peo.
Caesar, made promise he would geu^
his soldiers ground to till:
In Seyeilie, or Italy?
Sir, what is Cesars will?
We swearinge, that I know nothing,
Horace.
they marvel, as at one,
Of famous taciturnitie,
and secret gift alone.
In cise, thus I spend my days,
in much recourse of care:
O manor place, when shall I see,
thy groves so fresh, and fair?
When shall I soundlye plye my book,
and at my vacant hours
C (ut from the world) profoundlye sleep,
amid the fragraunte flowers?
Pithagoras, when shall thy beans,
or colewoorte sybbe of kind,
Refreshe, my hungry appetyte.
whilste I have supte or dynde?
O nights, and suppers of the gods,
in which both I and mine.
Make cheer, at home: my iollie men
do feed so clean, and fine?
Of all the townishe delicates,
of what, so lykes them best,
Mystraungers francklye take repaste,
with lyuelye heart, at rest.
When, that our sobre company,
begins to warm with drink,
Of purchasinge, or supplantinge,
we do not eftsoon think:
In trothe, our talk it multyplyes,
but not of baude, or queen,
Or who does friske it best in dance,
no, it is chaste, and clean.
Of knowledge, most behoueable
as if in riches be,
Or in virtue, the chefest good,
(I clepde felicity.)
If friendship spring of use, or gain,
or do to virtue tend
What is the good calde sovereign,
what is her very end.
If any praysinge hurtefull goods,
of ignorance do fail,
Our neighbor Seruie, hearing that,
steps in to tell his tale:
Full gosseplike, the father sage,
begins his fable then: Fable toulde.

The country mouse, did enterteyne,
within her homely den,
The city mouse, the old hostess,
her old acquainted friend,
Does welcum, loath to sparple much:
and yet for to unbind,
The corsey anguishe of her geste,
with syghtes of dainty fare:
Not hurded pulfe, nor long stalkd otes,
(the prodigal) does spare.
She serves in mouth the curnell dry,
the gobbets chewde of larde,
To please her geste, with cheefeste meats,
was cheeflie her regard:
(Her geste that tasted on each thing
with toth of much disdain)
The rural mouse eat new thrushde chafe,
and put her self to pain:
Reserving wheat, and cockle flower,
(two dishes of much toy)
Unto the fine fed citizen,
a stranger all to coy.
At length bespeaks, the city mouse,
my friend why like you still,
To live in country fastynglye,
upon a craggie hill?
How say you? can you find in heart
to haunte, and set more by
The city, then the saluage woods?
march on, be boulde to try.
"Our earthelie soul is ruinouse,
not possible to fly,
"From dinte of death, by any means,
the longeste liude must dye.
Wherefore good sister, whilste thou maiste,
do bayth they self in bliss,
Remember aye, how shadowye,
and short this life time is.
These sayings, moved the rusticall,
full lightly leapeth she,
They both begin this gay exployte,
the city for to see.
Benighted cum they to the town:
(for, midnighte then did hyde
The middle part of roumie sky)
when both at equal tide,
Did press their foot, in pallas proud:
where scarlet vestures read,
On Iuery beds, did gloss with gleames,
as it were glowing gleade.
Much was the noble remainder,
or gorgiouse supper paste,
Which was bestowed in baskets shut,
not clasped very fast.
Therefore, this stranger (country mouse)
on purple quishion set,
The townishe dame (as nurturde well,)
her noble cattes does fette.
A feast, of much varyatie.
she like a seruinge page,
Did daine to go to bring, to taste,
in proper personage.
The trauailer, does like her change,
and quyte deuoyde of fear,
As dedicate to feast, and wealth,
does glade her self with cheer.
All suddenly, the clappynge door,
does fraye them into flore,
Affrighted sore, a round they trip,
Dismayed more, and more.
Also the vaste, and ample house,
of mastie dogs did sound,
The mowse, beset in sorye wise,
does shape her answer round:
Farewell. I neade not such a life:
the harmless wood, and cave,
Can comfort me, with fatche, and tare,
and so my body save.
IT IS GOOD AND PROFItable, for the Master somtymes to bear, the true, and
honest instruction and aduertisment of his servant. In old time, servants
might speak in the month of December, whilst Saturnes feasts were
solemnised, frankly and at randon. The Poet brings in Dauus, detectyng his
masters practices.

The seventh Satyr.
Dauus.
ERe whiles, I listened to your words,
and sumthinge would have said,
But, I a servant, and Dauus,
was half, and more a frayde.
Dauus, a true, and trusty page,
so much as sense will give.
A friend sir, so far unto you,
as I my self may live.
Simo.
Becawse our auncitours so would,
the freedom of decembre
Enjoy speak out, all things amiss,
that, thou doste now remember.
Dauus.
Some men do stifflye stick to voice,
and still pursue their pray,
Sum, to, and fro, now well now worse,
and keep no common stay.
Like Priscus, chaunginge of his ringes,
who such attire had boughte,
And chaungde his suites, so often a day,
him self has chaungde to naught.
His house, and land, to morgage laid,
yea, need does him compel,
In simple cotage to abide,
where scarce a slave would dwell.
At Athins, very studente like,
at Rome, a lusty lad,
I marvel, what unstable stars
what byrthsygnes, once he had,
Volauery, sticks to, one trade,
for gowte, he can not rise,
And therefore now he fees a man,
to cast for him the dyse.
Such constaunte folk, be better, then
those chaunglings in and out,
Who plunge in every follye which
their heads can bring about.
Will thou not say, Simo.
thou stretche hemp, thou
whom thou means in thy pratlynge?
I mean even the Si. How so sir knave? Dauus.

Da. For, thou will still be tatling.
In praysinge, state of foreign times,
but, if that thou mighste choose,
And god would place the in those worlds,
no doubt, thou wouldste refuse.
Or thou in heart didste never think,
which thou in word have said,
Or thou not stoutly cleauiste to
the truth as half vnstayde.
Scarce fully yet resolude, to pluck,
thy foot out of the myer.
At Rome thou loves to be abroad,
abroad thou doste desire
To cum to Rome, and doste extol,
that life above the sky.
If thou beeste no man's geste abroad,
then doste thou magnifye,
The private clear, as though thou wouldste.
be bound to live so still:
And thinckes it well, that thou ne ghost,
to tipple, and to swill.
But if sum bid the cum indede,
thou lins, not then to cry,
Oil, water, haste my servants haste,
away, thou doste the hye.
Full many silly seruiters,
that wait with empty paunche,
Say to them selves, when will this churl,
his glutton stomach staunche?
I am a smelfeaste bellygod,
idle and full of slouthe
A greedy gut, and at a word,
a servant to my tothe.
Since thou art even as ill, as I,
and worse to, in thine heart,
How durst thou first begin with me,
as though thou better wart?
Thou canste disguyse thy sin with words,
thy wickedness unfold,
Thou art more fool, then I, which earste,
for fyftye grotes was soulde.
The satyr sitered.
Explain thy brows, restrain thy hands.
alay thine anger fell,
What Cryspins porter, toulde of the
I will make boulde to tell.
(Quod he) Dauus, that sillye fool,
has not his masters cast,
His heart, is ever in his toungue,
for if the fact be paste:
He takes no sounder rest, whileste he,
has chatterde out the thing,
Then does the swyne, that has her groyne
new wounded with a ringe.
In open day, in open streets,
he praunces, and he prates.
He makes the younkers, all a flote,
to break the brothells gates.
His acts, are ever euydente,
and therefore, ryfe in talk,
Because, he does not make pretense,
nor under coler walk.
His master, goes in sage attire:
that geues a sober shue.
His master, solemn in his words:
that makes him seem so true.
Dauus in sight of all the world,
does as I said before.
Simo, does all that pryuilye
much willinge, to do more.
Simo is rich and rubbes it out:
for goulde has this by kind,
To louse or tie the tongues of men,
and to content their mind.
Simo may be a goose, a sheep,
a noddie, and a daw,
And have not gifts, or qualities,
to counterpeyse a straw:
Yet Parasytes, will term him good,
and wise, at all assayes.
I wisse, read goulde, can make a doulte,
a paragon of praise.
If Dauus do but talk amiss,
a cockescombe, or a bell,
Such badges, might beseem often time,
the masters very well.
The reyster wears not always plumes,
nor yet the devil a tail,
If every fool did were a bell,
there would be iollye sail.
Simo can lay to usury,
and yet by plea of sleighte,
He will persuade the thing to be,
a sin of little weighte.
So drunckennesse, is fellowship,
furye, is manhood boulde,
Fondness, is francknesse, and scarcehead,
for thriftynesse, is houlde.
In fine, no crime, no vice, no sin
in Simo, must be known:
No fault in Dauus, but forthwith
with trumpet, it is blown.
Yea, Simo can cloak leacherie,
or clepe it, by such name
That now, it seems, a neyghborhood,
a thing of little blame.
Simo.
He slaundered me, ( Dauus my man,
I am no leacher, I.
Dauus.
Nor I a these, though, I would steal,
and yet for fear pass by
A piece of plate, but this I say,
take punishemente away:
Masters the more dissolute for defaulte of correction.
Nature would break her bridle straighte
unruly without stay.
Canste thou, be calde my gouernoure,
which art to vices thrall,
To fansyes, pleasures, wrath, and teene
sythens, I shun them all?
If all the customs of our court,
would franchyse thee in liberty,
Thy fear of gooddes, would make the slave,
and keep the still in villainy.
Also, an other argument:
if, that your customs all,
A servants man, a substitute,
or fellow servant call,
What am I, respect of you?
for thou haste rule on me,
A wretch a subject, to thy lust,
as any wretch can be.
My master, to a senseless block,
that's moved, by others might,
Pufte up with pleasures plungie puffes,
may be resembled right.
Who then is free? Da. The wise, that can
Sluo.
his own affections stay.
Whom, neither, need nor death, nor grefs
of massye gyues can fraye.
Who, can be lord upon his lusts,
and hawghtie roumes dispyse,
Strong, and sufficyente, in him self,
in full and perfitte wise.
Nor pass upon external things,
commoditye, or gain:
On whom fortune, his heuie friend,
does make assault in vain.
Canste, thou not note, by these few things
who may be coumpted free?
Admit, an harlotte, pickde thy purse,
and much abused the,
And calls the to her house again:
from yoke, and seruyle snare,
If thou beeste free, rid then thy self,
thou canste not quench thy care:
In deed, a tyraunte forces the,
and broaddes the forward still,
Does twyne thy chappes and prick the forth
full sore against thy will. Appetyde ^tyraunte.

When, thou doste gase, on woman's shape,
by Pausies hand portrayde: Pausie a copaynter.

And I of other painters, works,
my steadfast looks have laid?
(To mark the ranks, the warlyke troops
in letter lymmed plain:
And, how they stryke, and how they ward,
and how they take their bayne:)
Thou altogether womannishe.
her portrature doste view: Sin in for newing effeminate pictures.

Who sins more, or thou, or I?
speak soothe, say me true.
Dauus, is counted slack, and stowe,
if he do them survey:
Simo, does love antiquities,
and judges well they say.
They count me naught, if that I do,
but make a little cheer:
It is a virtue thought in the
to banquet all the year.
Why, is the pampringe of the paunche,
so hurtefull unto me?
Becawse, my back does bear the blows,
if ought displeases the.
How, doste not thou deserve the whip
that costly cates doste bye,
And eats, and drinks, and reuells still
Without all modesty?
One commodity of glotonie.
Dainties, becum no dainty things,
where, there is naught, but cheer,
Thy stackeringe stumpes, thy corsey corpse
at length will hardly bear:
The seruante, if he steal but grapes,
is streighte attachde of felony:
My master, sells his lands for meat
does he not sin in gluttony?
A gain thou art not with thy self,
thou never art at leisure,
Thou canste not rest, nor take a pause,
nor muse at things of pleasure.
Thou shunste, to reason with thy soul,
her counsel thou doste hate,
Per consequens, thou shunnes thy self
A very hand thing to hear our faults without collar
(full like a runnagate.)
Thou thinks by sleep, and bibbinge wine
to banishe out all woes
Dauus.
Ah sirre, where might I get a staff?
Simo.
wherefore? Simo: or else a stone?
Dauus.
My master maddes, or makes rymes,
he museth so alone.
Simo.
Except thou will be trudginge hence,
and make no more delays,
Thou shalt go to my manor place,
to work this nine long days.
Against the Epicures vsages, that to keep a riotous route of seruyng men, is
no true hospitality. Against excess in belly chere. Horace talks with
Fundanus.

The eight Satyr.
How do you like the Epicures Horace.

repaste, so rich, and gay?
This other day, I sent for you,
and then I did hear say,
You dynd abroad. Fund. In faith, my friend
it lyked me so much,
That ere this time, I do believe,
there never was one such.
If, Horace^
that it be not tedious,
nor do not you displease,
What meat was first, your angrye mawe,
that began for to appease?
First, had we brawne from Lucanie
the Father of the feast, Fundanus.

Said, he was slain, when southern wind
his blusteryng blastes releaste.
Rapes, radishe, lettice, Sherwicke roots.
brothes tarte in taste, and quick
Came next, to make our stomach slow,
more vrgently to prick.
Fair trenchers then was calde for straight
the purple carpett dreste
Each man desires to sytte next him,
that tauntyngly can ieste:
Ribauldes and cockescombes are in deed,
a sauce unto our feast.
Fools have with us a privilege
to tell who, what, and when,
Fools speak often times, the very thoughts
of wise and witty men.
There was the costly cullices,
the Turbut, and the Pyke,
The Porpose and the Porpentyne,
with many such the like.
Pygge, partrige, peacocke, sparrowe, whale,
so many of a row,
That scarce the eater leaves room,
to fetch his wind, or blow.
All things, so formally brought in,
so solemnly assayde,
As though on alters to the Gods,
the bankette had been made.
What drink you masters (quod our host?)
Gascoyne, or Kennyshe wine?
We have of all sorts in this house,
both lately brochde, and fine.
Then, when that wine had won the field,
and maisterde all our guess,
Lord, what it was a joy to see,
how some it down does press:
Like as the thing that heavy is,
of Nature so is made,
(Except the same by violence
forholden be, and stayde)
To fall to ground: like as the oak,
of substance styffe and stout,
Cums down, when he with dyntyng are
is hewed round about:
So do our hoglynges synke foorthewith,
(their head a Baccus barge)
Wine, is I tell you burdeynous,
and passing full of charge.
Some synges of love, and lovers fittes,
and how Cupides darte
Did smite him gentle soul amysse,
so beautyfull an heart.
Some mourn and blame their sorry fate,
why Fortune should be such,
That they such blouddes, should nothing have,
and others ouermuche.
Some chyde, some chatte, some rave, some reele,
and some can take the pain,
Of curtesye to give mine host,
his supper up again.
Some will unfold bygge mysteries,
and frame his matter so,
As though he had above the rest,
got Phoebus by the foe.
Some, will lament the state of times,
and how that all is naught,
How things be risen in their price,
and how they have been bought.
Some swear, that they have lived ill,
and how to morrow day,
They will accord with all the world,
and gynne an other play.
How Virtue is a perelesse dame,
how few do her embrace:
This will they preach in gestryng wise,
as though in public place
The thing were done (lo Horace lo)
our suppers and our cheer:
We spare no cost, we may not ask
if it be cheap or dear.
We keep a troop of serving men,
a crewe of lusty brutes,
And these for our great honors sake,
must cut it in their suits.
These be our handye instruments,
to woorchen all our will,
Not scrupulous for to inquire
if it be good or ill.
So many, so officious,
that not one hear may lie
Amiss on us, but he or he,
will spy it by and by.
We laugh at those, when the^ are drunk,
those make a sport alone:
To scoff at strangers, when as they
with drink are ouergone.
Horace.
So, so, no more Cupide can not
from hyue of honey lycke,
But one or other be, forthewith
will sting him with her prycke.
The world, the hyue, the combs, the wealth
which who so does assaye,
Pleasure in face, poison in tail,
Like Scorpion they will pay.
The stynges, that prick, be chokyng cares
These honey tasters have:
Whilst they are toste within them selves,
to seek, or how to save.
Wealth is a thing most venomous,
and few or none we find,
But pleasure has like Circes cups
yturnde them from their kind.
Why should the wise esteem so much,
a rowte of waytyng men?
Who, in their age most commonly,
what are they? beggars then.
Brought up so lewd, continue lewd
retchelesse, and ydell swaynes:
Not knowing art, or handycrafte,
nor able to take pains.
To keep them brave, doothe even as much
thine honor true uphold,
As if thou shouldste make thee a tail,
and gylde the same with gold.
Is hospitality in those,
in feedyng any such?
In keeping strong and heddy drynkes,
in beluynge ouermuche?
Like spunges never satisfied,
and like Ulisses foes,
From meat to bed, from bed to meat,
and so their circle goes.
Deuisers of all wantonness,
what should I tell you more?
Good, to increase and multiplye,
their lord or masters skore.
I do suppose, that if men's wealths,
should answer to their wylles,
That night and day would scarce suffice,
to revel out their fylles.
Each man is counted of most price,
and mete to be a lord,
As he with dyshes can depaynt,
and ouercharge a board.
No talk how wise, how virtuous,
or to take pains how able,
But if he keep great store of drink,
or honorable table.
Therefore some people parasites,
that they may seem to pass,
Will spend out maluesey, muscadell,
and fumyshe hypocrasse.
And make their cooks looshiously,
their delicates to dress
Their very meats in insensiue,
brought in, in such excess:
That I do loathe them more in mind,
as things more full of harm,
Then, if that witch, that Canadie,
had cursde them with her charm.
FINIS.
HIERONYMVS AD NEpotianum.
NOn vt aduersariis, sed vt amicis scripsimus. Nec tam inuecti sumus in eos qui
peccant: sed ne peceent monuimus. Neque in illos tantum: sed in nosmetipsos
seueri iudices fuimus. Generalis de vitiis disputatio est. Qui mihi irasci
voluerit, prius ipse de se, quod talis sit, confitebitur.

Virtus, est vitium fugere.

The wailynges of Hieremie, done into English Uerse.
The argument tendyng most to the ruin of the citte, as it was destroyed by
Uespatian and Titus Romans, and their soldiers.
Jerusalem, is justly plagude,
and left disconsolate,
The dame of towns the prince of realms
deuested from her state,
The sheene and glosyng paragone,
that blased as the son,
With wreakefull hand of just Iehoue,
for sin is quite undone.
Sin, sin, vpturneth town and tower,
though it be strong and hye,
Great Babell fell with hautie top,
that menaced the sky:
Jerusalem tormented sore,
and bruised in her walls,
Remedylesse is ruinous,
and therefore down she falls.
And holdyng up her broyled lymmes,
and gastfull scorched face,
Would now feign flee to God for healpe,
and call upon his grace,
Good Hieremie with sobbes and syghes,
that all the City hears,
Does wail and wayle, the ruthful case,
his pen full freight with tears.
To the Reader.
WHAT should I inform thee of friendly Reader, or whereof might not I inform
thee? Thou may read a profane writer, if thee list, and if he be profane,
thou may choose thee: toward the divine writer, there is no dispense or
franchise, but if he be divine, thou ought to read him, neither can thou
choose thee. I give thee here an holy kind of sadness, an exact myrrour of a
contrite soul, the heavy procedynges of just God, against his unjust
creatures. The Hebrew prophets write an infallible troth: the Greek and
Latin Poets write forgeries and leasyngs. The Prophets necessary to be
understood, and the other, because of those not clearly to be neglected. That
thou might have this ruful parcel of scripture, pure and sincere, not
swarued or altered: I laid it to the touchestone, the native tongue. I waied it
with the Chaldic Targum, and the Septuaginta. I desired to iumpe so nigh with
the Hebrew, y^ it does ere while deforme the vayn of the english: the
proprieties of that language, and ours, being in some speches so much
dissemblable. There is one God, but one: out of whose breast does proceed the
spirit and word of efficacy and effect. Thus much I say, because thou
sholdest not attribute the sharp showers of calamities, sent down for syn,
upon Jerusalem (wherein God would have betrayed the prerogative of his majesty
and power, to the awkward aspects of planets, and unfortunate constellations,
nor to the unsteady and much accused whele of chaungeable Fortune. His hand,
that has destroyed the greater, can easily confound the less. And he that
would not take compassion of great cities, plentifully peopled, because of
their transgression, will in such case hardly bear with private men. I
thought it my part to set it open to thine eyes, and I suppose it behouable
to thee, or at lest, it shall not hurt thee, to lay it to thy heart. Fare well.

The first Chapter.
How sytts the City desolate,
so populous a place?
The lady of so many lands,
Becumde in wydowes case.
The Princes of the provinces,
her tribute now must pay,
Full sore wept she, full sore wept she,
all night her long decay.
Along her cheeks, the furrowyng tears,
from watrishe eyes did rain:
Of all her lovers, now not one,
to comfort her in pain,
Her friends think much to visit her,
her friends are turnde to foes,
^choudah, Ichoudah the ^ribe of Judah
captive led away
a captive for the woes.
And slavery she brought men to)
she takes no kind of rest:
Mongste pagans, where she makes her bode,
with foes she is oppreste. Oppreste or taken.

The streets of Syon mourn and wayle,
Because there now is none,
That cums and goes to see their feast,
as heretofore have gone.
The gates deuoyde of folk, the priests
do sygh in sorrows keen,
The damsels drent, in moist of tears,
the dame her self in teene.
Her enemies rule, and who but they?
in wealth surcreasyng fast,
The Lord has shente her greuouslye,
for heaps of lewdnes paste.
Their young, went captiuate before,
her much dysdaynfull foe,
From child of Tsyon, all her grace,
and noble hue did go.
The Potentates like strayinge rambes,
not fyndyng where to feed,
Without all courage, went with those,
that did them drive or leede.
Jerusalem bethought her self,
upon the dismal day:
Of scourge, and of her rebel heart,
of all delytefull gay
Things, which she had in alder age,
what time her folks so coy,
Fell into foyshe hand, and none,
would succor their annoy.
Her enmies having thoroughly seen,
and noted her at will.
Did scorn her sacred sabbath day,
and gyggle out their fill.
Jerusalem, outragingly
was dedicate to vice.
Therefore is she a mocking stock,
all those in aufull guyse,
That honourde her, and did to her,
their homage heretofore,
Do clepe her, as a fylthy drabbe,
and set by her no more.
What should she do? she gave a sighe,
and lookde askaunce awrye,
Polluted foul within her skirtes,
Her end she would not eye:
And therefore lushed down at once.
All comfortless was she:
Rue O lord, rue upon my panges,
City.
the foe is proud at me.
The foe has stretched forth his arm
at all her things of pleasure.
She saw, she saw the profane route,
rushe in, without all measure:
Unto thy sacred holy house,
that route, which thou (O Lord)
Forboddste, that they, ne should come in,
the mansion of thy word.
Her numbrous folk (a syghyng flock)
and seeking after food,
Did give for meat, what so they had,
things precious or good.
To cheryshe their so needy sowles.
Mark Lord, and weye on this,
How vile I am, how beggarly,
My caytife plight it is.
O all wayfaryng passengers,
for Gods love, lock and see,
If ever grief were like my grefe:
for he has scourged me.
The Lord (I say) has spoke the word,
in day of furye fell
From hye, he flonge the fire adowne,
my mortal bones to quell.
It tamed me: Before my feet,
a trappynge net he laid,
And turnde me back, to captive yoke,
He, he, (alack) has made
Me desolate: in gulfes of grefes,
all day long did I wade.
My heinous sins, my swarming crimes,
to Gods dyre hand are tide,
And thence amayne upon my neck,
from time to time did glyde.
Empired I: The Lord has put
me in such straynyng claws,
That never shall I wrinche me from,
the pressyng of their paws.
My woorthies, and my valiantes,
he trod them under feet,
Within my self, against my self,
he made assembles meet,
To slay my youth, was never yet,
Wynepresse bestamped so,
On one virgin Iehoudahs child,
the Lord has stamped (lo.)
Therefore weep I, and from mine eye,
as from a water spoute,
A flowyng stream, of gushyng tears,
eftsoons doothe issue out.
My comforter, he kept aloof,
that should my soul relieve,
My brood berefte of hope, and those
preuaylde, that did me grieve:
Often proferde Tsyon, forth her hand,
but none would healpe her tho.
Great Jacobs raze, the Lord had plasde
amydde her enemies so.
Jerusalem, mydst all her foes,
is like a drabbishe queen,
Foul steynd with fylth of mouthly flowers:
a strompet much unclean.
Josias their king.
The Lord is just, disloyal I,
have forsde him unto ire,
Hearken O world, hearken all worlds,
once hark at my desire.
And view and view my thyrlyng throws
what plunges me assaye:
My virgins, and my young men eeke,
are captives gone away.
I calde my lovers, one by one,
but they begyled me.
My priests and elders in the town,
through famyne peryshde be.
For food to their forefainted souls,
long sought they far and near,
See Lord, and see, because that I
am troubled in each where:
Mine intrayles swollne: my heart yturnde
(such is my strugglynge pain,)
The swoorde denoures abroad: our home
a slaughter house of bayne.
Full well knew they, how sad I was,
but none would solace me,
My foes pursewde my harms, and ioyde,
to see them sent from the.
But as for sin, thou broughste on me,
a wreakefull vengaunce day:
Deal iustlye (Lorde^: and as to me,
to them their guardon pay,
Surueye their mischeefes all in mind,
and deal with them as sore,
As thou haste dealte with me pore wretch,
for trespass here to sore.
They made the surgyes of my sighs,
to multiply each day,
They made my heart a well of woes,
wearyng it self away.
The second Chapter.
How has the Lord in fury fell,
beduskde his daughter dear,
Tsyon his child of Israel,
The glory bright and clear
From heaven, to earth translated lies:
and in his vengefull day,
To batter down his own footestole,
the GOD.
irefull would not stay.
He flung it headlonge, neither sparde,
Jacobs fair blasyng bowers.
So, shoke he down, of Judas child,
her fortresses and towers.
Through glowyng furye, to the soil:
the kingdom he prophainde,
And wreakde for state, the royal wyghtes,
that over it had raignde.
What so was in all Israel,
of passing price and grace,
He marde it quite, turnyng his hand
back, from the enmies face,
He kyndled up in Jacobs sonns,
a wastefull flashe of fire,
Which consumde all things round about,
as it were in a gyre.
He bent his bow in foyshe guyse,
and further, like a foe,
He stretchde his arm, what so was fair,
or of much beauty (lo)
In tabernacle of Tsyon,
he did it all devour,
And stockmeale lyke^ to many flames,
his wrathes he did out power.
The Lord himself was now a foe,
he flonge great Jacob down,
Flung strong walls down, huge ra^pirs down
and bulwarks of the town.
Fylde Syon full of hearty grief,
appalling all her joy:
His tente, as it a gardeyne were,
tramplynge he did destroy.
He stroyde his folk, he rasde their feasts,
and sabbothes out of mind
In Tsyon: To their kings and priests,
through Ire he is unkind.
The Lord has left his altar, and
has cursde, which ones he bleste,
He gave unto the enmies hands,
such houldes as were the best.
The profane flock, within Gods house,
in mockerye did cry,
As in their sacred Sabbath, once,
thelecte did sing on hye.
Resolude was he, to thwacke down walls,
to even them with the flore,
And not to turn his hand from waste,
their rampyre mournde therefore:
The battred wall, prostrate did fall,
flat leuelde to the ground,
The earth supte up the gorgious gates:
their iron bars so sound,
He knapte in twain: mongste Heathens are
her Kings, and puissant pears:
The law is not: the Prophets now,
from Gods mouth nothing hears.
Fair Tsyons elders, in the land
sytte down in silence deep.
Their head yrubde with ashes pale,
their corpse still did they keep
In sack clothe wrapte. Jerusalem,
thy virgins fresh and fair
Do hang their heads with poutynge looks,
(as cast away with care.)
My streamyng eyes, dissolve to naught,
my belchyng bowels rumble,
My liver pyckte up, through great force,
tremblyng on ground did tumble.
Such was my pity toward mine,
because my babes did faint,
And sucklynges tawmed in the streets,
through pyne did them attaynt.
Often cried they to their mothers sad,
where is their wine or bread?
Like wounded wightes throughout the streets,
they sounded in each stead:
Unbodyinge their sely souls,
upon their mothers lappes.
What should I name? to what should I
resemble thy myshappes?
O daughter of Jerusalem?
what might I best compare,
To thee, O mine, O Tsyons child,
to mitigate thy care?
Like drops, in hougie tomblyng waves
thy flockynge troubles grieve the.
Ai me, mine own good gyrle,
(dear God) who shall releue thee?
False prophets blearde thyn eyes with lies
who would not plainly tell,
Thy sins to thee, to penitence,
that they might thee compel.
They scanned their lewd prophecies,
and reasons false would give,
Why, thou shouldste draw in captive yoke
and long in bondage live.
At the (child of Jerusalem)
all those that passed by,
Did clap their hands, and nod their heads
and fauntyngly say: Why?
Is this the town so perfect buylt,
the Paragon of hew,
The joy of all the world so wide,
that gave the gladsome show?
Gaynst the all foes did open their mouths,
with vile reproaches freight,
And hyssde, and gnashde, and cried march on,
Let us devour her straight.
This is the day, the wyshed day,
we have her found and seen:
The lord has done, what in his mind
of long time erste has been.
Fulfilde has he, his great beheste,
forspoken long before,
Hauoke made he in all excess,
of nothing made he store.
He stirde thy foes, to laughe at the,
and thy ill willers all,
By his sole means, did mount aloof,
as thou from hye didste fall.
Their hearts abrayded to the lord:
O wall of Syon town,
Forth of the fludgates of thine eyes,
let fluddes of tears run down.
Unceassauntlye. do way all rest,
the apple of thine eye
Apply it still, with moister still,
take heed, it never dry.
Arise, praise him in silente night,
praise him in earlye day,
Power out thine heart, to him as thou.
wouldste water power away.
Lift up thine hands, to god, that sittes,
in empire, and in seat,
That he may help thy babee for faynte,
with pyne in every streate.
See, o lord, see, consider well,
with home thou have delte: O,
And shall the mothers eat their young
why lord, and shall they so?
Shall they thus grind with teeth the flesh,
that from their flesh did rise,
(Their children scase a full span long?)
the preistes, and prophets wise,
Be murdered (yea) in thine own house
alas, and shall they dye?
Both young and old, through all the streets,
Upon the could ground lie.
My virgins and my youthful Brutes,
are fallen with stroke of sword,
Thou haste them kilde, and sparde not one*
in day of moodye word.
Thou calste as in a solemn day,
my terrors round about,
And in that day such was thy ire,
not one on live got out
Those that by me were choyslye fed,
and tenderlye up brought,
Are all consumde: (woes me) consumde,
and vanishde all to naught.
The third Chap.
I Am that wighte, that abiecte wighte,
which mine own neade have seen,
Whilste that, the massy rod of God,
upon my back has been.
He took me and conducted me,
to darkness, not to light,
Turnde gainste my quite, all day his hand,
he turnde against me right.
He filde my skin, and flesh with ^elde,
and brusde my bones in small,
He buylte in gyre and compaste me,
with travail and with gall.
Bestowinge me in darkesum shades,
(as one forlorn for aye)
Inuironing me round about,
lest I should escape away.
And pressinge down with pondrouse gyues,
my feet which else might fly,
He will not hear me when to him,
besechinglye I cry.
He has forestopde my paths with stone,
and crokde my ways a side,
He was a rampinge bear in wait,
a Lion dyre, vnspyde,
My ways he stayed and nie dismaide,
of hope he made me bare,
He bente his bow, and for his shaftes,
a mark he set me fare.
He causde his quyuer arrows keen,
my raynes for to assay,
I was a mock to all my folk.
their sonnett all the day.
Woormewood my drink he ballasde me,
with balefull bitterness,
He brake my teethe, and ashes gave,
to feed me in distress.
All rest disharboured from my soul,
my wealth, slipte out of mind,
My strength is gone in god (quod I
no further hope I find.
I bear in mind the stertlinge panges,
the woormewood, and the gall,
Fresh, fresh, ingraued in my soul,
my courage down does fall.
Nathlesse, this vnderpropte my soul
that trust could never quail,
Gods grace makes us not to reuelte,
his mercy cannot fail.
A wounder woorker is our God,
believe in him, will I
God is my part, Meaning o^ Christ.
(so said my soul)
I look for him from hye.
The lord is good to those in him,
that put esperaunce would,
Good to that soul, that soekes for him,
as for an anchor houlde.
Its good to trust upon the lord,
his sauinge health tabyde:
Ex^^ading good for all, which from
his precepts do not slide.
He that was proud and bare him hye,
must lyt in hushte alone,
And humble him unto the duste
(If all hope be not gone.)
And lend his cheek unto the stroke,
nor recke at words of spite,
This man the lord will not forsake,
he will not leave him quite.
Though smartingly he visit him,
and bitterly him beat,
Yet, can he not but rue on him,
such is his mercy great.
For, man because he will not stoop,
nor bannishe pride from heart,
Therefore such men God tryes and makes,
them feel such netlinge smarte.
He treads underneath his feet,
the captives of all lands,
Who so does injury the pore,
before the lord he stands,
Wrong judgment and injustice all
Understa^des after the Caldie targu^
the lord he understands.
Who now can say but all things cum,
by gods mere providence?
Prosperity or adversity.
From his sole mouth, things sweet or sharp
do they not flow from thence?
Why is man loath for lawless life,
by law to suffer pain,
Let us insearche and try our selves,
and turn to God again.
Let us arreare our hands and hearts
to God on hye alone,
Declynde have we, rebelde have we,
therefore thou spareste none.
Thou have orewhelmde us in thy wrath,
and bet us to too sore,
Slain, and dispatchde, dispatched all,
with none lord haste thou bore.
Thou haste inwrapte the, so in clouds,
our prayers can not perse,
We are like rages, and runagates
amid the pagans fearse.
Our enmies gainste us in despite,
did open their gapinge chappes,
Our fear, and eeke our snare is cumde,
deep danger, and mishappes.
Mine eye, does send out goulfes of tears,
to mourn my folk oppreste,
Mine eye, like stillitorie runs,
and weeps, and knows no rest,
Mine eye does melte mine heart, for all
my daughters of the City,
Whilste that the lord throw down his looks,
and from above take pity.
My foes pursude me as a bird,
Yet just cause had they none,
They thruste me down, in dungen dark,
and stopte it with a stone.
The water surgies wet my head,
I am forlorn (quod I)
Therefore lord from mine erksom den,
upon the did I cry.
Thou hardste my voice, shit not thine ear,
but hear my dryrie plainte,
Thou stoodste nigh me when I did cry
and badste me not to fainte.
Thou waste the proctor of my soul,
and didste my life restore,
(O Lord) thou didste perceive my wrong,
adiudge my cause therefore
Thou see gainste me, their fury all,
their damnable intent,
Thou hardste their words of villainy,
their thoughts how they were bente.
Their babbling lips, that rose at me
their corner muttrings see,
At down sittynge, and vprisinge
they make a song of me.
According to their dealyngs lord,
reward to them disburse,
Give them for agony of soul,
thy greeuouse shendfull curse.
Pursue, pursue them in thy mode,
confound them by and by.
Where so (O lord) they make abode,
under the shrowdinge sky.
The forth Chap.
HOw is the gould bedimmed so?
the gold most pure and fine
Is chaungde. The stones and glittring perles,
of holy house divine.
Flock meal, to corners of each street
are scatered, and roulde:
The pears, and nobles of Tsion,
compared well to goulde,
How are they now adnihilate,
accoumpted in the land,
Like earthen, vessels woorkemanship,
of potters mortal hand?
The dragons, (beasts of famous fear)
and dreadefull, with their tongue,
With propper breasts, (as kind has taught,)
do nurse their cresyue young:
But mine, the daughters of my folk,
(wightes cruel, and unkind)
Like Ostriches in deserts fly,
and leave their fruit behind.
My sucklings tounges, cleave to their roufe,
they were so clammie dry:
They calde for bread but none was brought,
therefore in vain might cry.
Those which had fed so sumptuouse,
did pyne in streets for meat
Babes wrapte in scarlet mantles once,
their ordure glad did eat.
My peoples crimes so manifold,
were more innormouse vile
Then Sodom sin, Sodom, that suncke
in such a sodein while.
No enmie ought his tente at it,
it felt no mortal blow,
My strait lyuers whyter then milk, Nazer y^ Hebrew word signifies
separated: the translatours call it the Nazireth, I thought better to call the^
strait lyuers.

whyter, then driven snow,
And rosall ruddish read within
clare read as preciouse stones,
And pollishde like the Saphyre gay,
clean pollishde for the nones:
Their visage vernagde all with black,
y blackte with colishe smeare
Go now unknown, that once in streets,
so admirable were.
Their ryueled skins, clongde to their bones,
inseperable be:
Their cracklinge hydes, britle and brashe,
as dried bark of tree,
Better to did upon the bladde,
then perste with pyne to lie,
In lingringe languour, and at length
for lack of food to dye.
The mothers (else much pitiful)
did boil their sucklings small,
And eat them up: so extreme was
my doulfull peoples fall.
The lord has wroughte his wrath at full,
and powered out his ire,
And burnt Tsion down to the ground,
with eger grypinge fire.
Not kings, or any man else wheare,
did ever think *it so,
That through Ierusalems strong gates,
could enter any foe.
Not sole Prophets, but priests have set
God, in this chafinge mood,
Priests seruisable to Idols,
and gorde in blessed blood.
The blind bloodmungers, blind with bleed,
did straie the streets about,
And when they could not see the pathe,
Much otherwise in the Geneue bible
behold they trod it out.
Hence, blooddie wightes, hence (quod the foes)
fie, fie, away, away.
Touch nothing hence ye currishe bruits
and make no more delay.
Both parties chid, both parties stormde,
some of the heathen said,
This people shall dwell here no more
the lord will keep them stayed,
The aufull countinaunce of God,
has scattred them in sundre,
Nor ever means to mind them more,
pardye, it is no woundre:
For they unto the royal priests,
would give none honor due,
Nor on the grissed horye syers,
the retchlesse would not rue.
Whilste, that we lookde for our vain hope,
our eye sight began to dase,
We lookde for lands that could not save.
nor ride us from the maze.
They hunte, our steps and trase us, that
in streets we can not go,
Our race is run, our days are don,
and death will prove it so.
Our persecutours, swifter then
the Egles of the sky,
Chaste us on mounts, and in deserts,
in wait for us did lie. Uitalls stay in the Hebrew nosethrills breath.

Our vital stay, and steddie aid,
Josiah nointed King,
Our payze of sin, and plage of payze,
did unto bondage bring.
Child of Edom, ^dom flowted.
that in Husse dwells
thou needs not carcke nor care:
For thou shalt pledge us on this cup,
thou shalt be druncke, Geneue for bare say the vomit. Edoms child the
Romans pro^^adinge for the more deal of the Edomites.
and bare.
Tsion, that scourge of thine is paste,
God will no more exyle the,
But Edoms child has plagde thy sons,
and shewde what did defyle the.
The fyfth Chapter Ieremies prayer.
Remember Lord what has bety^e
to us behold and see
Our opprobryes, and what they are,
and eeke are like to be.
Our heritaunce is cut of quyte,
and turnde to folk prophaine,
Our houses by the aliauntes
the barberouse is tayne.
Our mothers (silly as they be)
like wydowes, sytt alone,
Orphans are we pore Orphans we,
and father have we none.
We boughte the water which we druncke,
for wood our coin we paid,
Our necks were hamperde under yoke,
restless fainte, and ill stayde.
To Egipte, and Assiria,
our hand of league we lent:
That we might have a small of bred,
our carcas to content.
Our parents they transgreste thy law,
and now they are no more,
And we their burthynouse offense,
and mass of trespass bore.
Slaves ruled us, and none would ryd
us, from their hands, and gyues
We earnde our bread with extreme toil,
and hasarde of our lives:
Because of wastefull sword that from,
the deserte did issue.
Our skin is black through pauling pyne,
and like to soote in hue.
The wedded wyfes in Tsion town,
were wickedlie defeilde,
And Judas virgins, were deflourde
(all chastity exilde?
The princes and the potentates,
are hanged by the hands,
No man in fear, or reverence,
of elders vysage stands.
Our young men, like to vylaine thraw^es,
in drudgerie did grind,
Our children, (babes unfortunate)
to gallows were assignde.
The elders rauishte from the genets,
the young men from their songs,
Our joyful heart is gone, our dance
is whyninge at our wrongs.
Our glittringe crown, our temple brave,
the lord did quyte fordoe,
Woe ever woe, and out alas,
that we have sinned so.
Our heart with sadness is surchargde,
our eyes can see no whit,
Because mount Tsion is forsakte,
and foxes run on it.
But thou, O Lord for ever stands,
Ay^ duringe is thy throne,
Why doste thou still forsake us, (Lord)
still leauinge us alone?
Turn, O Lord, turn thee unto us,
that we may turn to thee,
And make our days as at the first,
from sin, and mischiefs free.
But thou haste clearly cast us of,
and mells with us no more,
Thou art no doubt (Lord) thoroughly chafte,
and angerde very sore.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMMATA ANTE duos annos conscripta.
In obitum ornatiss and spectatiss faeminae,
Domine Franciscae quondam Suffolciae Ducis
Carmen, non tam lugubritatis quam laetitiae
Plenum, quod tampie, sancteque mortem obierit.
NOx hyemalis erat, pulso cum lumine Phaebi,
Sessor equos cursu liquit dicteus anhelos,
Nec tunc argenti pallantem cornibus ire
Cernere Phaeben erat: non tardus plaustra Boots,
Impulit, acturi non Labi cardine visi
Sunt summo spissus diffunditur vndique nigror.
Alta quies passim mortalia corda premebat:
Ipse soporiferum ducebam pectore somnum.
Ecce, ruit caelo, ventis and praepete penna
In thalamum diui interpres: (mirandaque dictu)
Contundit pectus verbisque ita fatur amicis.
Somno soluere, (ait) dulcem seclude quietem:
Luminibus lustro tacitis, corpusque pererro
Immortale, volens multas prompsisse quaerelas,
Quod, prius ausonios nequij gustare liquores:
Ille recusabat, seriemque and tempora fandi.
Cinge capu^, grandi versu super astra locabis
Franciscam, cui certa fides, cui vi^a pudica
Immotas ponunt seeds, iustosque triumphos.
Dixit: and extemplo nebulis caput occulit atris.
Protinus, intonuere poli, se fin dit Olympus
Numini mandantis diui, dispergitur ether.
Hisce oculis vidi, Franciscam tecta subire
Lucida, fulminei (ductante cohorte) tonantis
Murmr tum vario, mistum crepat vndique caelu^:
Amphion fidibus canit, Orphaeusque sonoris
Indulsit neruis, clarus testudine linus
Personat, ingeminant cantus, tum conscius aethe^
Et visus saltare fuit, and spargere murmur.
Fas vidisse deos choreas ductasse, de asque
Passibus haud aequis sectari, and iungere dextras.
Tunc reboare tubae, crebris tum pulsibus era
Clangere ceperunt, necnon and plectra sonabant.
Cantor, ab vmbriferis ebuccinat arcibus. Euge
Aduena, pone metum tectis succeed beatis.
Tunc musae ceptare melos and fundere versus.
FRANCISCA DVX SVFFOLCIAE
Tellure corpus condidit,
Men's, aureos tenet polos
Carnis soluta carcere.
HIis ita digestis, praemitur tractabile caelum,
Et scissae coiere viae, clausere meatus.
Tum nostro lentum carmen sic creuit ab ore.
Euge, ter faelix, quater o beata,
Sen^ies faelix, gemino marito,
Stirpe ter faelix, hominum voluptas.
Cura deorum.
Mors quasi Saxum Tantalo,
Impendens: Cic. definibus. 1.
Carmen gliconicum cori ambicum.
Mors, (o) saeua, potens nimis,
O mors, mors, quid ages? quoue feres pedem?
Qua^tos saepe trahis, quanque bonos precipites viros?
Pergin dira? nec est modus?
Falcem cladiferam nemo ne reprimet?
Omnes tergeminu^ conspiciemus ne canem breui?
Sic stat numinibus ^atum?
Sic parce voluerunt tetricae? quid hoc?
Non mo^stri simile est? nemo supstes? dolor o dolor*
(proh), fuluo diademate
Reges conspicui, sanguinei duces,
Miles dira fremens corruerint, cum rutilo grege?
non circundata tempora
Ambitumve caput fronde hederae sacrae,
Victrix palma nequit nos spolijs ducere abinferis,
fundabilis es dea:
Heu, quam te memorem? queisue parentibus
Cretam nonne, silex te genuit cautibus horridis?
formosas ne puellulas,
cordatosque viros, and iuuinem efferum,
Imbellesque senes, and memore^ prelij anum rapis.
Fato, quam premimur pari.
Oris nil decor vllus mouet aur^i.
Dijs nasci nihil est. stirpe sua nemo fugit necem.
mors est indocilis fugam.
Non vult illa nigro carmine pellier.
Robor, tela, faces, tus, lachrymae, spretus honos iacet,
mors, aequo pede pulcitat
Turres magnificas: atque humiles casas.
Nunc sternit vigiles, nu^c, inopinos premit ad manes.
Quoquo, diffugias vagus,
aut vtcunque latens occuleris caput,
Mors (en) certa comes omnibus horis grauis imminet.
Ergo, tunde Iouem prece
Qui quondam liquidos euoluit polos
Chao, quique suis limitibus cuncta coercuit,
qui seeds quatit inferum,
Ne mors caedepotens (cum sopor algidus
It per corpora) nos falce recurua vrgeat inscios.
PRESENTED TO THE QVEENES MAJESTY BEING THEN at Cambridge, for the name of his
degree.
A Prince, extracte from hautie house,
a Prince of pompouse port
Approaches here, whose auncitours,
triumph in glories forte.
Cum noble lusty Poets cum,
strike up in regal rate,
To pens, to pens, pursue the cha^e,
ye have a game of state.
If, wit may win a worthy name,
if virtue purchesse praise,
If heavenly hue deserve an hyer,
her brute then let us blase.
Each Realm, does boste him of his prince:
each writer does advance
His sovereign: then happy we,
thryse happy, is our chance,
To whom the mighty puissaunte God,
has lent a Queen of price,
Whose fame we justly may procure,
unto the clouds to rise.
What pleasant smylinge, twincklynge stars,
what gods of wit so great,
Could find, for such excellent gifts,
in place so small a seat?
Well nature well, now maiste thou dance,
and pastyme for a time,
For never shall thou creature work
so quyte deu^ide of crime.
O, may not we: full rightly term,
that sacred Royal breast,
A paradize, where chaste advice,
of godliness does rest?
Ye kings, that rule by seas and land,
and ye infernal ghostes,
Bear witness now, we have a Queen,
of whom our Island bostes.
And Cambridge, now thou do enclose,
(hye thanks to him above:)
A wight, whom all the world adores,
And God him self does love.
DIcite io vates, and io bis dicite vates,
Elizabetha venit, nil nisi dicite io.
Dicite io, Regina venit, regina moratur,
Sedibus in nostris, nonne sonatis io?
Audite vocesque hominum, fremitusque tubarum:
Jupiter e caelis dicere visus io.
Cernimus heroes, heroarumque phalanges.
Cernimus and claram (plebe stupente deam
Clamet io, pandatque vlnas Academia laetas,
Ac clament villae, compita, rura, domus.
Dicat io crebris pulsatus vocibus ether,
Quamque potest late personet axis io.
Explicet exangues rugas quaeribunda senectus,
Laeta dies, fastis adijcienda dies.
Sancta dies, intacta dies, caritura senecta,
Caelicolis magnis magna colenda dies.
Dicat io quicunque dies superauit iniquos,
Qui dia gaudet principe, dicat io.
Nunc, Pater omnipotens, oculis nos aspicis aequis,
Nunc sumus ergo tui, vociferemus io.
TO THE RIGHT HONOrable and most noble Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of
Leicester.
TO hear a pleasant penned verse,
Augustus took delight:
And well allowde, the wits that could,
his praises well indite.
From massy care of common wealth,
often would he, for a space,
Translate him self, to interuewe
and judge a Poets grace.
Augustus now is dead and gone,
his fame has found her wings,
Of him, the brood of Pegasse house,
and noble Muses synges.
If England had such curious wits,
that could in stately verse,
The factes, the feats of worthy wightes,
and royal gestes rehearse:
Your lordshyps honor, should be made,
the myrrour of our time,
Because you love to lay your looks
upon a Poets ryme.
Some mountynge wits, that love to mount,
and soore aloof in sky,
Both will and can arreare your fame,
and lodge it in the sky.
If we be not to rude unkind,
You and your golden years,
Wherein you live, shall give assault
unto the furthest ears.
Not only we shall live in you,
the days that you dwell here,
Shall shine and show to other worlds,
in you set forth so clear.
A jewel, welcome to the world,
by whom the world shall win,
And welcome to that happy age,
wherein you did begin:
Most hearty welcome unto us,
on your advice does stay.
The pondrous peyse of public weal,
and urgent weyghtie swaye.
Graec. and Lat. des. IN ADVENTVM AMPLISSImi viri Domini Cecilli, equitis
aurati Regine Maiestatis a secretis, and Cancellarii nostri honoratiss.
PLurima debemus multis, quid reddimus ergo?
Reddimus hoc vuum, posse, refer nih il.
Hos homines, debere sibi, quis fecerit assis?
Debent, an soluant, possis habere nihil.
Carmina; dicuntur caelo deducere lunam:
Traxerunt vates carmine saxa, feras.
Aspicis, vt dictant versus iuuenesque senexque?
Carmina si spernas, soluimus, ecce, nihil.
Carmina Maecenas, and carmina Caesar amauit,
Carmina si spectes, carmine dives eris.
Consilio polles, res hoc tibi publica debet:
Anglia te meriti commeminisse decet.
Doctrina polles, atque hoc tibi patria debet:
Culta doctrina: patria read, tuum est.
Quod nos vicisti, debes academia soluas,
Aurea praestantem defer ad astra virum,
Hospita Iohannis quod te modo tecta receptant,
Hoc nos debemus, possumus atque nihil.
Sed tamen, ingentes reddemus carmine grates,
Isto, si fas* sit nos munerare modo.
Gratuses, and merito gratus, quicunque tuorum
Intret Iohannis limina gratus erit.
Tu merito gratus, tu maenia suggeris aedis,
Nos, nos nescimus, reddere, read d^us.
Read Deus, cito read deus, cito read merenti,
Quid reddas tandem? praemia read Deus,
Praemia, quae possunt homines fecisse beatos
Quae reddis diuis, praemia read deus.
IN ADVENTVM EIVSDEM, HOnoratis sin^aeque eius coniugis.
SPlendidam lucem celebrant Mycenae,
Qua, domum victor redit imperator,
Oppidum postquam Priami iacebat, Littore truncus,
Gaudium magnum Menelaus, olim
In tulit Spartis, peregre reuersus,
Quando, Neptuni cinis esset omne Ilion ingens.
Sulcat inuitum mare vi deorum
Gloriam magnam referens Ulysses:
Rettulit lauds, reperitque lauds ^ Praemia vitae.
Tu refers famam, rediens celebrem,
Tu tibi iustos cumulas honores,
Gratus es nobis, iterumque gratus, Magnae Cecillae.
Gratus aduentus dominae Cecillae,
Nobilis, doctae, pietate clarae,
Coniugis clari, patris atque clari Clara Cecilla.
Dignus (o) coniunx, domina Cecilla:
Dignaque (o) coniunx, domino Cecillo:
Viuat (o) viuat, valeatque longum, Dignus vterque.
In aduentum clariss. viri Thomae Hennagii Epigramma.
IF that my pen could paynt my mynd^
or wit be wray my will:
Then should your worship know my thoughts
that lurk for lack of skyll.
I would excuse my rash attempt,
the noblesse of your name,
I would set forth in words of weight,
and fynely fyled frame:
But eloquence she me denies,
she does my hand repel:
And makes me shrynke to show mine art,
to him where art does dwell.
Then blame your self, because I do
indyte my mind in few:
We simple Poets, dare not bide,
Your heedfull learned vewe.
I justly may mystrust my self,
that have a gyltie mind:
And most mystruste, when he is iudgde,
that can the guylt vnwynde.
I felt a sharp and hard conflicte,
in writynge of this rhyme:
Good will prickte on, rudeness reclamde,
great strugglyng for a time.
But, each thing has at last his end,
aduaunst him good will tho,
And shame exilde, he badde me write,
the victor vrgde me so.
That straight, my base vnspiced style,
was subject to your syghte,
Which ought not once to touch your steps,
unworthy there to light.
But give him leave, by gift of verse,
his meaning to escrie:
Whose hands, to present prouder price,
his power does deny.
And give me leave in fine to say,
thryse welcome to this place
Welcome, for shape, welcome for skyll,
welcome for ancient race.
To the same.
SEmper, ego tacito modulabor carmen in antro?
Quid mea number soli carmina facta mihi.
Pana per, and nymphas, procul, o procul iste camenae,
Cordi sit vobis, ire per ora virum.
Ite leaves elegi, letae fulsere calendae,
Ite leaves eligi, regia turba venit.
Scilicet, optatis mecum latitare parente?
Number iuuat occultos praeterijsse dies?
Cernetis proceres, operit quos tirea vestis,
Agmen, quod tellus far superbit, erit,
Forsitan, est aliquis, manibus qui sumet amicis*
Nonne sub hoc casu dilituisse pudet?
Auratas inter turmas, Hennagius heroes
Infert se socium, maenia nostra petens.
Illius ad vultus, cautos vos tendite gressus
Et curae tantam sit subijsse manum.
Audacem, verum si dixerit esse poetam,
Adme (confessae crimina) ferte pedem.
TO THE DVKES GRACES departing.
A Kyfe report does run abroad,
that Fame has fethered wings:
By healpe whereof, from ear to ear,
posthaste the goddess flinges.
An harbynger, often times to wight,
to speedy in her flight,
She flynges and friskes, through lands and seas,
she never loves to light.
O fame, where dydste thou then soiorne?
Inuironde in what place,
Waste thou? that we in no wise knew,
the coming of his grace:
His worthy noble princely grace,
whose martial feats of war,
Whose high attemptes, and hardy hand,
does fraie his foes from far.*
If understanding had been given,
if thou hadste said the word.
The Duke shall come, that valiant Duke,
That weeldes the wreakefull sword.
No pen, no poet should have seaste,
next to the very best,
In trymme attire, of sundry toungues,
his praise we would have dreste.
Then bear with us, (O famous prince)
Your coming was not known,
Though verses ebb, yet love aboundes,
our hearts is all your own.
Ad eundem.
Non nisi grandisoni capient tua gesta cothurni:
Omnia, non factis carmina digna tuis.
Nec tamen, est quisque, quin gestit nomina tanti
Principis, exiguis vel cecinisse modis.
Vrget tantus amor: stimulas sie v^que poetas.
Tantum debemus, virque senexque tibi.
Illa dies merito, nobis celebranda fuisset,
Qua, nobis visus ceperat esse tui:
Versibus illa dies caruit, letisque cam^^nis,
Nullius and calamo claruit illa dies.
Splendeat ista dies, qua maenia nostra relinquis,
Alterius lauds, auferat ista dies.
Aduentum tacui: discessum ^a udibus orno:
Non potui salve dicere: dico vale.
QVESTIO PRIMA IN COmitiis nostris Disputata. ANNO Domini. M. D. LXV. Corpus
Christi non st vbique.
Brentius, longo memorandus aeuo,
calluit magni sacra iura Christi,
Perperam, Christi tamen esse dixit
Corpus vbique:
Calluit Luther, retulit salutem,
Retulit Christum, repulitque Papam,
Fregit, and strauit male soeuientis
cornuae monstri
Fregit errores, coluitque lucem,
Antesignanus, tulit ille palmam:
Quin, and audacter satanam Tyrannum
fregit ouante^.
Attamen, res est, magis (o) Dolenda
Nesciit magnum columen salutis,
Quo modo Christus solet vsque sacrum
frangere panem.
Credidit, corpus simul exhiberi:
Credidit, panem simul exhiberi:
Corpus, and panem, simul esse posse
scripta reclam^nt.
Inde, turbatus nisi tradidifset,
Sedibus multis simul esse corpus:
Terminos dixit, Domini (...)
cingere nullos.
Hereses ceruis, quasi fune necti,
Cernis, and caute docuisse Priscos.
Si quid absurdi dabis, inde perque
multa sequ^ntur.
Brentius, certe male somniauit,
Ipse Lutherus titubauit ingens,
Cuncta cognosci sua Christus olim
noluit illis.
Cinglius vidit tenebras relictas,
Vidit, and sensit tenebras opacas,
Rebus vt fractis voluit mederi:
concidit ense.
Occolamp^^ dius.
Lux Domus, vidit remanere lucem,
Obuiam muli is facile sequacem,
(...) libris studiit vetustis.
(...)
Veritas, luxit radiis benignis,
Vidit, and scripsit nequiisse multis,
(...)
(...)
Augustinus.
Corpus humanum, nequit esse multis
in locis: Christi (...),
(...)
(...)
Basilius.
Corpus, aut christi (...) implet omnem:
Implet aut certam propriamque sedem:
Termino certo nisi posset esse,
(...)
Vigilius.
(...), si non teneatur vno
In loco certo, Deus est (...):
Sanguinem,, carnem (...) esse credis?
(...).
Act. Apost. 3.
Suscipit coelum, Domini, (...),
Cingitur (quid ni?) (...) Patris
Spiritus, vires tamen vndequaque
fundit, opemque*
Titii fundo, Iustinianus.
stet it arbos olim,
Arboris radix stet it illa fundo:
Maeuii struncum, patulosque ramos
fundus habebat.
Arboris, quisnam Dominus (...)?
Titius: qui sic? quiae, mansit eius
Praediis radix: Erit eius, ergo,
arbor and vsus:
Corpus in coelis, (...) ergo Christus,
Numinis vires penetrant abissus,
Sol manet coelis, radii solares
(...)
Numen in terris, Theodoretus?
neque corpus illic,
Corpus (...), velut ante (...),
Terminos nouit, propriumque (...):
cingitur ergo.
Trinitas esset, siquidem vel vnque
(...) capax (...) foret illa quanta: Ciryllus*

At capax Christus, capit ille corpus
fertque refertque
Ergo
Claudetur ille terminis.
Vbique non erit uagus.
Diuinit ^s est libera.
Sed corpus intercluditur.
(...)
(...).
2. QVESTIO. Gratiam fides, fidem Dilectio sequitur.
QVid Iudaea dapes, Babilo^, quid moenia iactas?
Quid iuuat hoc meruisse decus?
Quid, Sa^pson gaudes? quod amas, tua gaudia tollet:
Te tua robora magna prement.
Saul, retro propera, ferro petiture Damascum
Quam cito corruit altus aequo?
(...) iacent. sunt o sunt numina coeli:
Gratia magna petenda Dei est.
Posse Deus facit hos, liber quos spiritus afflat.
Est opus improbitatis homo:
Nil facit ille boni, sed suggerit omnia faelix
(...).
Credere qui poteris, per te qui numina nescis?
Gratia numinis ante fidem.
Illa beat quos vult, quos vult facit illa fideles:
Prodiga, fontis and instar aquae.
Nascitur inde fides, Dilectio nascitur inde:
Haecque piam docet esse fidem.
Si volumus, nostram meritis expendere causam:
obruimur numero scelerum.
Sola fides liquidis superauerit aethera pennis,
(sed tamen illa probata Deo)
Sola fides, Domini si sit substantia Christi,
Quodque semel pateretur homo:
Quodque velit solus* quod possit crimina solus,
Demere maximus ille Deus.
Gratia, deinde fides, Dilectio claudit vtramque
filia posteriore loco.
(...),
(...).
(...)*
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Hebr. Car. de sunt.
(...):
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...):
(...).
Ad Heskins, quod Do. Iuellum laesi vel vt Heskins malit detruncati textus
incusat.
HEschynus iccirco textum truncasse Iuellum,
Omnia quod textus, non referebat, ait.
Artificem pulchrum: Quasi, cognita verba tacere,
Detruncare siet: quis nisi truncus ait?
Credidit haud truncis, sese scripsisse Iuellus,
Hunc tu fallebas Heschine, truncus eras.
Hauditerum falls, tecum quicunque loquetur,
Cautus (cuncta suo verba citare loco)
Ac si cum puero, vel trunco res ageretur,
Nil non in fauces, ingeret ille tuas,
Adscribi possit notissima verba (...)
Doctor: si nescit, quid nisi truncus erit?
Plures hoc norunt, ergo si percipis ipse:
Et petis adscribi: sic quoque truncus eris*
Inconsultus homo, fors Heschynus, Aeschinus alter
Plus satis insanit, negligit atque pater.
Romanus Mitio, scelerum sacer ille magister,
Dedocet esse bonos, te docet esse malum.
Heschine, quin scortaris, ait, quin sculptile fingis?
Sculptile quin deamas? me patre gnate potes.
Non est hoc vitium: saltem me iudice non est.
Vtere tam belli commoditate patris.
Exordire dolos, faecundum consule pectus?
Aut dolus aut virtus, tu meditare dolos.
His ego vel solis, terras ac tartara vici:
Non aliter, gnati conualuere mei.
Sedulus hoc hortor, per viscera (chare) parentis
Praestes, praecepti summa sit ista mei:
Omnes quo fallas, mendacia plurima sperge,
Sic prodesse mihi, sic meus esse potes.
Sic solet haec Mitio* Non Heschinus vlla moratus,
Tam comicae vocis (...) esse cupit.
Protinus exclamat, textum truncasse Iuellum.
Heus primo mendax? Heschine patris eris.
Heschinus (obscuri vix caede cruentus Echyni)
Praesulis an nostri, caede cruentus erit?
Nugarumque potens, coniuratusque getarum,
Terribilis, no stram cogitat ipse necem.
Saeuiat ille, suis centum comitatus Echinis.
Si non truncus erit, saeuus Echinius erit.
Heschinus, Hardingus, Dorman, Rastal, Stapleton,
Multa edunt multis, ne videantur (...).
Heschinus, haeretici scribant, qnae quantaque possint,
Iurent se sanctos, catholicosque viros
(...).
(...).
FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON in Fletestrete by Thomas Marshe. Anno M.D. LXVI.


