THE Christian Governor, IN the Commonwealth, AND private Families: Described
by DAVID, in his 101. Psalm.

Guiding all men in a right course to HEAVEN.

Herewith also a part of the Parable of the lost SON. Luke 15.

Both expounded and opened by ROBERT HORN.

With the Doctrines and Uses thence arising.

The more particular Contents see on the Page following.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Francis Burton, and are to be sold at the green
Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

THE Christian Governor.
From whom KINGS on their Thrones, Nobles in their Houses, Pastors in their
Charges, Magistrates on Seats of Justice, Private men in their Families,


May draw good Instructions:

How to Rule their Subjects. Order their Servants. Feed their Flocks. Punish
Offenders. Govern their Households^


THE Lost Son.
In whom is (chiefly) obserueable SIN: the true cause of Misery. REPENTANCE:
the right mean to obtain Mercy.


TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, MY much Honored Lord, RAFE, Lord EVRE, Lord President in
these parts: all true Honor, with increase.
Christian Lord:
Having a great desire, in my great want of means, to express my self by
some Office and Testimony for your Honors good thoughts of me, in words of
undeserved commendation: the rather because one Country (...), in which you
were borne Noble, and one Country now contains us, in which you govern with
honor and love: I light upon certain briefes of Lectures delivered by me,
upon a very worthy Psalm, and before a worthy Audience, your Honors immediate
honorable Predecessor, and others, his reverend and grave associates then in
place. A Psalm made by a King, and for Kings, which (also) may indifferently,
serve as a Table of direction for all States and Policies, under that which is
Kingly.

Therefore in the mirror of this Psalm, and example of him who made it, as in
a true Glass, your Honor may behold clearly the right and lively image and
face of a Christian Governor and government. And, though no Psalm, as it
were pearl, in this Book of Psalms, or box of pearls can justly displease:
yet, as in the estimation of precious things That may please us for one use,
for which another (being to no such use) will not please so well, albeit
precious for the use it has; so it is in all these excellent Psalms, the
Jewels of Gods Church. For, for some purposes, one Psalm may be fitter, that
is, more excellent then another, though all be excellent and do edify greatly
in their several kinds. And indeed, as when the Prophet gave his mind to the
preparing of those things that might serve for the building of the material
temple, He disposed in his mind to what use this or that Jewel or weight of
gold and silver, and a number of other things should be applied: so for these
Psalms (most of which were penned by this sweet singer of Israel) the Prophet
having stored and laid them up, as the ornaments of Gods Church, in his
Sanctuary, for public use, and as precious stuff for the building of a
spiritual Temple to God; He had great consideration whereto each Psalm should
serve. Wherefore some he made for the Sabbath and Temple chiefly, some
(indifferently) for all days and places: some for a remembrance of the
general, some for a more special remembrance of the particular works of God
to his Church: some for meditation and practice, some for Doctrine and Prayer:
some for comforts, some for threatenings: some for confession of sins, some of
conversion from sin; all which he consecrated as Tables of perpetual
thankfulness to GOD in his House, better then the three hundred shields and
two hundredth targets that Solomon put in his house at Jerusalem, though they
were all of beaten gold, 1 King. 10.16.17.

Now, as Gods wisdom by David thus sorted and disposed these holy Songs, that
they might be suitable to all the occasions and necessities of the Church for
ever: so in more special manner, the same wisdom of GOD by him, did indite
this Psalm for instruction, that it might teach even Kings, and all under
Kings in authority, how to please and serve God in those high places, and that
they might understand, and not forget that religious services belong to the
Noblest as well as to the meanest, and in reason, rather to great persons then
to common men. For, who should do most work, but he that receives most
wages? and who should pay the greatest rent, but he that has the largest
demise?

This Psalm therefore (my Honored Lord) deserves right well your best
intentions, both for the contemplative use of it, and your practical in your
Family, and the Province. It is Gods Psalm, or charge to you, and such as you
are, by David. But because the Text of it (short as it is) is like to
Tapestrie, which (being foulded up) shows but a part of that which is
wrought, and (being laid open) shows plainly to the eye all the work that
is in it: therefore I, though most unworthy) have presumed thus to unfold this
Tapestrie of the holy Ghost, in so excellent a Psalm, and to hang up the
chamber of it in a very mean Exposition, given unto it by my weak judgment
and gifts, which in humblest good will, out of love and duty, I humbly tender
into your Lordships own hands, knowing the same to be willing, and ready,
graciously to pardon, and bear with things somewhat meanly done, but with a
well-meaning heart; and to respect, not so much the gift, as the good will of
the giver, in matters of this nature.

Howsoever I have dealt, the Psalm is the same that ever it was: which if I
have so opened, that is, so to the life of the Prophets words, and so unfolded,
that your Honor may discern of all the pieces and sundry works and matters
contained in it, as in a piece of Tapestrie opened you may: I humbly thank
God, and wish the fruit of it in your Lordships heart; and, from so good a
treasury in the places of your Honors public and private emploiments to
fructisie there: that is, turn it into a Prayer; that you may follow in the
steps of David's obedience to it; doing as he did.

Often pray this Psalm to God (my good Lord:) let it be your meditation, and
counselor in all your high affairs, and when you would stir the wheels of
all good graces in you for some holy and profitable dispensation of Justice in
the same, use it. Lastly, and for my self, I hum^ly beseech your Honor,
favorably to remit this trespass of my presumption, respecting rather, what I
would do then what is done, and in how homely manner. So, not further to
trouble your Honor: I pray God heartily, that, as he has honored you with a
double honor of Birth and Office, so he would accompany your earthly honor
with such abundance of heavenly graces to go with the same, that here you may
abound in every good work, to the praise of God, and, in Heaven, may receive
the pure crown of Righteousness and glory, which is laid up for you, and for
all who love and look for the coming of Jesus Christ, to whose grace most
humbly I commend your Honor now and ever.

At your Honors commandments, most humbly in the Lord. ROBERT HORN.

To the Christian READER.
GOod READER, I confess, ingeniously, that in some part of my way through this
Psalm, I have walked by the light, and in the steps of Du Pl^ss. Bishop of
St. David's: and M. Pigg. on this 101. Psalm.

Mr. Dod, on the fifth Commandment.

Mr. Cleauer, on Proverb. 11. and 20. Chap.

Mr. Downham, on Hozea 4.


some before ^e, whose names are of account and pray^e in the Church. And this
I have done for thy sake, that fauourest good intents, to help thee, and thy
Family, by helping thee (if thou have a charge) in the point of their direction
to godliness. For by these gatherings, thou m^ist read in one little Book
what is (otherwise) done in many, and (I trust) to thy commodity.

My drift herein may (the better) be borne with, when it shall be considered,
that for this labor, thus offered to thy Christian acceptance, no return is
expected but what shall be made to GOD by thankfulness for those good helps
wherewith I my self was (first) benefited, and desire, in Christ, to b^nefit
thee. And let no man say that I might have filled my hands, in this my Masters
great Harvest, rather then followed others: for; I am privy to my weak estate
in such matters; and the gleanings are for the poor, Leuit. 19.9.10.

All that I crave and hope to receive, is thy good for thy self, and thy good
Prayers for me, that in our several charges we may so well behave our
selves, that the Master of the House may be glorified by our service, and may
glorify us in his Kingdom, when he shall say: It is well done good servant
and faithful, thou have been faithful in little, I will make thee Ruler over
much^ enter into thy Masters joy, Matthew. 25.23. That we may be partakers of
this hope with the Saints in light, let us endeavor to nurture our charges
with the knowledge of that truth which is according to godliness, Tit. 1.1.
And where worldly Masters of Families, and carnal Ministers of Congregations
do little respect and favor this duty, or the doers thereof: let us (as the
Word has taught us) both do, and continue to do according to this rule: So
shall we reap in due season if we faint not, Gal. 6.9.

The neglect hereof in you ( Masters,) and us ( Ministers,) is cause that this
large House of the Commonwealth, so abounds with persons so (highly)
disobedient to God, and so (shamefully) disloyal to their Sovereign Lord King
JAMES, whose happy and long life, the God of our lives sanctify and bless
ever, to his great joy here, and everlasting salvation in the Heavens. AMEN.

Thine unfeignedly, in the Lord Jesus: ROBERT HORN.

THE CHRISTIAN GOVERNOR. Psalm 101. expounded.
A Psalm of DAVID. I will sing Mercy and Judgment: Verse. 1.
unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.
THis Psalm is David's: For, in the title which it has, it is called David's
Psalm, and bears David's name. In which, He declares how he will behave
himself in the Kingdom, after he is invested in it, both for the affairs of
his Crown, and for the more private matters of his Court. For the time, when
he wrote this most excellent Psalm, as it is not named, so the certain hour,
day, or year of it is not material: and it is probable that it was made some
short time after the report of Saul's death, or not long before he came to the
Kingdom by the common voice of all the Tribes, who came to Hebron to make him
King. 2 Samuel 5.3.1. The Psalm itself consists of the title and body of the
Psalm: the title is in these words: A Psalm of David. Where the Kingly
Prophet writes his name in the beginning of the Psalm, as Princes do in
their Letters and Commandments, to give further matter unto it, and says; A
Psalm of David, as if he should say; if any shall doubt who made so large a
promise to God of bringing himself under him in obedience and faithfulness,
yea, and bound himself by a religious Psalm, as by his bond and pawn, so
solemnly to perform the same, let that person know that it was David (Gods
King) that entered thus into covenants with the Lord for the good government of
his own house, and the whole Kingdom. This is the meaning.

Where we learn that none can be so Doct.
great as to be over great and good for the good ordring and holy instruction
of the charge that God has put him in trust with: therefore this Princely
Prophet; as he placed his greatest delight in the Arc of the Covenant, because
it was the presence of God, to Gods people; so to bring it into Jerusalem was
the joy of his heart. 2 Samuel 6.12.14.15. This made Solomon his Son (the
mightiest and wisest King that ever reigned in Israel, Christ excepted, (of
whose eternal wisdom and greatness his wisdom and greatness mortal, were
types and shadows) to call himself a Preacher. Eccl. 1.12. Joshua ruled his
house as a Bishop. Ios. 24.15. and Abraham, who had a great family, catechized
it. Genesis 14.14. After, God himself is Abraham's witness that he would keep
none in his house, Son or Servant, whom he would not train up in Religion,
and therefore says; I know Abraham. Genesis 18.19, or, I dare give my word for
Abraham, that he will command his son and household after him: that is, as he
fears God, so he will make them to fear him, and to keep the way of the
Lord as he keeps it, doing righteousness, as he is righteous. So C^rnelius
was a denout man, and devout Cornelius had a good house. For, of him it is
written, that he feared God with all his house. Act. 10.2. These all were great
men, and in their times, famous; yet did they look straightly to the ways of
their people, and diligently teach them in the ways of the Lord.

The Reasons.
First. In doing this, we are Gods servants, and, is any too good or great to
do him service? Secondly, we may save a soul from Hell: and, who can do too
much, or be too good to deliver his brother from perdition? Again, Christ died
for the poorest soul: did Christ die for him; and do thou despise thy
brother, for whom Christ died? Thirdly, none can be too good to keep hi^
house from infection, and those whom he has in house from the plague of ill
counsel. Not to reform a wicked person, or not to remove him if he will not
be reformed, is to cast an infection and plague of evil example upon those
that be good, and promises no better success then they can look for who
bring a leprous person among the whole, and a contagious person among the
sound; and, can any be so proud and merciless as not to prevent a spoil and
loss of Christian souls, so certain and near? Lastly, He that will not see
the persons under him well ordered, does give way to them to run into
disorder, and to break out into wickedness: and, what is this but to
communicate with their evil? and to be (if not authors, yet) abettors to them
of all the ungodliness that is committed by them in that undisciplined estate?
Nay, he that shuts not his doors against such, if he know them, opens
them to the curse of God which (undoubtedly) will know him, and follow him.
And, can any man be too good to prevent so great a danger toward himself,
though he will not do good, by preventing it in mercy toward others?

Uses.
Hence (then) they are reproved who disdain to set the Teachers chair, Use. 1.
with David, in the mids of their house. Verse. 2. and with him to do wisely in
it, till the people that be under them do (all) know the Lord. Some put from
them with great contempt, this charitable work, to others: and, some that
look for service from the persons they keep, hate to give them instruction.
But the best day that ever David saw, was that day when he danced before the
Arc, in a linen Eph^d, and with all his might. 2 Samuel 6.22. for, that was a
good day indeed, when his zeal made him so vile before the Lord, and so humble
before the Arc of his service. Solomon (as we heard) a great King, became a
Preacher: the Scripture calls him, and he called himself, Solomon, the
Preacher. Joshua protested for him and his house, that he would serve the Lord:
and Hester the Queen did as much for her and her maids. Hest. 4.16. Abraham
and Cornelius are praised in their story, because they had religious families.
And who art thou? and what is thy fathers house that thou should fancy to
thy self greater honor then (thus) to worship at the Lords feet, in the sight
of his Saints, with so great a Cloud of famous Leaders, all of them excellent
persons, and well reported of in their times? I confess that Princes and the
Nobles of the Earth may and ought to have, in their Courts and great houses,
their special Ministers, and eyes of assistance (the Scripture calls them
Seers, as Gad, David's Seer, and we Chaplens) in this great work; yet so as
they forget not to be good Nehemiahs and overseers of the work themselves.
For, if they do, that that perishes, perishes by their default, and is lost
upon their account, and they shall answer for it.

An instruction, Use. 2^
to Fathers of Families, and of Children, to do this high office of a Teacher
or Catechist unto them, for godly knowledge and nurture. If we would have the
Church of God to continue among us, we must bring it into our houses, and
begin it in our Families. For, as of particular persons come Families, so
from Families well ordered, proceed flourishing Churches. Many complain that
there is no discipline in the Church: but thou that so complainest for Gods
house, look into thine own house, and be sure that good discipline be there.
Many cry out upon evil servants, and stubborn Sons: But thou, that make
this outcrie, take heed the fault be not thine, and cause in thee that thy
Servants are so bad, and thy Sons and Daughters no better. For, have thou
endeavored to make thy Servants, the Servants of God, and thy Sons and
Daughters, the Sons and Daughters of the Lord, by good education and
teaching? Then thou may well complain that they are no better, but if not,
then it is thy just plague that they are so evil. But must great men do this
duty? Surely great David did it: and they must either do it themselves, or
see it done by others. But, as when Ahimaaz would have run to have told David
of the death of Absalom his wicked Son, Ioab said; thou shall not be the
Messenger to day: to day, or in this thing) thou shall not bear the tidings,
seeing the Kings Son is dead: 2. Sam. 18.20. So when any of our worthies
shall, having the Absalom of rebellion slain in themselves, offer to bring the
good news of it to others, not to David, but to the house of David and Church
of Christ, by endeavoring (shall I say to run?) nay, but to creep in this
race of private discipline for the making of a religious and well catechized
Family, they shall meet with many Ioabs and pull-backes. But Noble Ahimaaz be
not kept back: the more Noble your birth is, the better it does become you to
run the race or way of Gods commandments. For, as Apples of gold upon
pictures of silver, Prou. 25.11. so is true zeal when it is found in the heart
of a Nobleman or Gentleman of great parentage. Yea, as pearl set in gold, so
is it to find sanctified virtue in the steps of Honorable Lords. So much
for the title of the Psalm, the matter follows.

I will sing mercy, Verse. 1.
and Judgment to thee, etc.
WE have heard of the maker of the Psalm, which was David; the matter of it
consists of sundry protestations (as it were bills of covenant) concerning
his own person, in the two first verses, and concerning both it and his
Subjects, in the rest of the Psalm. That which concerns his own person, in
this verse, is his bill of promise, by which He enters into bond to the Lord,
to execute holily and indifferently mercy and judgment in his kingly place.
And, this contains the ditt^e, and person to whom he will sing it. The dittie
may be considered in the manner of expressing it, or in the parts whereof it
consists. The manner is by singing. The parts are: first, mercy or
gentleness to those that do well, opposed to tyranny and cruelty; then
justice or severity, due to incorrigible offenders, till they be rooted out,
opposed to dastardie and carnal fear. The person to whom this holy Psalm is
holily ascribed, is the Lord. Where He that is the Author of this solemn v^we,
promises to show mercy, and to practice judgment to his glory. For the
manner, and in as much as the Prophet (here) takes upon him to sing the matter
which he has in hand, not coldly to deliver it; he does in effect say, that
he will do it with joy and cheerfulness, with a lo^d voice, and with all his
might. For, they that sing, are (commonly) merry: and the Apostle James says;
Is any merry? let him sing. Iam. 5.13. Also, they extend their voice, and put
strength unto it that sing, as the Prophet here understands singing.

From whence this Doctrine may be gathered: Doct. 1.
what we do to God, or our Brethren for God, to do it with joy, heartily and
willingly. The Prophet here does so, seeing the manner by which he voweth
praise to God, is by a Psalm, which he spreads before Him in his sanctuary,
as his pawn and witness to testify for him, that what ^e solemnly
confesses as debt, he means justly to pay. He that distributeth, must do it
with simplicity; he that rules with diligence: he that shows mercy with
cheerfulness. Romans 12.8. The words are plain, and they speak thus much, in
effect, unto us: that in Gods matters, all things must be done in good form
and uprightly. The matter must be good, and the manner must please him. We
must do good, and do that good well: and come to God, when he calls us, and
come willingly to him. Psalm. 110.3^ For, the comers to him, that is, they that
come acceptably, are (all of them) voluntaries, and not prest-men: And, we
must not only do service, but do it diligently. Romans 12.11. For, he that
loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. holds him accursed by his word, that
does his work negligently, or with deceit. Ier. 48.10. And therefore, God, by
Moses, charge us to love him with all our heart; not with some of our heart,
or something in our heart, but p^rfectly, with the whole heart. For, he will
not have a little, but all: and, he further ^aith, with all your soul; not
with a part, but with every part; nor by halfes, but wholly, and, with all your
strength. As if he should say; all, or none. And therefore st^ong in anger
against his enemies, and strong in zeal for his glory: strong to do good,
weak to do evil: strong in forgiving a wrong, weak in revenging it: strong
to serve him, weak to serve sin. Deuteronomy. 6.^. The reasons of the Doctrine are.
First, men cannot endure a grudging giver: and will God respect him? Secondly,
David was the Lords type, when he rejoiced with great joy, that the people
off^red willingly to the Lord, 1 Chr. 29.9. Which is to teach us; when we
bring to God, for the building, not of an earthly but heavenly ^ouse in which
we dwell by faith, not talents of gold, or the shekell of silver, but a pure
and willing mind, as it were, a golden inhabitant in a mean and perishable
tenement of clay; that we cannot but greatly please the Lord, offering the
same, as we have received of him the measure and gift of faith, and desiring
to do well from a free heart. Thirdly, it is no gift, that is no free-gift;
nor good service, that is done with eye-seruice. Colos. 3.22. and, we please
God, when we offer not much but willingly. The child that does his goodwill,
does as much content his Father, as if he had done the thing, which he would
gladly have done, but could not. And, where there is a willing mind, it is
accepted according ^o that a man has, and not according to that he has not. 2
Cor. 8.12.

Uses.
Use. 1.
A reproof to those who come to our Church-meetings by constraint, and
grudgingly, rather to save their credit, then their souls. David daunced
before the Arc, with all hi^ might. 2 Samuel 6.14. but these (so soon as they
come into the assembly) squat down before the Arc of public Prayer and
Preachings, neither having affection, nor doing reverence. Or, if they hear
what is spoken^ and join in prayer, they do the service but coldly, and with
a desire to be gone. Now, if a woman should be weary, and take no pleasure in
her own husbands company and presence, where (yet) she is never weary, and
takes great delight to be in company and to have fellowship with other men,
howsoever she may give her self to her husband in certain bodily duties,
because the law and condition of their marriage compels her so to do, her
husband may well take her to be a wanton and evil affected wife. So, if being
married to Christ, by our vow in Baptism, and promise a^ his Table, so often
and solemnly made, we shall offer^ in his presence, and to him, in place,
unpleasing prayer and hearing, having small joy while we have him with us in
the assembly, howsoever (because the law commands our bodily presence, and
certain bodily duties of the ear, and tongue, and knee) we offer these for
fashion, not with any good will (for our hearts in the mean while are in
secret conference with the world, the profits of it, or pleasures in it, which
we desire to serve and to have fellowship with, even when we seem to ^erue
God, and to have fellowship with ^^^ Saints;) how can the Bridegroom steem^ us
as friends and Lo^ers, and ^^ot join us with women of fornica^^^on, that ^aue
departed from the faith ^^^ their Lord and followed other Lovers? ^^^ich may be
^^^ken (also) of such as ^^^ God, not of sin^^^^tie but for wage^: w^ose good
deeds (...) not from a lo^^ of righteousness, but^om fear, and wh^ give a
penny, but not alms to a poo^e man. For, it is no (...) that is given for
merit, or the praise men. The Papists alms is all such: and ^^^^^fore never
did a right Papist give true alms in all his giuings, and a poor Cottage
buil^ by a Christian, in faith, is better (I ^eane better respected of God, and
better to the doer) then all the Cells and Monestaries that ever Papist builded
for his own glory and merit. Good works follow faith, and must proceed from a
love of Christ, on whose members we bestow our gifts for his sake. Therefore,
though a man give never so much, yet if that which is giver be not given in
faith (which makes gift to be an almes-gift) it is not so much as a penny
given, by a sound Christian in mercy, to a Disciple, because he i^ Disciple.
But let no man here say, t^^t we (of the Religion) cond^nne alm, because we
do not iusti^^ (as neit^er does Christ our ^^ster) Ph^risa^^ll alms. Matthew.
6. For, the poor are he Lords Altar^ ^ong us, and we mus^ sacrifice our ^nes
upon it. They (...) his ground, on which we must so^ the seed relief, when
they fall into mi(...) God requires a l^ane of us, and (...) must send it to
him in their hands. The Apostle John says; Whosoever has this worlds good,
and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? 1 Ioh. 3.17. As if he should say, it dwells
not in him. And if the love of God be not in him, I am sure the life of God is
not in him, neither (except the Lord give him repentance) shall he live with
God, but with Devils. For, though we shall^ not be saved by our giving to the
poor, yet ^e that will be saved, must give to the poor cheerfully, and as
God has blessed him. Our good deeds cannot save us, yet if we will be saved,
we must do good deeds. And, though our good deeds cannot save us, our bad
deeds, and want of good, can damn us. We (then) preach good works as much as
Papists, but not in Papisticall manner, to merit by them. And for the Law, we
teach that it is good and holy, and binds our obedience to it in all things.
Gal. 3.10. Indeed we cannot continue in all things that are written in the
book of the Law, to do them: yet if we do what we can, and be grieved for
th^^ we cannot; that which we do is accepted, that which we cannot do, is
pardoned. And so the law has a necessary use, as we teach: and that is to
prescribe what in duty we should do, not to give us the wages of life for
that we have done, except we could (which we never shall) continue in all
things, which are written, to do them. So we exhort men to do good willingly,
as the Lords free men, and not as servants for praise, or wages.

Use. 2.
An instruction (further) to labor for the spirit of David, which is his
cheerful and singing spirit in matters pertaining to God and Religion. Now,
that we may get this spirit, where the wicked delight in sin, we must
delight in the law, to meditate in it day and night. Psalm. 1.1. For, delight in
a thing makes the burden of it light, and the y^ake ea^ie. And here we see
how far they are from having this spirit, who take so little pleasure in the
service of God, and so much pleasure in vanity. Which makes them to hear
coldly, to pray without feeling, to find no taste in the Sacraments, to bear
the Sabbath as a burden, and so; as they could wish (and that from their
heart) that there were no Sabbath, or that the Sabbath were gone. Amos. 8.5.
The Sabbath should be our delight, Esa. 58.13. that is, we should keep it with
joy, and take delight to keep it. And, for prayer, we should do service in it
with gladness; that is, pray with comfort, and give thanks with rejoicing.
Psalm. 101.1. And for the Sacraments; as we come willingly to a feast, so we
should come gladly to them. And for the word, we should desirously hear it, as
they that gladly received the word, and were baptized. Act. 2.41. And for doing
good, we should make it our comfort to do good always from a pure heart. And
thus, taking delight in good things, we shall more willingly, and with greater
pleasure do them.

Further, in these words David propounds himself for an example, say^ng; I
will sing. He says not, I will see mercy showed, and judgment executed by
such as have places under me, (and ^et this will he do too;) but I in person,
will sing, that is, joyfully stir and be a dealer (my self) in these
matters: yea, David a great King says, I will sing. He says not, I will call
my Musicians, and they shall sing, laying the burden from himself, upon
others; but promises to do ( himself) what he would have to be well done by
others. Doct. 2.
And here the doctrine is; that there is great hope the people will be good,
where their leaders are good; and where they do well, the people will do the
better. Which made the same Prophet when he called others to the praise of God,
to lead the way, and (first) to praise him. Psalm. 95.1. So Joshua serving God
(as we heard;) his house served him. Ios. 24.15. And Cornelius, being a
religious Captain, had a religious house. Act. 10.2. Also, Abraham's family,
was a godly family, because Abraham (the Master) was a godly man. Job had not a
swearer in his house; for Job (himself) was none, but an upright man, one that
feared God, and esch^wed evil. Job. 1.1. or, if his sons might (perhaps)
blaspheme God in their hearts, that is, secretly, Verse. 5. yet openly, and with
their lips they durst not; I persuade my self they did not.

The reasons.
Great men are the winds that move the people; and where they that rule, fear
God, the people that are governed, will (at least) seem to fear him. They are
the white that all look at. As (therefore) in a piece of a very fair and
white paper, a little blot is sooner seen then sundry blurres in that which
is course and brown: so in great leaders, one little fault is sooner espied
and followed, then many in the meaner and less marked rank of people.
Caiaphas was against Christ, and were not his men against him? and did not the
Maids help the matter? Matthew. ^ 6.69.71.73. So certain it is, and (for the
most part true) that they that govern are the party colored rods, at which
they look that are governed, and their example, the color, by which they
conceive, following their Governors. Genesis 30.39. Secondly, as when the head is
well, all the body is the better for it; and (on the other side) when it is
sick, the heart is heavy, Esa. 1. 5: so a good head in the politic body or
family, is a good mean to make a good and sound City or house; as
(contrarily) a sick or bad head in the same, is able to draw them to
transgression and sin. Peter dissembled not alone; Gal. 2.13. and when Herod
was moved, Jerusalem was troubled with him. Matthew. 2.3. Thirdly, good leaders
will teach their followers, and pray for them. Job. 1.5. Now of what force good
teaching and good prayers are to a godly life, we know.

Uses.
Vs^. 1.
An instruction to great men, and all Governors to learn for themselves the
fear of the Lord, that they may teach it to others. Psalm. 34.11. For, they
that will have good followers, must be good leaders, and they that call others
to the praise of God, must (themselves) come unto it. They must not speak^ to
others, and be deaf themselves; bid others to go, and (themselves) stand
still; pipe and sing to others, and not be (themselves) delighted with the
song: for, then they mock others, and shame themselves; and loose their grace
with GOD, and diminish their ^uthoritie with men. Magistrates in the
commonwealth, and Ministers of the congregation, are called lights that must
give light; Matthew. 5.16: and when the people shine in virtue, their ex^mple
(under God) must be the Sun of it. If they be zealous, it is their words and
example that enflames them: if they draw back, it is their cold affection and
bad leading that stays them. Besides, true godliness does (naturally)
communicate it self. It cannot shut up it self within it self, but breaks
out, to the glory of him that gave it, and good of those that are made truly
better by it. Where (therefore) they in authority are truly good, that true
goodness (as a tree that still flourishes in the Church and Commonwealth)
will shoot forth in diverse boughs and arms of increase, till many (that
partake of the sap and root of the same) be turned to righteousness. Dan.
12.3. And as the dew and rain falling upon the mountains, rests not there,
but passes down into the lower grounds, making them to flourish, and to be
fruitful as the field that God has blessed: so where the Rulers, as the high
hills) have received the dew of goodness and rain of grace, there the
people that are governed by them, cannot but (as the lower grounds) that lie at
their feet, in their subjection, receive of their fullness somewhat to the
benefit of a well ordered life. And, as the waters descend easily that come
from the mountains; so there will be a present following where such begin.

Use. 2.
A terror to wicked Rulers. For, as good R^lers may gain much people to God by
leading well: so corrupt Gouernour^ may draw troops to hell by going
(themselves) before in their bad lives. Jeroboam, an ill leader, had as bad
followers: Jeroboam that made Israel to sin. 2 King. 3.3: and when the
Emperors favored Arius, the world became an Arian. These great red Dragons
fall not alone, but with their tails draw down others. Apoc. 12.3.4. And
therefore, are they well compared to great trees, and the people under them to
low boughe^ and shrubs, which must needs fall when they fall.

Use. 3.
An admonition to all under authority to pray for all in authority, that they
under them may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2. For, their good comes with the good of their ouer-seers. A good
President will help to make a good Province; and where are such Masters in the
house as Abraham was, there will be such people in it, as Abraham had. Parents
that be religious will train up children in religion; and Judges that fear
God, will command the Country to fear him. Then; how much are we bound to
God, that had a virtuous Mother, and have a religious King. Queen ELIZABETH we
had^ King JAMES we have (and long may have) who begun in this whole Realm
this sacred song of piety, which David tuned to his Harp, and (now) King
JAMES (our David) prefers ^o his chief^ joy. Pray we (therefore) as we are
bound to pray, that he may sing it long and merrily to God his strength, in
despite of all enemies within the land, and in other lands, who would have him
to change his not^, and, in stead of the sweet song of Si^^, to sing the lewd
song of the whore of Rome in a strange tongue. He that gave him this grace to
be a King, must give him grace also to reign aright. For, as no man is borne
an Artificer; so none is borne a good King: and as it is one thing to be borne
a man, and another thing to be a good man; so is it to be borne a King, and to
be a good King. Therefore, and since it comes from God only, that Kings
continue to rule well; we had need to pray to him heartily for our good King,
and for all our Rulers under him, that they may do^ wisely in the truth, and be
truly zealous for that God and truth which gives them their honor here, and
will (hence) as good and faithful servants glorify them in heaven for ever.
So shall we do well, better (at least) because they have ruled well. So much
for the manner of expressing the d^^tie; the part^ of it follow.

Mercy and Judgment, etc.
THese two parts are put together, and may not be sundred in the administration
of justice, by Christian Magistrates. And here, by mercy, the Prophet
understands favor and grace, such as he would show to well doers in their
good cause: and by justice, that course of justice that he would observe
straightly in the chastisement of offenders. And, by putting both together, he
means that in the sentence that should come from the Throne of the King^
mercy should not be alone, nor justice dwell alone, but mercy and justice
together^ as under one roof, and closer, as in one room. As if he should have
said, that he would be merciful with justice, and just with mercy, favoring
the good for their goodness, and punishing the evil for the evil in them,
concerning whom he would not bear the sword in vain. So he will sing the
song of mercy with cheer, and the doleful song of justice with courage.

Now, where the Prophets song is of two parts, in which he sings, not of
mercy alone, nor of justice alone, but of both together; Doct. 1.
he teaches that these ^wo must go hand in hand, and in association be
combined together, namely mercy and judgment, when a sentence comes from
the Lord, by his Magistrate, Mercy and judgment must be his song. For,
mercy, without judgment, may turn into foolish pity; and judgment,
without the temper of mercy, prove summum ius, and cruelty in matters. Also,
what are Kings and the thrones of Kings without justice, and severed from
mercy? without terror to the wicked, and honor to the good? without
punishment, and recompense? Romans 13.4.5. These two, are the two daughters of
wisdom, by which Kings reign: Prou. 8.15. and the two Lions of wisdoms
throne, by which it is stayed; 1 King. 10.19; nay, by which it flourishes:
mercy being administered, and justice bearing sway. In one place it is said,
the throne is established by justice. Prou. 16.12: and in another place, the
throne is vpheld by mercy. Prou. 20.28. The meaning is, that Kings, and they
that sit in the Kings place, or upon the Kings Bench, are Fathers and Judges,
and that which they minister, must be mercy and judgment. So, in Psalm.
112.5.9. it is noted for a just man's property, and a good man's praise, that he
is merciful, and that his righteousness abides for ever. And the Apostle
requires of Magistrates, that they be for the wealth of them that do well,
and that they take vengeance of evil doers. Mercy (therefore) and justice
belong to one sword, but to opposite Subjects; as mercy to the righteous, and
judgment with righteousness to sinners. The sword of favor, in the good man's
defense, and the sword of justice, threatening death in the faces of the wicked.
Prou. 16.14: compared with Prou. 19.12. The good Magistrate must be careful of
both, so shall he find life and glory: Prou. 21.21: in this world glory, and
in the other, eternal life. Further; these two, mercy and justice have their
root in the good trees, and dig at the root of the bad trees of the
Commonwealth. One of them spreads in the sinews of the Realm, to contain
the people in their duties, and another in the veins, comfortably to refresh
the people that do well, with the Princes favor. And so mercy and truth must
meet, and righteousnes^^ and peace kiss one another. Psalm. 85.50.

The reasons.
Justice is the bo^d of all society among men, which being lo^sed, or not well
kept, the state is brought to confusion and tumult. And, where the sta^e
keeps no order, the King loses glory. Prou. 14.28. So for mercy, it
corrects the sharpness of justice without merc^e in the point of
sovereignty, and makes the hard b^rthen of subjection ^asie to such as must
obey. Therefore is mercy well called by one, the preserver of Scepters. The
body of man is kept in good estate by a good diet, and when it is decayed, it
is restored by yro^ and fire, that is, by cutting and ^earing: so, this great
body of the Commonwealth, must be maintained by the sweet diet of mercy, and
when it is impaired in ^state, be r^couered by the iron and fire of justice,
used against desperate offenders. Secondly, mercy is necessary to abate the
courage of justice that it riot not, and justice as necessary to master the
large affection of mercy, that it be not foolish. For, justice will be too
har^ie, if mercy pull it not down, and mercy too base minded, if justice do
not encourage it. David enquired if there were any left of the horse of Saul,
on whom he might show mercy, that is, laudable and thankful mercie^ 2 Samuel
9.1.3. and it is mercy in God, to bear the mourning of the Prisoner, and to
deli^er the children of death. Psalm. 102.20: to loose the bands of wickedness,
to tak^ off the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and to break
every yoke. Esa. 58.7. but it had been cruel pity in David, and in Gods
King, ^n unkingly ^biectnesse to have enlarged mercies favor ^and over head,
to all that (then) would have offered to bow and speak fair. Thirdly; mercy
without justice i^stifieth the wicked, and justice without mercy, condemns
the i^st: both which are an abomination to God. Prou. 17.15. that is, both
alike are loathed of God, and abhorred by him. For, he that clears the
wicked, condemns ^he law; and he that brings sin into credit, leads
virtue into reproach. Also, corrections are the medicin^s of God for the cure
of the evils of men; and he that delivers a malefactor from deserved
correction, deals ^s a Murderer under the name of a Physician, who, in
couraging him to feed upon poison, kills him. So the partial Magistrate,
whom he should deliver from the poison of sin, murthereth unmercifully with
the poiso^ of indulgence in sin. And therefore it is said, that such are an
abomination to the Lord, and (further) said, that such shall be plagued and
smitten of ^im. For, how can it be but that God should plague those that
destroy his people, and abhorr^ those that condemn his law? So, for those that
are cruel against the righteous, they are cruel to goodness, and ^urne the
edge of justice where they should turn the back: that is, whom they should
defend by it, they smite with it. And how can God but smite such whited walls,
and rain down even a storm of fire and brimstone upon such hipocrites and
painted Sepulchers in authority? Fourthly; for this the King has his Scepter
and sword. His Scepter in mercy to protect the good, and his sword in
judgment to punish evil doers, and by these two, his thro^e is preserved, but
without them, or by one only it cannot stand long^

Vse^. Use 1.
An instruction to all in places of authority, not to have respect ^f persons
in judgment, and to give sen^ence vp^ightly in m^tters. So is Gods Judge
de^cribed by Moses, Deu^er. 1.17. and 16.^9. and God the Judge, by Abraham,
before tha^^ Shall not the Judge of the whole ^arth do rig^t? Genesis 18.25. For,
as the head in the natural b^die, is set in the midst between the two
shoulders: and if ^t be a straight body, not more on one side then on another:
so he that is Ru^er (as it were head) in the politic state and body, must
not and (if his judgment ^e upright, and his conscience good) ^ill not by
partial justice, lea^e more to ^ne side then to another, or hang all of ^ne
side^ inclining too much to justice, ^y carnal anger, or too much to mercy ^y
labored remissenes. He will not be ^oo pitiful, and wring justice, nor too
^uch addicted to a rich friend and gift against justice, and make mercy to
complain of oppression: but as God waighed Belshazer in the balance, and found
him light before he judged him so, Dan. 5.27. so^ for the matter in judgment,
he will put it into the scales of an indifferent hearing, and know it to be
light, deserving no favor, before he judge against it. Which, that a man may
do, and be a good Judge indeed, he must let all love of men's persons go, and
fear of men's persons more then God, and covetousness, the spawne of all evil:
for, as in Music, if we strike a string too softly or too hard, or strike a
wrong string, we make discords and i^rring: so in the Music of justice, if a
little week string be wrested too high, that is, if small matters be made
heinous, where the great strings are but softly touched, if touched at all,
that is, great faults are extenuated, or not meddled with: or, if a string be
mistaken, that is, if we punish where we should reward: or, if striking the
right string, that is, punishing the offending person, either love of the
person makes us to strike too softly, that is, to punish partially; or hatred
of the person, to strike too hard, that is, to punish above desert: or, if not
mistaking in this manner, fear or covetousness (two Satan's at every Judges
elboe, but prevailing only against Judges of corrupt minds) shall make us
quite to omit the string that we should strike, as some great Gentleman, or
rich man, or our friend, or brother, how can there be any sweet report in the
stroke of justice, that, so vntunably to all good hearing, proceeds from us?
Therefore that Christian Magistrates may not make such harsh disagreements in
the cause and judgment, mercy and judgment must be their stops; so shall they
neither finger nor strike amiss.

A reproof to those in authority, Use 2.
who in stead of singing of justice, make justice weep, and turn the songs of
mercy into ^ cry. Some sing a song of their own case, and not of mercy and
judgment: and these will do a man right but it shall be for fear of
exclamation, Luke 184.5. Some sing a song of peoples love, with Felix, Act.
24.28. And some a song of self-love, with cruel Pilate, Mark. 15. 15. Ioh.
19.8.12.13. But a good man will sing a song of love to mercy and judgment with
David, and such Magistrates. Some will not proceed to sentence in a matter
till they hear how their Noble Lord will take it: and some, being to give
judgment in a cause, will look upon it, not in the christ all of justice and
mercy, but in some friends letter, as through false spectacles. But such,
though they may be acceptable to men, are abominable to God; and they that so
magnify the ungodly, may (justly) be thought, little to dislike of
ungodliness. Pro. 28.4.

Use 3.
Here (also) we have a further admonition to Princes and their Officers, as to
be refuges and hidden places to the righteous by mercy, Esa. 32.2. so by a
right use of justice, to bring offenders to punishment, Pro. 20.26. as men of
courage, Exodus, 18.21. and not as men-pleasers. For, as the King ought not to
deny the sunshine of sovereignty to well deserving Subjects; so he is bound
in the obligation of true justice, to cover his throne with a cloud when he is
to give sentence against pernicious sinners. There is a great error under the
sun, Papists are spared, which makes Papists so to increase, and Papistrie
so to triumph. The King has much taxed, and often given charge against this
unmerciful mildnes, in his own Royal Person, and by his Honorable
Chancelour: but what is done? surely deceiving Iezabel, and her children of
fornication, are still suffered among us, Apoc. 2.20: but this trespass be on
them and on their fathers house, that so suffer her and her children, and the
King and his throne be guiltless, 2 Samuel 14.9. And let those that have their
hand in this trespass pull away their hand and set it to justice, for the
putting out of the remembrance of Roman Amalecke from England, Deuteronomy. 25.19.
For, what peace (as Iehu said to Iehoram) whiles the whore domes of Iezabel
and her witchcrafts are in such number? 2 Kin. 9.22. That is, whiles Iezabel of
Rome, in her children of spiritual fornication among us, is used with such
unreasonable and dangerous clemency, what hope of peace, or expectation of
safety for good men? The reason is: as full and strong seeds, thrown into a
ground fit for them, and cherished with convenient moisture, and the
comfortable gleames of the Sun, cannot but grow ranklie, and bring forth
herbs or weeds of their own kind: so traiterous seeds laid up in the fat
soil of Papists, watered with wealth and indulgence, and shined upon with the
cheerful glimpses of opportunities, cannot but bring forth fruit of their
own quality, to wit, Treason against Princes, and per^urbation of States
professing true Religion. Our own experience has dearly taught us, that to
have used some of them with more rigor, had been a beneficial and merciful
sharpness, Cant. 2.15. 1 Samuel 15.22.23. Eccles. 8.11. Number. 33.^5. 2 King.
13.14.15.16. and 1 King. 20.42. 2 Chro. 15.16. Now as these ought not to be
boren with as they are, so good Subjects should be cherished by good
Magistrates. They that do well should be without fear of the power, and have
praise of the same, Romans 13.3. Their Sovereigns mercy should preserve them,
and they should have their portion in the common comforts of his favor. This
is the good Subjects hope: but take this hope from him, and what is his life,
but a life of sorrow and pain, or of death, which were better? And this hope
they take from them who enclose the Kings favor by corrupt justice, or make a
Monopoly of their Princes grace, that should be toll-free. Or that pull their
Sovereigns S^nne out of the firmament, but threatening them with the Kings
sword, when they should use his sword for their defense and comfort.

Again, Doct. 2.
David's song here is of mercy and judgment, that is, of profitable matter.
From whence we learn that the songs of Christians should be profitable and
edifying songs: therefore Saint Paul exhorts the Ephesians, and us in them,
to songs that contain spiritual Music, and which make melody, not to a
carnal ear, but to God in the heart. Ephesians. 5.19. And writing of the like
argument to the Colossians, he wills them to teach themselves and others in a
Psalm: and to sing, not Psalms of wantonness, but Psalm^^ of praise to the
Lord with reverence, Colos. 3.16. Such was the song of Moses and Miriam, Exodus
15.1.2. etc. of Esaias and Solomon, Esa. 5.1.2. etc. Cantic. Salom. and such be
all the Psalms of David.

The Reasons.
When we sing, we must sing unto God; and therefore to him, not wantonly, but
with grace in our hearts. Secondly, whatsoever we do, we must do it to the
praise of God, 1 Corinthians. 10.31. Singing is an action; and therefore when we
sing, we must sing to Gods glory. Thirdly, when Christ sung, he sung a Psalm,
Mark. 14. 26. not any vain song, but a Psalm of praise; and we should be
followers of Christ, so many as Christ has redeemed.

Use.
Use.
The Use, as it reproves those, who either of bashfulnes, or in contempt,
abstain altogether from singing; so it condemns such as sing carnal and
provoking songs; songs that serve for nothing, but to set an edge of wantonness
upon the hearers, or to satisfy loose minds with a kind of contemplative
fornication, rather then to build them forward to virtue and the power of
godliness, by a gracious Psalm: which may be spoken (likewise) of all Poems
and Meters that ^re penned and sung with such an artifi^iall ^^^tonnes, and
exquisite voice, that ^hey seem no better (and they are as ^hey seem) then so
many sacrifices and ^^ities made and sung to the honor of the (...). They that
made them, did but make them to abuse and disgrace the ^orthy faculty of
Poetry with unclean ^^me^, and to send them (as so many fil^hie Bawdes) into
the world, to en^ise by them to material folly and wantonness ^ff^^minate
souls. So much for the ditie ^r song: the Person follows to whom (...) will
sing.

To thee, O Lord, will I sing.
THe Person to whom the Prophet solemnly promises to sing this di^ine ditie
of mercy and judgment, is the Lord: not doubting (howsoever others should
accept of it) but that God would like it well enough, it being sung with a
^rac^ unto him: as if he should have said; Though others mislike the song, and
though it be harsh in a carnal ^are, ye^ (Lord) seeing it is melodious in
thine, and pleasing to thee, I will offer it. (...) seek not to please men,
and it is my comfort that I can do any thing that will pleas^ thee.

Doct. 1.
The Doctrine from hence is; We^ must not regard what men approve or condemn
in the matters of God, and (...) precise service, but what God ^^^selfe
allows or does mislike. Noah's the (...) was mocked by the w^rld of wicked men
(...) his time, yet did he bear it, and for it, obtain mercy to be called
the Preach^^ of righteousness to all ages, 2 Pet. 2.5. David, who for his humble
sincerity and reverend demeanor toward the Arke^ going to Jerusalem, was
scorned of M^^chol, was yet had in high estimation by the Maids of Honor
attending upon Mich^l, 2 Samuel 6.14.16. He cared not what she minded, his care
was to approve himself to Gods mind. He was vile, it was before God, and he
would be viler. Paul spoke the words of truth and soberness^, though Festus
judged such words to be madness, and him that spoke them, mad, and besides
himself, Act. 26.^4.25. But he passed little to be judged of ^im, or of man's
judgment, knowing that ^e that judged him was the Lord, 1 Cor. ^.3.4. And what
cares Michiah what ^ure hundred flattering men say to the ^ing: what the Lord
says unto him, that ^^ll he speak, 1 King. 22.6.14. He ^ake to God; and not
to please the King (...) that which was ^uill. Nabuchad^ezar ^ought it to be
great preciseness in Sha^ach, Meshach, and Abednego, that ^^ey (only) were
not ready, when they ^^ard the sound of the: Cornet, Trumpet, ^^d other
Instruments of Music, to fall ^^wne, and worship his golden Image, Dan.
^.14.15. But (...) were not careful, nor ^^garded to answer the King in that
^^at^^^, verse. 16^ for God had made the (...) to bow to him, and they would not
^^ffer the knee (that he made) to bow ^o an Image: therefore that that seemed
^isorder to the King, seemed, and was o^edience to God. They sung to him, and
that which they sung, pleased him, resol^ing to obey the King under God, not
against God, which made them to refuse as they did, and to answer, as we h^u^
heard.

The Reasons.
Gods wisdom is (incomparably) great, and who is like him in knowledge? Now,
is God incomparably wise? then his direction is safe, and what he commends
to be wise, is wise: or, has he all knowledge? then how can we do better then
to learn of him? or then to stand or fall to him? Again, a wise man speaks
in a matter, and a fool speaks in it; the one to purpose, the other to no
purpose: whom will we regard? I tro^ the wise man, not the fool. But the
fo^lishnes of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor. 1.25: that is, that which seems
foolishnes to men, but to men fool^^h, as this foolish thing of Preaching, and
thi^ simple thing of hearing, is wiser t^e^ men; that is, ^hen the best
wisdom that ever was in Man, or in all Men. And (then) shall not that and
that only that he approoueth be approoueable? Shall not his direction be
perfect that has all perfection? Or shall we care who disprayseth our song,
so he like it? Secondly, the children of Men, judge as Men, and they that are
like the world, are unlike God. Now, being men, that is, natural men, and the
men of ^his world, that is, men that have the^^ ^ome in it, as Citizens, and
not their Tabernacle only, and Inn of remove, ^s Pilgrims here, how can they
but judge ^s men, and walk as men? and if so, then that will be highly
esteemed among them, which is abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. They
will better like witty ^rophanesse, then humble righteousness: and Esaus
roughness will better please, ^hen Jacobs playnenesse. Where God^ Image
appears (as it does in the souls and lives of them that dedicate themselves
to his truth) there God loves: and Men, that is, Men sensual and earth^ie
hate. Men respect a man according ^o his goods and state; but God, according to
his good ways and good behavior. They that have wealth with much wickedness,
are accepted of men: but godly men in great poverty, are precious ^o God.

Uses.
A reproof to those who tune their song to men's ear, Use 1.
and care not what sound it has in Gods ears. They will sing the songs of
mercy and i^stice so far and long as they may please men, but they will not
sing them to the Lord: that is, they will not then sing them, when the song
shall please God, and displease Man. Perhaps, a wicked man is (deservedly) c^t
off, but did he that followed him, or the Judge that gave the sentence upon
him, do it simply, of a hatred to his sin, and not hasten the Execution for
their own ends? So some do some good to a good man: Do they do it
unfeignedly for his goodness, and because they would honor God with their
mercies: or are they drawn to it, for some blameworthy affection, as for
respects to kindred, policy, and gain, or to have praise of men? Surely, if
we do not hate sin, and love virtue, though (sometimes) we punish the
sinner, and reward the virtuous, we sing not to God, to delight him, but to our
selves and men to gratify them: then are we not doers of righteousness, but
hypocrites in our doings.

Use 2.
Also, here they are condemned, who do as multitudes do, which honor men; and
not as the best do, that fear the Lord: for men will not be singular; ^ooke
which way the most go, that way ^ill they go: as Chusa said to Absolon; Whom
this people, and all the men of Israel ^huse, his will I be, and with him will
I ^well, 2 Samuel 16.18. But it ^areth with such (oftentimes) as with Beasts, who
^istrusting nothing, and following the Drove, whiles they suppose they are
go^ng to the Pasture to be fed, are driven ^o the Shambles to be slain.
Company ^ good, but it is better to go the right ^ay alone, then to wander
with the Mul^itude; Exodus 23.2. Better to sing to the Lord with the few that
shall be saved, then ^ith the many, in the broad way of death, ^o sing to the
tune and humors of men, and with them to be damned. Then let ^he abi^cts
assemble themselves, to draw good things into disgrace, Psalm. 35.15. yet let
not this sway with us to draw us unto evil.

A comfort to those that so walk in their vocations, Use 3.
so holily, and so without guile, that in them they sing to God the plain song
of truth; not to men the crafty descant of the policies and flatteries that
are in the world: for the (...) words and works please the Lord: an^ what
matter (then) if they displease the world of ungodly men? Esa and his chi^^dren
were as signs and wonders in Isra^^ Esa. 8.18. but what of that^ seeing the^
judgment was with the Lord, and their work with their God, Chapter 40.4. Let i^
be said of John, That he has a Devil and of the Son of Man, That he is a
Glutto^ and drinker of Wine: yet Wisdom is i^ stifyed of her Children, Math.
11.18.15^ In our well doings, let men condemn us; God will justify us: and if
he justify who shall condemn? Romans 8.33.3^^ The judgment of God is greater
the^ Man's judgment.

Doct. 2.
But this which the Prophet sings he sings by a Vow, putting in the Psalm
of promise, as his pawn to do^ it: from whence we (secondly) learn^ that
Christian Professors ought (sometimes) by some solemn promise (...) bind
themselves, as by their obligati^^ to God for the service of his glory. So
th^^ Prophet, Psalm. 119.106. made an oath^ and kept it, saying, that he would
observe Gods righteous judgments. The chief of the people, in the time of
Nehemiah, did as much when they came to the oath, and to the curse, promising
that they would walk in Gods Statutes, Nehem. 10.22.30.31. Joshua (also) entered
into bond to the Lord, to serve him with his whole house, I^s. 24.15. And, if
men eger on some ^lay that hurts them in wealth or credit, bind themselves
from it, by some thing received, that they may say when others shall entise
them; I have bound my self from play, or from this kind of play: How much
more should Chri^tians, so much wasted in the graces of God, by their natural
foolishnes, bind ^hemselues by some vow (as it were a bond ^iuen) that they
will no longer be so ^^olish, or do so foolishly by the cor^uption that
dwells in them, but strive ^^ please God better in all his Comman^ements,
and, by his grace, more abstain ^^om that that shall provoke the wrath ^f God
then ever they did? Our Baptism a bond in this matter; yet it were good ^^r us
to be further bound by some law^^ll vow, as by a second helping obligation,
that a twofold cord may hold us faster in our promises.

The reasons.
First, this manner of entering into bond with the Lord, in a sacred vow of his
service, preuenteth, or will help to prevent a great untowardness of our nature
to good things, and then serve to shame us, as promise breakers, and to cast us
into prison as debtors, by our own confession, if we break with God
concerning our bond of covenants in such matters. Secondly, if in things
agreeable to nature, we help our delight by often speaking of, and repeating
them: Much more in things above nature, or rather against corrupt nature,
should we get furtherance, and seek help to our duties, by promising (often)
to do them to God, (unfeignedly) in his service. Which I speak, not to
justify Popish vows, made of matters, from which a Christian has no warrant
to bind himself, or of Marriage, etc.

Uses.
Use 1.
From hence we may (first) gather, that there is a weak desire in the best to
good things; and (therefore) that all stand in need of this discipline: which
(also) warranteth some kinds of vowings in the Gospel, and (for our better
sufficiency in spiritual matters) commands them, Psalm. 76.11.

Further, Use 2.
here are reproved all sluggish Christians that never open their mouths to
God, in the new Testament, for the pricking of them forward to good, or the
holding them back from ^^ill. I confess that such vows are not any parts of
Religion; yet are they (as has been noted) bonds to our minds for a faster
setting of us onward to Heaven, and a speedier drawing of us out of the world,
and from the love of worldly things. Another protestation concerning the
Prophets person follows.

I will do wisely in the perfect way, etc. Verse. 2.

OR, I will prudently attend unto, and with all diligence, walk in the perfect
way. The sweet Singer of Israel, David, ^s he is called, 2 Samuel 23.1. having
promised to sing the sweet and divine dittie of mercy and judgment to the
Lord in the first verse; does in this next, further promise, for his own
person, that he will sing it also to the same God, his King and Deliverer:
Where (first) he speaks of the means, according to which, or by the help of
which he will, both toward himself and others, perform his song, and then of
the things to be performed by him in that song. In the means, he tells how
he will do these duties, and how long. He will do them wisely, according to
the word, wherein is true wisdom. And he will do them till God come unto
him, to wit, In his promise to make him King, and by death to take his King^
that is, to his last breath he will do them. Before he said, That he would
sing devoutly; here he says, that he will do wisely; and so promises to
be at once, both merry and wise. A good resolution, and promise of some
hardness, which made Iob^ when his Sons gave themselves to feasting, to give
himself to sacrificing for his Sons, lest Mirth might enter, and God be
shut out, Job. 1.5. And it was a singular blessing of God, that Solomon could
taste of all Courtly delights, and yet his wisdom remain with him, Eccles.
2.8.9. But David will be merry and wise, and sing, and do wisely, knowing
that it is an evil thing under the Sun, when an error proceeds from the
face of him that Rules, Eccles. 10.5. Now, by doing wisely, the Prophet
understands, the doing of his matters with good report, order, and wariness;
as if he should have said, That he would weigh matters in the balance of true
judgment by the word, before he would deal in them: and by perfect way, he
means the way of the word, to which he will address his steps, and bring his
heart, and so do wisely in matters both at home and abroad. Thus David will
do wisely: and wherein wisely? In the perfect way; that is, in that integrity
of sound Religion, and incorruptnesse of honest life, that the word
prescribes, which is clean, and endures for ever. Psa. 19.9. The sum is
this; He will wisely demean himself in all his government, vvalking in the
way of grace and obedience to God, as he has learned in his perfect Law.

Doct. 1.
The doctrine from hence is; They that rule shall rule wisely, so long as they
walk prudently in Gods ways, following his word: for there is no sound
direction for matter of Religion, or manner of conversation, but from it. So
much knowledge we have, as we know it; and so much ignorance is in us, as
we are ignorant of it. The Prophet, who is author of the 119. Psalm, in
the 98.99. and 100. verses of that Psalm, makes this conclusion: whosoever
sh^^l hide the Commandments of God in his hear^, shall be wiser then his
enemies, then his teachers, then the ancient. But the Prophet did so, and so
do the godly: and therefore he found this wisdom; and therefore they shall
find it. David, while he rested on God, was wise: but when he numbered his
men, and trusted in man, he was confounded, 2 Samuel 24.14. Solomon, so long as
he walked before the Lord with a perfect heart, was wiser then his Father
David: for the wisdom of God was in him to do justice, 1 King. 3.28: but
when he turned away, by the temptation of his outlandish wives, to serve
other Gods, and to walk in other ways; he was more foolish then any man: for
he turned the face to Idols, and the back to God, 1 King. 11.1.3.4.9.11. Asa
did wisely so long as he did that that was good and right in the eyes of the
Lord; and God gave him great victories. 2 Chr. 14.2.11.12.13: but he did
foolishly, when he rested on the King of Ar^m, and trusted not in the Lord:
when he was wroth with the Seer, and put the Lords Prophet in prison: after
that he had wars. 2 Chr. 16.7.9. Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Iosuah, three
worthy Kings, reigned worthily so long as they walked in the perfect way,
doing wisely by it: but when, and so long as they turned from it to carnal
wisdom, they did unwisely in matters, and well in nothing. Therefore the
people that knows not God, that is, that knows him not in his word, are
called, A foolish people, Ier. 4.22: and they that cast off God in his word,
that is, that care not for the word, by which only comes true understanding,
have no wisdom in them, Ier. 8.9.

The Reasons.
The Scripture (usually) calls men without Religion, Men of no understanding,
Deuteronomy. 32.28. and unregenerate men, Fools: for no man can be truly wise, who
is not unfeignedly Religious: therefore the fear of the Lord, that is, his true
service by the Scriptures, is said to be the beginning of wisdom, Pro. 9.10:
and men begin not to be wise, till they begin to fear him, Eccles. 12.13.
Psalm. 111.10. Wisdom is a stream, and the service of God, by the word of
God, the fountain from which it flows to us. If we be Suitors to wisdom,
this is the father that must give her. If we be Merchants of wisdom, this is
the Key and Haven at the which we must have her. If we delight in wisdom,
we must rejoice in the Lord, and delight in his ways: so shall we find
wisdom, and judgment, and righteousness, and every good path, Pro. 2.9.
Secondly, the word, and our walking according unto it, makes us to walk
safely, Pro. 3.23. which is an effect of wisdom, and recompense of one that
is wise; where they that walk otherwaies^ walk as fools, and see not their
dangerous way till they enter into deaths house, and with follies guests,
receive such recompense of their error as is meet; death wai^ing on folly,
to take them at her hands, and hell following death to receive them (presently)
at his hands, Prouer. 9.18. Thirdly, they that walk prudently in good ways,
following the word, have God for their Leader: (for they that are ruled by his
word, are ruled by him, and what he is, that his word is:) and they must
needs be wise, and do wisely that are lead by him. This is the wisdom from
above, many fruits of the spirit are enclosed in it, and issue from it: for it
is pure, and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good works, without judging, and without hypocrisy. Iam. 3.17.

Uses.
An instruction to all men, Use 1.
chiefly to such as have the charge of others committed to their care and
trust, and namely to Rulers, to get the word into their houses, and store of
knowledge by it into their hearts, that they may do wisely in the perfect way:
for this is their wisdom and understanding in the sight of the people. Deuteronomy.
4.6: and this understanding and wisdom comes from the word, that gives
understanding, and makes wise.

If (therefore) they be wise, they are wise by it; and if they be learned,
they have their learning from it: and in this sense, Kings are exhorted to be
wise, and Judges to be learned, Psalm. 2.10. For to be wise, is not to have a
politic head, but a sanctified heart: and to be learned, is not to be able to
discourse; but being able to discourse of points and matters in Religion, to
labor for faith to believe, and for a good conscience to perform obedience as
we have believed, Deu. 4.6. Some esteem those to be the only wise men, who
can go beyond others in wit and fetches: but what was Achitophel? was not he
counted wise? that is, (as I understand it) crafty and deep; and yet did
(ever) man more play the fool then he, who having no means to help himself,
straight went home to hang himself? 2 Samuel 17.23. Also, who can compare with
Satan for craft and subtletie? and yet the Scripture, that calls him
crafty, never calls him wise. He is more subtle then all subtle men in the
world, and yet more foolish to work his own woe then (ever) was creature that
God made in the world. The rich man in the Gospel was worldly wise: he could
get and save, and keep, and thrive, and feather his nest, and increase his
substance while he lived: but God called him fool when he dyed, Luke 12.20.21.
And so is every one that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in God.
It is true wisdom (then) that is here commended to all Rulers, and men under
rule, and not a crafty head. And of this, God says by Solomon, that the wise
man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2.14.
His meaning is, The prudent man forecasteth perils, which the unwise fall into
by the darkness that is in them, Pro. 22.3. There is a wisdom in States,
inferior to heavenly wisdom, yet necessary for the managing of businesses,
and doing of acts about the same, for common or particular benefit. Rebekah had
this wisdom by the spirit that was in her, when she sent away Jacob from his
death-threatning brother Esa^ Genesis 24.42.43. And David was wise, and had his
eyes in his head, when he would give Saul no advantage, though he put him in
great trust: for the text says, that David behaved himself wisely in all his
ways: but will you know the reason? the same text further says, The Lord was
with him, 1 Samuel 18.14. And was not Solomon wise, when he gave the living
child to her, whom by the pulse of a mothers affection, he discerned to be
true mother to the living child? 1 King. 3.26.27. So, when my Lord Shebna
would hew out for himself a Sepulcher in Jerusalem, at that time, when the
King of Ashur threatened it with his great host, Hezekiah, by the wisdom that
was in him, gathered that he was but a temporizing Statesman, one that was
ready to entertain friendship with the Kings enemy, and did cast to live
safely in all changes of Church and Commonwealth, Es^. 22.16: therefore he had
an eye unto him. This wisdom is a blessing and gift of God, good for all
Governors, and necessary for those whose offices are to stand Sentinel over
the life of Kings, and safety of States: yet that true wisdom, which is here
said to be a walking in the perfect way, and a causing of others to walk in
the same way, is much greater then it, and much more necessary: for how shall
he direct others, that knows not the way himself, nor will learn it? For
this cause it is necessary, that he that will be a good Magistrate, should
(first) be a good Man. Philosophy says otherways, but true Divinity says
so: and the want hereof in the Magistrates of our time has turned the grape of
justice into such a sour wine, and bitter drink of oppression, that good and
bad in the Country complain much, and cannot away with judgments which in
some Courts of justice are now delivered. Abraham said to Abimelech, I thought
the fear of God was not in this place, and that they would slay me for my
Wives sake, Genesis 20.11. His meaning was, that nothing can be safe where God is
not feared; as, where God is reverenced, all things are in peace. So when they
that minister in the affairs of state, do so little fear God, or know what
belongs to his true fear, by the wisdom which he has put in his word, how
can justice go forward, and mercy take effect? as on the contrary, where such
are men of courage, fearing God, they will deal truly, hating Covetousness,
the ban^ of all good judgment, Exodus 18.21. As therefore a shrewd boy is but
ill timber to make a good man of; so an evil man is no fit matter, out of it,
to make a good Magistrate: look Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. But this which is spoken of
Magistrates in the Commonwealth, must be considered (also,) and is necessary
for Masters of families, who (if they will do wisely) must walk likewise in
this good way.

Use 1.
A reproof to those Magistrates and Ouer-seers who let go Religion, and cast
the word behind them in their places of government and private houses, and yet
think to do wisely enough: ill enough I may well say, so long as they neither
govern their own persons wisely, nor the persons under them prudently by the
word: for if they go out of the way, who shall do wisely in the perfect way?
if they cast off Religion, who shall care for it? and who shall punish the
abominable ^wearer, if they swear? and live chastely, ^f they break
wedlock? and sanctify Gods Sabbaths, if they profane them? ^f Noah be
drunken, who shall reprove Cham? What Olives can we gather of our Magistrates,
when they be not Olive trees in Gods house, but catching brambles; and mind
not justice, but scratching covetousness? for if the head be sick, can the
heart be merry? Esa. 1.5. and if the eye be dark, how great is that darkness?
the eye that will give light, must have light; and they must be good
Magistra^es that will make a good people.

A consolation against the reproaches that are cast upon men, Use. 2.
when they set themselves to fear the Lord, and to walk^ in his ways: Now
they begin to be fools, says the world; nay, now they do wisely, says the
Lord. Men say, They have been taken for sensible wise men, but now they dote:
God says, They are now sensible good men, and take the way for good
understanding. The world judges them fools, and God calls them wise. Before
they ruled by forc^ only, now they rule by discretion; before as men, now as
wise men; before in darkness or unregeneration, now in the Lord.

By perfect way, the Prophet means (as we heard) the way of Religion, and
true godliness by the word which is perfect, and it is called the perfect law,
Psalm. 19.7. Or perfect law of liberty, Iam. 1.25. And perfect will of God,
Romans 12.2. because in it is contained perfectly whatsoever is required to
righteousness or man's salvation.

Doct. 2.
The doctrine from whence is; The holy Scripture and word of God, as it is the
only register of true wisdom, so it is a most sufficient rule of man's life,
to instract him in righteousness, and to make him absolute to all good works:
for this, it is called the wisdom of God, and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
Romans 1.16. and the whole of it is said to be given by inspiration: and to be
profitable, that is, sufficient for doctrine, for rebuke, for instruction, for
correction: and therefore is it further said, to make, not the mean person
only, but the man of God, the Minister himself; not able in part, but
absolute; and not to some work, or some few works, but to all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16. Yea, so perfect is the word of God, that he that adds to it,
adds to his own plagues; and he that takes any part from it, takes so
much of his part out of the Book of life, Apoc. 22.18.19. and in Jude 3. we
read of a faith once given, that is sufficiently, or once for all. Indeed the
holy Books and Monuments of the righteous are as strong Chests and
Storehouses, wherein God has reserved always some precious food for
posterity, neither may we reject the industry of the Heathen; for (even)
they have some food meet for liberal men, in matters natural and politic,
serving well (if due regard be had, and choice made) for good direction in the
things of this present life: but these knowledges (meerelie humane) as those
waters of Tema, spoken of in Job, ^^yle those that drink of the River thereof,
and delight in the Brook thereof: for when men are dried up with Gods burning
indignation, and consumed with a hot fire in their bones, because of his wrath,
these sciences profit not: they that go to Tema have considered them, and they
that travel to Sheba, waited for them, yet were they confounded when they
hoped, and ashamed when they came thither: for, as waters that pass away, they
failed out of their places, and departed from their way and course, Job.
6.15.17.18.19.20. But the waters and this river of the word is a well of living
water: he that drinks of it, shall never be more a thirst, Ioh. 4.14. The
other food contracteth corruption, as our natural food does; but this is the
bread that endures to everlasting life, Ioh. 6.27. That wisdom is earthly,
and tastes of the soil from which it came; but this wisdom is heavenly, and
from God, who abides for ever.

The Reasons.
The word is here called, the perfect way of a Christian; the way that will
bring him to heaven, if he walk in it and in no other: and therefore that
which is sufficient; that is, in and by it self sufficient to his salvation.
Secondly, the Scriptures are (perfectly) holy; that is, holy in themselves, and
by themselves, Psalm. 19.8. and perfectly profitable, that is, profitable by the
truth which is in them, and profitable without any other truth added to them,
to instruct to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.16. and therefore all other writings
(supposed necessary) are superfluous. Thirdly, what is perfect but that which
is entire of it self, and needs nothing? Now that which is so entire and
independent, what lacks it that it has not? and what can we add unto it,
that is not already in it? but so perfect is the word. For where the Prophet
speaks of the perfect way, it is not meant that he could be perfect that did
walk in that way, except perfect in account and by endeavor, as Gods
righteous servants are said to be; but he means the word written, which he
calls the perfect way.

Uses.
A confutation to Popery: Papists add to the written truth, their unwritten
truths, as they call them truths, which they affirm to be as necessary rules
of faith to salvation as the Scriptures are; and so the Papists require a
supply: but wherefore a supply, when the thing is sufficient? That Book that
was sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, that only was put into the Arc,
and fetched from thence, Heb. 9.19: and this is the word of faith which we
preach, Romans 10.8. Also we read of a sure word of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.19:
and the same Apostle charge the Christians of his time, and us in them, to
take heed unto it; not to the uncertain breath of man, but to the most
certain word of God: for who will walk in a blind way, when he has a
known way to go in? But that place in Matthew is notable to this purpose,
where an Angel, in his message to Joseph, would not use his own credit and
authority for that he speak, but alleges Scripture for it, Math.
1.21.22.23. Joseph might have marvelled that his Wife should be with child by
the holy Ghost, though an Angel had spoken it; but when he heard Scripture
for it, he believed.

An instruction to Christians, Use 2.
chiefly to such as have charge of others, to read much and deliberately in
the word: for it is it only that can make us perfect to all good works, both
in respect of knowledge, what ought to be done, and of power to do it.

Quest. But may a man be perfect in this life, seeing David says, He will do
wisely in the perfect way: and Christ exhorting, said, Be perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect? Mat. 5.28.

Answer. No man, who is not more then man, can: and therefore where David
promises to walk perfectly; and Christ exhorts to be perfect; David meant
not that he could be perfect, save in respect of Gods imputation, or as he
stood in balance with others, who were ruder in knowledge, and weaker in faith
then himself: and Christ's words, Be perfect, as your heavenly Father is
perfect, implie only a like quality, but no way an equality.

Object. How (then) can the Scriptures make us perfect in all good works?

Answer. The Scriptures are able to make us perfect, if there were no defect
in us (the object) they work upon: and yet the way of the godly is called
perfect, not in respect of action, but of endeavor and desire, Luke 1.6. There
are great infirmities in our best works, yet if we strive against our
imperfections, and labor to perfection, the evil that we do shall not be
remembered, the good that we would do, shall be taken as done: for we are by
imputation, what we are in affection; and he is no sinner, who for the love
that he bears to righteousness desires to be none. If (then) we would be
perfect in Gods account and by imputation, and be means to make others so,
we must attend to reading, and (as it were) wear the Book of God in our
hands, having it always with us, Deuteronomy. 17.19. The practice of this we read,
Psalm. 119.97; Oh how love I thy law, it is my meditation continually! Where the
Prophet shows that the love of God is the love of his word, and that so much
as we love him, so much we love his truth. The King must exercise it, Deuteronomy.
17.18. and God be thanked that our King is so well exercised in it. Now is it
necesssary for the King often to read in the word, to teach him to rule? and
is it not as necessary for common persons, and all inferiors (that have more
time) to meditate in it, that they may learn to obey? Is it necessary for him
to grow learned by reading, and by meditation to be made wise in the
Scriptures, that he may not by the swelling of the heart (a grievous disease in
Kings) command things unlawful and intolerable? and is it not as necessary
for these, with like diligence, to exercise themselves in the word, that in too
great a baseness of mind they yield not themselves (seruilely) to obey man
rather then God? That we may give our selves (thus) to the study of the word,
we must pray that we may love it: for where love is, there is delight; and what
we love to do, that we delight to do. The rich man loves to be rich, and
therefore meditateth of riches. The ambitious person loves praise, and
therefore casts to be praised. The Natural man loves naturally, and
therefore lives naturally: and so, if we had no greater pleasure, wealth, or
glory, then to meditate in the word, our love (this way) would constrain us
continually to read and meditate in the same.

Use. 3.
A reproof to Popish superstition, and our common peoples profaneness, who are
so far ( themselves) from reading the word, that they abhor that others
should read it. The Papists keep it from the people under the Lo^ke of a
strange tongue: and our people, that may read, and hear it read in their
Mother Tongue, neglect it altogether. Of such we cannot say, by their fullness
in the word, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Luke
6.45. For if we shall judge of their inward knowledge by their barren tongues,
we may truly give sentence against them, that there is no drop of heavenly
learning in them, and that their Fountains within are as a long drouth in
Summer. So far for the manner how the Prophet will do these good duties; the
time how long follows.

Till thou come unto me, etc.
THe Prophet will do wisely by the word, and wait on God, doing his will,
till he come unto him; that is, (as some restrain it) during his interim of
attendance, and till God should give him the Crown of Saul, by Saul's death:
but (as I take it) not only so long, but till his dust should return to
earth, as it was, and the spirit to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. that is,
till God, by death should come unto him, calling him out of this land of his
pilgrimage, and valley of misery, by his happy change and translation from an
earthly, to an heavenly Kingdom. And so the Prophet promises to walk in the
way of the Lord by his practice of patience, till the Kingdom fell unto him,
and of true wisdom after it was fallen: for when God should set him in the
Throne, may we think that he would leave off to do wisely? nay, but he
undertakes this task by promise, till God should call him out of this world
by death. Indeed, though in that great distance and gulf of time that was
from his being anointed by Samuel, when he was by God: own mouth proclaimed
beyre apparent to the Kingdom which Saul then had, he saw many weary days,
and endured many hard penances by the injury of Saul, yet he never hastened his
own advancement by the making away of his Sovereign. And though by the
providence of God, Saul, who deadly pursued him, was offered into his hands
once in the Wilderness of Engodi, 1 Samuel 24.3.5. And another time in the
Desert of Ziph, Chapter 26.8.9.10.11.12. yet he spared him, and would offer no
manner violence to him, committing the judgment to God, and tarrying his
leisure till he should possess him of the Royal Diado^^. And when once he
had it, he promises to persevere in a godly course, till God should take him
away, and till his change came. Before he had it, he would not practice for it,
and when he had it, he would do wisely in it.

Doct. 1.
First (therefore) he promises to keep within the bonds of duty to his
Sovereign while he was subject to Saul; which may be a good lesson to us,
when God deferreth us in any thing that he has promised, to walk in hope,
and not to go out of the way of patience til (...) come^ So Sarah received
strength to conceive seed, being past children by ordinary course, because
she judged him faithful that had promised, Heb. 11.11. Isaac waited for
children twenty years, and prayed unto the Lord, that is, vvaited Gods good
pleasure for them, and he had two at a birth, Gen, 25.20.24.26. The pitiful
Church waited long for the God of her help; did she (therefore) cast away her
confidence, and by means, altogether unlawful, become her own helper? no,
but she practiced patience, and exercised prayer, saying, Let us lift up our
hearts with our hands to God in the heavens, Lam. 3.41. Of an excellent Prophet
we read, that his life claue to the dust; but what follovveth? it follovveth^
and his heart claue to Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119.25.31. Here David would
be Gods King, (...) King: and as this was his practice, so this was his
precept, waste upon the Lord, and hope in him, Psa. 37.7. Now, why has God in
his word and in the world, left us so many examples of this holy subject but
for our imitation, and that we by them should learn to run this race of
patience, and of a contented life in all changes.

The Reasons.
God knovveth the fittest time when to bestovv his blessings upon us; and it
is good reason, that he who gives us all things freely, should take what
time he thinks best to give them in: for so shall they bring more benefit to
us, and thanks to him. Secondly, it is the trial of our faith and patience:
and therefore necessary that there should be some space of time between Gods
promises and our receiving of them, that patience may have her perfect work,
and God, by faith, his deserved glory. Thirdly, God does often put us off, not
to put us by that we look for according to his ordinance in his word, I say,
that we look for and he will give us, but to make us more ready for it, and
more earnest about it, by making many prayers. Fourthly, the longer it is
before the Lord perform his promises, the larger his mercies are when they
come. When he prolongeth his seeding, he provides a more plentiful harvest;
and when he does not presently give his gifts, he takes the more time to tell
out much, that he may give more liberally, and offer larger gifts.

Uses.
A reproose to those, Use 1.
who if they obtain not a thing when they would have it, and as they would
have it^ fall to shifting for it. They will wait upon God no longer,
imagining that evil comes from him, and no good, seeing he makes so long
tarrying, 2 King. 6.33. If he lay crosses upon them for a time, and troubles of
some continuance, for a trial, they make more haste then good speed to shake
them off by corrupt courses; and so deprive the Lord of that honor, which
they should yield him in waiting for his help, and themselves of that comfort
which he would give them together with his help.

An admonition, Use 2.
when God delays our matters, and puts us off, to acquaint our selves with
the patience of the Saints, and that excellent fruit of hope which makes not
ashamed: for, these things are written for our learning, that we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope, Romans 15.4. So shall
we possess our soules^ and keep all sound within: which advantage we
lose, when we have neither power of our souls, nor command of our selves,
through a fever of distrusts, and impatient vnsetlings.

Secondly, the Prophet will wait for God in righteousness, till he come unto
him, that is, till by death he come unto him, and take him from baseness to
glory. Where we learn to spend our short time well, Doct. 2.
and that there will be a time when God will come unto us, as a Father, to
receive us, or as a Judge, to account with us how we have lived here: Job
considered this, and therefore, both showing what he had done, and further
testifying what he would do, he says, All the days of my appointed time, I
will wait, till my change come, Job 14.14. His meaning is, that he would not
be lead away from his attendance, though God now had fastened his arrows in
him, and set him as a But to shoot at. The Prophet was very low brought, when
with a crying voice he said, My soul faints for thy salvation; yet he
forsook not the path of righteousness, but waited for God in his word: that is,
in a good way vvayted for him, Psalm. 119.81. The exhortation of our Savior
Christ is this; Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, Luke
12.35. and it is as much as if he should have said; As they whose Garments
are long, doing some business, or being on some journey, trusse them up: so
you that are Christians, and have so many impediments of Christian conversation
to hinder you in good things, and to stay your course in good vvayes, cut short
these worldly affections, and (girded with diligence) trusse up the loins of
your minds, abstayning from all things that may hinder you, either in your
fight for Religion, as warriors, or in your passage to salvation, as
wayfaring men, 2 Timothy 2.4. And as they that receive their Master, or wait
for him in the evening, set up lights in the house, and have some in their
hands at his coming home: so you that look for the Lord, when he will come to
you, or when you shall remove to him, must wait for him continually, with
store of faith in your hearts, and like plenty of good deeds in your lives,
that you may have the praise and reward of good servants at his coming, Luke
12.36.

The Reasons are:
Death it self, and the last Judgment (both which shall most certainly be)
do uncertainly, and will most suddenly come; and therefore we should always
be ready, like wise Virgins, and true Christians, to meet our Bridegroom
Christ, Mat. 25.6.7.13. Secondly, it is a fearful thing to live so as thou
would not be taken dying, or in such an estate, as thou would not dye in
and be judged in: and therefore it is necessary, remembering that thou must die
and be judged, so to settle thy conscience, and order thy conversation at all
times, that at no time thou be found unready and undisposed to thy last end,
by a carnal life: for such shall be sawne asunder, and have their portion with
hypocrites, Mat. 24^51. Thirdly, if a wise Master will not deliver his money to
his servants, but he will account with them for it; we may not think that so
wise a House-holder will deliver any talent of grace to his household-people,
(the Merchants of so precious salvation) without account, Luke 19.15.

Uses.
An admonition to all in authority, Use 1.
or in rooms of service about authority, to consider their fearful
judgment, if they have not ministered well: for though Magistrates be called
Gods, because they have Gods place, and are called by God^ name, yet they shall
dye as men, Psa. 82.6.7. their Stewardship will not continue always, and God
will keep his audit with these earthly Gods, Luke 16.1.2. They shall dye; and
after that comes the judgment, Heb. 9.27. If (then) they have oppressed the
poor man in his cause, at the entreatie, or upon the letter of a wealthy
friend; if they have taken a reward to pervert judgment; if they have
dishonored God, who has so highly honored them. If the Lawyer, who is the
living Land-marke, that by a true opening of the case, should bind every man
within the compass of his own title, set in the Land-marke, and bound a man
shorter in his true title then is cause, by deceitful pleading. If the Officer
that is put in trust with dispatch of causes, and is the very hand by which the
Judge must reach from his seat of justice to a poor man his right, after he
has judged it, will keep it in his hands four, five days, or more without
delivery, because he is not bribed for expedition, a covetousness which I^b
never knew, who never caused the eyes of the Widow to fail, Job 31.16. Let
all these know (except they repent) that their Master will come in a day when
they look not for him; and that for all these things God will bring them to
judgment, Eccles. 11.9. Generally, all must learn (here) to redeem the time,
and to bestow good hours well, Ephe. 5.16. for time must be accounted for: as
how many days have been spent in vanity, and how few in Gods service: how
long time in sports, how little time (if any) in prayer: how weary of an
hours hearing, and how little vvearie of a days play at Bowls, Tables, or
Cards, wherein we do not redeem, but lose time. To recover which loss,
we must (presently) break from this fellowship of the world, to have
fellowship with the Saints; who number their days, not vainly to bestow them,
but vvisely to pass them in Christian duties, Psalm. 90.12. Young men must
remember their Creator young, Eccles. 12.1. And old men (because they be
old) as they have most cause, so they should give most diligence to remember
him: for young men may dye quickly, and old men cannot live long.

A reproof to the Atheists of our days, Use 2.
who think there is no day of account, or live as if there were none: of
such Amos speaking, says; They put far away the evil day, and approach to
the seat of iniquity, Amos 6.3. Indeed they are (sometimes) encumbered with
the horrors of conscience, and the sound of fear is in their ears: but
against all these, Satan does succor them, by teaching them to make out a
power of blasphemies, and derisions both of heaven and hell, or to earth
themselves in the canes of oblivion, that the judgment (to come) may not come
into their minds. So far for the means that the Prophet will use for the
performance of his song. The things he will perform in it, first as a private
man, secondly as a public King, follow.

I will walk in the uprightness of my heart, etc.
THe matters which the Prophet means to sing of, concern his private Court,
and the public Kingdom: and these will he look unto as a private man, or
as a public King. But in these words he speaks further of his private
behavior, and shows how he would carry himself privately in his own
person; and therefore says that he will walk; that is, converse, and carry
himself: but how? in the uprightness of his heart: and where? in the midst of
his house. He says that he will walk, not as a Pharisee, in open places, to
have praise of men, but as a true Israelite, in the close rooms of his heart,
that God, who sees in secret, may praise him. And he says that he will do
good, not dissemblingly abroad, when men may commend his doings, but privately
in his house, and more privately, in his chamber, where he has but a few
witnesses. Also, that he will walk with an upright or sound heart, or heart
wherein are no holes or clefis: where he compares his heart to a Vessel,
which (if it be close, whole, and sound) will preserve the liquour that is put
into it; but being riuen, and having holes, will hold nothing. So the Prophet
speaks of his one heart, promising that it shall be entire and sound, keeping
faith and a good conscience, and not leake through hypocrisy, nor be full of
the holes of shifts, and evasion from the truth, as the heart which is
deceitful uses to be, and which (therefore) loses quickly, by such
unsoundness all integrity, and the very name of conscience. The sum of all
is: The Prophet here promises, not only to look to the tackle of his heart,
his actions in public place, that they be sound, but to the heart it self,
that it be kept in good plight, and that the fountains be kept sweet, from
which must issue such a river of solemn reformation to Church, and
Commonwealth. Every one is ready to commend a straight body; but the Prophet
undertakes (here) to keep (that which is the commendation of a true
Christian) an upright heart.

Doct.
The doctrine from hence is; The seat of integrity is not in a man's words or
countenance, but in his heart: as David's heart was, so was he: and we are
truly that (and that only) that we are in heart and affection: neither are
they truly godly (though outwardly professing godliness) whose Chambers,
Cabbins, and Closets, serve but for lurking holes, or places of retire for
sin. The Prophet therefore solemnly promises, that the windows of his
priuatest life, and secretest heart shall be open to all that will desire to
look into him for the integrity of those matters that he publikelie deals
in, professing, that if he do them not well his desire was, and labor shall
be to do them better. And thus he will walks in the vprightnes of his heart,
knowing, that without such a soundness within, neither his actions, nor
sayings could please the Lord. Therefore all semblance of conversation in the
old Israelites, was but mere flattery, because their heart was not upright
with God, neither were they faithful in his covenant, Psalm. 78.34.35.36.37.
Simon Magus continued with Philip, and was among the Apostles, yet not as a
Christian, but as an Intruder, because his heart was not right in the sight of
God, Act. 8^13.21. He that came to the wedding dinner, and sat down with the
wedding guests, was singled out to shame and torments perpetual, because he
had not on a wedding garment; that is, was in body there, but not in affection
there, Mat. 23.11.13. And did not Judas speak as good words, and show as great
works as the other Disciples did; yet the Devil having put treason into his
heart, what good could be expected from him, even when he saluted and kissed
his Master? Ioh. 13.2. Mat. 26.48. Ananias and Saphira shall lose the reward
and thanks of their contribution, if Satan fill their hearts, and cause them
to lie unto the holy Ghost. Act. 5.3.4.9. and so shall they, who counterfeit
with their lips, but in their hearts lay up deceit, Pro. 26.24.

The Reasons.
Hypocrites seem to draw in the same yoke of sincerity with the Saints of
God; yet because their heart is not upright, as the heart of the Saints is:
they are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them perceive
not, Luk 11.44. Or, if painting will serve and smoothing be enough, the carrion
Iezebel shall go for a beautiful and well-fauoured creature, looking out at
the window, 2 King. 9.30. and where outward works are sufficient, the veriest
hypocrite and rankest Pharisee, shall pass for a most sufficient Christian.
Secondly, it appears Psalm. 119.1.2. verses, that sound happiness consists
in a sound heart; and that it is not in the action done, or words spoken, that
blessedness is to be found, but in the quality of these, when all is done
sincerely, and spoken soundly from a mind without guile, Psalm. 15.2. Thirdly,
the service of the hypocrite is as loathsome to God, as a Toade to man, (be his
outward color never so fresh, and work glorious) which would not be if
integrity could be found in the external deed, that rests in the heart,
Luke 16.15. The Pharisees would pray every where, with great devotion, and fast
every week with great stricknesse, and blow a Trumpet to their liberality and
alms deeds, that they might have testimony and receive the praise of zealous
and good men from the world, yet the Lord had them in utter detestation: which
could not have been, if there had been any true love in these things.

Uses.
A reproof to those, Use. 1.
who are (as one calls Hypocrites) signs without the things signified, or
Pottes seething in their scumme. Hos. 2.10. Good men care not, so good be done,
who have the praise: but Hypocrites desire not so much to be doers of good, as
to have glory for well doing: therefore says the Tribe of Ephraim, Why were
not we called? Judge. 8.1. The godly abstain from evil, because it is evil
and forbidden: the ungodly, if they forbear to do evil, do it for other
ends; as because the world may know it, or he that takes vengeance for evil
works: the civil Magistrate, may hear of it, and so, it is like, they shall
be punished with shame or stripes. Upright men, when they commit any sin,
though never so secretly, are not without fear, because the Lord is privy to
it, that knows the heart: but the hypocrite, so he may keep his credit with
men, cares not to keep his sin too, and so fears not God, but Man: or if
his actions be straight, that M^n see^ he cares not how crooked his heart is,
that God sees, Psa. 51.4.

Use 2.
An admonition above all things to look to the heart, when (either) we serve
God, or do service one to another by love, Pro. 4.23. Of the wise builder it
is said, that he dug deep, and laid the foundation on a Rock, Luke 6.48.
So of the sound hearted Christian it may be said, that knowing how much loose
earth is in him, and that the heart is deceitful above all things, Ier. 17.9.
when he means to do good duties to God and his Neighbor, he enters far
into himself, searching his heart, and bewayling his sin, that his building
may be on a rock, and not on the sand: for he purges away the leaven of
hypocrisi^ that has infected his nature, the loose and vnfast earth of a
hollow and false heart he casts forth, and whatsoever may seem contrary and
offensive to the work of sound repentance, he labors to be rid of in his
entrance to reformation. The Hypocrite (contrarily) makes quick work, all his
building is above ground, and he cares not how well he does any thing, so he
do some thing: he looks not to his heart, that it be in order, but to his
outward ways, that they may not shame him. If he lead a civil life, and
partake of the word and Sacraments, he thinks he has done enough, and that
he is a Christian good enough. But will a good builder, meeting with an ill
foundation, build upon it? nay, will he not throw out all that shall endanger
his foundation? And shall we lay a good work upon an unsound heart? To pray is
a good action; but will we lay the good action of prayer upon the rubbish of an
unclean soul to God, and uncharitable mind to our brother? To receive the
Sacrament is a good work; but will we lay the good work of receiving it upon
a foundation of malice, or spirit of bitterness, when we come together to eat
of one bread, and to drink of one Cup? To hear the word is a good duty; but
will we do the good duty of hearing with deceitful affections, when we make
show to hear whatsoever the Lord will say unto us? will we not take h^ede how
we hear? Let us (therefore) when we enter upon any good way, endeavor with an
upright and sound heart, to proceed therein, else had it been better never to
have entered or begun, seeing we have set no surer in the path of grace.

Use 3.
A comfort to those whose hearts are sound in matters, though their best works
be mixed with the infimities of men: for this that we desire (unfeignedly,) when
we have done amiss, that we had, or could have done better, is imputed to us
for uprightness. If sin hang on us, and we would feign cast it off: if we
find unbelief, and would gladly have faith: if we be troubled with hardness,
and would be softened: if we be humbled, because we cannot be humbled enough;
and have great sorrow, because we cannot be sufficiently sorry for our many
sins; let not our defects discourage us, but let this small measure of grace
enbolden us to enter before the throne of grace for a greater measure, which
God will not deny to those that prepare their whole heart to seek him, though
in a person, not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chr.
30.19. and for perfection, the Lord looks not for it at our hands in this
veil of frail^ie. The place follows wherein the Prophet promises to walk
in his vprightnes.

In the midst of mine house.
THe place where the Prophet will rightly order his way, or uprightly walk, is
his private house, or more private chamber. Where his meaning is that he will
be no changeling, and that among his household-people, where few behold him, he
will be the same that he is abroad, where many eyes see him. Yea, he will do
wisely in his chamber, as if he were upon the tribunal: and be godly at home,
as if he stood in the temple. Here (also) by the midst of his house, he
means the priuatest rooms of it, as his priuie-chamber, or bedchamber: and
even in these he promises to do nothing that shall be uncomely.

Doct.
From whence this doctrine arises; That Christians should carry themselves in
their houses, or alone by themselves, as if they were in open place. Many will
pretend holiness, and profess honesty while the are ouer-looked by two good
Tutors, Open-place, and Daylight; but (otherwise) when they be private or
alone, they give themselves to wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with
greedynesse, Ephesians. 4.19. Then, because they are not under the eye of men, they
persuade themselves that the Lord shall not see them, and that the God of Jacob
will not regard them, Psalm. 94.7. and thus they flatter themselves in an evil
way, while their iniquity is found worthy to be hated. Job speaking of
thieues, says, that they dig through houses in the dark, making darkness the
cover of their sin, Job 24.16. So the eye of the Adulterer is said to wait
for the twylight, making that kind of light, a kind of Bawd to his lewd
life, verse. 15. And of the Murderer it is said, verse. 14. that he rises
early, or at break of day to kill the poor, making the morning as the shadow
of death, wherein to murder the innocent. So they do that in darkness, that
they would not dare to do in the light. But Christians will walk uprightly as
well at break of day as at noonday, and upon their bedds at night, as in
open places before the Sun, and in the darkest twylight, as in the cleerest
day.

The Reasons.
God, who is holyer, and mightier then all men sees us every where; there is
not a thought in our heart, nor a word in our tongue, but he knows it
altogether, Psalm. 139.2.4. And, our turning of devices shall be but as the
Potters clay, when we seek deep to hide our counsel from the Lord, Esa.
29.14.15. Now does the righteous God, who knows the hearts and reins, Psalm.
7.9. and, who will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing,
Eccles. 12.14. behold us; and shall we not care how he sees us occupied? Does
the presence of a mortal man or woman (sometimes) bridle us from that we would
do? and will we give the bridle to all manner wickedness, God looking on?
Will a thief steal before him that he knows shall be his judge? and shall
we not tremble to do evil in his sight who shall judge the world? Gen, 18.15.
Secondly, it is plain Idolatry, more to fear Man, whose breath is in his
nosthrils, then to fear God, who is the Father of spirits, Esa. 51.12.13. and
yet some, when they are in company with those whom they cannot but reverence
for their calling and graces, of whom they desire to be well thought and
spoken of, will make great show of a desire to do well themselves, and to
bring their houses to good order, who (nevertheless) have no care (afterward)
either for their own persons, or their houses to do thereafter.

Uses.
A reproof to those, Use ^.
who if they do any thing well, do it in open places, and before men; that
they may have praise for the same, Mat. 6.2.5. but in their houses, and when
they are alone, they turn to their race, as the Horse rusheth to the battle,
Ier. 8.6. or, as we use to say, They are Angels abroad, and Devils at home:
the Sabbath is profaned, Gods fearful Name dishonored, the wife and
servants shamefully abused, no measure kept in chafing and fretting for every
trifle, sometime without cause, sometime without show of cause. And this is an
hypocrite in kind: by his fruits you shall know him, Math. 7.20.

An instruction to beware of secret sins, Use 2.
that the closenes of the place do not enbolden us to do that privately, that
we would be ashamed should be brought before the face of men, and light of the
Sun: for there is nothing covered that shall not be disclosed, nor hid, that
shall not be known, Mat. 10.26. the scrowle and register of our close sins
shall be laid open before the Lord, and before the Angels, and before men.
Men's great places (perhaps) may privilege them for a while, yet at their
death, the sting of Conscience, and worm of tormenting fear, will greatly
work upon them, and force them to some desperate confession; and being dead,
there is no farther sparing of them. Their name that was Honorable in the
sign and in a figure only, will now in speech and truth, be most shameful
after their death, when that channel is raked into, and the filthynesse of
their secret sin is brought to light. David, Gods own King, the author of
this excellent Psalm, was not spared long after his sin, which is so much
marked in Scripture, both by himself in the Psalms, and by him that wrote his
Story. He went closely about it, and had (no doubt) men of secrecy and
counsel, whom he used in it: when the woman was brought unto him, he had men
(that could keep counsel) to bring her, 2 Samuel 11.4. and either he wrote
himself, or had some trusty Secretary to write to Ioab. verse. 14. So all
was done secretly and cunningly, no tongue did mutter of it, 2 Samuel 12.12. But
the just God would not let matters so pass, and therefore sends a Messenger to
him, one of a thousand, first, to round him in the ear, by a parable or dark
speech, and then to tell him plainly and openly, what he had done, and that by
a deed, so dishonorable in Gods great Servant, he had caused the enemies of
the Lord of blaspheme, verse. 14. and after to prick him to repentance with the
goade of the Lords severity, whom he had provoked so much by his abominable
sin: then the whole matter came out by himself, and now the whole Church
rings of his impious fault to this day.

Now if they be reproved that closely do evil, Use 3.
how much more they, who with no bridle of shame, or common civility, can be
held from acting those impieties, and doing that thing publicly in the
sunshine, and at noonday, which others cannot, without blushing and the
help of darkness do. And (then) what a Monster was Absalom, who spread a tent
upon the top of his Fathers Palace, and blushed not to go in to his Father:
Concubines in the sight of all Israel? 2 Samuel 16 22. And what Monsters were the
Sodomites, who declared their sins, and hid them not? Esa. 3.9. Though
painted Tombs be spoken against, that is hypocrites, so resembled: yet better
be a paint^d Tomb then a filthy Sincke, foul without, and foul within. And
may we not think that the five foolish Virgins were more tolerable then that
great Whore, that sits upon many waters? Apoc. 17.4 5. Is it not better to
have Lamps without store of Oil, then to have neither Lamps nor Oil; that is,
neither means nor meaning to attend Christ? and better to do some good, then
to profess all wickedness? and better to seem holy, then neither to seem,
nor be? So much for those protestations that concern the Prophets own person:
they which concern him, with others, follow.

I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes.
BEfore the Prophet had said that he would follow the good; Verse. 3.
here he says, and makes faith for himself, that he will hate the evil, and
not some evil, but all wickedness: for, not to set a thing before our eyes, is,
in common speech, to l^ath it, or with dislike, to turn from it. And here we
have the matter that he speaks against, every wicked thing and obi^ct, by
which it is carried to the heart, the eye. By wicked thing, or Beli^l, the
Interpreters (some of them) understand the Man of Belial, or Man of wickedness;
as if the Prophet should have said that he would not abide to look upon any
such. But I take it to be meant of the thing that is naught, though with a
reference to the person that is naught also: and so the Prophets meaning is,
that he will, when evil is in sight, turn away from it, as from carrion: for
a man cannot rightly do justice, till he perfectly hate injustice, nor love
the good, till he abhor the evil. Neither does he say and promise for some
evil, that he will be against it, but his challenge is to all evil, that his
eyes should not behold it in any.

Doct. 1.
From whence this point of doctrine may be gathered, that a true Christian must
retrayne, not from some evils only, but from all wickedness. He must not set
any evil thing before his eyes; or, if any such thing come in place, either
not see it, or see it with grief. The Apostle James, showing that no
corruption, in any manner, is to be fostred in Christians, bids them to lay
apart all filthynes, Iam. 1.21 not some, but all; nor some way, but by all
means. The Apostle Paul goes farther, who, writing to the Thessalonians, and
to us in them, would have, and bidde^h them to abstain from all evil, and
appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. They that follow Christ, leave all to follow
him, Luke 18.28. And he that found the treasure, sold all to buy it. Mat.
13.44. And he that proves Masteries, abstayneth from all things, 1 Cor. 9.25.
Now what is it to leave all for Christ, but to abandon the world, and all
worldly desires, that we may be Christ's? And what to sell all for salvation,
but to give all in the bargain, that we may be saved? And what to abstain
from all things, but to renounce all evil things, for the mastery and reward
of life? Again, he that wills us to cast off the old Man, wills us to cast
him off with his works, Ephesians. 4.22. Colos. 3.8.9. His works are sins, and to
cast off all his works, is to cast off all sin: the like, Heb. 12.1. and 1
Pet. 2.1: for what is that that pr^sseth down, but sin? and to cast away
every pressing thing, is to refrain, not a few, or many, but all sins. And
what does Saint Peter mean by laying aside all maliciousnes, and all guile,
and dissimulation, but a resolving to lay away, not some iniquity, but every
sin and iniquity?

The Reasons.
It is our calling and duty (as we are Christians) to please God in every
commandment; and therefore it is against our Christian duty and vocation to
offend God, by sin, in any. What Master will allow a Servant, who in some
things shall serve him carefully, and in other some be careless of his
commandments? and will our Master in heaven commend us, or discharge us,
because we have done some things well, having offended and done wickedly in
many? What though thou be no Thief, nor Murderer, nor Fornicator, nor
Swearer, nor Drunkard; if thou break the Sabbath, thou have grievously
offended: for as one disease may bring death as well as many: so this one sin
( vnput off, and unrepented of) may damn thee as well as many sins may.
Secondly, every sin is a dishonor to God: but we Christians are bound, not
only to honor God, but to abstain from his dishonor; as it is the duty of
good Subjects, not only to do the King reverence, but to do nothing to his
reproach. Thirdly, God is of pure eyes, and cannot see evil; so says the
Prophet Habaccuk, Chap. 1.13. where he says (simply) evil, and not
(definitely) this, or that evil: as if he had said, God can see no evil; and
therefore he must abstain from all evil, that will see God. No Lazar is more
loathsome to Man, then sin is to him. A sore eye offends a sound eye; and
much more an evil eye, Gods pure eyes. It is a true doctrine (therefore) that
Christians must not think it enough to avoid some sins, except they
abstain from all iniquity.

Uses.
An instruction to deal roundly both with small and great sins: Use 1.
with our good will we will not leave a weed in our Gardens. O that we
had the like care and good will for the Garden of our hearts, to suffer no
weed of sin to grow in it! A little deformity in our face troubles us; and
should it not as much concern v^, when we perceive any little deformity in
the face of our souls? Is not he that is Lord of the body, Lord of the spirit
also? he has paid for both, and will he not be glorified in both? 1 Cor.
6.20. That God may be thus glorified, consider to what sin, or special
sins thou art most inclined by nature or education, and take the armor of
God unto thee, for it or them. Men fortify where the battery is hottest, and
where the enemy is most like to enter; and not where there is no assault, or
fear by weakness. So do thou watch over thy self in that, or those
corruptions of thy soul, in which Satan is most busy to force thy heart, and
thou most ready to open unto him. That which is thy sin, spend time about
it, and cry fie upon it, and not only upon Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Blasphemy, when these are not thy sin^: Pride (perhaps) grows in thee,
perhaps Covetousness is thy sin, peradventure both: or if these be not thy
special sins, (and yet who can say his heart is clean from these?)
peradventure, Impatience, peradventure, Rage and Malice are, Here thy enemy
assaileth thee, and here, and in these, thou must take thy armor against him,
and provide for his coming.

Use 2.
A reproof to those who put the Devil away in some sin^ and yet bring him
back, and make much of him in other sins. In Drunkenness (it may be) they can
take heed of him, or in the sins of Whoredom, and raging blasphemy, but he
Inneth, nay, dwells with them in Covetousness, Oppression, and Sacrilege;
with Herod, they will hear their JOHN'S in many things, Mark. 6.20. but not in
the Herodias, of any beloved sin, nor in those things that shall offer to
touch the quick of their sins, as in their brothers wife. Every one must
have his peculiar sin, or Rimmon, that he must be spared for, 2 King. 5.18.
and therefore some have a Rimmon of Drunkenness, some of Fornication, some of
Pride, some of Recusancie and the profane contempt of our assemblies to bow
in: spare them for these, and they will hear you for other matters patiently
and gladly, while you touch any other sin: but have we not read, how great a
thing a little fire kindles? Iam. 3.5. Satan cares not how he possesses us,
whether by one sin, or by many, by Whoredom, or by Pride.

A defense for those that make some Use. 3.
sound conscience of striving to some purity of body and mind by David's
example here. Our Savior says, Ye shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father
is perfect, Math. 5.48. His meaning is, though this cannot be, yet such you
must strive to be; or to be in like manner, though not in the same measure,
perfect. They that thus do, are nicknamed, Precise: but every Christian has
warrant, and receives commandment to be so precise. While we dwell in flesh,
we shall be imperfect; but we must labor to be perfect^ and we shall have
corruption, but we must strive against it. No strife, no victorie^ no victory,
no Crown.

Doct. 2.
The object: and that which carries wickedness to the heart, is here said to be
the eye; not that it alone does so, (for all the outward senses have their part
and hand in this trespass) but because the eye is chief of the senses that so
offend.

From whence we learn, as to keep the heart (principally,) Pro. 4.23. so to
watch over the senses that stream unto it, that they serve not the turn of
sin. A Christian must keep his heart to God against his own eyes, and the
treason (as I may say) of his outward senses. This made Job to make a bargain
with his eyes, Job 31.1. as if he should bind them from seeing; that is, from
seeing unlawfully, by some thing received. So when Christ our Savior bids
us to pluck out our right eye, and to cut off our right hand, Math. 5.29.30.
his meaning is, that we should pluck out, and cut off the offense, not the
member; as in the eye, the wantonness of seeing, and in the hand, the violence
of doing: and so we should serve every member that offends, though it were
our right eye, and our right hand, when they be weapons to sin, or fuel to
the fire of that sin that is in our bodies: for if we will not be Adulterers,
we must pull adultery out of the eye; that is, the eye must not be our Broker,
nor drive the bargain between the heart and the sin that is so committed.
If we would not be uncharitable, we must take away the occasion of it from the
ear, and receive no false report: for, the easy care is a confederate with
the lying tongue, when our neighbor is slaundered. If we would not hurt our
Neighbor, we must bind our hand to it good a bearing toward him: for when we
strike hastily, the hand is the Murderer; that is, the instrument of murder,
or the weapon of our wrath in that action. If we would not offend with our
tongue, we must hold it in with a bridle; or, set a watch before our mouth, and
keep the door of our lips, that our tongue may be peaceable: for when we give
it liberty, it becomes Slaunderers hyreling. And if we would not sin by
intemperance, and excess, we must not labor to please^ our taste, nor to
fill appetites eye with variety, but be careful to diet and sti^^ it to that
with is sufficient, keeping it low, that it riot not: for when it is made
vvanton with feeding too curiously and with too much niceness, it must needs
prove a Glutton and Drunkard too.

The Reasons.
The outward senses are the Conduill of sin, not only by carrying from the
heart, but by bringing to it. And therefore we must take heed, what they
carry out, and what they bring in. Secondly, to offer our bodies to God, in
the dialect of Saint Paul, Romans 12.1. what is it, but by care and diligence,
to give the bodily senses in the sacrifice of new life unto him? Thirdly, there
could be no murder in act, if there were not an hand to kill: nor adultery in
act, if there were not eyes to see, and ears to hear what is uncomely to be
spoken, and wicked to be done: nor slander in act, if there were not a tongue
to report, and itching ears to receive a wicked tale: nor Gluttony in act, or
Drunkenness acted, if the sense of taste were as it should be, and not corrupt
through lust; as it is in fleshly men.

Uses.
A reproof to those, Use 1.
who say there is no hurt in seeing, and that words are nothing, whereas vice
has a great entrance into the heart by these windows. But could the Apostle
speak of eyes of adultery, 2 Pe^. 2.14. if there were no hurt in seeing? and
if words were nothing, would chaste Joseph have so carefully kept his ears
under lock, from his M^stresses unchaste talk, Genesis 39.10. The body may
cease to sin, for want of occasion, or through weakness: but the wanton eye,
as it seldom wants occasion, so it cease not to commit Adultery every
where by unchaste and wanton looking, 2 Pet. 2.14. So when the body is
innocent, the ear may become an Adulterer, and the tongue a Harlot, by
reading, or hearing read some Loue-booke, or Loue-songs, with the match
whereof^ lust may soon be provoked, and wantonness take fire. Therefore the
Prophet speaks of the turning away of his eyes from vanity, Psalm. 119.37.
His meaning was not, that he would give his ears liberty, or lay no raines
upon his hands and tongue; but that he would see that the scoutes of the heart,
the outward senses, should (all of them) be preserved from the poison of
conspiracy with sin; knowing that where coun^ell is given to kill the Kings
Guard, there a devise is set to kill the King himself: for the outward senses
are the Sentinels or Guard of the heart; if Satan can corrupt these, he will
easily corrupt the heart it self, and take it, taking these. Achan and Achab
saw by the eye what the heart rued Ios. 7.21. and 1 King. 21.1.2. etc. And a
Judge, in matters, may use his ears, but must have no eyes to see a gift,
Deuteronomy. 16.19. For a gift, (I say not a filthy bribe) though somewhat innocently,
yet because inconsiderately at first received, begets (oftentimes) an
unknown error of corruption in the receivers, which, as a Clock in the
pocket, though it be silent for a while, strikes at a fit hour. Besides,
rewards (though not bribingly taken, yet taken where we have no calling to
receive) hold the receivers captive to the giver, and so, as they cannot be
their own men, but must see with other men's eyes; hear with other men's ears,
and use other men's tongues in the justice of a matter. And therefore it
concerns Christian Magistrates, with Abraham to life up their hands to the
God of heaven, against all those who shall seek thus to pin upon them a false
sentence in a matter, with a mocking gift, Genesis 39.17. lest it be said that
such have enriched Abraham, Genesis 14.22. for such P^^s have Nedles points, and
will (one day) prick the conscience in the vein of despair, with torments of
second death. Men must learn (therefore) I mean men in authority, as to hate
a bribe, so to suspect the inchauntment of a gif^. And where justice must be
the girdle of the reins, that must be observed, which our Savior, sending the
Tw^lue abroad, said unto them; Possess no many in your girdles, lest justice
hang too much of that side that the bag hangs.

Use 2.
A second use is, to show us that all the fault is not in the heart, when it
becomes wicked and vicious: for (as one says) the heart is a spring that
has not only spouts to send out, as a Cond^it, but pipes of sense wherewith
it is fed. And (therefore) as they gather ill that transfer all fault from
the heart to the sensitive powers; as of Seeing, Hearing, Talking, Taste, and
Handling; so they reason badly, who, because the heart is the life of these,
and the fountain of motion to these, do (therefore) lay all blame upon the
heart, for the corruption that these receive elsewhere, as from their
original impuritie, and the corrupt examples of Men. Also, as they reason not
sufficiently, who (because bad fellowship draws into sin) say, If I had
never known such company, I had never known such sin: (for if their hearts
had been good, the company could nor have been evil, that is evil to them:)
so they reason ill, who (because ill company is not the whole, or principal
cause of our error, but the heart, that is only evil continually, Genesis 6.5.
hold, that it is no cause at all, and that the heart receives no impression of
error from the stamp of lewd fellowship, 1. Cor. 15.33. So much for the
Prophets promises concerning himself: they which concern others, follow.

I hate the works of them that fall away.
THe promises that concern others now follow to be spoken of, the Prophet
having spoken of those that concern himself. And these concern the wicked,
in his hatred of them; and the good, in the favor that he will show unto them.
In those that concern the wicked, he shows what mind he bears toward
them, and what punishments he will lay upon them; which I cannot follow in
their own order, but must follow in the Proph^ts order, and as he speaks of
them. The first kind of wicked persons here spoken against, are Fallers away;
concerning whom, the Prophet shows that he hates them, and that they shall
not cleave to, or have protection from him. In the first, we may note the
Prophets affection, and the object: the affection is hatred, the object of his
hatred is, not goodness, but sin; nor the person of the offender, but his
falling away. So his meaning is, that he did not mislike slightly, but hate
greatly all declining: and Decliners in good things.

Doct. 1.
The point taught is: As the Prophet was affected against fallers away, so
should we be against every sin, specially against the height of sin, and
highest of sinners: that is, we should burn with wrath til sin be consumed
as dross in the fire. And here we must hate the Flesh, that is, sin, and
the garment spotted by it, Jude 23. So this Prophet makes protestation, that
he did hate the haters of God, not with superficial anger, but with deep
indignation, and with an unfeigned hatred, Psalm. 139.21.22. He hated those
(also) that gave themselves to deceitful vanities, Psalm. 31.6. and these he
hated, not in their created good substance, but in their mis-create vain
mind. The like we read, P^al. 26.5. where he is said to abhor that (which
too many love too well) the assembly of evil persons, or that knot of
fellowship in a town, that is combined in society against good Men and good
things. Moses was so far gone in his zeal against Idolaters, that he
forgate the Tables in his hand, and brake them, when he saw the Idolatrous
Calfe, Exodus 32.19. The Lord President, Nehemiah, hating those who had so
polluted the Sabbath with their Markets, and the Sanctuary with their wares,
protested against them, that he would lay them by the heels, or (as the text
says) Lay hands upon them, if they did so again, Neh. 13.19.21. The same may
be said of Iehosophat, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other reforming Kings: of
Peter, Stephen, John, Barnabas, Paul, and other excellent men in the new
T^^^ement. By all which it is plain that true Christians should, and will
profess unfeigned hatred to those that fall away from the truth^ and power of
godliness: and it may be further proved by these reasons following. For,
first, we must love where God loves, and hate, where he hates: but God
hates fallers away, yea, and all declinings from the path of truth, by a false
belief, and the good way of righteousness by a corrupt life. Such (therefore)
must be hated by us, not as they be men, but as they be such men, Pro. 8.13.
Secondly, it is Gods Commandment, by his Prophet Amos, that we seek good,
and not evil, Amos 5.14. and that we love the good, and hate the evil, verse.
15. Thirdly, where we are not hot against sin, we are soon entised to make
peace with sin, when we should make war against it. So when we wax cold in
hearing, and begin to cool in prayer, and yet neither abhor our coldness to
hear, nor loathe our blockish praying, we shall quickly be weary, and soon
give over to hear and pray. Fourthly, we will not be reconciled easily, where
we hate perfectly, as we are soon agreed, where we hate but little. Therefore
that we may not be at one with sin, to which God is enemy, Hab. 1.13. and
for which (without Christ) he will never be entreated, we must (no way) mince
with sin, nor stand indifferent to fallers away.

Uses.
Use 2.
An instruction to be zealous in the cause of truth; so will we hate those that
fall from it. The Apostle says, it is good to love earnestly, and always, in
a good thing, Gal. 4.18. the words are plain, and have this farther meaning,
that our affection to truth and good ways, must not be cold, but earnest; nor
for a fit earnest, but always zealous: for we are bought with a price, to be a
people peculiar to God; that is, enclosed from the world, to him: and zealous
of good works; that is, such as are careful to do well from a good heart; or
such as have a hot breath in good actions, and love fervently in good things,
Tit. 2.14. The contrary to this is Luke-warmenes, or indifferency in Gods
matters: but God does threaten such halting Gospellers, that he will cast them
out of his mouth, as a loathsome vomit, Apoc. 3.16 for Luke-warmenes agrees
with God, as warm water does with the stomach of a man: and he loves not
cold Suitors, but is found of those who seek him in the zeal of fire. Yet
that we abuse not this fire, to the burning of the good, as well as of the
badde, in our offending Neighbor, our zeal must begin and end where the word^
begins and ends. For that must be Moderator, and as that Pillar of cloud
to our zeal, that we read of, Exodus, 13.21. to order it: when that goes, we
must walk in our zeal, when that stands, our zeal must stop: If the word,
and farther then the word, condemns our brother, we must not condemn him.
Also, there must be no Pharisaicall (...) of Min^ and Cummin, with the loss of
better things in the law; as judgment, and mercy, and fidelity, Mat. ^3.23.
But our quiet, and vnmedling Politiques can abide no courage for the truth, and
such will rather hate good men, then fallers away. Such we call peaceable men.
and men of great charity, as if all that were otherways minded, were
seditious persons, and persons which are enemies unto peace: but then should
the excellentest men that ever were, and Christ himself be traduced for busy
bodies, and no friends to quietness; look Exodus 32.19. Number. 25.8. Ez^. 9 3.
Nehem. 13.15. 2 Pet. 2.7. Ioh. 2.15.

Use 2.
A reproof to those, who though they accuse not sin, which is bad, not
maintain it, which is worse, yet hate it not, as they would to see or hear
their ^ather dishonored. Some are so smooth and gentle in the pursuit of
sin, that no sin can be so heinous, or error absurd, that shall not find
some house of harbor in their mouth. Some will pretend an hatred of Papistrie,
and yet commend Papists to be honest men, and such as they know no evil by:
who because they are no more hot, may expect that the Lord will plague them
with heresy or prophanenes before they go hence. A good warning to all men,
specially to those men whom God has called by their great places, to see
Religion, and the power of godliness advanced among the common people. The
works of such as fall away, they must pursue to punishment or reformation: they
must not approve them in their Kinsmen, and rich Friends^ nor wink at them in
their servants, and children; nor spare to punish them, being found in their
Mothers sons. Eli, for his sinful mildnes, brake his neck, 1 Samuel 4.18. And
if they be not so punished, that is, so as Eli was, who transgress as Eli did,
let them beware that in Hell, the neck of their souls be not broken by Fiends
there. But are there no Pilates now on the Bench, who are ready to loose
Barrabas, and to condemn Christ? Are there not among persons in authority,
some Merchants and Factors for the fifth Monarchy, that it may not go utterly
into destruction? Are not fallers away winked at? are they called? nay, are
they not still at great liberty in their houses of pleasure, eating and
drinking, as if they carried no sin for their partaking with the sins of
the Whore of Babylon? Do they not ouer-flow as a River, and compass us as
Bees, who wish little good to the breath of our nosthrils, the Lords anointed
among us: and who (again) thirst to set up Altar against Altar, with Jeroboam,
and to fill the Land with Idols? Are there not that (daily) depart from the
house of David, with those false Israelites under Rehoboam, making them Priests
contrary to the Law, and declyning from the Lord, to set up Calves in Dan and
Bethel? 1 King. 12.16.28.29. Are there not that revolt to Popery from our
assemblies, even to this hour? and does not the number of them increase yet
more and more, who cleave to the Jeroboam of Rome, whom we may (therefore)
truly call fallers away? The consideration whereof should move you ( The Lord
Zouch then President in the Marches of Wales.
Christian LORD) to strengthen your hand to the rooting out of such noisome
weeds, growing in the Lords field, and seeking to choke and ouer-grow the
pure grain of Religion, that would (otherways) flourish among us. This
Country is greatly diseased, and your Honor is the appointed Physician. It
has many sores running on it, and one of the chief is the making of Papists
by Seminary men: for there is not a Papist made, but King JAMES aduentureth a
Subject: and Roc^s^^^ie (as a pernitiou^ G^^grene) runs from joint to joint,
from man to man, and will not stay (if it be not cured with your early
assistance) till it have infected many sound members in this body of the
Marches, wherein you are a principal and worthy member under his Maiesti^, the
head. Therefore the Country comes to your Honor as to a Physician of account,
for help in a case of so great infection and common fear, caused by the
contagious growing of Papists, and rising of Papisticall plague-sores upon men,
who were lately of our fellowship, and are now departed from us to the Beliall
of Italy. God has promoted you to great Honor, and I doubt not but you have
the wisdom which is of God. Now this wisdom requires, and must have
practice in the care of Religion, and in the care of Justice. David was called
the light of Israel, because at his fire they all lighted their candles, both
of Religious knowledge, and of righteousness. The principal resident Light,
upon the Table of this Country, is your Honor, (a borrowed Light I confess
from the Sun of our Sovereign;) it must so shine (therefore) that it may give
light to all that are in this large house of the Marches. And here I beseech
you, with that notable Lord President, Nehemiah, to see that God^ Sabbaths be
kept in the Province, and that fallers away be observed and watched, that they
increase not by infection. At least do what you can herein, and what law will
permit, (as you well do already) and God will be with you in the deed and
will. And for the cause of Justice, in the punishment of offenders, your
Honor, and the Rest in Commission with You, must be men of courage, hating
that which is evil, with a perfect hatred. Herein Ye must not honor your
selves, but seek the honor which is of God, doing Justice out of the love of
Justice, and hatred of wrong. You must not be indifferent to offenders, but
haters of iniquity, though the wicked hate you for it: for God will love you,
and what can man's hatred do where God loves? And so I come to my second note,
the object of your hatred.

The matter of the Prophets hatred (as was said) is not virtue or godliness,
but (generally) sin, and (more particularly) all declining from God. He
abhorred the plague, and pittyed their cases that were infected by it. Doct. 2.
From whence I gather, that in the affection of hatred, the person of man
should not be the object or thing hated, but the sin of the person. So this
same Prophet hated, but whom? Gods enemies, not his enemies; or Gods enemies
perfectly, and his own in part. And Psalm. 69.6. he speaks of the rebukes
that fell upon him, no doubt because himself was a rebuker: but whom rebuked
he, and whose faults? theirs who rebuked the Lord, theirs he rebuked, and to
them he was enemy. So Christ was angry, and yet mourned, Mark. 3.5. that is,
he was angry with sin, and mourned for those that sinned. As (therefore) in
Justice there must be mercy; so in hating there must be love: for we must hate
the sin, and love the creature. In every sinner, there is a man, and a
transgressing man: and we must love the man, and hate the transgressour. The
man God made; but the Devil made the sinful man: therefore we must love the
creature that God made, as we must hate his sin which (not God) but the
Devil is author of.

The reasons of the doctrine: As we must pity where God is pitiful, so we
must be angry where God is offended. But it is not the substance that he made,
which displeases him, but the evil quality which he cannot abide, that is
his grief. The same must vex us (therefore) that grieueth him, and we must be
so moved with offenses, as, in the mean while, we be troubled that a Brother
has so offended: and as the good Physician may love his Patient, and yet
minister sharply to his disease: so he that is his Brothers Christian
Physician, may, in love to his Brother, spare his Brother that has offended,
and yet deal roughly with the offenders sin. Secondly, the person in his
substance, is Gods creature. Now all that God makes is good, Genesis 1.31. and
nothing is to be hated that good is.

Uses.
An instruction to those, Use 1.
who have an ouer-flowing of the gall of anger in them, to spend it upon the
faults, and not the person of their offending brother. The hyp^crite will pull
out his brothers eye, instead of pulling out the mo^e that is in his brothers
eye, Luke 6.42. and they that are zealous amiss, commend that in a friend,
that they condemn highly in an enemy, and that which is a great sin in
another man, is no sin in their Kinsman. These accept the persons of men, not
regarding so much the matter which they love or hate, as the person of the man
that is loved or hated. But the good Christian loves always for good matter,
and hates for bad things, reproouing sin, as principally in himself; so
secondarily in these who are nearest and dearest unto him; as Christ sharply
reproved Peter, Mat. 16.23. If he be angry, it is with himself for sin, or
for sin in others. If he be displeased, it is because God is displeased: and
if he burn, he is offended because the law is broken. And therefore he loves
good, and hates evil, wheresoever, and in whomsoever; loving a good thing in
his most professed enemy, and hating an evil thing in his most assured friend.

Use 2.
A reproof to those who feed anger with the blood of their Christian brother,
in whom, all that they respect is, what he is to them, not regarding how dear
he is to God. So Joseph's brethren were mortally out with their good brother,
and had almost quenched their fi^rce wrath with his last drop of blood, Genesis
37.20. and Caines murderous anger against an innocent man, arose from hence,
Heb. 11.4.
because he offered to God a greater, that is, better accepted sacrifice then
his brother did, by which he obtained testimony that he was righteous, Genesis
4.4.5. Examples in this kind are innumerable, registered in Scripture, and in
the monuments of later and our own times. All which show that the nature of
the wicked is to turn anger upon the person or goodness of their godly brother,
which should be held in from these, and let go at sin in themselves and
others, to practice there. So much for the Prophets first affection against
fallers away: the second follows.

They shall not cleave unto me.
IN these words the Prophet protests his hatred of fallers away in a second
effect: Their work^ shall not cleave to him; that is, they shall have no
countenance from him, nor protection under him: where his further meaning is,
that their evil shall not be in his soul, nor their persons in his Court or
Kingdom: and that (therefore) he would avoid them as poyson^ to the fountain
of good discipline in a house; and (as plaguie persons) lodge them without the
host of Gods sound people, in their graves or in prison, where they shall not
be able to spread their infection as they might, either living or at liberty.

Doct. 1.
This is the Prophets meaning, where, in his example, all may learn that have
the charge of others, to take heed how they give hyre or countenance to any
under them, who are corrupt in Religion, or manners: where they must provide,
and be careful that they be the servants of God, who shall be their servants,
and be religious in Gods house, who would have countenance in theirs; and that
they have grace in their hearts, and a good conscience in their ways, that
shall serve them. But I shall have fitter occasion when I come to the sixth
verse, to speak more, and more fitly to this purpose. Adam must not keep a
Martherer in his house, Genesis 4 14. And Abraham must cast out Ismael, a Mocker,
Genesis 21.10. And Joshua must put out of the host. and put to death Aca^, an
excerable sinner, Ios. 7.25.26. And David (here) will neither have wicked
persons, nor tale-tellers, nor proud persons, nor liars, nor men of big-lookes,
and little grace, nor deceivers, nor slaunderers, to serve him, they shall not
clean to the house where he is Master, nor live in the Realm where he is King.

The Reasons.
Such are as pitch, that defiles those who touch it, and cleaves to those
whom it touches. Or, they are as Leprous persons among the whole, and as
contagious persons among the sound: and then who will suffer them that would
not have the sound corrupted, and the good made naught? Secondly, so much as
we are joined to God, we must be parted from sinners; and so much place as God
has in us, so little countenance we must give to sin. If (then) we will have
God to dwell with us, we must put the ungodly from us; and if we will stick
to him, we must break from them.

The use reprooueth those Protestant Masters, Use 1.
who keep in their houses a medley of Servants, of all sorts: for some shall
be Protestants, some Papists, some Atheists and Neuters, some Swearers, some
Drinkers and Swaggerers, and some such as those four hundred men of Esau, who
came against Jacob, deriders of Religion and decliners from it, Genesis 33.1.
These do not promise for their followers, as David did for his; nor for their
train of Seruing-men, as he did for those that should serve him, that none
shall have their badge, and wear their cloth, that will not cleave to God in
the badge of his truth, and livery cloth of his holiness, keeping his
Sabbaths, and reuerencing his Sanctuary, being religious to him, and charitable
to their neighbor.

Use 2.
Here (also) are condemned all lincks and tyings in Marriage between
Protestants-sonnes and Papists-daughters, being Papists for some portion of
money or piece of land. For how can these but countenance false Religion, when
they will be hired for a matter of nothing to marry with it? When Protestants
will match with the Devils Daughter for a portion, and he content that the
Devil shall be their Father-in-lawe for a little money? So much for the
Prophets protestation concerning fallers away: his protestations concerning
other wicked persons follow.

A froward heart shall depart from me, Verse. 4.
etc.
IN the second verse before, the Prophet had said that he would have an
upright heart: here he promises to bid auant to a froward and evil; that is,
to a crooked and sinful heart, neither nourishing it in himself, nor
suffering it in others. In the third verse, he showed how he would, and how
Christians should proceed against fallers away: here he shows how he will
deal with those, who (though they fall not away) yet misbehaue themselves in
their way, or seeming religious, are profane. By a froward heart, therefore we
must understand not a testie and angry, but (more generally) a proud and
stubborn heart, that will not submit to God, nor be taught of him: and by an
evil heart, an evil counselling heart, or a heart evil in opinion and
purpose. And where (speaking of a froward heart) he says it shall depart from
him, his meaning is, that he will not abide it in himself, nor bear with it
in others. And where he says he will know no evil, his meaning is, that he
will not allow it with any knowledge of approbation, as God knows the way of
the righteous, Psa. 1.6. that is, allows of it; but with a knowledge of much
dislike, abhor it, as God knows the wicked afar off, that is, greatly
contemns them: for we must not think that he would be grosely ignorant of
the evil ways of his people, and not observe them unto punishment, as he
would note the good, to reward them: but in that he says, he would chase away
a froward heart; and know no evil, it is manifest that he would look into
matters with his own eyes, and mark what is done by his own knowledge. So we
have the meaning of this verse. From whence (and because the Prophet could not
(thus) abandon the froward heart, nor dislike the evil, except he had so set
his watch of sight and hearing, that the knowledge and report of things, might
come directly to himself, and truly, as they were done and past: for what man
knows the heart of man but by the outward ways of it, and by observing those
ways? Doct.
) we learn that it is the duty of a good Ruler, to restrain offenders with
his own eye, Pro. 20.8. His looks must be terrible to them, and with his
eyes he must follow them; to cut them off, or to cast them off, if they will
not be amended. Therefore Solomon, speaking to Ouer-seers, says; Be diligent
to know the estate of thy Flock, and take heed to thy Herds, Pro. 27.23. The
speech is taken, by similitude, from vvatchfull Shepherds, who look to their
Flock, and to every head in it, in their own persons, and not by Deputies.
And thus David himself walked in the simplicity of his heart, Psalm. 78.72.
Job carried so resident an eye over Vagabonds and vile persons in his time,
that he compelled them to fly into the dark, desolate, and waste Wilderness,
Job. 30.3. He made them to hide their heads, so that they dwelt in the clefs
of Rivers, and in the holes of the earth, verse. 6. Neither did he thus proceed
only against those that were young, and wanted experience or begga^lie, and
lacked power; but he brake the jaws of the unrighteous, of what estate or time
soever, and plucked the prey out of his teeth, Job. 29.17. Great men (therefore)
must think themselves to be set up of the Lord, in places of power, to govern
such places with their own eye, and not to set over the charge to Cuza^s,
with the careless Minister of souls.

The Reasons.
They that prevent not evil in others, having the Sword committed to them for
that work, make themselves guilty before the Lord of that evil, vnredressed,
as if themselves had done it, 1 King. 20.42. All sins, not punished by them,
where they may and should punish, are their own sins, and sins which they
put upon their own account to reckon for. Secondly, from whence comes this
huge host of sin that has over run the land as a Conqueror, but from
hence, that Magistrates have multiplied offenders by cruel impunitie, and by
not looking into matters? for, as Justice exalts a Nation, Pro. 14.34. so
lack of Justice must needs bring it low. Thirdly, good Rulers are for the
praise of the righteous, and punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14. but how
can they reward the good, and punish the evil, defend the innocence of the
meanest, and censure the wickedness of the mightiest, if they know not, neither
care (impartially) to know who be good, and who evil, who innocent, and who
offenders?

Uses.
A reproof to those, Use 1.
who eye the best and most harmeles, in malice, to pick quarrels to them; and
set an eye upon the worst, in way of liking to give countenance to them. A
thing commonly seen, and much to be lamented in many great Families, and
Courts of Justice, where they that should drive out of the Country, Drunkards,
Blasphemers, and such like notorious offenders, suffer them to roost, and make
their nests in their own houses, feed them at their own Tables, and (because
they can play, jest, game, and make fools of themselves and others) use them
as their familiar companions: and from hence do such herds of evil doers,
and droues of beast^ multiply in the Kingdom. Besides, the Magistrates ears
(oftentimes) are so inchaunted with flattery, and their eyes dazzled with the
brightness of some golden gift, that they cannot see, neither are willing to
hear of those foul matters that the whole Country does uphold, and cry out
of.

Use 2.
An instruction to all inferiors, if they would stand before their Governors
with credit and good acceptance, to stand against the corruption that is in
themselves, and the common vices that are in others: for so shall they find
Christian Magistracy comfortable, and not terrible unto them; and Christian
Governors like mild showers of rain to refresh them, and not as raging
tempests to quell them; and the powers ordained of God, as shields for their
defense, and not as swords prepared for their destruction. O (then) would
thou be without fear of the power? do well, so shall thou have praise of the
same, Romans 13.3. Would thou have defense from the Magistrate? be innocent,
that he may defend thee. Would thou live with good Subjects? be no
malefactor to death, that thou may live. Give not thy self to Riot and
quaffing, and garishnes, and sinfulnes, and Whoredom, and execrable Swearing,
and impious Sabbath-breaking, and other enormities, so little feared, and so
much committed, if thou would have the reward of good, and avoid the
punishment of evil. For the Magistrate is bound in the chain of his high
calling to be impartial in his judgment, as God is no respecter of persons in
judgment, and to give to every one according to the equity of his cause, and
not the quality of his estate: and for this he is armed with Gods authority,
that the Majesty of his glory might shine forth in the execution of Justice,
which is Gods delight. Justice and just men do help to advance a Nation; and
therefore just men and Justice must be made of in the Nation. So on the
contrary, sinners and sin bring great shame to a people; and therefore sin
and sinners should be disgraced among the people. If (then) thou will cut thy
self off from God by dangerous Popery and rebellious wickedness, ho^ can the
Magistrate do less then cut thee off from men, by the Sword, which he must not
bear in vain? A Cananite may not be spared: if (then) thou be a Popish
Cananite, the Magistrate may not spare thee. A murderer must not live: if
(then) thou shed man's blood, by man, that is, by the Magistrate, must thy blood
be shed again? The wicked must be rooted out: if (then) thou do wickedly,
thy root must wither. Swearing, that is, cursed and odious Swearing, and
Drunkenness, and Whoredom, must be punished, and God will require the sparing
of such at his Magistrates hands if they be not punished: if (then) thou be any
of these, or all of these, repent, or expect thy deserved punishment here, or
in hell. The like may be spoken of other evils, and evil doers.

But here the Prophet speaks of a froward, that is, sinful or perverse
heart, because, when men do evil, they (commonly) do so by the wickedness of
the heart. Doct. 2.
From whence this doctrine may be gathered, that the Fountain and root of
sin is in the corruption of the soul, which we call the heart that is evil
from our youth, Genesis 8.21. For the heart is not here taken for that fleshly
part that is in the middle of the body, which we call the Fountain of vital
blood, but for the soul in the corruption of it, or faculties corrupted. And
so our Savior is to be understood, when he says, that out of the heart, that
is, out of the powers of the heart corrupted, proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, slanders, Mat.
15.19. for all these spawne in the heart. Lust in the heart begets; and the
heart by lust bears, and brings to form and shape all these filthy sins.
It is a proverb of Salomons, that the heart imagigineth destruction, and the
lips speak mischief, Pro. 24.2. For of the abundance of the heart (says
our Savior) the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34. I may add further, the eye sees,
the ear hears, the palate tastes, the foot walks, the hand works:
therefore says the Wise King, Keep thy heart with all diligence, as with many
locks: for thereout proceed the actions of life; to wit, by good regard, but
of death by negligence without regard, Pro. 4.23. Other things may occasion
sin, but our hearts cause it. Joseph saw as well as David, and with more
opportunity, but Joseph looked to his heart: David (in part regenerate)
neglected it: therefore Joseph, though tempted by the tongue and ear, had a
good issue of his temptation; David, in a like temptation, not considering his
weakness, and careless of his heart, was foiled, and did yield. Now if an
unregenerate heart in one truly renewed, did so soon and dangerously yield to
evil, what may the best judge of his heart at this day? and how will it riot,
if he do not set a guard of diligence about it, and keep it under many tutor?
But not to speak of a froward heart, in which sin is Crowned King, and
rules by sundry lusts; what shall we say of a heart, such as David had, how
quickly may (even that) for the corruption dwelling in it, be allured to
wickedness, in the best, if it be not watched? And then how true is it, that
though the occasion of evil may come from others, yet the cause of evil is
all in our selves?

The Reasons.
First, if we speak of actual sin, the root of it is in the soul, as the
branches of it are in the outward parts: for there is no sin actual, but the
will is in it. Now the body is not the seat of our will, but our reasonable
soul, which is said to have in it two principal faculties, the will and
understanding. Secondly, the heart does carry with it, every way, all our
outward senses, and (as the Heathen man could say) it is not the eye that
sees, but the heart; nor the ear that hears, but the heart: and so of the
other senses; which does further appear: For let there be great sounds and
much noise in a place, yet if our heart be earnestly set upon some other
matter, our ears that attend the heart, neither hear the sound, nor listen to
the noise: yea, sometime we stumble in the plain ground, and our feet fail
us in fair places, because our feet are carried with our hearts that mind
some other matter. Thirdly, it is the heart that makes or marreth all our
actions; which proves that the Fountain of goodness or vice is in the heart,
and the stream of them in the outward senses: for as the heart is in an
action, so it is accepted both of God and man. Give a small thing with a good
heart, and it is well taken; but offer a better thing unwillingly, and it is
not regarded: and wherefore not regarded? but because, not the gift, but the
mind of the giver is wont to be considered. So a man may leave a sin, and
not be innocent: for example; he may refrain Adultery, and yet be an
Adulterer; and forbear to steal, and yet be a Thief: for the heart may love
Adultery, though the body be clean; and a Thief (without the hatred of
theft) not dare to rob, lest the law proceed against him. Shame, or want of
opportunity may make an Adulterer in heart, no Adulterer in act; and fear of
the law may keep a Thief true, when his heart, before God, and by the verdict
of his own conscience, is a shameless Thief.

Uses.
Use 1.
This may serve to humble us, seeing the cause of all sin is in our selves,
and cannot be laid upon any other. It is our own heart that causes us to
sin, whiles, through the corruption that is in it, it yields to the
suggestions of Satan, to the persuasions of evil men, and to the treason of
our own flesh: for if this corruption were not in us, no temptation could
overcome us, and we should overcome evil through goodness. Christ was void and
free from sin, therefore Satan in temptation could do nothing against him,
Ioh. 14.30. no, nor yet against our first Father, till his heart was corrupted
through unbelief. We use to say, Woe be to such a Man and to such a Woman,
that ever I knew them; for if I had never known them, I had never known woe.
Indeed evil fellowship is a strong occasion of falling, and in company we
meet with great temptations, (which should make us to take good heed what
company we adventure upon:) yet our own corruption is it that makes us to be
overcome with evil, and by means of it, the evil examples of Men do wound
us to a following in badnesse: and therefore the cause of sin is still in our
selves, because our own heart, that is, (the corruption in it) has deceived
us.

Use 2.
A reproof to those who content themselves to have done some good outwardly,
and outwardly to have left some evil undone, and yet never care to plant true
goodness in the heart, or to purge it from evil; which is as foolish a part.
as if one, desiring to have all weeds taken out of his Garden, should cut the
tops only, and let the root grow: or, willing to have wholesome herbs and
flowers, should only plant the leaves of them, and neither the root nor
slips. So to top the weeds of sin, and to leave the root of them growing
in the heart; and to plant some leaves of goodness (that may show for a day or
two) and not the root, or some part thereof, what folly is it, entending to
have and preserve (well cleansed from ^inne, and stored with grace) the fair
Garden of a pure and clean heart? The Prophet therefore here, and Psalm. 51.10.
when he meant to have the outward conversation refo^med, begins with the
heart; as they who desire to have sweet and wholesome water, begin at the
spring: which should move us, with our first care, to look to our heart, that
the spring of our actions be clean and holy, the rather because it is in us by
nature so deceitful and foul, Ier. 17.9. or as a filthy Garment, that must
be washed thoroughly, as it were in many waters, Psalm. 51.2. before it will be
clean in part, and some way get out of corruption. Also, seeing the heart in
man is as a rotten garment past mending, what care should there be of putting
it off, praying GOD to give us a new heart, and to take the old from us? Ezech.
30.26. That which remains in this verse, is the Prophets undertaking for
himself, that he will know none evil. He had said before in the second verse,
that he would walk in the right and perfect way; and that (therefore) he
would put from him all such as perverted their way, or turned aside by crooked
ways, Psa. 125.5. Here he says that he will know; that is, approve or avow
none such, neither communicate unto them or bestow upon them any honors under
him: but seeing that God had authorized him, and that God was in him, he would
highly dislike sin, as in himself specially, so zealously in others. Neither
would he put Offices (as it were sta^es) into the hands of wicked Magistrates
of strike with, knowing that a wicked budde will quickly shoot out by so
dangerous a Sunshine of favor and countenance from the Throne of the King,
and by the abuse of supreme greatness so ill employed, prove fruitful of all
bad behavior.

Doct. 3.
The point and doctrine from hence is; It is not enough for Magistrates and
other public persons, to live well, and to hate to sin grosely themselves,
except (as men careful to do that that belongs to their places) they will
know no evil; that is, approve no gross sin or evil life in others. We must
look to our selves, as we be Christians, but (if we have rooms in the
Commonwealth, or have the charge of a family) our care must be for others. In
this case we must not do only what appertains to us, as we are Christians,
but consider what we ought to do in this or that calling wherein God has
placed us, as men that have more then our selves to answer for. This is
significantly noted by the comparison of a head, as Number. 1.4. where such
public persons are called heads. For hereby they are taught, that they are
called by that name, not so much because they are placed uppermost in the body,
as the head, as that they are placed there with ears, to hear what is good
and fitting, with smelling and tasting to choose what is wholesome, and with the
tongue to show what will help or may hurt that body: but (specially) with eyes
to see afar off which way the foot should walk, the stomach be relieved,
the body in some good sort maintained, and every member so provided for, that
the whole (both head and members) may long continue. And this does Almighty
God require of the heads of Lands and Nations, that is, that in the midst of
dangers, and height of sin, they look not abroad with drousie eyes, but (as
men perfectly awak't) see what is coming toward them, and (withdrawing
themselves from peril) withdraw their people also. Eli himself was a good
man, but his own goodness could not save him from breaking his neck, seeing
he suffered his sons to be wicked. 1 Samuel 2.29.30.31. and 4.18. David was
carnally tender of Ab^alom, and would not displease Adonijah, but what came of
it, his story shows, 2 Samuel 15.13.14. and 1 King. 1.5.6.

The reasons of the doctrine are: Magistrates are to see to themselves, and to
look to others: they must have conscience to order themselves, and they have
the Sword to pull in others: therefore it is not enough that they live ciuilly
and religiously^ except they provide that the people under them lead a civil
and religious life. Joshua (as we heard) would not alone be no Idolater; but as
he himself would serve no Idols, so his house shall serve the Lord, Ies.
24.15. He that uses not his authority to restrain from evil, gives leave
by it, and power with it, to do evil: for he assisteth the wicked man,
lending him his hand, and does the wicked deed, because his power does it.
Secondly, in actions that depend upon us, and be in our power, there is small
difference between the doing of them, and suffering them to be done, save that
(sometimes) he may have more fault that permits evil, then he that does it:
for he that does it, may be moved to it by some temptation of benefit or
sudden desire; but he that suffers it (when he knows it) if he be a great
Commander, receives discredit by it in his place of Honor, and hurt in the
people which he governs, who from the bad air of so corrupt an example, may
draw in a very dangerous infection. The one does it with intended profit, the
other suffers it with apparent hurt; and who has the greater sin? Thirdly,
a Nurse that takes the charge of a young child, is not excused though she
look to her self, if she neglect the child. Neither is the Master of a
School faultles, though he go to his own Book, if he apply not his
Scholars. So Magistrates, being Nurses of Gods people, bear a great sin
before God, if they feed themselves with case, and feed not the people with
their government: and evil Tutors that mind themselves only, and not the
people, as it were Scholars, that are under their rod, in the School of
policy, cannot be innocent.

Uses.
Use 1.
An instruction to those who have places, so to watch in those places over
those, both for their sincerity in Religion, and manner or life, whom they
take charge of, that they may be, neither in points of faith impious, nor in
behavior profane: for though themselves be never so eminent and
prayse-worthie for sanctity and righteousness, yet all is nothing, if they
make not those whom they rule to savor thereof, under the sweet perfume of
their government. If a blessing be upon them, it must, like Aarons precious
Ointment, drop from the beard to the skirts of their clothing, that the low
Valleys may have the benefit of that fruitful rain that falls upon the
Mountains. Psalm. 133.2.3. The people which God has subdued unto them, they
must acknowledge to be the Field wherein the Lord has bestowed them, to the
end that they might labor to make it like the Paradise of God, full of chosen
plants, and free from all weeds and rubbish of sin. They must (therefore)
plant it, and prune it, and water it, and hedge it, and carefully dress it,
that it may be beautiful to God, and comfortable to man, rejoicing God and Man.

A reproof to those public persons Use 2.
who (even) tempt unto sin by giving countenance and matter to notorious
offenders, and when they should imitate the Highest, whose soul delights not
in the death of a sinner, but that he may turn, and be saved, put on corrupt
affections, either of soothing men in their sins, or of winking at faults in
pernicious sinners. Also, here we have a confutation of that speech, which
seems to give commendation of sufficiency to public persons; because they
are good private men, though naughty Commonwealths men, and Churchmen, living
as a body divided from the public body, and public good: for we shall many
times hear such speeches as these concerning the Magistrate; as that he is a
good gentle man, and one that keeps a good house: and concerning the
Minister^ that he is an honest man, and lives well^ and yet the one punishes
no faults as a Magistrate, neither does the other teach diligently, or at all,
as a Minister. But as it will not discharge him that has the charge of the
Chamber, Kitchen, or Stable in a Noble-mans house, to busy himself in other
matters, and to neglect the duties of his proper place: So to show some zeal
in the common duties of our Christian places, will not aquite us before God, if
we be not sufficient, or be careless, if we be sufficient, in the discharge
of our particular callings. We must know no evil; or if we know any, the
Minister must reprove it, and the Magistrate punish it, and he that has
charge in a family, proceed against it. A fault (then) in Ministers, who
dawbe the sins of a Parish with the vntempred mortar of flattery, and of
saying all is well, where nothing is well, Ezech. 13.10. A fault in doting
Fathers, and cockering Mothers, who are not displeased with sin in their
tender children, whom they carnally love, that is, honor above God. A fault in
Magistrates and Overseers, who, rather by ungodly indulgence give men
authority to do evil, then restrain evil with timely discipline. And a
fault in all Men, who, instead of reproving sin in their Neighbors and
brother, set them on by an uncharitable delight to see them to do evil. For
as Cham saw his Fathers nakedness with pleasure, Genesis 9.22. so they behold their
their brethrens naughtiness with joy: yea, they are so pleased with sin in
others, that they laugh till they be sore with laughing, to perceive men to
break the Commandments of God, to discourse filthily in common talk, and to
run riot into all manner sin, with greadynesse, foaming out their
owne-shame, Jude. 13. which, what is it else, but to profess that they are
glad to see, and help forward the perdition of their brother, to whom they
should wish salvation in Christ?

But the Prophet will know no evil in himself, as he will not allow any evil
in others. And so, as he vowed in the verse before to do no evil, so in this
he protests with an affection answereable to his outward practice, that his
heart should like no evil. Doct. 4.
From whence the doctrine is: As we outwardly leave sin, so (...) heart we
must abhor it, if we will be innocent. Many (outwardly) forbear a thing, who
(inwardly) affect and love that thing. In such, sin is rather restrained then
mortified, as in the faithful, Romans 8.13. For, hope of benefit, or fear of
punishment may make men to leave some enormitie without true mortification, or
some by-respect may restrain it. A^imelechs adultery was kept in of God, but
not vanquished, Genesis 20.6. And Ham^n, full of wrath, without conscience of
being wroth, refrayned himself in a policy, Hest. 5.10. And many have
abstayned from evil, when their heart has been set upon mischief.

The Reasons.
As in good things, the will is taken for the deed, and what we would be, that
we are by acceptance: so in evil, not so much what we do, as what we have a
mind to do, is respected by God. Secondly, he that is restrained from evil,
^s not innocent; but he that will not offend, though he might, may be
accoun^ed righteous: for the mind is the trespasser, the tongue and hands are
but instruments. Thirdly, the veryest hypocrite may (outwardly) leave that
sin, which in heart he is commanded of: and there is nothing more ordinary
(what if I had said general?) then to seem religious, and to be a worldling,
and to profess Religion, and to mind earthly things.

Uses.
An admonition, Use 1.
in leaving of sin, not only to take the evil of it out of our hands, but
the love of it out of our hearts: for what we love not to do, that we will
do unwillingly, though we do it necessarily. If we love goodness, we will
do good gladly, and evil against our wills: but if we love to do evil, we
may forbear it for purposes, but will not forgo it for any thing. The
children of God find such a strife in them between regeneration and
unregeneration, as was between Jacob and Esau in their Mothers womb, Genesis
25.22. And why such a strife? but because the good which they would do, they
cannot do, and because they do the evil which they would not, Romans 7.19. For
they commit evil unwillingly, and though, when it is conceived, they bring it
forth necessarily, yet they bear such an enemies heart unto it, that they
would smoother it if they could, while it is yet young in thought and
conception; or, because they cannot so do, destroy it in the birth, and before
it be grown by custom of sinning, to a habit of wickedness. The cause is, the
will, so far forth as it is regenerate, resists and draws back: yea,
when the natural man is thrust forward unto evil by the sin dwelling in
him, the spiritual man, revived by the holy Ghost in part, meets with diverse
contrary winds against that Bark of his, under sail, striving in him to
destroy the good work of regenerate conscience. And from hence comes that
war of lust that the Apostle speaks of, Gal. 5.17. which he calls the
lusting of the flesh against the spirit, and the like lusting of the spirit
against it. They that meet with no such spiritual throws in the travel of
new birth, are still in their filthynes, as it were old nature, and do still
love sin, though sometime, and for some causes, they do not practice it by
open sinfulnes.

A comfort to those who dislike the evil which they do, Use 2.
for they are nearer to innocence then they who either would sin, but cannot
or can and would, but dare not, lest they should suffer discredit or
punishment. And, which is better, to sin greedily and willingly, or of
infirmity, and partly against our will? Gods children mislike sin, as it is
sin, yea, though by nature they be inclined to it: and because sin
displeases God, it displeases them, though it be their own sin, and not
any sin in a stranger or enemy. But the wicked mislike some sin, either
because they are past it by course of years, or because they fear punishment,
or because accusing conscience does affright them from it, as in the example of
Pilate, Mat. 27.19. 24. Ioh. 19.12. Gods best children, because their whole
will is partly flesh, and partly spirit, as the whole air in the dawning of
the day, is partly light, and partly dark throughout, therefore they partly
sin, and partly work righteousness; or, are partly sinners, and partly
righteous: but the wicked are flesh and not spirit, wholly carnal and no way
spiritual: evil they do, and will do it, good they do not, nor will do:
where the godly (contrarily) do evil, but would not do it, and do not
good, but would do it. The Prophets further protestation against other
offenders and offenses, but of more special kind, follows.

Verse. 5.
Him that privily slaundereth his Neighbor, will I destroy.
IN this verse the Prophet more specially does protest against two kinds of
evil persons, and their two several evils. The evil persons are Slaunderers
and Proud persons: the evils condemned in them, are detraction in the
Slaunderer, and big looks, and a large heart in proud persons. For the
Slaunderer, the Prophet threatens to cut him off: and for the Proud person, he
says threatningly, that he will not abide him in the Kingdom. But first for
the Slaunderer; here is noted his offense and punishment. His offense is
described by the quality of it, it is called a privy slander; and the
object, he is called a Neighbor that is slaundered: the punishment is, he
shall be destroyed or cut off. To slander here, is by giving out, or by
receiving in of a false tale, or true report, but uncharitably made, to wrong
our innocent, or absent brother. And to slander privily, is to wound a man
upon his back by a cowardly tongue. A slaunderer (therefore) is a malicious
informer; and a privy slaunderer, a privy thief of his brothers name. Such
unmanly dealing with our Neighbor, by a whispering tongue, the Prophet so
abhors, that he threatens destruction to it. Such vnauthorised Relators,
and secret Thieues of a man's name in the world, who abuse the ears of persons
in authority, or of brethren in amity with offensive and siding tales, yea,
though there be some truth in the reporters words, he promises to cut off.

From whence this doctrine may be observed, Doct.
that the sin of slander or privy detraction, whether by giving out, or
receiving in of a false and malicious, or true, but uncharitable and hurtful
report against our Neighbor secretly, is a detestable sin. That the giuers
forth of a false report to the hurt of their neighbor; that is, of any
Christian, in his name, (for now every Christian is our Neighbor) are horrible
sinners may appear by that which is written of them, Ezech. 22.9. where they
are called Cursitants, or, goers about with tales to shed blood. Such a son
of Belial, and man of blood, was Ziba, who falsely accused his Master to the
King, that he might be Master of his Possessions, 2 Samuel 16.3. The Devil
spared not God himself, Genesis 3.4.5. and these tongues (descended from his
house and lineage) have a like disposition in them to touch all his children:
and for this they be compared with most deadly and hurtful things; as to the
Poison of Aspes, to a Rasor, to a Venomous Arrow, to a Scorpion, and greedy
Viper, to fire and coals of Juniper; and when they are inflamed by Satan's
Bellows, and Gunpowder to the fire of Hell^ Iam. 3.8. Psalm. 140.3. Nay, the
Scorpion hurts not as the scorching tongue, nor is the biting of a venomous
Viper so deadly as the wound of a tongue that tells lies: for the Scorpion
hurts not but where he touches, nor the Viper but where he biteth first.
But the Slaunderer wounds and kills, not near only, but far off, nor at
hand, but removed, nor in our own Land, but in a strange Land, nor curably,
but deadly, nor the living only, but quick and dead. Such a detestable beast
is every malicious Slanderer. There is a Law against such walkers, and goers
about with tales, Leuit. 19. 16. where the Spirit of God, as also in Pro.
11.13. and 20.19. compares such busy bodies, to petty Chapmen, or Pedlers.
who carry wares about, selling in one place, and buying in an other: for so
these Chapmen of reports go from place to place, and from house to house, and
wander hither and thither, to gather up tales to tell again, and to vent in
one place what they have received, and more then ever they received or heard in
another. And now, as they be detestable beasts, that give forth false tales to
their Neighbors hurt, so they are evil beasts that hurt him, though by true
reports; else Doeg could have been no Slaunderer: for that which he spoke, and
whereof he accused David in absence, was true, yet he is noted for a cursed
Slaunderer, because he blabbed out the truth to an evil end, and at an
unseasonable time, even when Saul was in a great chafe against David, to kindle
hotter persecution against him, Psalm. 55.2.3.4. etc. The like may be said of
Daniels enemies: for what they reported concerning him, was true; yet they were
malicious Slaunderers, because they reported a truth maliciously, Dan. 6.6.7.
Lastly, they that love to hear such tales are wicked Slanderers, as well as
they that tell them. So Eve listening to the Serpent, and Adam to her, both
suffered as Slaunderers of their Creator, Genesis 3.6.7. Tale-bearers, and
Tale-hearers (says one) are guilty alike: Bernard de considerat. lib. 2. in
fine.
for as the Talebearer has the Devil in his tongue, so the Tale-hearer has
him in his ear. The Apostle speaking of such as are deceived with vain words,
calls them Companions with such, Ephesians. 5.6. the Receiver as bad as the Thief.
And the words of the Law are^ Thou shall not receive a false report. Exodus
23.1. It is not said, Thou shall not make a false tale; but, Thou shall not
receive it, being made.

Quest. But may not a man without sin, hear of his Neighbors faults, his
Neighbor not in place?

Answer. Yes, and report them to, if it be profitable for him that is absent,
or expedient for thee that hear, or necessary for him that speaks of them.
Profitable for the absent party, as when his faults, by such information may
be corrected. Expedient for the hearing party, as when danger may come to him
of injury or infection by that persons faults. Necessary for the speaking
party, as being the delivering of him from the concealment of an offense. Eli
complained not that the evil behavior of his sons was brought to him by
faithful relation, 1 Samuel 2.22. indeed it had been good for Eli, and better
for his sons, if that information had been better regarded. So Jacob was
well content (I doubt not) that his son Joseph should inform against his
brethren their slander or evil saying, Genesis 37.2. And all good men will
confess, that it is necessary for a public State, and for good order in a
populous Family, that some be authorized to make report of offenses. But the
reports here spoken of, and enueighed against, are reports false, or malicious,
made, and received. And that it is abominable to devise these, or to give an
ear unto them, being devised by others, may further appear.

The Reasons.
First, Mr. D^d on the ninth Commandment.
because they that bring up a false report, hurt three at once, and cause three
wounds at one time: The first stroke lights upon him to whom they tell the
false tale and he is made uncharitable by it. The second lights on the
reputation of him that is slaundered, and his name is blotted by it. The last
and greatest lights upon the souls of those who make that false report: for it
infecteth them with slander, and makes them guilty of a lie. Of these three,
he scapes best who is falsely slaundered: for being innocent, God will heal
his name, and bring forth his righteousness as the Su^. The other two wounds are
more dangerous, because they are made in the soul, and more hard to be cured
because they are made by sin. Secondly, they that make a true, but
unseasonable, or malicious report, speak either idely, and must answer for
idle words; or uncharitably, and so hate their brother. And though we speak
the truth, yet if we speak without discretion, or unseasonably, out of time
and place, because our end is vain, and purpose naught, it is a slander. A
good man, when he repeates a matter, will have some good end in telling it; as
that it shall be good to him of whom it is spoken, or good for him who hears
it, or good to both. Thirdly, they that hear a false tale; that is, they who
with patience and liking hear it, encourage such offenders as receivers make
the thief. Nay, as in Murder, there is never an accessory, but all are
principal: so in this kind of murder, every such hearer is as he that
slaundereth with his tongue. Yea, though a tale were suddenly raised, yet would
it as quickly fall again, if it were not held up by some easy ear.

Uses.
Use 1.
A warning (therefore) to all, since Tale-bearing is so detestable to God, and
injurious to man, to avoid to be, or to receive Slaunderers. The first would be
considered of Flatterers and Sicophants, who insinuate themselves by the
thrusting out of others. The other of Magistrates and great Men, that they
punish by discountenance, or with the Sword, the malicious Talebearer, and
Sycophant. He that does not chastise Slaunderers does provoke them. And as the
favor of great men is most desired of men, so their tender complexion will
soonest be altered by a cunning tongue. David himself (this way) was grosely
flattered, 2 Samuel 16.3.4. and took such a stain from Ziba's subtle words, in
the beautiful countenance of Justice, that the mark of his black tongue is
found remaining in it to this day. 2 Samuel 19.29. But to persuade Christians to
abhor the sin of having, or bidding welcome to a faithless and deprauing
tongue, let it be considered that charity is by it impeached; first in the
reporter: for, the rule of love is; Whatsoever things we would have men to do
to us, to do the same to them again. Matthew. 7.12. And (secondly) in the
person spoken of; for, it causes him to seek to requite the report-maker with
as bad or worse: and so Satan sets one to hunt another, till Hell catch both.
And (thirdly) in the person spoken unto: for, where charity thinks not
evil, 1 Cor. 13 5. he by such aspersions in absence, causelessly condemns his
brother. Again, he that slandereth with his tongue, is commonly a liar, and
always seditious. For, he will tell so much of the truth as may do hurt, and
nothing that may pacify anger, if he speak true: and if he speak not the
truth in a matter, he will clip it by a deceitful tongue, or add unto it by
lying lips, his own soulder and base invention. Thirdly, besides the sins of
malice and lying, his mouth is grimed with foul hypocrisy, persuading, or
laboring to persuade the party to whom he^ brings this false report of his
neighbor, that it is spoken in good will to him, when it is rather spoken in
malice to the other^ and therefore he must keep it to himself, and the
devil with it, or he shall not hear of him. And by this trick of false play,
the party who is accused, shall never come to his purgation, and he, to whom
he is accused, must promise to keep the Devils counsel in a lie. So, he shall
bear coals without cause; but to the burning of himself, while he burns in
displeasure secretly against him or her, who in no such manner offended him.
Fourthly he that is a slanderer, is of base condition, and (for his unworthy
mind) fitly compared to certain abject Flies, that are always lighting upon
gallea backs, and foul places. So, the slanderer of his neighbor, resting
only or chiefly upon the sores and galls of men, passes by things in them of
good report, and when he meets with a matter that deserves dispraise, he
blows it as far as the wind of his wide mouth will suffer him, where his
whole speech tends not to amend the fault, but to damnifie his brother. He
aggrauates a light fault, and deals extremely with a great fault. Also, he
adds to the good actions of men, his diminutiues; as that they did well, but
did it of affection to praise, or in much hypocrisy, and others do as well.
So the clearest water shall be defiled with mudde, when it passes through his
foul conduit. And here (by the way) let me remember you ( Christian Lord,
and the rest in commission, you worthy Judges in this honorable Court) of an
abuse that would be amended in those that draw Informations and Bills, to be
presented to those eyes that should be as the pure eyes of the Almighty that
cannot see evil. Habac. 1.13. For, how many Bills, filled with lies, and
fraught with vanity, are, without respect to Truth (whose countenance should
be lovely, and estimation precious in all Courts) offered to the sacred eyes
and ears of God, and Gods high Magistrates here? and shall uncharitable slander
have for protection, the judgment seat? But this by the way. Now these things
that have been spoken against the slanderer, may and should be strong motives
to set us out with the slanderers sin. Where this may be further added, that to
hearken, or give the care to tale-bearers, is a thing unlawful, hurtful, and
shameful. Unlawful, because he that would be (here) the child of grace, and (
hereafter) an heir of glory, must receive no false report against his
neighbor. Psalm. 15.3. Unlawful (also) because it is no honest thing either
for men to deliver slanderous reports, one to another, or for the hearers to
receive them. Hurtful it is, as is evident by our Mother Eve, who giving both
ears to the Father of liars, speaking in the Serpent, by such credulity
overthrew her self, and her husband, and in him, the whole race of man.
Shameful it is, and of no good report: for, it brandeth those who favor the
slanderer with the mark of wicked men, Prou. 17.4, making them false as he is,
and liars like to him. Therefore, a cursed tongue and carnal ear are well met.
The former rubbeth where the latter itcheth, and the latter is chapman for that
which the former utters. Lastly, neither he that tells lies, nor he that
hearkeneth to him, can be good: for, if the tongue of the one be slanderous,
the ear of the other is graceless.

A reproof to those who drink in Use 2.
with greater thirst of hearing and more eagerly, a false and uncharitable tale
against their neighbor, then the foul conduit of the slanderer can deliver
it: and who, in true reports, regard altogether the matter, and not the good
manner of uttering them: neither abhorring in themselves, nor reproouing in
others the discovering of a secret, to the touch of their absent neighbor in
his name, when their complaint can no way edify. For, we Christians, should
follow after things that be of good report, Philip. 4.8. Solomon says: As the
North-winde dri^eth away the rain, so does the angry countenance, a
slandering tongue. Prouer. 25.23. His meaning is, that the countenance of a man
and woman in great place, should be set as the North-winde against the rain of
slander, and that their frowning brows should shut up, and silence all
clamorous lips. For, it is the ouer-good entertainment that the slanderous
tongue finds that cherishes it, and it is the stern countenance that
drives such guests away. But some love to clawe these hissing Serpents, till
they have spent their poison, and left their sting in the good name of those
who are simple in heart. Such dig a pit for the innocent, and fall into it
themselves. Therefore men and women in credit should, with no better will,
entertain these Devils in flesh, then they would the Devil in person, if they
could be aware of his coming.

Use 3.
Here (also) they are reproved, who proclaim their Neighbors secret faults to
the wide world: and who, because their speech is true, though their end, in
speaking, be evil and wicked, say, they are far from slander. For, what is
it to slander in a true report, but to speak against our Neighbor, and to
blaze his weakness at all times, and before all companies? The ordinary
defense of such, is, when they are reproved: I speak truly, and tell no lie;
and, I will never be ashamed of the truth. But a wise man will be ashamed to
speak the truth foolishly, when his words may do much harm and no good: and,
it is sin to speak slanderously (though truly) in a matter. Yea, a man may
more sin by speaking some truth with an ill mind, then when (through
infirmity) he shall speak an untruth, with a purpose to do good; the
Midwiues lie being more tolerable, Exodus 1, then Doegs intolerable true report.
Psalm. 53. That we may (therefore) keep the midway of charity in our
reports, and neither speak the truth foolishly, nor speak lewdly against it,
let us well observe these rules which follow. And first, let us make a covenant
with our mouth, not to give our tongue liberty to be busied overmuch about
other men's faults. For, he that speaks too often of other men's infirmities,
cannot, at all times, keep himself from speaking too-much of them, and from
slipping too far into them. Secondly, when we have a good calling, and just
cause to speak, let us speak discreetly in time and place, that good may come
of our speech, to the amending of him that is faulty, and to the bettering of
them that hear us. Thirdly, in good affection, and with good discretion, let
us so reprove another, that we forget not our selves to be faulty, and that it
is a brother that has offended. So shall we make him to confess, that that
which is then uttered and spoken, comes in tender bowels from us, and not
from wrath, or humor. Fourthly, what we would have others to do to us, let
us do to them. We would not (our selves) be reproved with bitterness, so let
us reprove others mildely: we would not have our own private infirmities
published, so let us conceal our brothers: we would not (our selves) be made a
Table talk, so let not our brother. Fifthly, to discourage the backe-biter, and
to defend the innocent; if the report that is made be of things doubtful, let
us admonish him who is the reporter, in charity, to interpret things to the
best; if of things true, when the fault is private, privately to reprove it;
when it is manifest and public, not to enforce it too-much, nor too busily, if
it be little; and if it be great, to consider if ^e had not great prouocations
to it. Thus doing, if the slandere^ be fir^, we shall be water to quench him.
Lastly, let us remember the Law that puts the slanderer to that same
punishment that the fault he spoke of had deserved, and the person, he accused,
should have suffered, if the thing had been true. For, he that wrongfully
accused another of theft, should have been dealt with as if he himself had
played the thief: He that falsely should say, another committed adultery,
should ( himself) have been punished as an Adulterer. For, what can be more
indifferent, then that he who prepares a pit for another, should fall
(himself) into it? and he that seeks to take away his neighbors name and
life by a lie, should (himself) loose his own credit and life for a lie?
Deuter. 19.19. So much for the quality of the offense, the object follows.

His Neighbor.
THe object of the Slanderers tongue is his Neighbor. And it aggrauateth his
sin, because it is against a neighbor, that is, a Christian, his nearest
neighbor. A Neighbor (properly) is he that dwells near us, or next unto
us, or in the same street. Commonly, by participation of Nature in the image
of God, all men are neighbors. By a figure and strictly, they are our
neighbors who are of one household of faith with us, in the love and profession
of the same Gospel. And, here he is called our neighbor, whatsoever he be,
with whom we have any dealings in our fellowship and trade of life. Luc.
10.36.37. He that slandereth such an one, and (consequently) any one, is
worthy to be punished; David says by death, his meaning is, if he offend unto
death. But some thing may be gathered from the word, which here the Prophets
uses, to the conviction of the Slanderer. For, whom will he slander? even his
neighbor, one who is nearest to him in society and common use of life: one
that dwells before him, or at the next door to him: Then, whom will he not
slander?

Doct.
The Doctrine from hence is: a slanderer is false to all men. So the Prouerb^
says, that speaks of the slanderer: Prou. 11.13. for, it makes him a geer
about with tales, and a discouerer of secrets; that is, one that will be as
ready to defame them whom he speaks unto, as whom he speaks against: for,
he trafiques altogether by exchange. He will not go empty, and if he
deliver any thing unto you, it shall be on condition to receive something from
you. As he tells you secrets, so he will blaze your secrets. And who can
trust him? Prou. 20.19.

The reasons.
The slanderer is true to Satan, who is false to mankind; and his work they
do, whose work they cannot do, and do well. Secondly, that that moves the
slanderer to relate other men's affairs to thee, cannot but induce him to
discover thine to others; which is want of love, and a desire that he has to
serve the Market of an itching ear. Thirdly, the slanderer is Satan's
Gunpowder, and if Satan put fire unto him, he cannot choose but take it. Iam.
3.6. But Satan will not fail to give fire where he is sure it will burn,
seeing he is a continual makebate between God and man, and man and man, and
a friend, and his nearest friend.

Uses.
Use. 1.
This shows how unnatural the sin of slander is, which makes a man cruel
against his own kind, vide: Man; and the nighest, in dwelling to him, his
Neighbor. I may add, the nearest of all, his Mothers Son. Psalm. 50.20. The
Lion rages not against his fellow- Lions, but makes his prey of beasts of
another kind. The venomous Serpent spetteth not his poison at worms of his
own shell, but at the enemies of his life. But a man teareth a man in pieces
with words of cruelty: Men at Man, the brother at his brother spetteth the
venom of a Dragons tongue, and destroys those by falsehood, whom he should
preserve by grace in his lips.

Use. 2.
An instruction, not to hang any thing upon the report of a deprauing tongue.
For, he that is false to one, will betray another. And, who will trust him
that is false to all? Slanderers are such. They will speak fair, and protest
as friends, but their sweet counsels are as an infusion of Wormwood, and their
delicacies more bitter then the bitterness of death. Therefore, when such
shall offer friendship to us, and the sweet bait of good will, Let not their
Balmes break our heads. Psalm. 141.4.5. Insteede of opening their mouths, let
us shut our own ears, and the doors of our lips against them, be they our
friends, or counselors, or yoake-fellowes: For, their commoning is not for
peace, and either they have already betrayed us, or are about to do it.
Surgeons heal when they inflict pain and cause smart: but flatterers, that
is, flatterers of us, and slanderers of their neighbor, kill, when they
pretend to please, and offer to delight. So much for the slanderers offense,
his punishment follows.

I will destroy.
THE punishment threatened to the slanderer, is destruction, or cutting off, if
the case so require: as Deuteronomy. 19.19. And where the Prophet thus minaceth the
slanderer, his meaning is, that he will prosecute him with all the extreamitie
he can show, though it be unto death if the quality of the offense deserve it.
And he will not so do only, when himself shall be slandered, or it shall be
his friend, or near kinsman who is slaundered; but if any Neighbor, or
Subject, kinsman, or other man, friend or not friend be so slandered, he will
cut off the slanderer.

Doct.
The point to be learned is; Gods Magistrates must indifferently administer
punishments and rewards. As men sin, so they must be punished, and as they do
well, so they must have praise for well doing. This the Lord commanded by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 25.2.3: Where he that deserved chastisement was to be beaten
according to his trespass: for, according to the quality of his offense; he
was to receive more, or fewer stripes. From the Throne proceeded lightnings and
thunders. Apoc. 4.5. So from earthly thrones should come lightnings, that is,
warnings; and thunders, that is, strokes and claps, and sometimes, and for some
faults, the bolt it self, which is present death. In Rome-heathen, the
Magistrates had carried before them a bundle of rods, and an Axe: the rods
for lesser faults, the Axe for greater. And this equity should be observed by
all those to whom is committed the power of life and death.

The reasons.
As in the last judgment, every one shall receive the things that he has done
in his body, according to that which he has done, good or evil. 2 Corinthians.
5.10: so in man's judgment, the quality must be considered of that good or
evil that shall be rewarded, or must be corrected by him. Secondly, as the
Lord judges according to right, Genesis 18: so ought they also, who are his
Ministers. Now, it is right that every one should bear his sin, that is,
have the punishment that it deserves, and that he who sows iniquity, should
reap the same. Ioh. 5.29. Thirdly, judgment is to be given in respect of
matter, without respect of persons, Deuter. 1.17. Magistrates must not further
the evil cause of a good man, nor hinder the good cause of an evil man.
Though he be a good man, if his cause be naught, they must judge it, and
though he be an evil man, if his cause be just, they must hear it. In a
stranger, they must consider justice, which is the friend; and in a friend,
proceed against wrong, which is the stranger.

Uses.
Use.
An admonition to Magistrates to be men of such courage in their judgments, and
of such experience in matters, that they may discern what is right, and
knowing what is just, no consideration mortal may draw them from it. But more
was spoken to this purpose (before) upon the first verse. So much for the first
kind of evil persons: the second follows.

Him that has a high look, and large heart, etc.
THe Prophet now speaks of a proud person, whom he describes by the sign, a
high look; and the thing signified, a large heart. For, pride (properly) is in
the heart, manifestly in the eyes and external behavior. The eyes, that is,
the eyes life up, are the windows out at which pride looks, and the heart
(the large heart, for, so it is in the own tongue) is that highly exalted
Chair of estate in which pride sits. So that proud persons have big
looks, and a large heart; or are large in heart; that is, aspire to great
matters, and swell with ouer-weenings. And though the heart be unsearchable,
yet it may be found and judged of by the pulse, and beating of it in a
disdainefull countenance, according to the Phisiognome of the holy Ghost in
this place. In the words themselves the Prophet shows what a proud person is,
and how he will proceed against him; he will not abide him: where he
immitateth the Highest, who resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. For the first, he
says that (for the most part) a proud heart may be seen in the Glass of a
proud countenance: at least, where there is a lofty countenance, there must
needs be a proud heart.

The doctrine here taught is: Doct. 1.
A big look, and a large heart, are inseparable M^tes: and where a haughty
face looks out at the window, there is a Iezebel (certainly) within doors, 2
King. 9 30. So Pro. 21.4. A haughty look, and a proud heart go hand in hand.
And Esa. 2.11. The high look of man, and the loftiness of men, are taken for
proud Man, by a figure of the sign for the thing signified. Also the Prophet
Esa, speaking of proud w^men, lays them open in diverse token^ of pride and
lightness: as that they ha^ stretched-^ut necks, wandering eyes, and made a
tinkling with their feet, Esa. 3.16. The like we read, Deuteronomy. 28.56. And so
now adays many of our coy women go tripping, and mince it as they go: which
proud gesture, in such, what is it but the evidence or blab of a proud heart?

The Reasons.
As the fruit does manifest what the tree is, Mat. 12.33. so the behavior
shows the man. An Adulterous heart has eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14.
and a Covetous heart is quickly displayed in a covetous tongue. Secondly, the
countenance and the outward parts are moved by the heart, and as the heart is
so go they. They that have proud hearts, walk proudly, and look big: and
they that have froward hearts, talk churlishly, and speak ill: and they that
have guile in their hearts, will have vanity in their mouths, and falsehood in
their right hand, Psalm. 144.8.

Uses.
A reproof to those who being reproved for their outward evil behavior,
Use. 1.
(the true copy of an evil heart) as, because they look big, have rolling
eyes in their head, filthy talk in their mouth, and put on pride in all their
apparel, use to say that their heart is as good as any man's, or as theirs
that reprove them. But is not the body the Lords as well as the soul^? and did
not he that made the soul, for his service, make the body for his glory? 1
Cor. 6.20. Why then should he not be served with both, who made both? Or, to
speak more to purpose; Does not the Lord bring to light that which is within,
by that which is without? and do not proud speeches, countenances, goings, and
apparel, signify a vain and proud heart? when men's actions are worldly, do
we not say that they have a worldly heart? and who, seeing streams of pride in
the clothes men wear, will not think that they flow from the wellhead that
boyleth in the heart? If we have humble souls, our eyes will be cast down,
as were the Publicans, Luke 18.13. or if we think other^ better then ourselves
(and it is our duty to be so minded, Romans 12.10.) we will strive to give them
honor, and not honor our selves by striving with them for the better hand.
Seeing (then) we lay forth our hearts thus in these bodily actions, who will
not say that our heart is as these are? and who will find fault with him that
shall say, This is naughty fruit, and therefore the tree is naught that bears
it?

Use 2.
Again, here we see what may be thought of Swaggerers and Ruffians, who look
big, and care for no man, are rude in behavior, and wicked in talk, having
no grace in them, nor outward thing to commend them. They think themselves to
be some body, and that all men should look after them: but they are abject
base persons, their glory is to their sha^e, Phil. 3.19. and their valor
(that which they call valor) is nothing but a kind of drunken rudeness. They
show that they have a vain heart, by so foolish behavior. I pray you, who did
swagger more then Ismael, whose hand was against every man? Genesis 16.12. but was
he for such fiercenes ever the better man: nay, says the Scripture, he was a
wild man; and what was his swaggering (then) but the effect and testimony of a
wild heart? And thus we have heard how a man may trace a proud person by his
high look. That which follows is the swelling heart, blown up by the wind
of conceit, and may therefore be compared to a pair of Bellows that having
gathered wind, begin to swell, and take a larger room. But that which is
called here a large heart, is called, Pr^. 16.5. pride of heart: and they that
are swayed by it, proud in heart. Such as have an habit of pride, and in whom
pride has dominion, such are said to have a large heart, or heart enlarged by
covetousness.

From whence we learn, Doct. 2.
that proud persons think all too little for themselves: so says the Lord by
Esa, (speaking of such) that they join house to house, and lay field to field,
till there be no place, that they may be placed by themselves in the midst of
the earth, Esa. 5.8. The meaning is, that they will have none to dwell by them,
that shall not hold of them; and that all others shall be Tennants, and no
Lords but they. Jeremy speaks of some, who build a wide house and large
chambers, Ier. 22.14. as if a little house could not hold them, nor a few
rooms contain them. If then we would avoid the ulcer of Covetousness, we must
abhor the itch of vainglory.

The Reasons.
A proud person is ever covetous of more, and never content with that he has:
for he cannot abide to be less then another; and he cannot be greater, but by
a desire of greatness. Secondly, a proud person never thinks what he has,
but always enuieth what another has: and from hence it is that pride stirs
up so much strife, Pro. 28.25. and that there is no peace in their Tabernacles,
that have a proud heart, Pro. 13.10.

Uses.
Use 1.
An instruction to abhor Pride as we would hate to be Extortioners, and
covetous: for the Wolf of Pride is hungry, and must be fed with supplies
from whomsoever: Also, Pride is haughty, and will not be satisfied with a
little. Then we must keep down our heart, if we would keep under the humor
of desire.

A reproof to those who keep no bank by humble affections, Use 2.
and therefore cannot but run over, as a Flood, by large covetousness. This is
evident in all those Tyrants, who, not content with their own territories
(because Pride has made them insatiable) have broken into other Princes
possessions, and taken the wide rooms of the earth by oppression, that there
might be one alone, and not a second, Eccl. 4.8. Such before the Flood, were
called Giants, Genesis 6.4. and after it, Hunters, as Nimrod, the mighty Hunter
before the Lord, Gen 10.9. These were Rangers, and kept not their pale as good
Princes do. The Prophets manner of proceeding against a proud person follows.

I cannot suffer.
DAVID (here) shows, not only that he would not, but that he could not
dispense with a proud person to have him about him. He might have contented
himself to have said he would not suffer such an one; but more plainly to
express his hatred of this high soaring sin, he says he could not. And
herein David is a worthy Magistrate in the image of God: for God could not
suffer proud persons to serve him in heaven, Jude 6. and David in his image,
cannot abide that such should live under him in earth. Therefore where he
says, I cannot suffer him; his meaning is, that he would not be persuaded by
any means to bear with such an one, or to be otherways affected then God is
toward proud ones.

Doct.
The Doctrine that I gather is; No proud person must be encouraged, but resisted
by a Christian Magistrate, in a Christian Commonwealth. Ismael was a proud
Scorner; therefore God commanded Abraham, and Abraham at Gods commandment
cast him out, Gen^ 21.9.12.14. Moses, when he saw a proud Egyptian smiting his
brother, a poor Hebrew, as Gods High Marshall, presently slew him, Exodus
2.11.12. Solomon says that humility goes before glory; as much as if Solomon
had sayde^ They whom Magistrates should prefer, and good men set by, must be
humble. But Haman, that was lift up by pride to so great cruelty against
Mordecai, and so many innocent Jews, came with much shame to his end: for God
made the King that loved him, his Officer to execute him upon his own
Gallows, Hest. 7.

The Reasons.
Gods Magistrates must be affected as God is, whose Magistrates they are: they
must love where he loves, and be enemies where he is enemy. Now, God
resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. or, sets his host in array, and orders his
Army against him: and therefore they must do so to. Secondly, the proud rob
God of his glory; and shall the spoylers of God be spared? Thirdly, the proud
are fools, and proud persons sinful fools, such as must inherit destruction,
Pro. 3.35. Now if destruction be their inheritance from the Lord, they sin
that keep them from it. But not only Magistrates that may punish pride, are
here provoked to their duties; but they who having the charge of others in a
private Cure, may restrain it, are taught also, and must learn, though not to
punish it as Magistrates, yet not to bear with it as fools.

Uses.
Use. 1.
A reproof to those in authority, who countenance Swaggerers, rude in
carriage, and proud in heart: nay, Papists, and such proud ones as claim
heaven by their works: for he that must not suffer a proud person, how shall
he abide a Papist, that thinks his works worthy to stand before the Son
of God? David (I persuade my self) if he were now living, would not bear with
him, who so sharply) threatens a high look, and large heart. Here (also)
those foolish Parents and Husbands are reproved, who are so far from not
suffering pride, or a proud person in their children and wives, that they
pranke them in it, by offering the means in cu^ious apparel and new
fashions, that rather blow up then keep down the swelling of a vain heart.

Use. 2.
An admonition to avoid pride, as we would not have good men to avoid us, and
good Magistrates not to abide us: nay, if we would not have God for our
enemie^ let us not have pride for our friend. Let us rather use all cooling
remedies for the inflammation of so windy a stomach. And let us (if God have
graced us with good things) bewail the evil things that are in us in greater
measure. Neither let his blessings make us proud, and let our wants humble us.
Let us consider that we have nothing but what we have received. 1 Cor. 4.7.
and shall a Beggar, that lives of the Almes-basket, be proud of the meat that
is given him? Let us not conceit of our selves above that which is in us, nor
have our selves in more admiration then is cause. Finally, let us take heed of
the flattering prayser: for what needle creature, pinched with want, will be
made to believe that he swimmeth in plenty? and that he were a liberal
Housekeeper that has not wherewith to keep himself? So much for the
Prophets affection toward evil doers: his good affections to those that do
well, follow.

Verse. 6.
Mine eyes shall be to the Faithful of the land, etc.
THe Prophet in this verse shows what kind of persons he will make special
choice of, to use in his government, and to have in his service. And they be
the faithful of the Land; not the great men, but the good men of the Kingdom.
And that we may know what he means by faithful men, he (therefore)
adds; they that walk in the perfect way; to wit, of the word, as we heard
before out of the second verse. Not that fulfill the perfect way and sin not;
for there are none such, Pro. 20.9. 1 Job. 1.8. Eccles. 7.22. but that walk in
it, though with slippes. So the Scriptures call those upright; that is,
faithful men, not who are altogether free from sin, and endued with
righteousness, but that are void of hypocrisy, and fraught with truth, Luke
1.6. 2 Chronicles. 15.17. compared with Chapter. 16.2.3.10, 12. Two things (then)
are propounded in this verse: As how the Prophet will choose the Servants of
his house, and Ministers of the State; and how he will use them being chosen.
For the manner of choosing them, he says, his eyes shall be toward them,
either to hearken after them, or to give grace unto them. And for his kind
manner of using them, it is expressed where he says that they shall dwell
with him; to wit, in the house, and that they shall serve him in the affairs
of the Kingdom. In the manner of his choice, he promises to give diligence,
and to use care for the having of good Servants in the Court and Commonwealth:
for he says, in effect, that he will seek them, and enquire after them, as
such Jewels are worthy, and employ his eyes over the whole Land, till he find
them.

Now, from so good an example in a King, either already placed, or shortly to
be placed, great Magistrates and good Masters may learn how to get good
Officers near them, Doct. 1.
and to have good Servants about them. They must choose them with wisdom and
good discretion, and not take the next at hand: and though they would hide
themselves among the stuff, as did Saul, they must seek them, and from thence
fetch them, 1 Samuel 10.22.23. Abraham made a good choice, and had good Servants,
Genesis 14.14. and 24.12.13.14.33.34. And it could never have been said of
Cornelius, that he feared God, with all his house, Act. 10.2. if he had not
regarded what manner Servants and kind of people he had entertained in his
house. And did not David, when he gave a charge to Solomon his son,
concerning certain evil Servants, to proceed against them, 1 King. 2.5.8.
give a contrary charge concerning good Men, and good Servants, to make much of
them? to wage them? to show kindness unto them? verse. 7. And did not Rehoboam
loose as much by evil Counselors, 1 King. 12.9.10. 14. as ever King gat by
good?

The Reasons.
They that seek shall find: it is spoken of our Christian-seeking by prayer,
and Christian diligence in good things, Mat. 7.7. So they who choose good
Servants with wisdom, and use them with consci^nce, shall have them. But they
must use diligence to get such; and having them, have care to use them well.
Secondly, a good man will make choice of his company which he uses seldom;
and shall he be careless of the Family which he must use daily? Thirdly, he
that hopes for benefit by his Orchyard, will not run to every hedge to fet
Grafts from it, but will provide himself of the best Grafts and Sciences to
make Trees of them, and to plant them in his Orchyard: Will a man care thus for
his Orchyard, what good Plants he does set in it? and in the planting of his
Family, will he be careless what Servants and Officers he does bring into
it? If such complain of untrusty Servants and evil Ministers, whom can they
blame but themselves? for do men gather Grapes of Thorns? Mat. 7.16. and can
we from a wild hedge of unruly people fet the Graffes and Sciences of good
Officers and good Servants in a Family? or should we not set them from the
Trees of righteousness in well governed houses? He that sets Thorns, and
Briars, and Brambles in his ground, must not wonder if it bear Hips, and
Hawes, and Sloes: and is it marvel that they who plant their houses with
unfaithful people; should have unfaithful Servants? and who care not to
choose the good, should light upon the bad?

Uses.
Use. 1.
A reproof to those Masters that have no regard of grace and Religion in the
Servants which they receive into covenant but inquire only what wages they
will take, and what work they can do; where, if they can do sufficient
work, and will take reasonable wages, they seek no farther: be they Papists,
Atheists, Drunkards, abominable Swearers and Swaggerers, the worst in a
Country, they will receive them: though they be unfaithful to God, if they
will be faithful to them (which they shall seldom see;) and though they walk
ill, if they work well, they will sooner put Christ away, then such. Here
(also) those great Men are reproved, who take so little care to provide
themselves of good followers: for though they be good themselves, yet if they
whom they trust in matters, be not good, or if they be not trusty bearers,
whom they send abroad as Messengers of their good edge to many; their
goodness is but to themselves, and they to whom they wish it, are never the
better for it. If then ( Christian Lord) you would have your credit and true
honor communicated, you must see that they be faithful, whom you put in place
about you. For, evil officers about great persons, as Iuie, clasping to the
Tree about which it grows, eat out the heart of their Honor, and discredit
them with the people, of whom they should be honored. And, though their
cisternes were full of honorable courtesies, able to refresh a multitude of
weary souls, yet should but a few drink of their fountains, the passages
being stopped with earth, or with the corrupt minds of men, as vile as earth.
Therefore, as you love your honor, when you find such Worms and Cankers of
true Nobility about you, abandon them.

But, Use. 2.
must godly Governors be so careful to choose religious persons, whom they
must admit to service and places about them? then it is their duty to call
upon those whom they keep in their service, for duties of religion, and the
service of God. The law is plain in this, Exodus 20.10; where it is required,
not only that the Masters themselves, but that the Masters and their Servants
should enter together into the house of God to keep his Sabbaths, and to do
him service in the face of the assembly. And it is great reason that men should
be as careful of Gods work, as they are of their own work: and, if they
will not keep one that is not true unto them, no reason that they should be
Masters of one that is unfaithful to God. The Queen of the South, she and her
servants came together to Solomon, to hear his wisdom. 1 King. 10.1.2. How
(then) will it he answered, if Masters in Christian Israel shall refuse to
bring, not from the furthest parts of the earth, but from their houses at hand,
not to Solomon, whose wisdom was mortal and limited, but to the true
Solomon, Jesus Christ, in whom is all wisdom, and treasures of knowledge
without measure. Colos. 2.3. and not Heathen Servants, but Christians, bound in
like bonds as their Masters are of promise in their baptism, to forsake the
Devil and all his works: I say, if such Masters shall refuse to bring (coming
themselves) such Servants to such a Solomon to be taught of him, what will they
answer to him, who has bought their souls as dear as theirs, when in wrath
he shall bring them to judgment, and in that great judgment make them to
answer, not for themselves only, but for all these, and for the poorest
Kitchen-boy, among those whom they shall wilfully suffer to perish, by not
caring to bring him, or to make him come to the waters of life, drawn out of
the Wells of salvation, that he may live for ever? Many complain of bad
Servants. But do they, who make the complaint, consider that the greatest
fault is in themselves, as because their choice was naught, and their
government as bad after they had chosen. You have taken here a briar, and
there a bramble, and thorn, and set them in your Orchyard, and do you
complain of a bad Orchyard, and that you have neither Apples, nor Pears, nor
Plummes as others have? So, you would have a good family, when your care is not
to graft it with good Servants? For, have you cared to make your Servants, the
Servants of God, that they might be good Servants to you? Have you set them
about Gods work, on his day, as you are careful to set them about your own
work on other days? Abraham did so, and had good Servants, and they that
would have good Servants as Abraham had, must be good Masters, such as Abraham
was.

Now the persons whom the Prophet would make choice of, to be in his Court, and
to serve in the Kingdom, are called the faithful of the Land. And, that we
may (further) know what these are, he calls them such as walk in the perfect
way, that is, as walk in the way of Gods word, with purpose of heart, though
imperfectly. He says not, they that are perfect in the way, but they that
walk in the perfect way, though (sometimes) they may trip as they go, yea
stumble and fall. From whence it is plain, that there is no state of
perfection here.

Doct. 2.
But the point and thing that I observe is: they that are to be employed in a
public State or private house, must be men of conscience and religion, fearing
God. Because Princes and great persons cannot do all themselves, but must have
some to deal for them, and under them; therefore Iethro his counsel to Moses,
was to provide some among all the people, whom he might appoint to be Rulers
over thousands, rulers over hundreds, rulers over fifties, and rulers over
tennes; by whose eyes he might see, by whose ears he might hear, and by whose
hands he might minister in smaller causes. But what kind of persons must these
be? they must be men of courage, fearing God, Exodus 18.21. that is, men of
conscience, having religion, and not Papists in affection, or Atheists in life.
Josiah was Gods King; God looked toward him: and he was a most religious and
zealous King. He feared God betimes, and twice in his time, reformed religion,
the first reformation, not being perfect enough, 2 Chronicles. 34.3.4.8. The King
must not be a child: Eccles. 10.16; that is, they must not stand in need of a
Ruler that should rule others, nor be ignorant of GOD, that should make others
to know him. For, a fit Ruler is the child of Nobility, that is, of virtue;
and they that will rule fitly, must be truly noble, that is, virtuous, verse.
17. Also, the pleasure of a King is toward a wise servant. Prou. 14.35. Then,
they that serve must be wise, and whom we take into ser- godly. For, when the
unworthy are put in authority, and the worthy are kept out; what is it but
to set folly in great excellency, and the rich, that is, such as are truly
rich and sufficiently wise, in a low place? Eccles. 10.6.

The reasons.
Every officer, though never so mean in place, and low in degree, ought to
punish wickedness and reward virtue, that is, ought (to his power) to reward
it. But, who will suppress sin in others, who favors it in himself? and
uphold godliness in the life of another, who abhorres it in his own?
Secondly, it is a joy to the people when the righteous are in authority, as
they (contrarily) lament when the wicked bear rule. Prou. 29.2. Thirdly,
though every officer have not a Throne to sit in, yet the lowest
ruling-officer, is Gods officer, or the Kings officer in Gods place; and
therefore ought to carry Gods image, and to resemble Gods Majesty; which they
cannot do who are not zealous of true religion, and friendly to such as fear
him. Besides, when Magistrates become great offenders, they do (what lies in
them) to make others believe that the Almighty is so, Fourthly, they who
truly fear God, will honor those that God has set over them, and be
faithful in the things which their Masters commit unto them, as in the
examples of Jacob and Joseph. Genesis 29.30. and 39. Chapters. For, all obedience
and faithfulness flows from the first Table, and has his Spring head there.
Lastly, as a good servant opens many doors to God, blessing: so be that opens
his door to an evil servant, and when he should send him out of his house,
makes much of him in his house, though a swearer, drinker, liar, swaggerer,
etc. let him know that the curse of God will follow that house, and the
unfaithfulness of Servants plague that housekeeper.

Uses.
Use. 1.
A terror to irreligious persons. For, if they would serve, none may receive
them, and if they desire to be in office, none may employ them. None may open
his doors to a wicked servant, who would not open them to his hinderance and
the curse of God. And, to set up the ungodly, is to pull down the godly, which
none may do. Besides, every good Man is bound to cast off a profane wretch
as a sorry curre-dogge; and who (that is professedly impious) can look for
countenance, or hope to get service in a well ordered State?

Use. 2.
An instruction to Nobility, to add to their great parentage and worldly
birth, the grace of faithfulness and fear of God, that they may be fit for
great employments. For, if Noblemen be not wise, Princes must make wise men,
Noble. Though a man be never so worthy by birth, if he be not so by grace,
he does forfait, in the sight of God and account of all prudent Monarchs, all
his other estimation that springs out of the earth, and stands only upon
the clay-feete of pedigree and ancestors. Dan. 2.33. Therefore, true Nobility
(Christian Lord) must not dwell solitary, but combine it self in fellowship
with true and sincere religion. The girdle of it must be faithfulness, and it
must have more then that which is fet from the Golgotha of corruption. It must
honor God, that it may be honored of God with everlasting honor. It must
walk in the perfect way of truth and grace, that it may have grace and favor
with God and man. And it must submit to the Gospel, that good men may submit
to it, and good Princes may employ it.

An admonition to all those who are publicly used in the business of justice,
Use. 3.
to be men of religion and conscience, that Gods seat be not made a seat, or
rather grave of wickedness; and their Sovereigns trust, nay oath, (left in
their hand) a strong fore-horse to corruption, being made vile by abuse, and
intolerable by executing no judgment in the gate. But this has bin spoken of.

A like admonition to Servants to join the service of God with their Masters
service, that their labors may prosper, and their hand may not be empty in
the house. For, much good comes in by a godly Servant, as (on the contrary)
much goes out at the backe-gate of one that is ungodly and profane, Covetous
Masters, who only mind their worldly advantage, which they seek to make
fertile with their Servants blood, count it no gain but loss, that their
Servants so much fear God, and so desire to do him reverence upon his
Sabbaths. But Christian Masters should enquire after such only, and receive
them into wages; couenanting with them at their admission, that they do Gods
work, and in the Lord, their work. That they serve GOD, if they will serve
them, and be religious in Gods house, if they look to have countenance in
theirs. And for those who think religion an enemy to lawful gain, let them
know that all their increase, gotten with the breach or neglect of that gain
which is according to godliness, cannot be called the Lords increase, but our
own getting, or his gift who said to Christ; All these will I give thee, if
thou will fall down and worship me. Matthew. 4.9. What lost Obed-Edom by making
his house the Tabernacle of the Lord's Ark? 2 Samuel 6.12. His house fared much
better for receiving so honorable a stranger into it. I say further (that
their condemnation may be just, who think Religion to be an enemy to godly
gain) that true Religion is that only that makes a Servant to make
conscience of his Masters thrift, and that the readiest way to thrive indeed,
is to get and keep good, that is, religious Servants. And, to put them out of
doubt that to have, and to make much of religious Servants, is not any loss,
but the comfortablest Christian advantage that may be, let them but remember
how the Lord blessed the houses of Laban the Aramite, and Potiphar the
Egiptian, for Jacob and Joseph's sakes. Genesis 30.30. and 39.3: So much for the
Prophets choice of good men and faithful, his manner of using them, follows.

That they may dwell with me, and serve me.
THE Prophet having showed what choice he would make of his public officers
and private servants, here shows how he would favor them, and how much he
would make of them when they were chosen. He had promised to approve of, and
to advance, not simply the honorable, but the faithful, and the honorable,
not for their noble birth, but for virtue, and (therefore) not profane Nobles,
nor the sons of nobles, that be fools, but the wise in heart, and godly in
conversation: here he promises that such shall dwell with him in his Court,
and attend upon him in his counsels of state. He that walks in the perfect
way, says the Prophet; that is, who walks in righteousness, and not
crookedly in his sins, he, he, (for he doubleth the speech) as if he should
say, he, and no other, shall be my servant, or be put in office and place by
me. This is the Prophets meaning, where, that which moved him to stand thus
affected to men of good conscience, and holy conversation, was the favor that
God bears to such, and that he might love where the Lord had loved first.
These are greatly beloved of God^ and bring his letters of commendation in
their behalf, requiring godly Princes and al Christian Magistrates and
Masters, as they favor him, to care for them, and (therefore) he promises to
settle his affections where God had settled his, and to respect where he has
had respect.

From whence this doctrine and Note arises, Doct.
that we must set our hearts upon those that walk in the truth, and are
faithful: that is, we must cherish the good, and favor the righteous. The
Good will that we bear to God, we must show by dealing well with those that
be his, Psalm. 16.3. For, it is a mark of those that shall be saved, that they
honor those that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. that is, they defend and prefer
those that be good, as they ought to oppose unto, and put down the unrighteous.
Then, as we must not flatter the wicked for their wealth, so we must not
despise the godly because they are poor. Solomon says, the favor of a King
is toward a wise servant, Prou. 14.35. the meaning is, a Magistrate has not a
better seal in his bosom then this, that he loves the wise God in a wise
hearted Christian, defends him against the oppositions of the wicked, is a wall
unto him, and a recompense, and in his good race gives him, both at his
setting forth, and while he strives lawfully, his due applause and garland of
praise. In the 1 Ioh. 3.14. it is made a sign of our translation from death to
life, that we love the brethren, that is, the godly, delighting in them, and
favoring them.

The Reasons.
We must honor those whom God honors, and love where he loves: but his
eyes are upon those that fear him, and he loves the righteous, Psalm. 34.15.
Such (therefore) must we love: also, virtue makes honorable, not the gold
ring, Iam. 2.2. and honor is the adiunct of verine, not birth nor external
pomp, wanting virtue. Secondly, he that loves him that begat, must needs
love him that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.1. that is, he that loves God in
his being, will love man in his image. He that loves the Father will love that
Child who is most like unto him, and he that regards the Master, will
receive the meanest whom he shall send for the Masters sake. How (then) can
we love God, and hate the good that are so like him? or reverence Gods
majesty, and despise his image? and honor our Master when we revile his
servants? Thirdly, that which we owe to God in these debts of outward favor,
delight, bounty, and love, we must pay to him in the hand of his Saints, and
such as excel in goodness, Psalm. 16.2.3. and, what we do to the least of
these, we do it to him, Mat. 25.40. would thou (then) do any thing for
God? nay, would thou do much for God? do that much for a good man.
Would thou take Christ part? then take part with a Christian: or, would
thou receive Christ? then reject not a Christian. Fourthly, the World, that is,
the company of them who are not Citizens of Heaven, love those who are of the
World, John 15.19. therefore (contrarily) they who are not of the world, will
love those whom the world hates.

Uses.
Use 1.
An instruction to delight in goodness, and to love righteousness: so will we
love and delight in the owners of these things, that is, we will love their
names and rejoice in their persons. For, wherefore do we love a worldling,
but because we are in our disposition, worldlings? and why do men company
with drunkards, but because they be affected as drunkards are, and love as
drunkards do? And so, if we were truly good, we could not be familiar with
an evil person, and we would rejoice in the Communion of Saints: if we
loved virtue, we would single our selves to those that love to do well; at
least, we would not in our daily familiarity, espouse our selves to those
who have another husband then Christ, and other dowers that they trust to then
the dower of Heaven. If we rejoiced in goodness, would we delight to be
where we shall hear little goodness, and much evil? would a man, when his
provision is spent, go where is no market, and not where he may help
himself with variety of Markets? do we not seek rich friends because we
need them, and they can help us? and shall we spend our time in the company
of beggarly Christians that cannot help us to God, nor any way furnish us for
heaven?

A reproof to those who grace Swaggerers, Use 2.
and disgrace the simple because they cannot swagger, nor creep into favor by
flattery, and sycophancie, and such courses. We may not honor such with our
company, and shall we speak good of evil, to honor them! Esa. 5.20. As
far as we believe the Communion of Saints, so far we should separate from
them, else our practice is against our faith: and, shall we cast in our lots
with them for respects in flesh, and praise them in their sins? Is it any
credit to grace a thief and robber? and, what more credit; nay, what greater
discredit and shame for a Christian to take pleasure in, and to grace tha^
fellowship that robs God of his honor, and would rob a child of God of
his salvation? Then, as sin has made them vile to the Church and odi^^s to
God: so every good man, who is a member of the true Church, and servant of the
living GOD, should think of them and use them. But, as the image in Daniel had
the head of gold, when the feet were iron and clay, Daniel 2.32.33. so the
golden society of the Saints that should, as the head of fine gold, be and
live without the mixture of the ungodly, is made in many places, a very Idol,
strangely compounded: for, the head is gold, the rest are clay and iron. They
that can make Idols of us in our vein^, and will flatter us in our sins,
shall (though they be never so unworthy otherwise) be made our companions and
dearest lovers and friends. And, if there be a Cedar in the Town in which we
dwell, though a Cedar but in worldly stature, and in goodness a bramble, we
rather combine in society with that pricking briar, then with those meek ones
that fear the Lord, and do reverence to his Name. The reason is, the smoke
of pride loves to be climbing, till it vanish by a high mind, that goes
before the fall, Proverb. 16.18. And, this is it that makes our proud
Christians to look with such disdain upon those that are of low degree,
though their virtues deserve their best countenance; where yet they honor the
apparel and external habit of persons in high place, though their vices
deserve contempt, and their names no good report. Indeed, so long as we be in
the world, we shall not chose, but sometimes must keep some kind of company
with such, yet we may choose to grace them, and to take pleasure in them, and
though we cannot in body, yet we should always in affection separate from
them.

A terror (therefore) to the wicked, Use 3.
who (though they flourish in the world) yet they wither and grow vile in the
estimation of every good man. Gods children must hold them base, though the
worlds children think them precious. For the world loves them, but with the
enmity of God. People salute them, but with disdain, and, at feasts they have
the chief room, but no place in heaven.

A comfort to those who lie open to all contempt for their profession. Use 4.
For the world may despise them, but good men are bound to honor them. The
wicked may vnhouse them, but they shall dwell in the hearts of Gods children.
Vile persons may evil entreat them, but good Magistrates will save them from
wrong, and punish those that wrong them. Scorners may mock so mean a type of
honor in those who are content to be f^oles for Christ, but David, and such as
David is, will praise them as wise, and use them as companions^ Other wicked
persons protested against, follow.

Ver. 7.
There shall no dissembling person dwell, etc.
THE persons against which the Prophet makes a further promise to proceed, are
Dissemblers and Liars, and their qualities, deceit, and lying. Before, he
said that he would entertain faithful persons, and persons that walk in the
perfect way, or way of truth: here he promises to put from him and from all
affairs under him^ those who practice deceit, and tell lies. For the first of
the two, which is a diss^mbler, and the property in him, which is
dissimulation; by a dissembling person, we must understand a deceiuer and
hypocrite in word and deed, and by dissimulation, falsehood and guile in both.
The Scripture calls it the guile of heart, or, the sin of a double heart,
contrary to integrity and faithfulness, fruits of a simple heart, and
properties of plain men, simple-hearted. Now the Prophet says that no such
persons, and that no persons of such parts shall dwell in house with him: his
meaning is, that so far as he could know them, they should not tarry in his
service, nor continue servants in his house: which he speaks as Master in a
Family, and as chief Magistrate in a kingdom. From whence the point taught,
is; that all Governors should have an eye unto, and proceed against all
dissemblers and dissimulation publicly, and in their private government.
Saul, an hypocrite had an eye on David, 1 Samuel 18.9. where he needed not, but
where is need, every David should have an eye of suspicion on all hypocrites,
such as Saul was, in a Country or great house. Elisha had a dissembling and
bribing servant; a Gehazi who would run after a reward, where his Master
would take none: but his eye went with him, and he watched his hypocrisy
when he went from him, 2 Kin. 5.26. Shebna was a dissembler, and Chancellor
to Hezekiah: therefore, when the King sent him to the parle with Rabshakeh,
he sent two good men with him to vvatch him, even Eliakim the steward of his
house, and Ioab the Recorder. For, Hezekiah, for his hypocrisy and ill deser^,
had lately, at the commandment of the Lord, taken one great place from him,
and given it to his fellow, that was better then he, though he durst not
disrobe him all together, and leave him without all place, le^t his ambition
mounted before upon the wings of two so great honors in the kingdom, should,
furthered also with too great coffeehouse (if both his w^^gs had been cut)
have been set upon revenge and disloialtie: therefore, he would put no great
trust in him, but sent him under guard: and (as it were) with two
Superintendents to the King of Ashurs Lieutenant, then before the wall, to
watch him that he might not be lift up to do^ evil ^sa. 36.11.22.
.

And thus Eliakim and Ioab, two great men were sent with him to be bridles to
his ambition, that he might not take head against his Master. There was little
confidence to be put in Ioab: David durst not trust him, and could never master
him, and therefore gives a great charge to Solomon his son to look unto
him, 1 King. 2.5. Shim^^ (also) dissembled and could co^nterfait: that David
knew; and therefore gave a like charge to his son concerning him, ver. 9.
Ananias, that hypocrite, and Saphirae his Wife as very an hypocrite (both of
them great dissemblers and liars to GOD) were stricken by the hand of God, in
the Ministry of Peter. Peter could not abide them in his sight, and they fell
down dead at his feet, Act. 5.5.10.

The Reasons.
First, dissembling takes away the use of speech, which should be the Key to
the mind to open it. For, the use of speech is to express the meaning of the
heart, or to be the hearts I^terpreter. But the dissembler corrupts this use
of speech and end of talk by a deceitful tongue; nay, ouer-turneth all humane
society and dealings between man and man, by uttering with the tongue what
was never conceived by the heart. And is he to be suffered among men who
labors to destroy the fellowship of men? Secondly, the dissembler is not
only false in tongue but in deed: and dissimulation, as it makes a divorce
between the tongue and the mind, so does it between the tongue and the hand;
and so he that is a dissembler, is false tongued, and left handed. But, he that
is such shall be known, that is, made an example, that he may be known. Prou.
10.9. And, who shall make this example of him, but Magistrates, and such as are
in authority? Thirdly, a dissembler is like a covered pi^ in the fellowship of
men: the simple fall into it. For, having crept into the service or favor of
persons of countenance by flattery, and keeping in by falsehood; what is he not
able to do against the innocent by a smooth and glosing tongue? How privily
will he accuse him? and what protestations will he make to be believed
against him? Such a tongue, as a dangerous rock, hidden under a calm Sea, is
to be found in the mouth of the dissembler. One flattering word, in the mouth
of such, can do more harm in an hour, then a good Preacher shall be able to
do good in many Months. And should not good Governors look unto such, least
they be made by them, a sharp sword to the righteous, and a strong buckler to
flatterers. Fourthly, a deceitful person (such as Achan) may bring upon a
family, yea, whole Province, great wrath and destruction. Ios. 7.5.12. And
lastly, it well becomes a great house to have all the servants of the same,
suitable, as in Lineries, so in goodness. For, as it is evil in nature to
compound fire and water, and hurtful in policy to nourish peace and war,
and impious in Religion to bear with two Religions: so is it dangerous in a
house to keep faithful persons in it, and dissemblers.

Uses.
Here (then) we see what an odious sin the sin of dissembling is, Use. 1.
seeing that good Governors are bound so (as has been showed) to have an eye
unto it, and to proc^ede against it. The contrary to it is plainness and
Christian simplicity, which should be as precious to us, as the other is vile
to God. But where are the plaine-hearted Jacobs, and simple-hearted Nathaniels
of elder times: Is not simplicity called folly, and are not simple-men counted
fools? nay, is not simplicity so much hated, that the name it self is had in
reproach? and to be a simple man and a foole^ are they not now, in our dialect
and language, synonima, that is, names of one thing and signification? Is not
truth fallen in the streets? And does not he who refraineth from evil, make
himself a prey? Esa. 59.14^15. Our plain Fathers, who loved faithfulness
more then wealth knew not what this meant: He that cannot dissemble, cannot
live; and their word would be taken, where our bond will not. Therefore,
that which should be odious, is now precious, and which should be hated and
had in reproach, is now commended, and made of. So contrary is this age of
our^ to the days of our plain Fathers. And here, the Papists figure of
aequiuocation in Oaths, half in the lips, half in the heart and
conscience, is argued of irreligious perjury, and odious opposition to
Christian plainness. Which is a protestation with a mental reservation in a
thousand windings and turnings, all conceived in the mind, and no way
expressed in the speech of him that protests or makes faith. Which (yet)
they with the faces of Sodom and Gomorrha, defend to be lawful and godly in
Catholics when they come to answer before Protestant Judges.

But, Use. 2.
should dissemblers be watched over by good Governors? then good Governors
must watch over dissimulation in themselves. They must take heed of dissembling
persons, and that they (themselves) be no dissemblers. They must not endure nor
countenance a bribing Servant, nor (themselves) love gifts. They must not bear
with a deceitful person, nor lay wait (themselves) as he that sets snares.
They must not cherish those that overthrow the right of the poor, nor
(themselves) make pittes to catch men. Ier. 5.26. They must punish others for
lying, and (themselves) be no liars. They must teach others, and he that will
teach another, must teach himself. Romans 2.21.

Use. 3.
An admonition to Governors to be diligent inquirers into the conditions and
nature of the people, whom they keep in service, or put in office under them.
For, among some that be good, there may be such as will seem and are not. Such
as we read of Jude 4. who are said to have crept in, or to have entered, not
boldly, but by stealth. Such are the Popes Factors among us, who (as Serpents
sent from Rome, or some of Romes Schools) for want of the diligence, or by
reason of the negligence of the householders of Counties and Corporations, have
gotten into some of the fairest Gardens of our Land, and there, having
prevailed against Eve the woman, have by her prevailed also against Adam the
Man, turning both Man and Woman from GOD to Popery. Genesis 3.1.5.6. 2 Timothy 3.6.
Matthew. 23.15. Also, Governors must, and the good will be awake in the causes
that come before them. For, sometimes, as the woman of Tekoah, who was (her
self) subtle, and instructed by subtle Ioab, to put on mourning apparel, and
a mourning behavior, spoke unto the King, and falling down before him, and
doing obeisance to him, said, Help, O King: 2 Samuel 14.4.5. So some subtle man
or woman, taught, as by some deceiving Ioab, to put on mourning apparel and a
sad countenance, may come unto them, and doing low obeysa^ce, may cry unto
them, and say with a pitiful, but lying tongue: Help my good Lord, help,
good your Honors, or as she; Help my Lord, O King. Sometimes (as we heard) a
treacherous Ziba will not fear to accuse the innocent unto them, with a gift
in the hand: 2 Samuel 16.1.2.3: therefore it stands them in hand to observe
wisely, and to hear indifferently and justly the truth of those cries, which
are many times (causelessly) raised, and with false tears. Again, in swearing
in a matter, many will have a fallacy in their Oath: and swear with a double
heart: These and such like shifts of faithless wretches, cannot be discerned,
but by having a watchful eye over matters in judgment. Therefore necessary it
is that they should not sleep in causes that would turn away, or avoid the
edge of dissimulation or dissemblers in them, which David protested to do, and
which all careful Governors will do.

Use 4.
A reproof to those who will keep in their house, or in places under them
Dissemblers, and wretched men, because they be their Kinsmen or Friends sons,
or an old Servant, or Servant that they may not spare, and who cannot live if
they put him from them, though otherways he be a common Drunkard,
Whore-monger, Swearer, profane person, and what not?

In the mean while what is become of our Saviors admonition; If thy right
hand offend thee, or cause thee to offend, rather cut it off, then suffer it to
be a continual offense unto thee, Mat. 5.30. Or, If thy right eye offend thee,
rather pluck it out, then suffer it still to be an hinderance and scandal unto
thee. Surely, nothing can be, for situation, more dear unto us, or, for use,
necessary, then our right eye, or that other member, our right hand; yet should
we rather pull out the one, and cut off the other, then suffer them to offend
us to damnation. And shall they, who are farther off, dwell in our house,
though grimed with most black vices, though loathsome to God, and hurtful to
our selves, and though in bad nature and condition so lewd that hell has
better (save that they in hell cannot repent, these may) because of kindred,
and friendship, and service, and things that they can do about us? Shall they
take heart in a great persons livery, as by a protection, to do evil, who do
so much evil, and take such boldness to offend daily, because they doubt not to
be borne out by the credit of their great Master in any disorder? I speak not
this with any suspicion of you ( The Lord Zouch then Lord President.
my LORD) in place: for I can testify truly before the Lord, that your Honor
has great care to purge both your own Family, and the whole Province from
such loathsome spots. In your own private charge (be it spoken to Gods glory,
and your true justification, against all tongues, specially such as oppose unto
quick, but necessary and sober government) you have given, and still give good
proof of a good mind and will in you, to bring your whole charge to the
discipline of the Gospel in things appertayning to salvation, when time shall
serve: for you will keep none in your house, that has not, at least who
pretends not to have a care to serve God and your Honor in the way of
Religion and obedience to laws: which I speak not to give titles, (fearing my
Makers reproof if I should so do) but to stir you up farther, and the grace
in you, to continue as you have begun (as I doubt not but you will) and to
provoke others by so fair a precedent, to begin and continue as you have done,
having in your worthy self, so clear a Pillar of fire to go before them. So
much for that which the Prophet speaks against dissemblers: that which is
spoken against those who tell lies, follows.

He that tells Lies shall not remain, etc.
THe second sort of Offenders are Tellers of Lies, or common Liars: persons so
deceitful and false that one cannot trust them. Such he promises to put out
of his house, and to throw out of the Kingdom. Before he spoke of the sin
of Slander, which is by the tongue, verse. 5. and of dissembling, which
requires the tongue: Now he speaks of Lying, or of telling of Lies, which
is a work of the tongue, and does less or more increase, as the tongue is
better or worse directed.

From whence the point to be learned is: Doct. 1.
As the tongue is governed well or ill, so wickedness breaks out, or is
restrained in the body. Solomon says, He that keeps his mouth, by ordering
aright the tongue in his mouth, keeps his life; and who would lose his life
that may keep it? or live unquietly, who may live in peace? but he that
opens his lips, or prostituteth them in his talk, by much babbling, shall
come to destruction; that is, such an one shall never want woe, and at last be
destroyed, Pro. 13.3. The same Solomon says that death and life are in the
power of the tongue, Pro. 18.21. that is, the abuse or good government of the
same is effectual for destruction or salvation. Christ our Savior having said
that men shall give an account of their idle words, adds this for a reason;
because by our words we shall be justified, and by our words we shall be
condemned, Mat. 12.24. And James says, If a man will seem relig^ous, that is,
would be judged godly, and cannot refrain his tongue, or if he have an unruly
tongue, his hope is vain that any man will take him to be a virtuous and good
man: for a good man, is a good tongued man; but he that cannot command himself
in that member, can command himself in nothing.

The Reasons.
Saint James compares the tongue to fire. Iam. 3.6. Now fire well governed,
will warm us, but misguided, undo us; and who will not look to his fire? So
the ^^ngue, well ordered, will comfort us; but set at large, shame us: who
(then) will give such a member liberty? Secondly, a good tongue is the means
by which our actions are well managed: therefore Saint James calls it the
rudder of the Man, Iam. 3.4. then as the Ship is directed by the rudder; so
are men's deeds by the tongue: and he who wants a good tongu^, is in as great
peril, as a Ship in the roughest Sea, that wants both Sterue and Pilot.

Uses.
An instruction to set a guard of attendance before the doors of our lips:
Use. 1.
for no Malefactors are more ready to break out of Prison, nor waters to flow
out of their Fountains then lewd, or foolish, or fruitless words are to
proceed out of our mouths. And how quickly shall (even the best) forget
themselves this way, if they be careless what passes from them? for how many
unfit and idle speeches come from men (otherwise not evil) because they bound
not their talk with the law of grace when they speak in matters? Therefore
has Nature, not without cause, shut in the tongue with a double wall of lips
and teeth; which proves that it is no easy thing thus (as has been said)
to govern the tongue; and therefore David prays the Lord to set this watch
before it, Psalm. 141.3. And where the Apostle James calls it an unruly evil,
Iam. 3.8. he would have us to give great diligence to master it: that we may
so do, we must (first) speak considerately, and not without some
premeditation: for he who answers a matter before he hear it; that is, he
that will open his heart before he open his ears, shall have shame, Pro.
18.13. Iam. 1.19. The mind should be the tongues guide, as the tongue is the
minds messenger. And therefore so often as we speak (not minding what we
say) the messenger runs without his errand. Secondly, we must speak
wisely, or (as the Apostle speaks) graciously to ed^fication, and within
bounds of truth, Colos. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29. Our speech must be poudred with grace
to those that hear us: else, as fresh meat long kept without salt, does
putrify; so our talk, if it be not salted with wisdom, will prove rotten
talk. This wisdom is showed when a man speaks with judgment, (which a
fool cannot) who pours out all his mind, where the wise keeps something
for hereafter, Pro. 19.11. Thirdly, we must not be too full of talk; and when
we speak, we must speak little and soberly: for in many words there is
iniquity, Pro 10.19. and he that speaks much, shall speak falsely, or
idly, or both. God (therefore) has given us two ears, and but one tongue,
to the end we might be more ready to hear then to speak; or to teach us to
hear much, and to speak little. And, as when a River ouer-floweth, it leaves
much slime: so much talk, much corruption: and we cannot run over in our
talk, but we shall offend with our tongue.

A reproof (therefore) to those who turn their tongues loose, Use 2.
and give them liberty in their mouths, leaving them without a Rudder or
Steers-man. Now this liberty of speech is in respect of God, or man, as when
we speak not reverently of God, nor soberly to Man. We speak not reverently
of God, when out of an Oath we speak idly of him, or blasphemously in an
Oath. Out of an oath we speak idly of God, when we speak of his titles,
neither in due time, nor with any reverence: as they, who for every trifle,
and when they would utter a troubled affection, break out into a speech of
God, in some of his names, neither making profit of them to themselves, nor to
those who hear them: as Jesus Lord, where have thou been? Lord have mercy
upon us, what a thing is this? and, O Christ what a man are you? with the like.
But Moses says to such, Thou shall fear this glorious and fearful name, the
LORD THY GOD, Deuteronomy. 28.58. and David, to the shame of such; They shall praise
thy great and fearful Name, because it is holy, Psalm. 99.3. In an oath we
speak blasphemously, when, with a contemptuous and raging tongue, we call God
to witness for every trifle: specially, when we divide the LORD into parts
and quarters by lips of blasphemy in common talk, which is a sin so rife
and general in our days, that it cannot be but GOD must still plague our
Land, as in that vision of the flying Book, with variety of curses, till we
be consumed, our houses and our persons with stroke after stroke, except the
horrible swearers of our Country, and the Kingdom be by compulsiue discipline
(betimes) amended, Zechar. 5.4. And here, who can but prophecy? for (alas) how
does the Land mourn because of Oaths? What danger are we in who live in an
age of such wickedness, where, if men be never so little crossed in their
affections, they are ready, and sometimes when no man crosses them, to cast
up their choler, and disgorge their filthy stomach upon the name of God, by
tearing and rending it into small shiuers? then, wounds, and sides, and blood,
and nails, and such a chopping and hewing in pieces of that great and
fearful name, the Lord our God, in common speech, that he that hears (if
he fear God) cannot but fear that God will show some visible judgment upon
such places and Monsters, to teach them not to blaspheme. And, shall we keep
silence, when no good man may hold his peace? or say nothing when such oaths
cry? The Apostle says, His servants ye are to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. and, i^
he an obedient servant that will ease his distempered stomach upon his
Masters credit; fly, like a mad dog in the face of him that gives him his
meat and finding, and use him with the vilest names he can invent and utter,
to his reproach? whose servants are they (then) who, if they be crossed
(never so little) in their pleasures, will cross God in his glory? If they be
at the Tables, and the Dice run against them; look how fast the Dice run
against them, so fast their tongues shall run against him: or, if there be
but a penny in a bargain between a Man and his Neighbor, he will have it,
or dig into Hell for oaths, if swearing will get it. And be these Gods
servants, and not servants of sin, and brands of Hell? Pilate and Paynim was
not so outrageous: for, when he heard but the name of the Son of the Soune
of God he was afraid, John 19.8. These toss and bandy it from one to another,
and fear not the condemnation of hell. The high Priest in his fury against
Christ, showed more reverence. For, at the hearing of that which he supposed
to be blasphemy, he rent his clothes, and was troubled, Matthew. 26.65. but
menruffians, and women-roisters in these days, wickedly name God at every
other word, and instead of tearing their garments, tear in pieces his glory.
And for Christ, who must be their Savior or Judge, they crown with piercing
oaths, as with most sharp thorns, his tender head: they smite through his
body, with the spear of swearing, and goare his sides with swearing by his
sides: they rage against his wounds, by which we are saved: they profane his
blood and death, and wound his heart, his hands, and blessed feet, by damnable
swearing, and are not moved. And shall any great person clothe such? or, any
good man's house receive such? Does not the plague enter where they enter? and
vengeance pursue the house where they live? Christ says, forbidding whatsoever
is more in common talk then Yea or Nay, Mat. 5.37. Whatsoever is more comes
of evil, that is, of the Devil. His meaning is, that that detestable sin of
idle and common swearing, is spauned of the Devil, and becomes a plant of
his setting, the root whereof is sin, and the fruit damnation, Iam. 5.12. and
should not this terrify wretched and prodigious Swearers? and teach Masters
not to keep a swearing servant, as they would not keep the plague of God in
their house? and persuade Magistrates not to favor a common Swearer, as they
would not countenance the Devil, whose spaune and generation common Swearers
are? For, are such plants of the Devils se^ting? how (then) can the Orchyard of
God in a private family, and the Church of God in a public state, bring forth
any good fruits where such slippes of Hell are, and have their root of
continuance? Consider this ( The Lord Zouch
my honored Lord,) and you Masters, who have the charge of a Family; put the
Devil from you in these members of perdition, if you know any such in your
Houses, and if they prove miscreant and incorrigible. You would not
(willingly) keep a thief in your House: and, are you not afraid to keep in
your cloth and service a common blasphemer? or, is it a greater sin to rob
you of your goods, then it is to rob God of his glory? or, can you be more
moved for a little perishing wealth, then justly vexed for Gods dishonor? Job
sacrificed for his sons, because they might blaspheme God at their feasts,
he was not sure they did; and yet they were not so wicked as to blaspheme him
with lips, only he says they might do it in their hearts, Job 1.5. And
should not you sacrifice care, and burn in zeal and diligence to reform that
servant, and those children whom you do not imagine but hear daily to
blaspheme, and not in their hearts, but with fearful oaths the name of the
Almighty? If this were thought of in some good conscience, we should not
have such families of Beliaell and households of cursed swearers, as now
multiply in every Town and little Village, and threaten the Land. And here I
wish that both Town and Country would be followers of that example that your
The L. Zouch, his well ordered Family.
Honors Family in this behalf (I speak in Faith under the seal of my
Office, and not dissemblingly) does as a worthy light, kindled at the fire, and
with the breath of your own religious authority and great zeal, give to the
same.

But the want of this care is cause, that not only the old Bramble, but the
young spray coming from it, bears sharp pricks of blasphemy in the tender
tongue of it: and that the little child, that is but lately crept out of the
shell, has a mouth full of cursing and bitterness, as that which has no
sooner learned to speak, then it has learned to blaspheme, and is taught no
sooner to name God, then it is instructed, or (without teaching) apt by that
which it hears daily, to swear by God. So true it is, that where the Father
is a Bramble, the Child will be a prick. But, as we speak not reverently of
God, so neither do we speak soberly to Men. I say not soberly: for, do we
not give our tongues liberty to say any thing of our enemies, and of our
betters, if they be our enemies? Do we not disgrace such as are faithful,
with unseemly titles? Do not Papists call the professors of the truth, by the
names of such as have been famous instruments of God in the Gospel, as
Caluinists, Zuinglians, Lutherans, and that in reproach and derision? Do not
brethren call some of their godly brethren, Puritans? Does not a Christian call
his fellow Christian Hypocrite, Sectary, Raca, Fool? Do we speak as if God
had made our tongues? or rather, do we not speak as if our tongues were our
own, Psalm. 12.4.

But, the Prophet mentions here, among other wicked sinners, whom he would
put from his court and presence, tellers of lies. What he means by such we
have heard, and they are contrary to those who speak the truth from the heart,
Psalm. 15.2. A liar is he who speaks an untruth weetingly, or the truth
otherwise then he thinks. And, a lie is a false speech, vented willingly,
and with a mind to deceive. Where, we are to put a difference between a lie
and an untruth, and him that is a liar, and that speaks untruly. For, he may
be said to speak an untruth, who rashly speaks it, thinking it to be true:
and he may be called a liar, who either speaks that which he knows to be
false, or speaks the truth, but falsely, that is, with a mind to deceive.
The one has no truth in his mouth, and the other has much deceit in his
heart. The one, speaking a lie (as it is said of the Devil) speaks of his
own, John 8.44. the other, speaking a truth, resembles the Devil, who, even
when he speaks the truth, is a liar, Matthew. 4.6. Therefore, there are two
sorts of lies: the first, when a man speaks not as the thing is; the second,
when he speaks as the thing is, but deceitfully. The first, which is a
real lie, is likewise of two sorts: the first, when a man speaks an untruth
against his mind and knowledge, and this is the chief kind of lying, from
whence in the Latin it has the name. For, me^tiri, is, contra mentem ire.
The second, when a man ( inconsiderately) utters an untruth, thinking he
speaks true. And this, though it be a lie, in the general term, yet he
who utters it, cannot be called a liar, because his words agree with his
mind, though they agree not with the thing. Therefore, here by a teller of
lies, we must understand, one that speaks either an untruth against his
mind, or the truth with an ill mind: and this is he, who knowing that which
he speaks to be true, coueteth to be understood otherways then he speaks,
that is, otherwise then the truth is. As (therefore) a man may utter an
untruth, and yet be no liar, so he may be a liar in speaking the truth, when
he does not speak it with a simple heart. Which proves, that to the speaking
of the truth, that is in a man's heart, a double agreement is required; the one,
of the tongue with the mind; the other, of the mind with the things
themselves. And to this is opposed the double falsehood that was spoken of: as
when a man speaks that which is false, or the truth, but falsely. So we have
heard of lying, and the kinds thereof. From whence I conclude, that a teller
of lies, (such an one as the Prophet here means to put out of his house and
sight,) is he that speaks that as true, which he knows to be false, and
that which is true falsely, and not with a simple heart. Such (he says) shall
not remain in his sight.

Doct.
From whence the Doctrine is; that a teller of lies, and the intolerable sin of
lying should not be abidden by a Christian. It appears else where, that David
could not abide flattering lips, nor a false tongue, seeing he prays against
them, desiring God in some judgment to cut them off, Psalm. 12.3. Solomon
(also) makes it one property of a righteous man to hate lying words, Prou.
13.5. that is, to hate them in himself, and to abhor them in others. God is
said to hate a lying tongue, Prou. 6.17. and Job craves no favor, if he have
walked in vanity, favoring a lie, Job 31.5. He put up his tongue from doing
of hurt, and would not vnsheath it, but when he was to skirmish with Satan, or
to strike at sin. And shall we think that he could endure those in his sight
who walked in vanity, loving evil more then good, and lies more then to
speak the truth? Psalm. 52.3. who instead of skirmishing with sin, make frayes
with their brethren, and draw upon their names with a lying tongue?

The Reasons.
The Devil is the Father of lies, and of liars. Ioh. 8.44. lies are his
creatures, and liars his children. Now, cannot a man abide the Devil, and will
he agree with his unclean brood? Further, Truth makes us to resemble our
heavenly Father, the fountain of Truth, where lying makes us to resemble the
Devil the Father of lies: and as truth is a cognizance of a Christian on
earth, and a Saint in heaven; so lying is the note of a wicked one here, and
of a damned one in hell. Again, as there be two Fathers, one of those who
speak the truth truly, which is God, another of liars, which is the Devil;
so there are two Kingdoms, one of light, and another of darkness. The dialect
of the light is truth, the language of lyi^g is darkness. And who that loves
not darkness, will abide the tongue of darkness? and that loves the light,
endure that which is an enemy to the light? Secondly, who can abide that
whereby Satan reigns in the heart of him who is possessed of it, as in his
Kingdom? But, where the Scepter of Satan is borne up, as by lying, there he
reigns as King; and there the Scepter of the Lord which flourishes in the
truth, is depressed, and God is made as no body. Thirdly, the common liar
makes that soul that should be of a good savor to God, no better then stink
and carrion: for, the liar is an abomination to God. Prou. 12.22. And, do we
stop our noses at unsavory smells, and will we thrust them into an unclean
dunghill, by taking delight in lying vanities? Fourthly, no man can endure to
converse with his enemy, or to put his hand to that that his heart rises
against. Also, men and women use not to play with Snakes and Serpents, as with
Whelps and Birds, because they hate them. So, if we hate lying, if our heart
rise against it, if we think of it as of an enemy, would we love liars?
would we suffer them? nay, would we live with them? or abide that they should
live with us? Fifthly, we must love where God loves, and hate where God
abhors. But God loves truth, therefore we must love it; and hates lies,
therefore we must abhor a liar, and hate to tell a lie. Now that every liar
is loathsome to God, besides the former plain Text of Prou. 6.17. it may
appear by the companions among which he is marshalled, and his fellows who
are reckoned up, Apoc. 21.8. as unbelievers, and abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters. Now are these fit mates for a
Christian to dwell with? or if they be not, then the liar is not: for, he is
one of that fellowshippe which shall be cast into the lake of fire. Sixthly,
who can abide that that shuts out of heaven, and casts into hell? but
lying does. For, all liars must have their part in that lake, that burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Apoc. 21.8. And it is written,
that without, that is, out of heaven, shall be Dogs, and Enchanters, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves, or makes
lies. Apoc. 22.15. O good Lord, shall unrepentant liars never enter into
heaven? shall they burn, world without end, in the tormenting fire of hell?
Have liars no better fellows, nor worthier companions then Dogs, and
Enchanters, and filthy Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and the
like rabble of sinners? and shall we account it so small a matter to lie for a
commodity, nay to face and lie for nothing? Lastly, lying takes away the
right and good use of speech, and necessary use of trading between man and
man. For, the speech is made to express the true meaning of the heart: and if
that do not, what shall? Also the trades of life, which are the bonds of
humane society, are preserved by truth, and ouer-turned by lying. Besides,
lying makes a man to loose his credit among men: for, he who uses to lie,
shall not be believed when he speaks true. And who can abide or agree with
that that overthrows a man's credit, that overthrows his trade of life, his
society with his neighbors, his sure estate and very being in the world? Nay,
who can abide that that so provoke the Lord, that he cannot abide us? for,
the Lord has a controversy, and is at war with liars: Hos. 4.1.2. And if we
be such, the Lords action lies against us, and his pleading will be with us
by his fierce judgments.

Quest. But you will say; and what man (then) shall not be odious to God,
for, all men are liars? Romans 3.4.

Answ. I answer; they are called by the Apostle in that place liars in
comparison: as liars to God. For who does not lie to him? and liars in respect
of God: for, who is not a liar compared with him? but not liars to men, nor
liars in respect of men; nor such as love to lie, or are accustomed to tell
lies.

Quest. You will say; our brother may be in necessity, and may we not lie a
little to help him in his necessity? May we not lie to do good?

Answ. I answer; necessity can no more privilege us to lie, then it can
warrant us to steal. And for the good that may come, I say; We may not do
evil, that good may come thereof. Romans 3.8.

Quest. What will you say to the Midwiues and Rahabs lie? Exodus 1.19. Ios.
2.4.5.

Answ. I say their faith was good, their lie was naught.

Quest. But Charity requires that we do good to our Neighbor?

Answ. I answer; Charity rejoices in the truth. 1 Cor. 13.6. And it is no
charity to do our Neighbor good with the Lords dishonor, and our own
admixed hurt in the wound of our souls. And if we may not lie to bring glory
to God, Romans 3.7. Job. 13.4.7; how much less to bring a little perishing
benefit to our Neighbor?

Uses.
Use 1.
If no Liar nor kind of lie may be abidden by Christians, then is not the
merry lie tolerable^ nor the officious or profitable lie lawful? Some hold
both to be expedient, and the pernicious and hurtful lie to be only spoken
against here, and in other Scriptures. But that the merry lie or jesting lie is
not tolerable, may be showed: for if we must give account for every idle word,
Mat. 12.36. how much more for every lying word? Besides, the Liar is contrary
to God, be he Liar in sport or earnest? and can a good child be merry and
glad to be contrary to his righteous father? Or may we not make Princes merry
with our lies, Hos. 7.3. and is it a sin to make the King glad with such
wickedness? then may we not lie in mirth, to make our selves or others merry
with a lie: for what we may not do for the King, we may worse do for a meaner
man. Vid^ Aug. lib. de mendatio.
Augustine will not have a lie told to save a Man's life, and would he allow it
for the pleasure of Man's life? Thus the sporting lie is proved to be
intolerable: and for the officious and profitable lie, this I have to say
against it, that truth must not be sold for any thing. The Scripture is plain;
Buy the truth, but sell it not, Pro. 23.23. and though by so doing, good should
come, yet (as has been said) we may not do evil that good may come
thereof, Romans 3.8. Indeed, truth is judged now so base^ and truths purchase so
little worth, that some will part with it for nothing, who think it a grace to
make themselves and others merry with a lie. Some sell it for the least penny
of profit and dram of pleasure, who for a trifle will not stick to cross
the truth and themselves, out of the Book of truth. Or, have Men committed a
fault? presently truth must be sold to buy a cover of some false excuse, to
hide it with a lie. Do they hunt after the favor of some great Man? truth
must be sold by base flattery to purchase it. Have we enemies? or are we
malicious? truth must be gone, or be bid to go, by slaundering, back-byting,
and other evil speakings, that where we owe a spite, there we may take
revenge. And thus truth, for a profitable lie, is bought and sold by all
degrees of Men, and in all trades of life.

A reproof to that trade of Lying that is so commonly practiced in Shoppes and
Markets, where Men can no more buy and sell without lying, then they can
without speaking, and where false and lying words are the waights, and a
corrupt mind (void of all good conscience) holds the Balance between a Man
and his neighbor. The Father commends that Child, and the Master praises
that Servant, who can for their profit most cunningly smoothe and face out
matters. And Men are come to this fullness of sin, that they think it to be
no fault, but praise rather to put away their bad wares with artificial lying.
By this Art they get their living: and therefore as the people cried, Great is
Diana of the Ephesian^, Act. 19.34. so because they so gain by this silver
sh^ine of a lying mouth, therefore great is this Diana of England^ and much
honored in Town and Country. But me thinks they should never look upon the
money so gotten, but it should make them to open a vein and bleed: for may
they no^ say of such money; Is not this Ac^ldama? is it not the Field, nay,
price of blood? have we not for this corrupt reward, with cruel hands, even
shed the bl^^d of our Servant, and the blood of our own dear Child? have we
not for a little perishing wealth sold the life of our Servant, and the life
of our own bowels to the Devil?

But may lying at no hand be endured? then the admonitio^i which the Apostle
gives is good for us, and we should endeavor to cast off lying, or to thrust
it from us, and to speak^ the truth, every Man to his Neighbor; that is, to
speak nothing to any Man, but what we know to be true, or answerable to our
new-man in the image of truth, Ephesians. 4.25. for we are ren^ed in the holiness
of truth: and therefore must be true, as God is true, verse. 24. Also, we have
put off the old man of unrighteousness, therefore we must not lie one to
another, which is one of his works, Colos. 3.9. Further, that that Moses says,
or the Lord by him, belongs to us; Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely,
nor lie one to another, Leuit. 19.11. And here, as thef^ and lying usually go
together, so they commonly couple as companions. Would thou (then) blush to
be a Thief? be as much ashamed to be a Liar. To lie is a base thing, but truth
is noble: and who can endure, that it should be said to his face, Thou lie,
or, You lie?

Lastly, is it intolerable to tell lies? then is it horrible to swear them:
and here the greater may not be abidden, where the lesser cannot be endured;
which makes against false witness and perjury in judgment: for if we may
not tell a lie, then we may not swear a lie; and if not in private speech,
much less in Judgment. This would be considered of Iurers and Quest-men,
who, as they fill m^ns ^ares with untruths, so they defile the place of
Judgment with perjury and unrighteousness whiles by a false verdict, they make
the sacred Seat of Justice (which is Gods own Chair of estate on earth) a
Sanctuary for false sentence and whiles (as much as in them lies) they make
the Lord himself, in those high persons who sit in that chair, to oppress
the innocent, and to clear the wicked. Some, with respect of persons, give
themselves altogether (being Sworne-men) to pack matters to gratify their
friends with the Lords dishonor. And some, (going upon the life and death of a
man whom they would corruptly save, or wickedly destroy) dread not, either by
perjury to save life in the vessels of carnal pity and corrupt hyre; or to
shed blood by cruelty, where no cause is, save that malice will not let the
simple live. By this high strain the holiness of the Lord is defiled, as much
as is in man to defile it; and the person of Satan put upon the person of the
Lord, as far as Man can do it. The consideration hereof should admonish all
of you ( Christian Lord, and grave Magistrates) to be circumspect what oaths
you receive, and what lawful oaths they that be under you minister in Court
where you sit as Judges: and if you find any to fail of fidel^tie, to sift
their testimony well before you pass it; for it is no small matter to suffer
a seat of such excellency as you sit on, to be defiled with impure swearing.
The Kings Chair is kept clean, and shall the holiness of the Lord be
violated? Here (also) you must take good heed how and with what reason you
believe those Advocates that speak for their Fee, though unsworn. For, some
will tell you far otherwise then the thing is, if you will believe them,
and speak evil of good, or good of evil, Esa. 5.20. if you will hear them.
Some will whet their wit, and polish their tongue, to cover a false and
naughty matter, and to make that seem good, which is (indeed) naught. If
there be none such in this Court (and I hope there is not) I speak against
none here. And for those who be here, this that I have said may serve to
prevent corruption that it enter not, not to tax: corruption where it is not.
Here let none excuse himself, because he must speak for his Client. For, he
must speak that only for him which is true, or which he thinks to be true;
else he takes a fee to go to Hell for his Client. Some say, they spoke as
they thought; and some of such say true: for, they neither spoke well, nor
thought well: else how could they who are so witty to provide shifts (as it
were colors) to mend and varnish a bad cause, be so simple in the helps which
belong to a good cause? The Prophets last general protestation against
offenders follows.

Betimes I will destroy all the wicked. etc. Ver. 8.

THE Prophet, as a clean soul, coming out of the hand of the Creator, and
entering into the Realm (left by Saul) as into a body altogether unclean, and
polluted with great filth of much injustice and wickedness that then abounded,
does here take a bond of himself presently, by Gods help, to root out
wicked persons, and to purge that whole body; where, without delay (as it were
rising early) he promises ( betimes) to set upon the work with purpose to
effect the cure of the holy City, and whole land. And here he resembles the
Sun in the heavens, which (as soon as it rises, or before it appear) chaseth
the darkness before it, and is clothed with glory, as with a Roabe: for so, as
soon as he came to the Kingdom, or before he was placed in it (as the Sun
of that Firmament) like a right Noble Star in an obscure Land, he gave forth
(as his beams of approach) these holy promises, which he holily observed so
soon as with the consent of all the Tribes, he was made and confirmed King.
Further, he says that betimes, or, morning after morning, he will destroy, or
utterly cut off all the wicked of the Land He says all, without acception of
persons, or exception of Men. And for the wicked, he shows in the words
following what he means by them; as namely, workers of iniquity: and these
he will with his morning care dispatch out of the Church and Commonwealth of
Israel; that is, he will presently so do, and from time to time. This is the
meaning of the words: wherein we may consider (further) the manner of his
reformation; it shall be instantly done, and constantly followed; and the
object or substance of the same: and this in the punishment it self, or
persons whom he will punish: the punishment is destroying or cutting off: the
persons are, all the wicked of the Land; whom by exposition, he calls the
workers of iniquity: for the manner of reformation here promised, it is
promised that it shall be made betimes, Doct.
or without delay.

From whence the Doctrine is: Magistrates and other Governors, must betimes
without putting off, proceed against the wicked in their greater or lesser
charges, at home and in the Commonwealth: that is, good and quick justice must
be done upon evil doers whosoever they be, that are within their authority, as
it were gates: and they whom God has bid to rise up to give judgment, must
say, presently, by Gods grace, I will command justice, and establish peace;
Virtue shall be my first care, and forthwith I will banish ungodliness. So
Joshua rose early in the morning, to find out the trespasses of Achan, Josh.
7.16. He lay not all day in bed, when Israel had committ^d an execrable sin:
Having found out the sin he executed the Malefactor the same day. S^l^mon,
David's son, prayed for this Wis^dom^, and obtained it, 1 Kin. 3.7. For, so
soon as he was set upon the throne of David his Father, and God had
established the Kingdom in his hand, he proceeded to sentence against diverse
^icked persons, whom his Father had spoken of, to do unto them according to
the wise^ome of his heart, 1 Kings 2.24.26.31.66.44.45.46. and Iehu is said to
be zealous for the LORD, 2 King. 10.16^ though (otherwise) no good King,
because he began with the Lords sword in his hand to destroy wicked
Iehoram, and to root out the whole house of Ahab, and worship of Baal, 2
King. 9.24.33. and 10.1.2.3.7.8.10 11.17.25.28. A^a did not put off to do good
therefore he is said to have done that that was good and right in the eyes of
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 14.2.3. though his end was not like his beginning, Chap.
16.2.10.12. For, when sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
the heart of the children of men will be fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11. In other things (as the saying is) occasion i^ bald behind^ but
here men may see her brains, if they who have the opportunity and calling to
punish vice, defer to do it, and take not hold of her forel^ckes. Besides,
the greatest have no Patent, or Charter of their life: what care (then) should
they have, as GOD has called them; to walk to day, and to morrow, and the
third day, even till they have finished their course with joy?

The Reasons.
First, they are not sure of to morrow, and therefore the good they are able to
do, they should do it with the present day, redeeming the season, Ephesians.
5.16. Secondly, punishments are as medicines, which (if they be kept too long)
hazard the patient, and loose their work: and Magistrates are as Phisicians,
who must not let a disease go too long, lest by sufferance, it prove
incurable, which might have been helped by timely ministering. Delay in common
matters is dangerous, but unspeakably banefull in the case of punishment. For,
in the time of so large intermission, the wicked will make friends, and the
offense so borne with, get a protection. And, as a small fire which at the
first beginning, may be put out with a handful of dust, yet (neglected for
some time) so rages against houses and whole Towns, that it prevails
against, not only a great deal of water brought unto it in vessels from
Wells and Conduits, but sometimes against Ponds and Rivers: so an evil
member, which at first might have, with small hurt to a multitude, been
removed, by the diligent hand of a good Magistrate; yet suffered long without
punishment, and having by such unmerciful sufferance, gotten a deep root and
long growth of acquaintance, among those who are of good sort and note in a
Country, cannot but breed great offense, and be occasion of much evil before
he be, or can be cast out. Thirdly, by deferring of punishment, Men's heat,
(that which they had against the sin) will grow cold, and that fault,
which they thought to be vvorthie of sharp punishment, will in time seem,
or pass, as unworthy of any punishment. And not to punish the wicked
speedily, what is it but by such evil impunitie, to set them at a greater
liberty to do hurt, as so many Lions, and Bears, and Beares-whelpes, let
loose among harmless Sheep and Lambs.

Uses.
An instruction to Governors with a joyful quickness to seek after God, Use
1.
and not to delay, or put off, to keep his Commandments: so will they with
more speed and courage set upon offenders. Psalm. 119.60. For, wherefore is
sin so spared, and they who commit it so seldom and sparingly punished, but
because they so little fear God, who have received charge and power to
proceed against such to punishment and vengeance for evil doing? When did
iniquity more multiply in Israel, then when there was no Ruler in it? Judge.
17.6. It was not without Rulers: but as good there had been none as such,
seeing they were (spiritually) so sluggish and (generally) so naught that
every man did that which was good in his own eyes. The Scripture is plentiful
in examples of this kind.

Use 2.
A reproof (therefore) to lingering Rulers) who, being Magistrates but for a
year in Cities and Towns, pass that whole time without drawing the sword of
justice upon the sin of any Malefactor; and who so long bear with the
wicked, (of whom there is little hope that they will ever prove better) that
they do nothing but multiply offenders; where their calling is to visit for
faults. Such in their own causes are soon stirred, and yet they can bear
with outrageous evil livers, and such as they know long to have lived in
drunkenness, fornication, and other deadly enormities. And so far off are
their purposes from cutting off the wicked betimes from the Commonwealth if
they be Magistrates, and from their own houses if they be Masters of families,
that neither betimes, nor at any time do they with any good conscience,
perform this duty. The cause of this in some is the evil that reigns in
themselves, which therefore makes, that they cannot impeach the sway of it in
others. For, who shall punish idolatry, when Jeroboam ( he who is King) is
given unto it? I King. 12.28.29. in some the cause is more fear of man then of
God. For, because they shall be Majors and Bailiffes but for a year, and after
their year be as another man, therefore (while they are in office) they will
vnserue GOD^ and serve flatterers, that they may not offend. To such we may
say: who art thou that fear mortal Man (that must be given to the worms,
and fear not the glorious God that spread out the heavens? Esa. 51.12.13.
But we fear too much, and where we should not, because we fear too little or
nothing, where we should fear only, or specially, even the Lord who is to be
feared. If (therefore) we would sanctify the Lord in our hearts, and m^ke him
our fear, Esa. 8.13, we should neither fear so much, nor vainly as we do.

But the Prophet will not only presently Doct. 2.
punish offenders, but constantly punish them. From whence the Doctrine is: as
Magistrates should not put off to reform vice: so, after they have begun well,
they must not be weary till they have finished their course. The sum is;
good is to be done constantly, and not by starts. It is the Apostles
exhortation: where he not only exhorts to a continuance in well doing, but
also promises from the Lord, a reward to those who continue well-doers. Gal.
6.9. Also, the fruit of the tree of life is promised, not to Soldiers, but to
Conquerours, no^ to him that fights, but to such as overcome. Apoc. 2.7. The
meaning is; we are Soldiers, and our life is militant; and the militant life
of a Christian must be, not a striving but conquering life, if he will be
crowned. He who continues to the end, (says he, who is the beginning and
the end) shall be saved. Matthew. 24.13. And the laborers in the Vineyard had
their pe^ny of reward in mercy, not in the morning, when they begun well, but
at night, when they had done their work. Matthew. 20.8. And wherefore was the
tail of the sacrifice commanded to be offered, but to teach us to sacrifice to
God, not only the beginning of a good work, but the tail or end? Leuit.
3.9.11. We have a saying, that the end makes all, as (contrarily) the want of
a good end marres all: and it is a true saying, that constancy and continuance
in well doing, does Ierom. Finis corenat opus.
crown the work.

The Reasons.
Many hypocrites are hot at hand, who can humble themselves for a day: Esa.
58.5: but the true Christian (and he only) keeps his heat till the last
field be fought, and till he receive the Garland of his labors in glory.
Again, to begin a thing is pleasant, and variety delights while things are
dainty and new. For, if every day were as our marriage-day, who would be
vvearie? Secondly, perseverance is the Garland of our race: and he is crowned,
not that runs, but that so runs, that is, so by his patience to the end,
that he may obtain. 1 Cor. 9 24. For in this case, as good, nay better, never
a whit, as never the better.

Uses.
Use 1.
A reproof to those Magistrates, who are diligent when they (first) enter into
office, or, till they be a little better acquainted with the air of the place.
After, when with Asa, they have taken the gowte of sloth in their doings
(which is the sickness of letting all alone, a sickness familiar to
Towne-Magistrates, if to any) they fall quite away by despair and idleness. 2 Chronicles. 16.12. And (here) some are as Nabuchadnezzars image (being images of
government rather then living Governors;) the head was gold, the arms silver,
the thighs brass, the feet iron and clay, and so the nearer the end the worse
still. Dan. 2.32.33. Which may be spoken (also) of some Preachers, who in the
first or second year or month of their incumbence, like a bottell (at the
first pulling out of the stopple) teach profitably and with full-^unning;
after, more seldom and distractedly, as with a smaller stream and flower
running; and at last, drop after drop, if the vessel be not so empty of
spirit and full of earth, that it will run no longer. But in the journey of
godliness there must be no giving over, nor in the race of our callings. When
we are in a good way, we must hold on to our ways end, not looking back
with Lots wife, much less going back with Demas. For, as soon as we cease
to be better, we begin to be worse.

An instruction to those, that cast to be Officers in Cities or Towns, to cast
their charges, like wise builders, Luk 14.28.29. least beginning, and not able
to make an end, God cast them off. They who desire the sweet of an Office, must
take the sauce of the labor with it: and he that would not be damned for
lack of good government, or for guilt of evil, must consider what it is to
be a Governor before he desire rule. For, to whom much is committed, of him
much shall be required. Luke 12.48. He that has the five talents of
government, shall answer for more then he who has but the two, or one, of a
more private life. Matthew. 25.20.22.25. I doubt not (Christian Lord) but GOD
has put into your heart the consideration of your great duty, to do it in
fear before him: which makes you so early and so late to be present (your
self) in Court at all Terme-causes, and so, as nothing can pass shufflingly,
but (as it were) openly in the Court or at the Table before an honorable and
reverent Session. But remember what your Savior says: Be constant, and I
will give thee the Crown of life. Apoc. 2.10. It is the property of true
virtue, not to begin well but to end well. And ye to whom God has committed
much, consider what I say, and the Lord (as the Apostle speaks) give you
understanding in all things. So much for the Prophets manner of reformation,
the matter follows.

I will destroy all the wicked of the Land.
THE reformation (further) intended by the Prophet concerns punishment, or
the persons whom he would send to punishment. The punishment is destruction,
if the offense deserve it, as before in the fifth verse: or rooting out and
cutting off. Here he speaks of sharp punishments, which he voweth to
inflict upon stubborn and notorious offenders; not (partially) some, but
(indifferently) all.

From whence learn, Doct.
that it is no cruelty in the Magistrate to punish sharply by destroying or
cutting off, every lewd and pernicious evil doer. And, this is the part of a
wise governor; who (therefore) is compared to a skillful Husbandman that
fanneth his Corn, to the end he may souer between the Chafe and pure
Grain, Proverb. 20.26. For, so a wise King, that is Ruler, will scatter the
wicked, breaking the knot and fellowship of Drunkards, Epicures, Swearers in
common talk, Thieves, and such Mates, and turn the wheel over them, that is,
severely punish them, or (as it were) thresh them, as Men used to thresh
Bread-corne, in those times, with a Cart wheel. So Esa. 28.27. and Deuteronomy.
21.20.21. GOD commands the Father to bring forth his own Son to death,
when his fault deserves it. In this case (also) the Husband must not spare the
Wife that lies in his bosom, nor a friend his dearest friend, Deuteronomy. 13.6.9.
Asa was not cruel to his Grandmother, who deposed her, because she had set
up an Idol in a grove, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. if he had been gentler to her, he
had been cruel to himself, and sharp to others. Moses, a mild man, yet
commanded the Levites to slay every man his Companion that had sinned in the
idolatry of the Calfe, Exodus 32.27. and he says, that God so commanded.
Samuel, a good man, yet hewed Ag^g in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal, 1 Samuel
15.33. and David himself, a good King, did put the enemies of God under Sawes,
and under iron-harrowes, and under axes of iron, 2 Samuel 12.31. And, is not the
God of mercy incomparably merciful, of whom yet it is said, He smote great
Kings, for his mercy endures for ever, and slew mighty Kings, for his mercy
endures for ever? Psalm. 136.17.18.

The Reasons.
First, the Magistrates sword should be defensive to the good, and offensive to
the evil: for, he bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4. and, it is just
that they who offend the Law should be offended by the Law.

Secondly, it is the Lords commandment, that evil doers should be rooted
out. Now, if it be cruelty in the Ministers of Justice to root them out, how
can it be but he must be cruel, who comma^nds them to be rooted out?

Thirdly, due and well seasoned severity toward gross offenders is many ways
profitable: it may be a medicine to the offendour to heal his soul by
repentance; it may be a bridle to those who would offend in like manner, to
pull them from sin. And, it is the only means to discharge the Magistrate
and to clear the Country from the guilt of enormious facts.

Uses.
Use 1.
A reproof to those who interpose themselves for the sparing of desperate
Malefactors, or who exclaim if they be duly executed, as do Papists, who in
their infamous Books, charge the highest Sovereignty with wading in the blood
of Recusants, where yet nothing has been more familiar to the same, then to
breathe mildness and favor toward them, if any grace could supple them. Which
makes (also) against those who (commonly) use such arguments as these are, for
the impuni^y of such as have made themselves by their horrible errors, Men of
death: as that he is a proper man, a personable man, a man of a high wit, and
good parentage: and, is it not pity to cast away a Man? but, is it not pity
that a proper man should undo a profitable man? that a witty man should kill
an honest man? and, he who has good parentage, spoil him that has good
graces? Also, to take away a bloody person by the stroke of Law, is not to cast
away a man, but to preserve mankind.

An encouragement to good Magistrates Use. 2.
who severely proceed against heinous offenders, and trespasses of an horrible
kind. For, such shall have the Lord to ^eare them out against all vile
speeches, complaints, and murmurings of wicked tongues. He has commanded them
to do Justice; and, if they love Justice, he will take part with them against
all their accusers. Such as desire and cast to live dissolutely, may open
against them, and they that would (being themselves great) without the
controlement of an authority greater, riot and ride Post into all impeachment
of higher government, that they only may reign, will not stick (perhaps) to
put in lying and scandalous Bills against them in Courts above: but God, who
commanded their service, will back it, and those who shall execute it for his
glory. This does concern you (Christian Lord) and may much incourage^ you, and
your reverend associates and helpers, when evil men and unruly, tax your
just, and (for matter objected) faultlesse and most indifferent (I speak my
conscience) proceedings here. What matters (worthy blame) may be done by some
corrupt persons about you (unknown unto you) I know not: I will not defend
them, neither you (I persuade my self) if you knew them: But for your own
persons, I doubt not but I may say, that even in matters distastefully
apprehended by some, you have had clean hands, and a pure heart. I speak this
to encourage you to go on, and no way, (as knows the searcher of all hearts)
to insinuate, by courting of authority. For, though I desire to exercise my
vveake gifts, in the Ministry that is committed unto me, with your aid and
countenance, for the repulsing of oppositions that may be made against it by
persons of corrupt hearts and life, yet I would not buy your credit so dear as
(for it) to bring my person out of credit with the Lord, by a lie. So much for
the punishment, the persons follow whom the Prophet will punish.

All the wicked of the Land, that I may, etc.
WE have heard of the punishment; now the Prophet speaks of the persons
whom he will punish; namely, all the wicked, without exception, whom by way
of exposition, he calls workers of iniquity. And these he promises to cut
off by death, and all of these, without respect of kindred or persons, to
execute impartially and indifferently, if their sin so require.

From whence we learn, that no sin ought to be spared, or sinner favored
by partial Justice. But this point was spoken of before: and the reasons
(further) to enforce it, are: First, God is no accepter of persons, Acts 10.34.
and Christian Rulers are forbidden to accept the persons of men. Secondly, God
can see no evil, that is, cannot abide to see it, Habac. 1.13. therefore
religious Magistrates (who in the Scripture are called Gods) should not suffer
it.


Use.
Use.
Now, may no sin be spared, not offender boren with? then Drunkenner may not,
nor Drunkards: neither idleness, nor persons that live idly and in no honest
Trade: or, are these no sins: and they who are guilty of them no offenders? I
name these two, above others; because they swar^n^ so in Town and Country,
and because they do so much hurt, and because the Magistrates eye i^ so
seldom upon them to punish them. By Drunkenness and by Drunkards I mean that
drinking in excess, which the Scripture calls a ^itting at the Wine, or a
following of strong drink, Esa. 5.11.22. till Wit go out, and Grace fly out:
or an insatiable desire, in Captaine-drinkers, to change vessel after vessel,
Host. 1.7. whose travels abroad are to Tauernes and Tippling-houses; and
exercises at home (if they be men of wealth) are to drink healths, and to show
their manhood, or rather worse then beast-hood, in subduing their fellows with
the force of the Flagon, and in offering the sacrifice of filthy excess to
Bacchus in their cellars. But so many healths, this way or after this manner,
so many damnations without repentance.

These are ungodly challenges, and it is no shame, but praise to a Christian to
refuse them: for if another will drink sickness unto me, should not I tender
mine own health? and besides, with what comfort can he look upon Jesus
Christ, who daily, or at any time, hurts soul and body with the abuse of that
creature, that (otherways) would be comfortable to many of his thirsty
members, who lack that, which makes him to sp^^^ and cast like a beast? This
is Drunkenness; and they are Drunkards who are mighty to drink^ wine, and
strong to ^owre in strong drink, though their heads can carry it, and legs
carry them. I know the Scripture, and I doubt not but the Statute provided
against Drunkenness, calls such Drunkards. By Idleness, the second sin, I
mean such a sin as is contrary to an honest vocation; and by Idle persons such
sinners as follow no trade, but the wicked trade of Gaming and Drunkenness, or
the Beggars wandering trade. Such persons are Idle persons, and not the
members, but the diseases of the Commonwealth. Also, the houses which harbor
such are no better then Bawdes to all manner vice and lewdnes. Such houses of
unnecessary resort, being without number, and in no order, should be shut up
by the Magistrates key, specially such as are kept at Towns ends, or in
corners and blind Lanes, for greater conueniencie of receiving late, and
conuaying away early persons of most infamous life. God blesses a man's
lawful trade, and Man in it: but this blessing they cannot hope for who live
in no calling, or (sinfully) in a wicked calling. Moses, keeping sheep, saw
the Lord, Exodus 3.1.2.3.5. This excellent Man of God (whose Psalm this is) was
taken from the Sheep-folds to be King Psalm. 78.70.71. Lidia, in her honest
trade has the benefit of her conversion, Act. 16.14. And in Q. Mary's time,
there was (almost) no trade Mechanical so base, but some were called out of
it, to suffer for Christ. But how many Roysters, Tiplers, Gamelters,
good-fellowes e,mbraced the Stake and hot flames of fire in those raging days?
And for Carding houses, Dicing-houses, Tipling-houses, Brothell-houses, what
Chapels are these to serve God in? and of what trade are they who keep them,
that they may say, they live in a trade with comfort to be saved? Also, these
houses, and such trades of life, what do they but multiply Rogues and Thieves,
who though they have nothing to live upon in a lawful course, yet go gay, and
haunt Alehouses day after day? This cannot be borne out but by some bad
dealing. Therefore you who have your Princes Sword and Oath put into your hands
for such matters; as you tender the glory of GOD, the welfare of your
Country, your Sovereigns glory, and the salvation of your own souls, be
zealous against both Drunkenness and Idleness, and let not those houses stand
open, that are open I^nes to one or both. And what I have said of these, I
would have to be said of all other works, and workers of iniquity. And so I
come to that which the Prophet means by the wicked of the Land.

All the workers of iniquity, etc.
THe wicked which the Prophet before spoke of, he here, by an exegesi^ or
exposition, calls the workers of iniquity. By which he means such as give
themselves over to wantonness, to work al uncleanness even with
greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. and such as commit sin, not unwillingly, but with
purpose of heart.

Doct.
From whence this Doctrine is taught, that every doer of evil is not a wicked
person, but he that does evil, and will do it. David had many faults; so have
the best Men; for in many things we sin a^, Iam. 3.2. yet they are not to be
numbered among the wicked. Zachary and Elizabeth were both sinners, yet the
Scripture calls them not wicked, but just persons, and persons just before
God; that is, in Gods account just; and concerning the Law unreprovable; that
is, unreprovable by Man, Luke 1.6. Paul likewise after his conversion had a
body of death, but no body of wickedness, Romans 7.24.

The Reasons.
First, the doer of evil may do evil against his will, or as carried to it by
some violence, and yet be a good Man, and so opposite to one that is wicked and
does purposely offend: for he is no sinner, who in truth and deed desires
to be none.

Secondly, he is a wicked person, not who sins, but who is of the trade
and work of sin, and who is led by it, as a Dog in a line after his
Keeper. Also, he that works sin, 1 Ioh. 3.8. that is, that follows it as
a man does his trade, is a wicked sinner. But he that does evil (sometimes)
does not so offend: and when a good Man offends, ^t is not his work but the
sin that dwells in him, Romans 7.17. and, can he who thus is rather
overtaken by sin then an ouertaker of sin, be properly called wicked.

Uses.
Use 1.
Here we see what may be thought of those, who when they behold or hear of the
frailties of Gods children, judge them as wicked as themselves, who daily
offend and with greediness; and excuse their wilful wickednesses by the
unwilling slippes of those that are sorry that they do evil. But it is one
thing to have sin in us, and another thing to have it reigning in us, as it
does in the workers of iniquity, who give their wills, affections, and
members, as servants unto it. Indeed no man can say his heart is clean, Pro.
20.9. and sin dwells, and has dwelt, and will dwell in the best that ever
was, is, or shall be begotten by Man. But sin is in the godly as an ill
Tennant, that they would but cannot put out: and the godly are in sin as a
Malefactor in prison, that is in hold, and would be at liberty. So it is not
with the wicked; for they, without striving, willingly serve sin, make it
their trade and occupation, and delight in nothing more then to do evil. They
live by it, as a man does by his meat, and walk in it ordinarily, as
Travelers by the way. Sin reigns in them, Romans 6.12. and, by such
regiment, expels all voluntary goodness, it self only having the Kingdom
and glory. They wallow in sin, and rise not from unrighteousness. And these
the Prophet calls the wicked of the land.

An instruction (therefore) to put difference between the sins of Gods
children, and the works of iniquity in Saethans children. Both may do evil,
but both do not evil in like measure, nor with like mind: therefore the one
sort ^re, and may be called the doers of evil; the other wicked. The place
follows, out of which the Prophet purposes to destroy these wicked of the
Land.

From the City of the Lord, etc.
BY the City of the Lord, in these last words of the Psalm, the Prophet
means Jerusalem, which is called the City of the great King, Matthew. 5.35.
for as the Lord out of all the world chose the Land of Canaan to be his
portion: so out of all Canaan he chose Jerusalem to be his place, where he
would put his Tabernacle, and set his Temple, Deuteronomy. 12.5. and 1 King. 8.29.
Metaphorically, he means by the City of the Lord, the Church of God: and so
the reformation of the Church shall be his first and chiefest care.

The Doctrine is; in all reformation^, the Churches should have the first
place. The Commandment which Christ gives, Mat. 6.33. First seek the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, belongs to all, teaching them with
their first care and best means, to promote the glory of GOD in his Church.
This David practiced himself, 2 Samuel 6. 14.15. and 7.1.2. and commanded to
his Son, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.10. By this Solomon ascended into a most glorious
seat (as is noted by the Lions at his feet on either side) and sat down
above all the Kings of the earth; whose glory (so sitting) was such that he
seemed to be a new Adam, reentred into the Paradise of God; or rather as the
Son of God, whose glory, in a sort, was shadowed in his. And the Lord
greatly prospered Hezekiah, because, with his morning care he opened the door
of the Temple of the Lord, which his Father A^az had shut up, 2 Chronicles. 31.21.
More examples and precepts to this effect might be alleged; but these may
suffice that have been spoken of

The Reasons.
First, Religion and Godliness, (which are the Iachin and Boaz, the two strong
and durable Pillars of Gods Church, 1 King. 7.21.) are the two, and principal
two necessary proppes of a sanctified state, without which it falls.

Secondly, if a man that has the charge of the Kings house, in the Kings
absence, will carefully look unto all the rooms of the same, but specially to
those (that they be clean and in good order) into which the King, in person,
will come: shall not they, who have the keeping of Gods house, (which is his
beautiful Temple,) though they must not neglect the out-roomes of the
Commonwealth, yet (specially) look to the presence, and those holy Chambers
in the which Christ will keep his Passe-ouer with his Disciples, that they be
trimmed? Mark. 14.15.

Thirdly, the Church, as the first moveable, must be first stirred and well
ordered, or the wheels of the Commonwealth will (all of them) either stand
still, or go in no order. Therefore were they reproved by Haggai the Prophet,
who builded their own houses, and dwelt in settled houses, but neglected or
did not regard Gods house. Agg. 1.2.4.

Uses.
An admonition to all Rulers and Governors, Use.
in all their purposes, specially in their Parliament and State-consultations,
to set the motions of policy under the weighty bills of the Church, till
Gods tabernacle have all his pinnes and whole furniture. And here that which
Azariah the Prophet said to Asa the King, and to all Judah and Benjamin; may
truly and fitly be spoken^ to all Kings, as to Asa, and to all their Nobility,
as to the royal seed of Judah, and to all the people, as to Benjamin: the
Lord is with you while you be with him, and if you seek him, He will be found
of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The first
fruits are Gods: He that denies these, denies Gods right, and refuses to
give him his royalties.

But there are in the holy City, that is, in the Church wicked persons (as
the^e will ever be) that must be cut off. Doct. 2.
Where the point taught is: the Church visible is a mixed assembly, wherein are
good and bad, true believers and hypocrites. Some are sound members, and some
not members, but certain superfluous and troublesome humors in the veins of
the Church, living in it as Goats among Sheep, and being in it as tares among
Corn, Matthew. 13.27. Jerusalem in the days of Christ, was called the holy
City: yet in it were blind leaders of the blind, a corrupt Priesthood, and
ministry of sacrilege. Matthew. 15.14. This is that great sheet, knit at the
four corners, and let down to the earth, wherein are all manner of beasts and
foul, clean and unclean. Act. 10.11.12: and this is that drawnet of souls,
that gathers of all kinds, good and bad souls. Matthew. 13.47.48.

The Reasons.
There must be heresies in the Church, and Schisms in Doctrine. But there can
be no heresies, but there must be heretics to teach them, even in the Church;
nor Schisms, but where are Schismatikes to make them, even from the Church. 1 Corinthians. 11.19. Further, the faith of the good must be tried: 1 Pet. 1.7. And
how can that be if there be no bad to try them?

Secondly, Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it. Ephesians. 5.25.26. And wherefore sanctify it, but because it was
unclean, and yet a Church? When he presents it to his Father, it shall be
without spot, but till he take it from the dross of mortality to present it,
it shall have spots, yea it self shall be spotted, and live with spotted men.

Use.
The use reproves those who think there can be no sound Church, Use.
where are any corrupt members, and who, for the evil which are in the
Church, forsake the good that are in it. Hebr. 10.25.38.39. There was a Judas
in Christ's company, and at Christ's table, yet did Christ suffer him, neither
showed him to the other Apostles, that they might separate from him. Which he
did (no doubt) to show that among Professors there will be always faulty
Professors. The Magistrate should reform them, but Christians may not
separate for them; neither depart from the company of the Church, because of
that evil company that is in the Church. Indeed, we should not make them
our companion^: and we ought always to separate from their sins. But shall I
run from my Fathers house, because a bad servant is in it? No doubt, but
there were good men who abode in that Church where the watchmen were blind,
and where they were (all) dumb Dogs, who should with wholesome barking, have
driven away the Wolf, or given warn^^g of his coming: or where were they?
Esa. 56.10. If a brother walk inordinately, we should withdraw our selves
from him, not from the Church because of him, 12 Thessalonians. 3.6. 1
Corinthians. 5.11. So I conclude, that to separate from a Church is unlawful,
where many things unlawful, and not so refined from the dross of flesh, are
practiced in that Church.

ROMANS 16.27. To God, only wise, be praise, through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

IOS. 24.15. I, and my house will serve the Lord.

ACT. 10.1. Cornelius, with all his household, feared God.

FINIS.
GODS Gentle Remembrance, this last Summer. Anno 1613.

OR AN EXPOSITION on part of the Parable of the lost Son.

BY ROBERT HORN.

PSALM. 111. verse. 4. He has made his wonderful works to be had in
remembrance: the Lord is merciful, and full of compassion.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Francis Burton, and are to be sold at the sign
of the green Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, RICHARD ATKINS, Esquire: at Tuffe-leigh, in the County
of GLOCEST. My special good friend; Grace and Peace.
YOur bounty (Worshipful Sir) besides my obligation to your Richard Atkins,
Esquire, Justice in one of the Welsh Circuits, and one of his Majesty's
Council in the Marches of Wales.
Fathers name, after his blessed death, has deserved a better oblation then
the tender of this small Book; which, by way of thankfulness to you, and
remembrance of Him, in all thankfulness, I send to you, and abroad into the
world under your Name. It pleased, that your Religious and (truly) godly
Father, to seek Me out in a dark sky, or night of distress, to do me
good: which he spared not to do while he lived; For, as another Onesiphorus,
he often refreshed me, 2 Timothy 1.16. the Lord give mercy to his House, and
Posterity for it. Also, I know few like-minded, who will faithfully care for
our matters, as he did: and, where men (earthly minded) seek their own, that
is, seek that, and that only, which is nothing worth when they have it; he
sought in his life, and found in his death that which is Jesus Christ, Phil.
2.20.21.

But what need I to embalme him (being dead) with my report, who (living) had
so good report of all who knew him, and the grace in him: and dying sweetly in
the peace of his Master, and his good conscience, like that box of ointment,
which (being very precious) the woman powered on Christ's head, in his breaking
by death, cast forth that name, that is better then the best ointment, Eccles.
7.3. Mark. 14.3. A name of a right good savor, such as has filled the house;
and may be an ornament and crown of rejoicing to the House and Stock he came
of? For you that now live, the Heir of his House, and (I trust) of his good
mind in good things. You are to remember (as I hope you forget not) that your
life is in that age and time, wherein you may, as in the morning, sow your
seed, Eccles. 11.6. the good seed of the doctrine of salvation, in the field of
your own heart, and furrows of those that are of your family and proper
charge.

I beseech you, let not your hand rest, and be diligent to take heed to your
self, and them, for all necessary instruction in the way of life: so tilling
them, spiritually, for GOD, and his true fear, that your whole House may be
as the field of the righteous, which the Lord will bless, and the name of it
may be, The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. So did your good Father in the mids
of You, whiles he lived: and so (good Sir) do you constantly in the mids of
your own House, by his example, who (now is gone. He learned of Abraham, who
commanded his householde after him in such matters, Genes. 18.19. and learn
You of Him, that the blessing of Abraham may follow You and Yours. I write not
doubtingly, and I have good confidence in the Lord, that you are so minded. In
which good meaning, and intention of yours, to a work so full of spiritual
consolation and godliness, you must look for adversaries. The more truly
you fear God, the more you shall find what enmity is against it. Look for
this in every good purpose under the Sun. The world that is not of the
fashion of Heaven, Romans 12.2. will be against you. The flesh, that is all for
it self, Romans 13.14. will lust against the Spirit, and the good motions of the
Spirit in you, Galat. 5.17. and the Devil (the Centurion of the band) will
pursue you with his armies of temptations, on your right hand, and on your
left, Ephesians. 6.12. But He that is with you is stronger then all these, and, as
long as Michael is your leader, and his Angels your fellow-Souldiours, what can
do you hurt? if God be on your side, what matter who be against you? Romans
8.31. If you love the love of Christ with all your heart; who, or what shall
separate you from it? who, or what shall make you to forsake it? verse. 35.
Neither the worlds injuries, nor the fleshes allurements, nor all the malice
of the enemy, over all which you are more then Conqueror, through him that
has loved you, verse 37. shall be able to take Christ from you, or the holy
Spirit of Christ out of you; by whom you are sealed to the day of Redemption,
Ephesians. 4.30.

Strive (therefore) forward (cheerfully) in this narrow way of life: fight the
good fight of Faith to the end: whet your heart upon the Word, and make the
Statutes of IEHOVA, your Meditation and Counselors: pray in your holy Faith:
hold that you have with increase^ get ground of the commune enemy daily; and
that by doing well, while you have time. This matter requires your earnest
meditation, and deepest thoughts: and, therefore, against all encumbrances and
impediments of spiritual life, already remembered, or further spoke of by Saint
John, as the lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and pride of life, 1
John 2.16. put forth your self courageously in the name of the Lord of Hosts,
who will order the whole battle for you, and finish it to your everlasting
victory, and joyful triumph over all powers, earthly and infernal.

How ill they proceed, that do not so strive, I have endeavored to show in
the meditations that follow, concerning the sin and punishment of the
prodigal son: persuading my self that of Him you have nothing in you but
his repentance, and grace to come home to your heavenly Father, where you have
with Him (young and ignorantly) in anything; (and who has not in Iam 3.2.
many things) declined from obedience to God, or the ways of his truth. These
I took to task the beginning of this last Summer, at what time the Lords
storm fell, that caused so general a fear: I would it had effected a like
general amendment in us. For the now coming forth of them, the Apostle, who
says, Be instant in season, and out of season, 2 Timoth. 4.2. shall answer
for me, if any shall think them unseasonable.

Besides, how can that be, or be judged, with any color of soundness,
unseasonable, that teaches us to remember what GOD would not have forgotten:
namely, his wonderful works, which he made, the last two months of May and
June, to be remembered? Psalm. 111.4. Or, if all his works must praise him,
Psalm. 145.10, why should not those praise him in the Gate, which he wrought so
fearfully, and so lately among us? And, is it ever too late and unseasonable,
to show to the world how graciously, and how strangely, the Lords late mercies
got the better hand of his other fearful works, by taking his frowns from
the sky, and by putting a more loving countenance upon it, in the blessed
weather that ensued? I call it the Lords mercy, or not the least of those
mercies that are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. For, did our repentance, or
any work of ours seek and find that comfortable alteration at Gods hands?
Or, did not the greatest number desire a better, and more kindly season, and
complain of a season so (generally) hurtful and intemperate with sin in
their right hand? was one Sabbath for all that power of thunder that so cracked
about our ears, and pouring Rain that so fell upon the Earth, that is, in
such abundance, that it made Brooks and Rivers to rise, and the water to stand
in the Furrows, less profaned in Town and Country? I doubt not, but some
stood, as Aaron in that breach and gappe with their Censer of seruent
Supplication to the Lord, by whom (in all likelihood) he was entreated, and
who sought and found him in due time, Psalm. 32.6. Yet what was that to the
general inconformitie that still bears sway? And here who can but
prophecy? for seeing that neither Judgment nor mercy can prevail, what can
we look for, but destruction upon destruction? Esai. 1.5.

The last Winter, which was in the year 1612, what mercy did GOD show, to
make it so mild in so great want of F^dder as was then: so great, that (I
think) greater in our time has not been observed? Indeed, it began
sharply, and proved sharper to true Christians, and lovers of the GOSPEL,
Nouemb. 6. Anno 1612.
then that sharpest Winter which about four years since, destroyed all our
Flowers: for, it took away our most beautiful Rose and Flower: our
Carnation-Flower, the fairest in the Garden of Christendom, which the LORD
plucked up for himself, to plant in the Garden of his own presence: I mean,
the beloved of GOD and Men, HENRY, our late Prince, the Flower of our Age, whom
the Lord took from us by death in the Flower of his Age, that was so lovely.
But, who is more turned to GOD for it?

This last Summer begun roughly, and in storms, which caused weeds to come
up abundantly: which weeds GOD sent, as Lions, upon the standing Corn, to
pull it down. The latter end of it, was with great mixture of favor, and in
a fruitful calm: and GOD in mercy, has given us, but with great abatement,
those fruits that some despaired off, yet have we not turned to him that has
smitten us, Esai. 9.13. Amos 4.6.8.9.10.11. And now, if neither the sweet love
of GOD can stir us, nor his smart wrath rowse us, what will do us good? But
I will end: praying the Almighty God of the spirits of all flesh, to inspire
Your heart more and more with all grace and gracious parts, needful for soul
and body; for the ways of this life, and for Your sure way to eternal life
hereafter. So I commend this poor testimony and Mite of my thankful heart,
to your Worships kind and favorable acceptance; and You, and Your Christian
Yoke Fellow, to the special grace and keeping of your, and our, most merciful
GOD and loving Father in CHRIST IESV; with a mind to be what the same God
shall enable me to be, for the further help, and service of your Faith: and
rest

Febr. 19. 1613. Your Worships to his power, in the Lord Jesus, ROBERT HORN.

AN EXPOSITION on the fifteenth Chapter of Saint LVKE.
Verses. 13.14.15. etc. So not long after, when the younger son had gathered all
together, he took his journey into a far country, and there he wasted his
goods with riotous living.

14 Now, when he had spent all, there arose a great dearth throughout that
land, and he began to be in necessity.

15 Then he went and claue to a Citizen of that country, and he sent him to his
Farm to feed Swine.


13. So not long after, when the younger Son, etc. Verse. 13.

IN this Chapter, or part of Scripture, being a Chapter which brings much
true and sound comfort to touched and mourning sinners, are set down three
parables. The first, of the lost Sheep, verse. 4.5. the second, of the lost
Groat, verse. 8.9.10. and the third, of the prodigal and lost Son, verse.
11.12.13. etc. to the end of the Chapter. The occasion is to be seen in the
first, and second verses, which was the coming of many Publicans and sinners
to Christ, and for it, the murmuring of the Scribes and Pharisees against
Christ.

In this parable of the Prodigal and lost son, two things are spoken of
principally, as the Father and his two sons in the literal sense: and God
the father, and his children, of different inclination and ways, in the
mystical. For, by the elder, or bragging son, are meant the Scribes and
Pharisees, and by the younger, and prodigal, Publicans and sinners. The first
sort seemed to live in the bosom of God, the second professed to live in the
botom of the wrath of God. The one kind were (seemingly) righteous, the other
(apparently) profane. The one in the Church, and under the Law, the other not
in the Church, nor under a law, but out of it, and without law, in their far
country of sin.

And so by the lost Son, we may understand such sinners as are not called
out of the broad way of their sins to the path of life, and yet are
(secretly) marked to salvation, and shall be (mercifully) called to repentance
in the Lords good time, as the lost son here. Of him my purpose is to speak
now, and but of some of the Parable concerning him; as of his sin, and
entry-dore to Repentance. His sin is, that that which was before, he
received his portion; or, after he had received it. His sin before he
received his portion, was his greediness to have it, and impudency in calling
for it: His sin after he received it, was his leaving of his Father, and
Fathers house: and, after he had deprived him of the comfort of a Son, and
(unjustly) of that portion that belonged not to such a Son, a wasting of his
goods with a riotous life. And this is spoken of in this 13. verse. where we
have that, that was the occasion of his sin, and the sin it self. The
occasion was his gathering together of his goods, and that substance which his
Father had given him. And here our Savior, by the Evangelist, shows how
dangerous a thing fullness is, even to Gods own children, by abuse. For, it is
said, when he had gathered all together, etc. the meaning is, when he was
left to himself, and to his own caruing, in these outward things, having Money
in his purse, and the raines of himself in his own hand, he would endure his
Fathers house and service no longer, but hasted out of it, as out of some close
Prison, desiring the open Air of Liberty, and to depart far enough from his
Fathers discipline and fear, that nothing might stop his way to the dissolute
life he intended to pass with sinners, out of Gods Church, in a strange land.
So long as he was at his fathers finding, stinted by him, it does not appear
that he poured out himself to any such riot: but after his portion came to
his own hands, he went into a far Country with it, and wasted it with
riotous living.

The point here taught, is: Men had more need to watch sin in a full estate,
Doctr.
then in a poor life. In the 69. Psalm, verse 22. the Prophet speaking of the
full table of those desperate sinners that had dealt wickedly with God, and ill
with him: wishes (and that with a Prophets spirit) that their table might be
a snare unto them, that is^ that they might be snared to destruction in it: and
their prosperity, their ruin: that is that that wall of a prosperous and
wealthy estate, to which they so leaned, in their contempt of God, and rage
against his people, might fall upon them, and in that great fall, send them
from a peaceable life to perdition.

And this he prays for, with a knowledge, by the spirit of prophecy that was
in him, of their reprobate estate, and that they were the enemies whom the Lord
would destroy. But, what furthered their sin, and hastened their end more or
sooner, then unsanctified fullness, and that hill which they supposed to be so
strong in their immovable prosperity? Saul, being of a low degree and spirit
in his Fathers house, lived commendably and well, 1 Samuel 9.2.21. But, having a
kingdom, and being King, he left the Lord, and did much wickedness. Satan
would have set up Christ in prosperity, as upon an hill, thinking that if any
estate could, a full estate would make him fall from God, and fall down to
him. But Satan could find nothing in Christ, John 14.30. that is, nothing for
his purpose in any temptation, though he found corruption enough in others,
even the best, after they were tempted in such manner: for, when David had rest
and ease, by such rest and ease, he fastened the point of this nail in him,
and drove it to the head in his adultery, and bloody sin, 2 Samuel 11.4.
Peter, feeling the fire of a warm estate, denied his Master by fear, John
18.18.25.27.

And (therefore) as the mild and gentle beams of the Sun have more force
upon a wayfaring man, then the strongest gale of wind that blows in the
sky: for, the Sun, by his warm beams, makes him to cast off his Cloak,
and to put off his Coat, as a burden too heavy to be borne, where the
vvinde, with his loud and cold blasts makes him both faster to hold, and
more closely to wrap about him, both Cloak and Coat: so the vvarme Sun of
prosperity can make us more naked to God by sin, then the cold wind of
times, blustering with troubles. Therefore has a Christian more need in
prosperity to watch sin, then in days of adversity and trouble: which may
further be proved by these reasons following.

The reasons.
First, Satan has more cords to bind us, in those temptations which are on
our right hand, fet from profits, pleasures, and honor, then in those which
are on our left, drawn from adversity, want, and baseness. Which made him to
reserve his temptation, taken from prosperity, to the last place, in which he
reposed all, as in his best weapon, or vveapon of proof. Secondly, prosperity
is a slipperie path: a man may soon fall in such a way: but adversity is a
more rugged and sure way, not so apt to fail us. Thirdly, in a full life, we
have more means of sinning, then in a bare estate. For what will not wealth
do to the help of riot, that poverty cannot? A poor man cannot offend by
drunkenness, by whoredom, by oppression, by fullness of bread, by garish
apparel, as a rich man may.
Uses.
Use 1.
Therefore no cause to be secure when we have fairest weather with the world
in these outward things. For, then (commonly) the foulest is within. In Luke
Chap 12. ver. 19. He that ouernight had his vvarme Sun, in much goods laid up
for many years: that is, which he supposed should continue long, and were
(presently) gone; was in the cold shadow before the next morning, or rather
in the arms and shadow of cold and senseless death. O fool, this night they
will fetch away thy soul from thee, verse. 20. Belshazzar was (presently)
driven from his Banquets of Wine to a banquet of Fear, where he saw in his
deepest rests the fingers that wrote and wrought his greatest vn-rest and
trouble. For, they pointed to his present unhappy change, from a glorious
Monarchy to an inglorious Sacrifice, by the sword of Darius of the Medes, Dan.
5.4.5.6. And the Text says, that the same night was Belshazzar the King of the
Caldeans slain, verse. 30. Also, when did the envious Man sow his tares, but
while he slept that had sowed good seed in his field, Matthew. 13.24.25. So
when we promise to our selves, or the flattering world does offer to us the
sleeps of a quiet and easy life, then does Satan sow in our minds the tares
and impediments of true Peace and Righteousness.

The young man, who rejoiced in his youth, must, for that abuse of his youth,
come unto judgment, Eccles. 11 9. And if so; then, what security or sound
peace is to be found in the best worldly estate so threatened with judgment,
and tormented with fear? What better to have our fill of Quails, and they to
come out again at our nosthrils? Numbers 11.20. When we are filled with the
Quails of what we would have, we may think our selves well: but how
well? and how long well, when, at that very instant, and while that sweet
meat is between our teeth, the wrath of God, by such lusting against God, is
ready to fall upon us? when Satan is pleased, and the strong man has
possession, all things are in peace, Luke 11.21. but what peace (more cruel
then any war) is that which has peace with Satan, and war with God?

Use 2.
Secondly, here we see that goods are not good, but by their good use. They
cannot make us better, this power belongs to the Lord, Psalm. 62.10. prouder
they may make us, and more to trust to our selves, and less in God: or, they
can do us no good without grace, and the desire of them cannot but purchase
us great harm: for, 1 Timoth. 6.10. the root of all evil is in such
covetousness.

Many say, Who will show us any good? that is, vvorldly good, Psalm. 4.6. but
there is no good in that: and this is true good, to have Gods countenance,
which is more then all riches; and God with us, which is better then all
worlds. For, it is the blessing of GOD that makes rich, Proverb. 10.22. that
is, riches make not a rich man, but Gods grace with riches; and he shall rise
to wealth, not that rises early, Psalm. 127.2. but to whom God gives riches,
and the power to use them, Eccles. 5.18. To be rich here, is to have a good
and comfortable estate here. Not to have much goods, but to have much good of
that which we have, be it much or little. The wicked may be rich, but not in
such manner; rich, having the plague, but not the blessed contentment of
riches, which is the gift of GOD, Eccl^s. 2.26. This young man had riches, but
was he rich? We shall (after) hear how poor he was when he would feign
have filled his belly with the husks that the Swine did eat, because no man
gave unto him, verse 16. And so rich are they, who having wealth without
grace, are so commonly, as it were, driven from their full tables, with this
young man, and lost Son, to great hunger, and the diet of husks. So much for
the occasion of this lost Sons sin: the sin it self follows.

[ He took his journey into a far Country.] Here the Evangelist, or rather
our Savior, by him, speaks of this young man's sin in two things. First,
telling us vvhither he went; and (secondly) what he did in all that time of
his stray-life. He went into a far Country: that is, as far as he could
go from his Fathers presence and fear. For, the nature of such sinners is, to
remove as far as they can, in their persons and conversation from God: that
is, from Gods word, and the assembly of Gods people, being professed vagabonds
and Cains from his Temple and Service.

Doctr.
This is the meaning of the words. The Doctrine and thing taught, is: It is the
nature of sin, and property of sinners, to turn from God and to turn the
back to his house, and presence there. The wicked in Job, meaning to live in
pleasures, and to grow in wealth; that is, in wealth gathered with a deceitful
hand, Job 21.7. say unto God, Depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways, verse 14. So in the Psalm, those wicked, who were so proud
that they sought not God, Psalm. 10.4. and covetous that they contemned him: in
whose mouth was cursing and deceit, and under whose tongue lay mischief and
vanity, ver. 7. set the judgments of God high above their sight, verse 5.
that is, set the God of judgment as far off as they could in his high acts,
that his power might not daunt them, nor his presence be a curb unto them.
Jonah (Gods own Prophet) when he refused to go to Nineueh, to preach to that
great City, as the Lord had commanded him, fled from his presence under sail,
Jonah 1.3. and the Angels that sinned, left their habitation; that is,
original condition, which was to minister before the glory of God, 2 Pet. 2.4.
Jude 6. knowing that to live in sin, and to live in Gods presence, who is of
pure eyes, and cannot behold, but with detestation, any sin, Habac. 1.13. is
intolerable madness.

Also, they, who in Amos, approached to the seat of violence, put far away
from them the evil day, Amos 6.3. the meaning is; they said to God, be far
off, when they said to the seat of violence, come near. And, when they sell
judgment, who are set up to give true judgment in matters: God must walk in
the Circle of Heaven: that is, God must not see them while they purchase such
an Aceldama to them and theirs.

Thus it is plain that they turn from God who mean to do eu^ll, and from
his Shoole and Discipline: and the reasons are: First, Out of Gods sight (for
they think they can be where he shall not see them) they presume of greater
liberty, then when he is near: as a wicked Son meaning grosely to offend,
will not do it in his Fathers house and sight, but (if he can) further of,
and rather before a stranger then him. Secondly, the further from God, and the
further removed from Gods people, the more they shall have to bear them
company in their sin, and greater and stronger means to embolden them to
wickedness: there they shall have none to dissuade them; and, in company,
none, that will not run with them into all that excess of riot, that they
follow so eagerly, and love so well. Thirdly, they that evil do, hate the
light, John 3.20. God is light, 1 John 1.5. and (therefore) evil doers, hating
to do well, hate God, or to be where God is that is light, and cannot abide any
darkness of sin, or ungodliness whatsoever.


But, can a man go from God? No, Quest.
not out of his reach and knowledge, Answ.
Psalm. 139.7.8.9.10. yet he may go away from Gods awe, by his rebellious
will: or, he may go from his house, where his presence, that is, familiar
presence, is.

I would they could think of this, who (so ordinarily) on his Sabbaths go
from his service to the service of their bellies, and from his dinner to their
carnal dinners: for, such break from his presence, and little regard his
providence.

Uses.
We see (then) what to judge of those, Use 1.
who (though they cannot go from God, that is, from his reach and knowledge,)
yet love to go as far as they can from his house, where his presence is.
Such are in sin, and in the right kind, Sinners.

Consider (therefore) when thou go from Gods house that thou go from God:
and that, departing from his word, thou go, as it were, into a far
Country from him. And, what is it to go from God, but to run into evil?
and what to turn from GOD, but to turn unto vanity? Cain, when God had cast
him out of Adams family, said: Thou have cast me from thy face this day, Genesis
4.14. His meaning was, that in that family (which was the Church then) Gods
face was seen in his worship: and therefore he took it for a great part of
his punishment, that he was so cast out, or rather, had so cast himself out
by his sin. And, shall Cains mouth condemn you, who (so ordinarily) by your
inordinate ways, depart from God, and, in contempt, from his house? rather,
consider your ways, your straying ways, and turn your feet unto Gods
testimies, Psalm. 119.59.

To turn to God, is to turn from unrighteousness; and to return to his
house and presence, from Recusancie, and other profane absences, is to begin
to be virtuous. Would thou (then) be thought and accounted one that is
desirous to leave sin? set God in place, and his great power before thee: or,
though thou have long put off, would thou, at last, enter the way of grace? O
then, enter into his Courts, and come before his face, in the assembly of such
as praise him, and call upon his name. Let them turn from God, who mean, not
only to turn from him, but against him by raging oaths: nor only, to turn
from the graces of his house, but from all grace and goodness: but let us draw
near with reverence, who purpose far to remove from such evil doers, and
doings; and seek his face, who have no meaning, and would be thought to have
none, to provoke him to his face.

Also, Use 2.
this teaches, where God is removed; or where there is any removing from God,
there can be nothing but sin, or a mind to sin. Men, at their meals,
turn out God: CHRIST cannot be known at their breaking of Bread, Luke
24.30.31. Let such take heed that they do not eat and drink their own
damnation, or last. At their recreations, God must not be in place: or, how
dare they be so drunken in them, as they are, playing, or no better then
playing, from weeks end to weeks end? while they are at their sports, they
will not have to do with God: or, would they dare to speak and work such
uncleanness, and God so near? Such rejoicing is not good: 1 Cor. 5.6. and,
where God cannot be at thy play, Devils are thy play-fellowes. So much for
this young man's first kind of sin: Now follows what he did in the time of
his stray-life.

[ He wasted his goods with riotous living.] Our Savior having showed, in
this lost Son, what is common to Adams young men in their Fathers house,
pricked with the prouender of fullness: as that their Fathers house cannot
hold them, and that they cannot endure with their tender soles to tread upon
his hard pauement, so strawed with Nettles and pricks of sharp, but wholesome
severity: here, he shows what this Gallant did out of his Fathers house, in
a strange and far Country, where he had more scope and liberty for his
prodigal ways. He wasted all, says the Text. The meaning is, when his lusts
were his lords, so as they might command him in any thing, and prevail with
him for any purpose; all was too little to put into their mouth, and he must
only grind to them, Job 31.10. The point is, Doctr.
when man departs from the service of God, doing service to his lusts, there
will be no spare made of Gods blessings.

Lust is a great spender; it is one of those three things, or worse rather then
all those three things that will not be satisfied; and the fourth that says
not, It is enough, Proverb. 30.15. By it, Adam lost Paradise and himself. Genesis
3.11.23. the lusting Israelites lost Canaan, by means of it, Numb. 11.5.6. and
14.23.30. and Solomon lost his wisdom, and had (almost) lost GOD by his
lusts, 1 King. 11.4. Absalom did not only loose all grace, but good nature and
shame, when he went into his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of all Israel,
2 Samuel 16.22. Also, the Gentiles that followed their lusts, how were they left
of God and common honesty? Romans 1.24.26.27. Likewise, Christians, so far as
they were followers of their lusts^ how untowardly, how negligently did they
follow God? the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
how did they command and carry them from the service of God, to the base
service of sin, 1 John 2.16. From whence are wars, says Saint James, but
from the lusts that fight in your members? Iam. 4.1. Gal. 5.17. as if he had
said, this, that you are so unquiet in your selves, and passionate against
others, has no other cause, but your own distempered affections, quarrelling
always about somewhat that you would have, or do, toward your profit, or
pleasure, or vvorldly credit: and these disorder all the wheels within you,
making them to run by their poyse and weight, without any stop of
contentment. What prophaneth Gods Sabbath^ so much, as the lust of
covetousness, or lust of wantonness? For, either for our own markets we
neglect and loose Gods markets: or, we vnserue God to serve our bellies,
dancing to the pipe, when we should dance before the Arc,

The lust of whoredom, how does it waste the substance, and destroy the
soul? Pro. 6.26.32. and 29.3. or, like a fire, that deuoureth all to
destruction, Job 31.12. waste both body and soul? Pro. 5.9.10. and 6.33. He
that feeds among the Lillies, abhors such unclean Goats.

The lust of drunkenness, what vvounds procures it, what stripes, and
scratches, and desperate stabbes? Prou. 23.29.30.

The lust of daunces, and lustful after them, how do they martyr their
bodies, and fill the soul with wickedness? They who cannot serve God with
patience, one hour on the Sabbath, can serve the Devil with delight half the
day, and some part of the night of the Sabbath, which they take up such lusts.
Mean while, whose Martyrs be such? Gods? or the Devils? whose day keep
they? Gods? or the Devils day? and, to whom do they dedicate their Sabbaths? to
God? or to the Devil? making them days, not of holiness, but of their lusts?
Thus it appears, that the wicked, in their life of lusts, make no spare of
Gods blessings, and may further appear by these reasons. The reasons.

The first, may be taken from the contrariety that is between such lusting
ones, and Gods faithful ones. For, as the true Christian gives all to God, so
the carnal man gives all to his lusts, Pro. 13.4. Ezech. 23.5.6.11.12. etc.
Prou. 7.18. and 31.3.4. Romans 13.14.

Secondly, they that are lusts servants, will do any thing at lusts bidding:
and, what did this lost Son withold from his lusts which he served? They
that are taken with the net of the whorish woman, will they not, for her sake,
bring all to a morsel of bread? Prou. 6.26. This young man, in a like matter,
brought all to nothing. Shall I need to go into a far Country for examples?
does not our own Land so full of whoredoms, so poor by whoredom, and other
lusts, on which so many have consumed all, their souls and all, give too
plentiful witness to this truth?

Thirdly, all things are vile to that a man does most affect: for, if we love
God best, what will we not do for him? Phil. 3.8. and, if we love the world
best, what will we not take from God to give to it? Parents love their own
children best; and therefore they lay up for them, and not for strangers. So
they that most affect, and best esteem of vile and stinking lusts, will
sacrifice every precious thing to them.

Uses.
If (then) we would be good husbands of grace, Use 1.
we must not be under the power of our lusts: for, they fight against the
soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. that is, the salvation of it, and graces in it. We put bits
into our Horses mouths, says Saint James, Iam. 3.3. much more should we put
the bit of Reason into the unbridled chaps of lust, lest when we should
turn it from vanity, it turn us from GOD. That we may so do, we must
(first) mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, Romans 8.13. Now, to
mortify flesh, is so to keep down the soul in that part which is fleshly,
that it shall command us in nothing: or, to mortify it; is to do nothing for
it, in nothing to gratify it, and to take all life from it. Not to restrain
it a little, or, a little to hold it in Genesis 20.6. Hest. 5.10
, as some do, but, after the manner of Gods children, to kill it, or so to
master it, that (if it will live in us) it shall live as an underling, and
faintly, and droupingly, as one drawing to the grave. And to mortify the flesh
by the spirit; is to set it down with arguments, not from our carnal lusts,
but from the Word and Spirit: for, some think to drown their lusts in outward
things, in which they rather swim then are drowned: and this makes them to
say, that if they might be thus rich, and thus well reported of, and thus
seated, they would desire no more.

But the sickness of desire being within, how can things without us be the
cure of it? Is the dropsy cured with a parcel of Land, with a portion of
Money, or with a brave suite of apparel? No verily: for such things are no
approved Physic, either for dropsy, or other disease. And he, who, having
the dropsy or other sickness, should say, he should be well if he had these
things, should speak but simply.

Lust is a dropsy of the mind; and will things help it, that belong only to
the body, and can (properly) satisfy the mind in nothing? therefore, by thy
spirit the deeds of the flesh must be mortified; that is, by following the
spirit, and not by lusting after carnal things. Secondly, if we will keep
down lust, we must vvatch over it with the word, that is mighty in
operation, and sharper th^n any two edged sword, Hebr. 4.12. If we be young
men, we must cure the dangerous disease of youth by the word, Psalm. 119.9. if
we be men, we must become men of God by it, absolute to every good work, 2.
Tim. 3.16. and, if we be old men, it must be the staff of our age, and
crown of our gray hairs.

A third good mean to subdue lust, is to consider that we are out of our
Country, and strangers here in a Pilgrims life, 1 Pet. 2.11. Some will not
wrestle with their flesh, in this conflict under lust and sin, lest it
should abridge their merry days: but what merry life should a stranger look
for in his far Country here? and what long life, where he is not certain
of one poor hour? and if our life be so uncertain, and must needs be so
uncomfortable, what needs such fear of abridging that mirth which we must
not look for; and of not seeing those many merry days that we do but
dream of? we say, if we take this sad course of mortifying our
concupiscences and lusts, we must not look to live one merry day more. But let
not this care trouble you, says Saint Peter, for ye are Pilgrims and
strangers; and what know ye if ye shall see one short hour more? for,
Pilgrim^ are at night in their Inn, and gone in the morning.

Finally, the best mean to mortify our flesh, that is, the corruption which
is in us, and to master our lusts, is to be girt always with our armor of
opposition to such enemies and traitors in our own bodies, Ephesians. 6.11.12.13.
etc. where we must consider, that our lusts fight against us, and that
therefore we be always provided, upon good and sufficient furniture from the
spirit, and word of God, to fight with them. They will never be friends till
they may command us: therefore should we make sure, never to have peace with
them, that we may not be commanded, but rule in our own house.

A man will weaken his enemy all that he can; we have no worse enemy then
our own corrupt flesh: and, if we forget not this, to b^ing it down, we
shall be in a good way of subduing this old man in us, with his concupiscences
and lusts.

Secondly, Use 2.
we here learn, that to yield to our lusts, is to make neither good nor
saving bargain: for, what shall we get by drawing the heart from God, and by
giving it to the world and flesh, making them Gods? They that so do, lust and
have nothing, Iam. 4 2. Now to desire, and not to obtain, is simple getting:
no, such kill their bodies, and damn their souls. For, when men ((...)
eagerly) desire earthly things, as, Commodity, Pleasures, and Honor, which is
deceitful, they care not how they punish their bodies: the covetous, what he
takes from them: the voluptuous, into what diseases he casts them: and the
ambitious after the shadow of honor, to what dangers and kinds of death he
brings them: and for their souls, they blinde-folde their ^indes, and make
their hearts fa^ and senseless, so that they can neither discern spiritual
thing: nor be moved with them, whether they be threatenings, promises^
judgments, or mercies. And what i^ this, but to kill the body and to damn
the soul? and, what is gotten^ when these are gone? Our duty in this case,
is, to keep our desires within the bounds of Gods will in his word. For, if
we ask any thing according unto it, he hears us, 1 John 5.14. Rahel, when
she would have had children for her lust, the lust of envy in her, had none,
Genesis 30.1. But, when she asked them to Gods pleasure, and prayed for them by
Gods word, she had first Joseph, Genesis 30.22. and then Benjamin, Genesis 35.17.18.

Isaac prayed for a Son twenty year, Genes. 25.20.26. after twenty years
attendance, and when God saw a fit time for him to give, and for Isaac to
receive a Son, he gave him two sons, Genesis 25.24. Thus God puts off his
best children: it is that they should put all unto him, and be content to take
his word for their vvelfare. For, he will will not fail them, nor forsake
them, Hebr. 13.5. If (then) we will be gainers at Gods hands, we must
submit to him for all our vvelfare; where, if we follow our lusts for it,
we shall be as he that earneth wages, and puts them into a broken bag.
Aggi. 1.6.

The way to catch a shadow, is not to follow it, but to fly from it, so will
it follow us: and so the way to have the world, is to deny it: and the way to
be rich, is to be content to be poor: and the way to have health, is to put
all to God for health or sickness. So says a good writer. They (then) who
desire the world more then heaven, and temporal more then eternal riches, and
bodily health, rather then the souls health; take the next way both to loose
the world, and to forsait Heaven; to be poor in wealth and poor in grace,
and to have a sickely body, and lepro^^ soul. So much for the lost Sons
sin: the punishment of it follows.

Verse 14
And when he had spent all, there arose a great dearth throughout that land,
and he began to be in necessity.
WE have heard of the young man's sin; the punishment of it, is occasional
and proper: or, general upon the Country, in these words; and particular upon
himself: and this verse shows what end his sin had, as the next declares
what shifts it put him to. Here it is showed that when he had consumed all
on his lusts, which had eaten him up, and had spent his patrimony upon
Harlots, and with loose companions, in a dissolute life that undid him: God
sent an exceeding famine upon the Country, that was so riotous, and
exceedingly, with want punished him that had so rioted. Where it appears,
that this lost young man made choice of this Country, as most fit for his
young mind to be in: being a land of great excess and fullness, a land stored
with Mates of his own fashion, and that was addicted (altogether) to that
wanttonnes that best pleased him. For, like will to like, as the saying is: and
they that love vanity will follow it: or, as thorns folden one in another,
and as drunkards in their drunkenness, Numb. 1.10. so the tie of such
fellowship will hold together, Proverb. 1.11.14. What a man loves he will
do, and where he loves he will be.

But the point more directly to the Text, aims at the punishment of the whole
Country, and of this lost Son, by a mighty hunger that was sent upon them.
The Country sinned by a fullness of bread; therefore the Lord plagued that
Countries sin by a famine of bread. Where we see a dearth of Creatures for the
abuse of the Creature; and a scarcity of them for their intemperance in them.

Doctr.
The Doctrine that we learn is, in what a Land sins, in that or in some
measure of that sin, it shall be punished with a remove of that blessing.
This Country abused her abundance, therefore was she plagued with want. God
brings a famine of Bread, when men prepare bread for laughter, that is,
excess, Eccles. 10.19. or satietis that will ^^t suffer them to sleep,
Eccles. 5.11. When men will eat till it come out at their nosthrils, Numb.
11.20. and drink, till it come up at their mouth; drinking healths, till they
have no health; the Lord must needs draw the Table. Judah that was prevented
with liberal blessings, having one fruit ripe after another to feed on, in
due order, and with great plenty; Amos 9.13. because she became wanton through
abundance, and kept no measure in sinning against God, as he passed measure in
being gracious to her; therefore was that fruitful Land turned into a barren
Land: the meat was cut off before their eyes: tin women did bake their bread
at one Oven, and delivered it by weight, that is, by small weight again. If
they sowed an hundred Pottels, it yielded but ten: that is, ten of an
hundred, and the principal lost: and they did houle and cry out for the Wheat
and for the Barley, because the Harvest of the field was destroyed, Joel 1.11.
So, David's punishment was in that wherein he sinned: he sinned in numbering the
people, and GOD diminished the number of them by the Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24.15.
Eph^sus dealt not well with her Candlestick, and God put out her Candle, Apoc.
2.5. for, not long after she fell sick of diverse grievous Heresies, D.
Rainolds in his conference with Mr. Heart.
and, at last, dyed of the plague of Mahomet. God knew Iewry by his benefits,
but Iewry would not know God by thankfulness for those benefits, but despised
his Word, and those that brought it, killing some, and stoning some, therefore
the Word departed from them to the Gentiles, and God did let out his Vineyard
to other Husbandmen, Mat. 21.41. It is a true saying therefore, that in what a
man sins, he must look to be punished. The Reasons are.

First, it stands with equity, when a blessing is abused, to withdraw it.
As if Mercy be contemned, to turn Mercy into Justice: if health be abused, to
plague abused health with sickness: and, if the Word be not believed, to
punish that v^beliefe with a believing of lies, 2 These. 2.10.11. Secondly, the
Law of correction was, that according to the measure of the fault, so should
the number of the stripes given for it, be, Deuteronomy. 25.2. According to the
quality of the trespass he was to be beaten that had trespassed, and it is
reason that we be plagued as we have sinned, Apoc. 18.7. Thirdly, it is an
old saying, Like i^ faul^, like in punishment: and, with a little alteration,
as true a saying, Like fault, like punishment.
Uses.
Use 1.
An instruction, when the hand of God is upon a Country, in a scarcity of
grain, or other commodities, with Pharao's chief Butler, to call our faults
to mind that day, Genesis 41.9. when we can say, This day this Scripture is
fulfilled in our cares, Luke 4.21. or, this day there is great want in our
Country, of bread and other sustenance; then, as Adoni-bezek said, we in a
like case of proportionate punishment, should say; As we have done, so God
has rewarded us, Judge. 1.7. We have sinned in our food, and God has
diminished our food; the last year by want of rain, this year by too much
rain: for, God has left a remembrance behind him, and we may yet see where
his finger was. What is the cause of this? Fullness of bread and drunkenness
have reigned among us. Some make a Noah's Arc of their bellies, vitailed with
(I know not) how many kinds of Creatures. One is hungry, and another is
drunken, 1 Cor. 11.21. And what eating with contempt of the poor? what eating,
as in the days of Noah and of Lot, Luke 17.27.28. that is, what dainty and
continual eating? or eating like beasts, that eat all the day, and some part
of the night? and eating with no remembrance of God; using Sauces to let down
excesse^ not to help the stomach, but to oppress it? Nature is content with a
little, and Grace with less; but such feeders, no friends to Nature, and
enemies to Grace, make it their Religion not to serve God, but that which is
their God, the Belly, Phil. 3.19.

You will say, what is this to the poor? I answer, though they cannot offer
so much to the belly, yet it may be the sin as well of the poor as of the
rich, to bring more then enough unto it. A poor man may be given to his belly,
and to consume himself that way, as soon as a richer man.

But let us pass from this sin to the sin of Drunkenness; and we shall
find that rich and poor are drowned in it. For, the sin of Gluttony, though
foul in those that use it, yet is it not so general as this sin of
Drunkenness, which (like the darkness of Egypt, Exodus 10.22.) goes over all
the Land. Where men do not only, as a Assuerus Royal Feast, Hest. 1.7.
change vessel after vessel, but empty vessel after vessel, nor, (as then)
drink by order, but in no reasonable order: then, none might compel his
fellow, ver. 8. so the King had commanded: Now, a man is enforced under the
pain of the stabbe or thrust, to drink the health or pledge of his friend:
and a man gives his neighbor drink, and makes him drunken, though the King
and the Laws of the Kingdom have (otherwise) commanded, Hab. 2.15. For, what
drinking of healths, till men have drunk themselves out of health, out of wit,
and commonly out of common sense and honesty? I say out of common honesty. For
what Goats do they rise, when they rise from their drink? how impure? how
adulterous in their talk and doings so hard a thing it is to sleep in
Drunkenness, and to watch against Adultery, look and compare Prou. 23.29.33.
These may be called the Drunkards of a Land. Not they only who cannot bear
their drink, and therefore fall down like beasts, being wounded by some
stronger beast; but they much more, who are strong to pour in strong drink,
Esaias 5.22. that is, are able to sit with the longest, and to drink with the
last in the bottom of a Celler, turning down bowl after bowl into some
unclean Sincke-hole, or Throat, like a Sepulcher.

Towns and Country swarm with such dead Flies, drowned in their po^s of
excess, Eccles. 10.1. of which we may say, Death is in them, 2 Kings 4.40.
and they Deaths guests that use them, Prou. 9.18. For these sins, and because
of these Pharaos, and their Host, who lie thus ouer-whelmed in the Red Sea of
Drunkenness, the Lord, this year, threatened our grain, both bread-corne, and
drinke-corne: how far his hand has gone we see, how much further it might
have gone, who did not see, and fear, when the storm fell?

But, are these sins the only sins that make such waste, and cause such
want? or, is the Lord provoked for these only, to bring great necessity upon
a Land? Surely, though these be great Worms of the wealth of a Nation; yet
there are more consumers then these. For, have not the Prodigal Sons of our
Country (some of them) waste their goods and flesh with Harlots; who rising
up full, have neighed after their neighbors wives, as a fed Horse after his
Mate^ Ier. 5.8. Have not some laid but all upon vain and chargeable bravery
from their Hat-string to their shooe-strings? Have not some hid their Talent
and Patrimony in gorgeous and costly buildings, desiring to dwell in larger
houses then their fathers builded, without all desire and care to keep the
good houses their fathers long maintained? Have not some turned all into
smoke, As one said lately at the Cross.
by making that to pass through their mouth and nosthrils, in towns and
Cities, which should, in good and charitable Hospitality, have gone through
the chimnies of their fair Houses in the Country, whereof some (like a
Plague-house) stand ever shut up? Have not some, having turned all to
destruction with the riots of Dice and Gaming, turned beggars, who were
Gentlemen well descended and left? And how great is the number of those, who
having filled their mouths with the smoke, that has been spoken of, call in
for their pottels and gallons to quench it with large drunkenness?

When we consider such general abuse of Gods blessings, and men's
unthankfulness for them, what marvel if God punish us with scarcity of
fruits, and poverty of estate? For this cause the Lord wrought fearfully in
our eyes, the last Summer and the beginning of this. Let us not forget his
work, his great work, worthy to be remembered.

The last Summer there was little grass to make into hay: this Summer and
year, a great year of grass; the ground never, in man's memory, better clad
with that commodity. Yet how was her fair clothing with grass soyled with
dirt, in many flouded Meadows within the Land this year? The last Summer the
Sun in his open chariot; this Summer, or the beginning of this, in his
chariot covered with clouds. The last Summer, glorious: the beginning of this,
wading in water. The Heavens, the last Summer, as brass over our heads: this
Summer, or beginning of this, as a Spring or Conduit. The last Summer, bright
and shining: this Summer, black (like a Hayre-cloath) ouer-cast with
darkness. The earth, the last Summer, as an Iron-earth: the beginning of this,
as a marish-earth. The last Summer, gaping with thirst: the beginning of this,
drowned in rain and waters.

Does the Lord work so strangely and contrarily, in two years so near
together, and in two Summers immediately following one another, to leave no
impression, and to get no audience? Is it not to show what power he has, both
in his right and left arm, that the careless in our Land may fear and be
humbled before his great glory? Is it not to make them to call their sin to
remembrance, and their hearts to repentance? This is the end of the Lords
smiting a Land with sore diseases and long dearth, that that Land by such
visitation and humblings might mourn, girded with sacke-cloath, like a virgin,
for the husband of her youth, Joel 1.8. But if for all this, it laugh and
rejoice with sinners; the Lord has not lost that correction: for, he will
loose nothing by any that is hardened desperately in his sin; but has left
it, as his witness^ among us, of a smarter, if the easier cannot prevail, or
of our most certain destruction, if he shall say, why should ye be smitten any
more? Esa. 1.5.

Use 2.
A reproof of those, who in a matter of such punishment, as this Land has
been lately under, by two unseasonable Summers, look not into their sins,
as causes, but (altogether) into the face of the sky, and the distempers
there, blaming them. We set our sins against God, and he sets his
creatures, for sin, against us. We refuse to serve God, they grudge as much
to serve us. A wise man considers this, and considering, finds in his
Christian search, the true cause of all such distempers in the sky, and
alterations on earth to be in that ill vveather, that comes from the corrupt
Air, and mud of the age and times, in which wickedness so abounds. He that
gathers other ways, is unwise; or, as one that is blind, and can not see a
far off, 2. Pet. 1.9. It is so (then) that God did thunder maruailously with
his voice, this year, Job 37.5. and in these parts on the Sabbath? What
marvel, when on the Sabbath, we drum against God, he, on the Sabbath
also should thunder against us? two or This, at the end of the last Spring, and
beginning of the last Summer, which were altogether wet.
three Moons have changed, but with small change of the weather, from evil
to better: and what marvel if the weather be not changed, when our hearts
are not changed? and when we look into the change of the Moon, and not to
the change of our ways? If we would set the sign of the weather, not in the
Moon or Stars, but in our good conversation in Christ, we should have better
signs of better seasons then have lately appeared.

But some, when there is any ill weather up, talk and complain of some
Coniurings abroad. To such I may say; if they would drive out of themselves
Satan's great host of lusts, and those, more then seven, or seuen-times seven
Devils, which have so possessed them by customary and familiar sinnefulnesse,
they shall see a present calm and end in all storms.

Job says, Misery comes not forth of the dust, Job 5.6. his meaning is,
these miseries that so many complain of^ come from sin; not from the dust of
the earth, but from these bodies of dust, and the body of sin. God is able
to give us rain in season, and the appointed weeks of the Harvest, Ier. 5.24.
The rain we have had has been unseasonable and the weeks we have seen,
have proved uncomfortable. Comes this from the Earth, and (altogether) from a
troubled sky? no, but our iniquities have turned away these things, and our
sins have hindered good things from us, Ier. 5.25. When the child begins
to play with his meat, a wise Father will take it from him; we have abused
our plenty, and do still abuse it: and what can we look for from so wise a
Father, as our Father in Heaven, but penury and dearth after fullness so
abused? So far of the punishment, which was by occasion, and general upon
the Country; that which was particular upon this lost Son, follows.

[ And he began to be in necessity.] The Country being punished with a
great dearth, the lost Son is here said to have had his part in the general
affliction: for he (also) began to be in necessity, that is, the general
want extended to him, as his sin was in it, and he tasted of the cup of the
common calamity. He was in want, and as appears by the 16. verse, in great
want: which want, and great want, was laid upon him, justly for his wastes, and
secretly for his good, by his heavenly Father, to bring him to repentance; and
by repentance, home to himself. Where, we are to consider the kind of
punishment, and effects thereof, verse 15. the kind of punishment was the
straites of hunger, such as the Land endured, and he was in. For, the Lord set
poverty before him, and sent misery into him, that inwardly and outwardly,
he might draw him to himself with strong cords of love, Hose 2.8 9. before,
(no doubt) he had knocked at the door of his heart by the word; that is, by
exhortations, admonitions, threatenings, promises, and there was no opening,
Apocal. 3.20. Now, he knocks by his judgments, as before by his word,
saying to such servants, Compel him to come in, Luke 14.23.

Doctr.
The Doctrine is, when the word cannot reclaim us, God will use other means to
make us to look home. God does seek us by his Word: if he cannot find us by
it, he will make us to seek him by his judgments. He will beat us gently
upon our coats: and if yet we continue in sin, he will whip our naked
consciences. GOD would not cast away his people which he knew before, Roman.
11.2. and whom he delivered from the hand of the enemy, with signs and great
wonders, in Egypt, and in the terrible wilderness: Therefore, when they left
off to serve him in righteousness, as they did after the days of Joshua, and
after the days of the Elders that ouer-liued Joshua, doing wickedly in his
sight, and serving Baalim, Judge. 2.11. He taught them in mercy, by his word,
and with great signs by the Judges, whom he raised up, as Saviors, to
deliver them, verse 16. but when they would not obey their Judges, and when
they went a whoring after their Gods, verse 17. he made them to cry for the
affliction, Judge. 3.9. that is, when he could not by gentleness reduce them,
he tried other means, and those of some sharpness, to win them, Judge.
3.12.15. and 4.2.3. Of this people, further, it is said, that when they had
their desire, they were not turned from their lust: Moses and Aaron could do
no good upon them, Psalm. 78.29.30. what did the Lord then? he struck some
with sickness, and slew some with death: and when he slew them, they sought
him, verse 34. that is, when he laid affliction upon them, and sent death
among them, they would stand out no longer, but returned early, that is,
presently: though more in show then in heart. And (thus) whom he could not
reform by his word, he reformeth or seems to have reformed with strokes.
Ephraim, and the Princes of Judah, would not give their minds to turn unto
God, Hose. 5.4. and though the Lord sent Hosea, Amos, Joel, and other Prophets
unto them, to turn them from that spirit of vanity, and whoredoms, that was
in the mids of them, and among them; yet would they not know IEHOVA;
therefore he spoiled and wounded them, that is, spoiled them in their estate,
and wounded them in their persons, Hose 5.14. that they might acknowledge their
faults, and seek him, verse 15. He hid himself, to weet, in his loving
countenance, verse 6. that they might seek him in affliction, verse 15. and
went and returned to his place, ibid. that is, seemed (as Christ) to go
further, Luke 24.28. that they might constrain him, saying one to another,
Come, let us return to the Lord; for he has spoiled, and he will heal us: he
has wounded us, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6.1.

When Jonah would not come back without a storm, God sent out a storm, or
wind of commandment, to fetch him, Iona. 1.4. As (therefore) the needle
makes way for the thread: so GOD boareth the ear by piercing troubles, that
his word may enter that word, which is the thread and twist of Evangelical
Salvation. The reasons are: First, God loves all his children; and as many as
he loves, he chasteneth. Apoc. 3.19. that is, breaks them (as Colts) of
their unhappy touches, with his rod of nurture, Pro. 3.12. and (here) he
deals with his children, as earthly Parents do with theirs: they pass from
words to blows, when words can do nothing. Secondly, God will loose none of
his children, and (therefore) if they wander (like strayes) from their Fathers
house, he will call them home by his word, or vvhippe them home with
chastisements, Psalm. 23.4. Thirdly, God does, and ever will, put difference
between Sons and Bastards. Now, if we be without correction, we are
Bastards, and not Sons, Hebr. 12.8. and, who can better tell how to reform
the heart then he that made it?


Uses.
This teaches us, Use 1.
when we find the Lords hand to be weighty upon us in any cross, to
remember that God does it to make us to remove nearer to him out of our far
Country. He (sometimes) sends want; it is that we should sue to him for our
store by repentance. When we depart from him by sin, he crosses us, as he
sometime did Balaam in his way^ Numb. 22.22. it is to make us to leave sin,
or to turn from sin to righteousness. God roundeth us in the ear: it is to
open our ears by his corrections. He sends a storm after Jonah: it is, as
if he had said; Jonah come back. He bre^keth the staff of our bread: it is,
to break the sto^^ of our hearts. He strikes us with sickness: it is, to
strike us to amendment. He makes us poor in our Trades: it is, to make us
rich in well-doing. Finally, he plagueth our bodies: it is, to prevent a
greater plague in our souls. Ezekiel. 20.37. 1 Cor. 11.32.

Use 2.
A terror to those who despise the Word, and will not hear the Rod; nor for
what it comes, nor from whom, Mic. 6.9. For, to such what means remain to
reclaim them from their vain conversation? and how near are they to
hardening. Let them consider who will not open to the Lord, for any knockings at
their hearts. When he reproves their sins by affliction: they open their
eyes to blasphemy, but open no door of the heart to God: they murmr against
the rod; but profit not by it to goodness: or they despise, and set light by
it, but it touches them to no care of amendment, Esaias 1.5. Amos 4.6.8.9.10.11.
Ezekiel. 21.13. God has long knocked at our hearts by the amiable voice of his
Gospel, and (lately) by the loud voice of his winds, and marueilously by the
glorious voice of his Thunder. But what opening by unfeigned repentance? Do we
not open presently to a great man that knocks? And shall we put off to open
to him, who is greater then man, or all men? Shall a stranger be received, and
shall he that owes the house stand without? Shall strange affections find no
denial, and will we not return to the Lord of our hearts, that his loving
correction may make us whole?

An instruction, Use 3.
not to faint when God rebukes us with rods, Heb. 12.5. Proverb. 3.11. for,
his chastisement^ are not tokens of desertion, but of love, verse 12. We
heard, that if we be without correction, we are bastards, Heb. 12.8.
Bas^ards are not so looked unto as a man's own Children. For, where his own
Children are kept in, they (oftentimes) are at liberty: but at such liberty
as the sons of the Concubines had, to whom Abraham gave certain gifts, and
sent them away, Genesis 25.6. Here, they receive their portion of liberty and
pleasures, but no inheritance in Isaack^ nor part in Christ. And, what harm
can it be, with affliction to be beaten home to thy fathers house, where is
bread enough, from a strangers house, or strange Country, where is nothing but
want and necessity? Or, will it hurt thee that God loves thee? As many as he
loves he chasteneth, Apoc. 3.19. Or, are they blessed whom God corrects?
Job 5.17. And, art thou only unhappy, and miserable, because God gives thee
correction? are such Gods delight? Prou. 3.12. and will we not be pleased
where God is pleased? shall that that delights him trouble us? and that that
rejoices him make us sad? or, is it our grief that we are Gods delight? So
far for the kind of punishment, the effects follow.

Then he went and claue to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent him to his
Farm, to feed Swin^.
COncerning this lost Son, Verse 15.
the kind of punishment has been spoken of, which is the necessity to which
his sin had brought him. It follows that we (further) consider, in this
young man, the effects that followed: Which respect himself, or this Citizen,
to whom he put himself Servant.

In respect of himself, the rod of hunger did so drive him, and with such
sharp teeth bite him, that he refused no condition of life wherein he might
get any thing to put into his belly, by it to assuage that pain of necessity
which he endured. And this made him to join himself to a certain miserable
and churlish Citizen, who employed him basely, and not according to his Gentry
and breeding: for, he did not command him about his more honest and ingenuous
services in the City: but, being (as it is like) some rich Townesman, or as
one of those wealthy Citizens, that have houses in the City, and Farms in the
Country, sent him to his Farm. And there, not to look unto his better
cattle, which (yet) had been a place of better respect; but to feed his
Swine. And so he that (not long before) was impatient to be a natural Son,
and younger brother in his Fathers house, was brought to that low ebb of
necessity in his poor life, and the house of a stranger, that he could not
be in any office, but the meanest, nor do any work, but the most
contemptible. So we see the best preferment, that they get by the Devils
Service, who put their necks into his yoke to be commanded of him. And yet
this stray-Sonne had rather submit to this, then (till further misery compel
him) to his Father, whom he had offended. If he can take any other way then
his way home, he had rather wander in it, then keep the path of repentance.
So it fares, and has fared with all the Sons of Adam, since; in him they
were strangers from God, in this far country of their exile from heavenly
life. For, how unwilling are they to come home to their heavenly Father by the
Grace of Repentance, from whom they depart daily by the Error of Sin? They
sooner cleave to any, then to the Lord, and to any refuge then to his
providence: which they would still do, with those bidden but refusing guests,
spoken of, Luke 14.18.19.20. if the Lord did not use compulsion, where he will
not be denied, verse 23.

The Doctrine from hence is; Doctr. 1.
it is natural to man, and a proper effect of sin in man, further and
further to depart from God, till he bring him backe^ Adam, when he had once
departed from God by his sin, departed further by impenitencie, till God
called him. For, the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the
Lord God among the Trees of the Garden, Genesis 3.8.

And (here) behold (in this lost Son) the old Adam of disobedience to God,
hiding himself among one of the Trees of the garden, rather then he will come
back to his Father, who, in the voice of affliction, calls to him, saying;
Adam, where art thou? Genesis 3.9. But, this appears in kind, considered in
Cain, who being a vagabond from God, and runne-a-gate in the earth, did never
return, because never brought back by him that turns his Children, Genesis
4.14. David, Gods dear Child, departing by his Adultery and bloody sin,
from his Fathers house, with this lost Son, thought not of returning thither
by sound conversion, till after three quarters of a years absence or more, God
sent Nathan his Prophet with authority, to bring him by the words of his
Parable, and by the interpretation of them, saying unto him; Thou art the man,
2 Samuel 11.27. and 12.1.2.7. He that says, Return ye Sons of Adam, Psalm.
90.3. knows that the Sons of Adam cannot return, till he turn them, who
(only) orders the goings of man. So that stray-sheepe of Samaria, with whom
CHRIST had conference at Jacobs Well, wandered further and further, in her
taunting speeches, from her direct salvation, and from God her Savior, till
CHRIST stopped her, by telling her what she had done, and how naught she had
been, John 4.11.15.17. for, he said, Thou have well said, I have no Husband:
for, he whom thou now have, is not thy Husband, verse 17.18. Thus it is clear
that man straying from God, cannot return till God turn him.

The Reasons are. Man departs not from God but by sin, nor returns, but
by Repentance, but repentance is Gods gift, and none can turn to God, except
he be first turned of him, Ier. 31.19. And (therefore) our coming back, when
we wander from him, is his work.

Secondly, for this, lost man is compared to a stray and lost sheep, which
will wander further and further from his Pasture till his Shepherd seek him,
and bring him home, Luke 15.4. For, so the wandering sinner will stray without
end or return till God have mercy upon him.

Thirdly, what is man fallen, but a rebellious creature^ proud by Nature, and
stubborn to Grace? But pride will not come down, before it be taken down;
nor stubbornness yield, till stubbornness be mastered. This comes only
from God, and therefore it comes only from him that we are converted to
God. Also, no man can repent, who does not (first) hate sin, and love
righteousness. But does any man so naturally, or till God by grace alter him?
Must he not be sanctified? must he not be justified? must he not have Faith
that shall do so? And, who sanctifies but the holy Ghost? 2 Th^s. 2.13. who
justifies but God? Romans 8. ver. 33. and whose gift is Faith but Gods? Romans
12.3.

Uses.
Use 1.
An instruction, in our conversion, to resign all to God, by praying him to
bring back his lost Son in us. We wander through many a vale, and over many
a mountain, after we have broken from him by our Coltish lives, and would
run into hell if he did not stay us. Therefore, and seeing his love to
wilful sinners is so great, that he will not loose one whom he has chosen,
but will seek him (and that with great patience) by his Word and Judgments,
ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, or longer, till he find him. Let us
consider wisely how long he has sought us, and every particular man, how
lovingly he has sought him by his Messengers, whom he has sent unto him, by
what Messengers, and by how many: and, finding himself, in his stray-life,
more ready every day then other, to loose himself in the Vales of Baca and
Mountains of Sin, let him cry unto God with his heart, and say with the
Prophet; O seek thy Servant, Psalm. 119.176.

Some dream (and it is but as a dream when one awaketh) that they can repent
when they will. Or, why do they with so lost a conscience put off repentance,
as if that were in their gift, which is not theirs but Gods to give? Acts 5.31.
2 Timothy 2.25. But suppose it were in our power and hands to repent when we
would, were it not great madness to sin wilfully and presumingly because of
that? One says well; would any man that is sober and in his right mind,
surfeit of his meat because he has a Pill in his Closet? or cruelly hacke his
flesh with a sword, because he has in his power and keeping, that which will
cure the sore of those desperate gashes? And is he a sober Christian, or
Christian of any sound or sober judgment, that will, by sinning wilfully,
expose himself to the strokes of God, and gashes of a wounded and tormented
conscience, because he has that in his power, that is the remedy of sin,
Repentance? But Repentance is not in our custody, nor under our key, as some
think. And, therefore, wanting this Oil of Repentance, to turn from sin,
and to God; what folly and madness is it to defer it with the foolish
Virgins, till there be no opening, and till we would be glad to buy it with a
thousand repentances, and ten thousand worlds, if we had them? Mat. 25.11.12.

A confutation of that Popish Pelagian error, Use 2.
which is, that we bring some helps with us in Nature, to our conversion.
But, what furtherance does the stray-sheepe give to the Shepherd of finding
and bringing him back upon his shoulders with joy? Luke 15.5. What had Christ
from that scornful woman of Samaria toward her salvation? Ioh 4.7. he had not
so much from her as the assistance of a good nature to help him with. For,
besides that she gave no gentle answer to the Savior of her soul, by her
mal-apart talk, she gave him to understand plainly, that a light-Huswife was
in place. And if we consider our first birth: are we not borne of fornication?
but do Children of fornication any thing that can please God? do they, or can
they, in any thing help forward their second and new birth? or, are they not
desperate enemies to it? Further, God hates (and that justly) the whole
unclean bed of nature, and whatsoever lies in it, begotten with the seed of
Adam. And shall that that God abhors, be able to join (purchaser) with the
most holy finger of God, in the frame of man's Redemption? Also, the Apostle
says, speaking of all, and of the best of all; Ye are dead in sins and
trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. Now, can a dead man raise his own body? or, perform
the duties of him that lives the life of Nature, and of this world? or, can
he not? then how can we who are dead in sins and trespasses, bring any
matter to our spiritual life, raising it up by Free Will from the graves of
the dead and sepulchers of sin?

But our Adversaries tell us, that we were but wounded in Adam, and cured by
CHIRST, where the Scripture tells us, that we were dead in sin, and therefore
raised by Christ, not from sickness to health, but from death to life. But our
Adversaries compare the natural man to a man in bolts; that has power to
run if his bolts were off. For, (say they) sin has laid ^etters on those
faculties which are left in nature toward our redemption: which being removed
by grace, men are able (of themselves) to run the way of their salvation. But
the Scripture says, We are not sufficient to think any thing, to wit, that
good is, of our selves, as if our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. A man in bolts can vvish
for liberty, and think of going out: but our condition in the state of
corruption before grace, is as the condition of a dead man, that can neither
think of life, nor desire to live. But, the same men tell us, that as he that
is sick has not all health taken from him, and as the Physician that
restores him, does it by adding to that which is left, and not by an entire
supply: so we bring something in the point of conversion, and CHRIST (the
Physician of our souls) adds to our small store his great increase: but the
Scripture says plainly, it is He that works in us both the will and the
deed, Phil. 2.13. without whom we can do nothing, John 15.5. For this cause,
our conversion is called our new birth: to teach us that, as it is in the case
of the old birth; so it is of the new and regeneration. And (therefore) as no
Child can beget himself in the old birth, so no more is he borne by his
own will the child of God in the new, John 3.3.

Quest.
But some may say, are we drawn as stocks, Answer.
and as things without life? I answer, no; for, God sanctifies our reason,
and gives us sanctified will, and then we say, Draw me, and we will run:
Cant. 1.4. John 6.44. that is, as a Father says, Give us to do what thou
biddest, and bid us to do what thou will.

Use 3.
A terror to the old man, living in unregeneration, and vnconuertednesse: for,
every step forward is down to hell: the further we wander from God, the
further we go from the path of life. And, what hope is there that we shall
be saved, so erring in our ways, till GOD bring us to our right way, which
he does by means? these are, the Word, John 17.3. Prayer, Luke 18.1. and
Sacraments, Cant. 2.4.5. For, these three are our Pillar of Cloud to Paradise,
Exodus 13.21. and the steps of our way to blessedness. And, as possible it is
for men to make stairs up to the sky, as (without these) ordinarily, to come
to Heaven.

The Word is the Key, that must shut Hell gates, and set us at liberty from
sin, and death armed with sin, and open Heauen-gates, to set us in the
liberty of the Sons of God, Matthew. 16.19. The Sacraments, rightly discerned,
and reverently dealt with, are seals hanging at the Word of the Covenant, which
assure, and possess us of our part in Christ. Or, those flagons of Wine, in
the Cellers of Christ, which stay the Church; that is, revive and comfort her,
being fallen (spiritually) into certain swounes, and senseless traunces, by
some momentanie despair, Cantic. 2.4.5. and these seal up life or death, as
they be received worthily, D^u. 30.15
or unworthily; worthily to life, or unworthily to damnation, 1 Cor. 11.26.29.

So for Prayer: the Apostle S. Paul, having set forth a Christian in all his
Christian armor, and pieces of armor, as his head-peece, his brest-peece, his
girdle-peece, his shoe-peece, with his shield of Faith, and sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, makes Prayer (as it were) the button or
knot, that is chiefe-peece of all that large furniture to the war of the
Spirit, which he (there) speaks of, saying: and pray always, in all manner
Prayer and Supplication, in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. as if he had said,
whatsoever is wanting, let not Prayer be wanting: and when you put on this
armor, or any part of this armor, let Prayer be your Button, or tying knot to
hold it together, that it fall not from you in the day of the Lords March, lest
you be naked.

If (then) we know, or care to know little of the Doctrine of Salvation,
having passed an estate of our souls to ignorance, for term of life: or, if
(as we know, or care to know little of the word) we have as little good will,
rightly to know, and reverently to come to the Sacraments: and if (as we pass
little for these) we care as little for Prayer, to pray in the Spirit, and in
Faith, by the Word, we wander souly to destruction: our house tends to
death, and our paths to the dead, Prouer. 2.18.

Alas (then) what will become of all contemners, and ignorant of true
knowledge? in what case are they who come to the Sacraments profanely; or, but
once in two or three years? and what spirit leads them, who have such a
deadness in them of spirit and spiritual life, that they call not upon God?
Psalm. 14.4. Such, walking in darkness, know not whither they go, John 12.35.
and have no surety to be saved, having, at the Charter of grace, never a seal
of salvation: and cannot but despair to have any thing from God, who have
asked nothing of him, that is, by the Prayer of Faith; nothing, that they might
obtain at his hands, that which is good and necessary for their infirmities
and wants here, Iam. 4.2. To be short, wanting the means of protection from
death and hell, how can they but wander in death, and fall into hell.

Yet this is commendable in this young man, that he chose rather to live justly
by labor, and meanly in a calling, then to rob and kill for his living, as
many (who have been brought up Gentlemanlike) do at this day.

Doctr. 2.
And it teaches hat they are more lost then the lost Son, who (being without
means, and tenderly bred, and pampered with ease, and the delights of Gentry)
had rather (like wild men) hunt for a purse, then dwell in Tents, that is, in
a calling, as Jacob did, eating their bread honestly. Esau was a man of the
Field; Esau, whom God had forsaken: but plain Jacob dwelt in Tents; that is,
(commendably) in a Trade, whom God loved, Gene. 25.27. Also, Christ, speaking
of the Pharisees, and Scribes; those, who did persecute the Master, and poison
the servants with their leaven of false and corrupt Doctrines, compares them
to thieves, that steal, and our high-way-theeues that kill, John 10.8.10. and
Saint Paul, speaking of a rabble of reprobates, puts thieves, that is,
unrepentant thieves, in the number: nor thieves, 1 Cor. 6.9. Besides, thieves
(specially by the high way) cast for wealth, and lay wait for blood, Prou.
1.11.13. and are so fa from repentance, that they draw away others, ver. 10.14.
And, can any be more lost, then so lost? the lost Son that went far, went
not so far. But is it such a matter to be a thief and robber? then let them
consider their dangerous estate, who live to no benefit of the Commonwealth
or Church, in a calling, but as Droanes, eat the Honny and sweet thereof,
without any labor. The Apostle Saint Paul calls such, Thieves. His words
are; Let him that stole, steal no more, but labor rather, Ephesians. 4.28. as if
he had said, He that labors not, to wit, in that which is good, steals;
and he that is in no calling, to wit, of some profitable exploiment, is a
Thief. And if all such be Thieves, then all that are such are
Common-wealths-men, inferior to a Swine-herd, though they can say, they live
of their own, or of that which is given them.

This young man (though bad) would not be so bad: he would not be a thief, and
was content to labor: and (therefore) they that are thieves, and all that
will not labor, are, in the case of Church Members, and point of
Commonwealth-manship, worse then he. But, to our purpose: it is plain (as has
been proved) that they are more lost, then this lost Son, who rather choose a
theefes life, out of a calling, then an honest (though mean life) in a lawful
Trade. The reasons are: First, Such hate their own soul, Prou. 29.24. which
this young man did not, though he provided ill for it. Secondly, they are
further from repentance, which is seldom given of God out of a calling. The
converted Thieves example, Luke 23.42.43. is a rare bird in this case, and but
once seen in the Bible.


Uses.
Use 1.
An instruction to live in any mean place and sort, then to steal. David, and
the men with him, though they lived in want, yet lived not by spoil: and
though they were poor men, yet they were true men: and asked relief as
strangers, but would not command it as Rogues, 1 Samuel 25.5.6.7.8.15.16. So
virtuous Ruth gleaned in Boaz Field, Ruth 2.3.7. She gleaned only, but took
not from the whole sheafe, nor whole sheaues, as some leasers now.

Saint Paul, who bids every Christian to labor with his hands, rather then to
be idle, and to eat his own bread in some calling, rather then stolen Bread
in no lawful calling, 2 These. 3.12. does rather choose to make Tents, then to
eat with offense, where yet he might have eaten with authority, Act. 18.3. 2
Cor. 11 8 9. Indeed, the unjust Steward that was ashamed to beg, Luke 16.3.
was not afraid to steal, verse 6.7. so, though to beg be evil, and to
steal worse: yet the wicked, rather then they will eat their own bread,
that is, bread that they have right unto by their honest labor, will do one,
or both. But what get they by such unrighteousness? surely, the curse, spoken
of, Zachar. 5.3. the curse that will out them off, and find them out to
destruction, though they would hide themselves, verse. 4. not a lingering curse,
but a flying curse. Nor a curse that will leave something, Obad. 5. but a
fretting curse, or leprosy, that will seize on all: nor the curse of damage
only, but the bitter curse of damnation. A curse that will suffer nothing to
prosper with it, or that is near unto it, Haba^. 2.9. And therefore stolen
wares are rightly called infectious wares, because they bring all to nothing,
house and all, by a kind of leprosy, or fretting canker in them.

Mr. Dod, on eight Commandment.
And one says well, that a man were as good put a coal of fire into the
thatch of his House of Barn, as to lay up stolen goods among his other stuff:
for, they will turn all into a fire of destruction, and no man shall quench it.

Use 2.
A terror to Thieves, and Robbers: and threatening to all that live by unlawful
idleness, or by ungodly profit, in no lawful calling. For, such are far
from repentance, being more lost then the lost Son. There is no trade of life
so mean, whereout God calls not some by his grace in the Ministry. But how
many are so called, being out of a Trade, or in no lawful Trade? Mean Trades,
in the burning reign of Queen Mary, gave glory to God, by sending some
continually from their shop to give witness to Christ in the fire. But, how
many good-fellowes (as we call good fellowship) and drinking mates, and dicing
mates, and other lose mates, (then) received such honor? It it a step to
Religion to live according to Gods ordinance, in some honest place of some
liberal or other Science, to the benefit of the Church, and Commonwealth.
Therefore, Moses, keeping Sheep, saw the Lord, Exodus 3.1.2. Amos and Elisha,
two Prophets: the one called from the plough, 1 King. 19.19. the other from the
herds, Amo. 7.14. and Lidia, in her honest trade, received the benefit of her
conversion, Act. 16.14. Contrarily, Dicing-houses, houses that live by tippling
and Drunkenness, Play Houses, and the whole stage of those that counterfeit
goodness, and act vice in kind: what Trades are these, that a Christian may
live in, with comfort to be saved? I have not said any thing of the Usurers
trade, that moth in the Common-welths-garment: fretting it to a bare thread of
necessity, which yet I judge to be a Covetousness, not worthy to have any
standing given to it among the lawful trades of a kingdom. It is fearful,
either to live out of a trade, or in such trades.

But must all have a calling? must rich men and landed men live in a calling?
yea, if they will live as members of their country, and not as diseases in it.
It is not meant that all should go to Plough and Cart; or all be Tradesmen,
and men of occupation: for there are profitable Sciences which are not done
with the body, or chiefly by it, as these are, but with the industry of the
mind, wherein the richest and greatest should live a helping member of his
Country^ in the Church, in the Commonwealth, or in his private house. He that
does otherwise does worse then this lost Son, and is no sound, but rotten
member among the members of the body, Romans 12.4 5. 1 Cor. 12.21. So much for
that effect of punishment that concerned the lost Son himself, that that
concerned him, in regard of the Citizen, follows.

[ And he sent him to his fields, or Farm, to feed Swine.] In regard to the
Citizen, whom this poor man chose for his dependencie in so great a dearth of
things, it may (first) be reproved that he did not employ him about himself,
in the City, but basely in the fields, or at his Farm: and then, that, having
abundance (for so it may be thought) in so great a want of bread and dearth of
grain, he would not allow what was sufficient to him that served him: for, the
Text says, that no man gave unto him; no man, no not his Master, v. 16. which
makes me to think that this hard Master, was like some Corn-Masters in our
days, who by a cursed engrossing of the markets of the poor, keep in Corn
when they should sell Corn, and starve Men to feed Mice.

But in this example, Doctr.
our Savior, by a Parable, and darkely, does teach what a dead hold the world
takes of those whom it brings under, for the practice of any oppression,
caused by a covetous soul. It makes them to violate Justice, and to forget
Humanity. Justice requires that they that labor for us, should eat with us:
and pitiful Humanity, that no man should with hold that, which being
brought forth in time, might save the life of a man. But where the world is
most in mind, these things are most neglected. The bread of the hungry is the
life of the poor: he that depriueth him of it, is a man of blood, Sirach.
34.22. yet what merciless worldling will not do this villainy? The hire of
the labourer which is kept back cries, James 5.4. This hire is not only his
portion of money, but that proportion of meat which is kept back, that is,
denied by hard Masters, when it is neither for quantity sufficient, nor for
time seasonable, Mat. 24.45. Prou. 31.15. The Leuite is forsaken, Deuteronomy. 12.19.
The comfort of his labor is eaten up by greedy men, at their full Tables, who
receive his spiritual things, and grudge him their carnal, 1 Cor. 9.11. Men
join house to house, and lay field to field, Esaias 5.8. that is, their study
and toyling care is how to increase their wealth, and to enlarge their house. A
sin of great men in Esay's days: a sin of mean men as well as of great
ones in our days. For, high and low have sold themselves to this
covetousness. The Thistle that is in Lebanon sends to the Cedar that is in
Lebanon, saying; Give thy Daughter to my Son to wife, 2 Chr. 25.18. that is,
mean men aspire to set their house upon Eccl. 26.18.
Golden pillars, and to match in great houses: which is not spoken any way to
tax those who have risen to great Marriages, and means, by their industry,
and true worth; but justly to reprove all ambitious Brambles, Judge. 9.15. who
that they may mount and be aloft, care not how unnaturally they spare from
themselves, and how unjustly they pull from others. Of such Solomon spoke long
ago in his Ecclesiastes; God has given to man riches and treasures, (I may
add) Abundance, but not the power to eat thereof: For, a stranger shall eat
it. This (says that wise King) is vanity and an evil sickness, Eccles. 6.2.
A vanity and sickness that holds too many at this day, in the cords of
sparing more then is meet, Pro. 11.24. And that makes them needy that are
full, and to borrow that should lend, and to feed, not the poor that should be
fed, but the rich by Usury: in whose net being taken, they are constrained;
they, or their children after them, to sell as fast as ever they bought; and
sometimes all, both old store and new.

And this ambition of livings has shut up the doors of Hospitality in very
many houses that have given succor, but are now, either occupied without
Tenants, or desolate without an inhabitant. What shall I say of our
Corne-masters? Have they not? do they not unseasonably, with great distrust of
God and instinct of covetousness, in hard years, withdraw their corn, Prou.
11.26. to make the markets to fail, and peoples hearts, with failing, to look
for no mercy, nor bowels of mercy from such obdurate covetousness? Do they
not, in a time forbidden, reserve their Manna of provision, where God has
said, Let no man reserve thereof till morning, Exodus 16.19. That is, do they
not hoord up corn, where God has said, and the poor man's hunger does say,
Sell corn? But Manna kept out of time was full of Worms and stancke, Exodus
16.20. To lay up Corn with Joseph, in a time of plenty, against a time of
dearth is not unlawful, and may be judged profitable: but to lay up corn, or
to keep in corn, in a time of dearth, to make the dearth greater; when men
that should sell may spare it, and the poor that must buy do want it, is
intolerable cruelty.

Such a Corne-monger was that Rich man spoken of, Luke 12.18.19. he would pull
down his lesser, and build greater Barnes, that he might into them gather all
his fruits and his goods, not against a dearth, as did Joseph, but rather to
cause it, as they, who with that cursed rich man, feed and make merry with
that which is taken from the life of the poor. But how long had he peace in
his days, that had such peace in his wealth? He fell into a pleasant dream
of many years to come, who had not the respite of one whole night to provide
for his end so near. For, the Text says, O fool, this night they will fetch
away thy soul, Luke 12.20. they, that is, the Devil and his Angels shall
fetch it, as God and his good Angels fetch the souls of the righteous, Luke
16.22. And surely, if the Devil of covetousness be gone into any, it is into
these, Amos 8. 5. It may be they may look toward Religion, but it is a-skew,
and with an heart espoused to that Covetousness which is Idolatry. For so long
they will walk with the Gospel, as they may not withdraw their foot from
the world: but if the world begin to go, then farewell Religion. Demas must
be gone, 2 Timothy 4.10.

Thus it is plain, as upon Tables, Hab. 2.2. that where the world is master,
there Compassion, Gentleness, Pity, Mercy, Bowels of mercy, Brotherly Love,
and such fruits of the Spirit, are made underlings; and where it may command,
nothing shall bear sway but worldly greediness. The Reasons are.

The love of the world is a kind of Adultery, James 4.4. In corporal
adultery, men and women adulterers go a-whoring from their own Mates, and in
spiritual Adultery, they that are worldlings go a-whoring from God. Now
corporal adulterers fancy not their own chaste Mates: and worldly Adulterers
do as little care for God, or for godliness, and tender compassion. The
adulterous person is cruel to the innocent person: and adulterous worldlings
are merciless where they owe, and should show mercy. Secondly, the world lies
wholly in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Therefore where it may be Master, what good
can follow? Thirdly, they cannot serve God who serve it, Luke 16.13. And in no
service of God, what may be expected, but the service of the world, and of all
wordly affections, whereof unmercifulness to the poor is one; and the
practice of all sin for worldly gain, another? Fourthly, as God draws his
Children to himself, so the World draws his own Children from God to
himself: for, God and the world are contrary, James 4.4. But God will not
vnfasten with his Children; therefore neither will the world unclasp with his.
Uses.
An Admonition (therefore) to resist the beginnings of this worlds love: Use 1.
not to hear it speak, and to break off in our first conference with it,
that we be not circumvented. For, the world is a great Absalom, and
heart-stealer, 2 Samuel 15.6. If we lend but one ear to it, it will have both.
If we give it an Inch by a little consent, it will have the whole Ell by
large covetousness. If we follow it in a little, it will make us servants to
it in much: from seeing and praising, we shall with Heue come to eating. Genesis
3 6. D^mas first liked the world, then embraced it, 2 Timothy 4.10. Judas first
held it, for he bore that that was given, John 12.6. then, it held him: for he
said; What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? him, that is,
Christ his Savior, and the blood of Christ, his salvation, for money? Mat.
26.15. In our own days, do not men, as in stealing^ so in coveting proceed
from a pin to a point; from small covetousness to large covetousness?

Some that have been liberal before they entered into the world have they not
when it once entered into them, turned (passingly) miserable and covetous? And
what marvel, seeing no man can serve God and Riches, Luke 16.13. If love of
riches take place, God must give place; and, if the World enter, that which is
contrary to it, Godliness, which is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. must be gone.

But may not a man have these outward things, Quest.
in some good measure, and be godly? Answer.
Answer, Yes: a man may have them, as Abraham, Isaac, Job, and Solomon had,
and be religious; but not set his heart upon them, and be so: or, one may use
them, and love God; but not love them, and love him. Therefore S. John says,
Love not the world, 1 John 2.15. as if he should have said, Set not your
affections upon it, and send not your desires after it, to make the God of it
your God; and the pleasures that are in it, your chief happiness. For,
worldliness and Christianity are two ends that can never meet, and he that
greedily pursues after earthly things, will coldly seek heavenly. The Apostle
S. Paul says, they that will be rich, that is who by any covetousness will
be so, fall into tentations and snares; that is^ are sure to be greatly
tempted, and as sure to fall, being so tempted, into the net of the Devil, and
those foolish and noisome lusts, as it were Seas, that drown men in
perdition, and destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9. Then, in the 17. verse, he directs
his precept or charge to Timothy, concerning such rich men in the world, that
they be not high minded; that is, that they swel not by wealth, and the poison
of riches; which he calls uncertain; because they taste of the soil, out of
which they come, and so are uncertain, as all things else under the Sun;
but that they depend, and put trust in the living God for all their increase,
who gives them richly to enjoy all things.

But, if this, which has been spoken, be not sufficient to wea^e us from the
breast of the world; for our better and further abstinence, let it be
considered that the world (couetously loved) makes God our enemy, and
(consequently) the Devil our friend, Iam. 4.4. And, is it not a fearful
thing, for the creature to stand in check, or to stand foe to God his Creator?
or, can they hope to be spared, and to prosper that so rebel against him? Does
he not destroy all those who go a whoring from him, whether after the
commodities, preferments, or pleasures of life? And if so: then it should be
our wisdom (as it is our duty) to hold in our affections, and not to give
them head at any desire that tends to worldliness, and that base
covetousness, which is Idolatry, lest that command us, that, in Christ,
should be commanded by us, and put under our feet, to wit, the world, and the
lusts thereof.

This exhortation is needful at all times: for, the world is a dangerous
bait. Most men run a whoring after it, and the godly have too wanton an eye,
and desire to be looking after it. Some never suspect their eyes, till they
have taken possession (as did Ahab, 1 King. 21.1.16.) where they have no title:
and some, in a covetous heart enclose that, as with a quicke-hedge, or
stone-wall, that should lie open in their goodness to the Saints, as common
provision. But let us not straiten in a time of showing mercy, the bowls of
mercy, that should be enlarged: and let us (betimes) resist the world, to wit,
in the covetous desire, before it come to covetousness indeed; bringing it to
shame, before it make us ashamed, and casting it off, before it make God to
cast us off, as hard-harted and merciless to his poor.

Again, Use. 2.
here we see what is to be expected by the children of God, and poor
Disciples of Christ, at the hands of churlish vvordlings: for, what could Jacob
expect at the hands of Laban? David at the hands of Nabal? and this miserable
man, of this merciless Citizen? Laban was a churlish Uncle, and hard master
to Jacob; and he changed his wages ten times, and his countenance toward him, I
know not how many times, Genesis 31.2.41. Naball was cruel to David, and, instead
of releeuing him, railed on those whom he sent to him for something in his
great necessity, though he had been a wall of assurance about Him, and His, 1 Samuel, 25.10.11.16. And this Churl sent this poor man, that depended on him, to
the Hogstroffe, to feed Swine, or rather with Swine. When Labans sons are
greedy after the portion that they look for in their Fathers house, the soul
of Jacob shall be cast down in him, by their grudgings at whatsoever he has:
for, will they not say, Jacob has taken away that that was ours, Genesis 31.1.
And, do not our Labans, sons say, at least, think as much now? had they not
rather part with the person of Jacob, then with the portion of their Father
Laban? Had not worldly Gadarens rather part with Christ, Mark. 5.17. and
covetous Gospellers with the Supper of Christ, Luke 14.18. then with their
Swine or Farms? for, they who are at the command of gain, though their ears
go after the Word, their heart goes after their covetousness, Eze. 33.31. But,
to end this point: where the World fills the Inn, there can be no room for
Christ, Luke 2.7. and, if none for him, then as little for those that come to
us, from him. Therefore, when they become once griple of the world, that have
been zealous of God, I mean seemingly so; let no man promise any thing to
himself from such broken Christians. So much for this lost Sons sin: his
entry-dore to Repentance follows.

Verse. 16.
And he would have filled his belly with the husks, that the Swine ate, but
(...) man gave them to him.
IN this verse, and the next, we have two forerunners of this young man's
repentance, which we may call occasions, or doors into it. The first, is the
extreme necessity that he was in, with the reason thereof, in this verse:
the second is his coming to himself, by a better looking into himself, and
wiser consideration of his ways in himself in the 17. verse. His extreme
necescitie and hard hunger is testified in these words, He would have filled
his belly with the husks which the Swine did eat: and the word intimates,
that he feign or gladly would have done so. The reason is added, for, no man
gave unto him: that is, no man's eye did pity him, and no man's hand did
minister to him. He that (not long before) filled his belly with such costly
Dishes, and Fare, is now (for a just recompense of so intolerable care for,
and love of the belly) sent to the Hogges^rogh, there ^o feed more coursely
upon husk^s, with which (yet) he would have fi^^^d his belly, but could not.

The point here taught, Doctr.
is: it is a just thing, that they should feel want and great want, who make
it their chief exercise and happiness to fare curiously, and to pamper flesh.
They, whose God is their belly, Phil. 3.19. must look to fall into necessity,
when they will needs offer all to such a Bell of vittailes, or greedy deuourer,
Hystory of Bell, verse. 3. Adam, having eaten of the forbidden tree of pleasure,
was (with the loss of that and all the other pleasant trees, full of
delight, and excellent variety) sent forth of the garden, in great misery, to
till the earth, which, by the means of sin, brought forth nothing but
thistles, and thorns, and such woeful bread, Genesis 3.17.18.23. Nabuchodonoser,
who, was so proud that he cared not for God, feeding without fear, was
driven from men, or being king of Men, to feed with beasts, or to feed like a
beast, till a seventh of times passed over him: that is, he was so long
neglected, and became so long wild, that they deposed him from government,
and banished him from Men: and from a Princes diet and state, sent him to a
very homely Table, to feed there, Dan. 4.30.31. So, that rich man who was not
content to fare well at times, but fared well and delicately every day, having
his Table full of Dishes, and his Cellar full of Wines, was brought to that
beggarly necessity, by his store abused, that in hel-torments he could not
have a drop of water to cool the heat of his tongue in such flames, Luke
16.19.24. Sodom, by fullness of bread, of a Land of Corn, became a Land of
Salt and Brimstone, Deuteronomy. 29 23. or Land mixed with Clouds of Pitch, and heaps
of Ashes, 2 Esar. 2.9. It is right therefore that they should come to want, who
have surfetted with fulness. The reasons are: First, it is profitable for the
children of God to feel want where they have made waste; that, schooled with
the pinches of a lower estate, they may learn hereafter to follow temperance,
and to fly excess. And, it is necessary for the children of destruction to be
brought by the pain of want, to a sense of their wantonness, that they may
see (for their greater condemnation) in what they have sinned, John 9.41.
Secondly, it is just that the abuse of a good thing should be punished with the
absence and loss of that good thing which is so abused: but this our being
(all) for the belly, to pamper it, what is it but to abuse unto sin those good
things, which, for such abuse, may justly be taken from us! Lam. 4.5. compared
with Am. 6.4.6. Thirdly, of such curious and dainty feeders, it is true that
we read, Psalm. 69.22. Their table is a snare unto them, and their prosperity
their ruin. There is a table that deceaueth others. Of this it is said, Prou.
23.3. their dainty meats are deceitful meat. But this table, running over
with excess, deceaueth those who prepare it (not for strength and honest
delight) but for laughter and drunkenness, Eccl. 10.17.19. for, it brings
those by a secret waste and just punishment, to unrecoverable misery, that
maintain it.


Uses.
This serves (first) perfectly to awaken Use
us from the sleep of those lusts which are about meats and drinks, that
we be sober, and no longer drunken in them. For, to sacrifice to our bellies,
is to sacrifice to beggarie, and to feed them is to feed poverty, Prou.
23.21. So, too eagerly to desire the Pottage so red; what is it but to think
the time long, till, with Es^u, we have eaten and drunken away our
Birthright? Genesis 25.30.34. Moreover, this large fullness and filling with
meats and drinks, without repentance, what does it but make our condemnation
more just, and open the mouth of the creature more wide against us, to accuse
us to God, when he shall open that Asses mouth? Numb. 22.28.

Some think (but they be carnal and not spiritual that so think) that there
is no good thing to a man under the Sun, save to eat, and drink, and to
rejoice in his days, Eccles. 8.15. But when Ammons heart is merry, being
oppressed with meats or drunken with wine wherein is excess, what says
Absalom to his Servants? Smite Ammon, kill him, fear not for have not I
commanded? 2 Samuel 13.28. This Ammon is every liberal drinker, and large eater,
and this Absalom the Purueyor for every such excess, who by his Servants,
Drunkenness and Gluttony, (which prevail too much, specially at Feasts)
waits, or rather lies in wait, for such as feed without fear, and drink
without reason, to smite them to destruction: as if he should say to this cup
of wine, and that dish of meat, (fair to the eye, and good to the taste)
Smite Ammon, smite, and kill him, and fear not, that is, smite with death, and
to second death, the soul of the eater in excess, and drunken with excess:
Lead the fool to the stocks: bring him to the house where the dead are,
Prou. 9.18. fire him with anger, and burn him with evil desires: Let his eyes
look upon the strange woman, and his heart meditate of lewd things, Prou.
23.33. for, have not I commanded? or, may not I command? Thus, or little better
deals the Absalom of excess with all his desperate guests, specially with
hopeles Drunkards.

And therefore the Prophet Joel, when he would stir up to attention the
deafest hearers, and furthest from hearing, does direct his speech to
Drunkards, saying; Awake ye Drunkards and howl, Joel 1.5. as if drunkards
were a A figure of part for the whole.
Sinecdoche of all impenitent and senseless sinners. And, indeed, of all
wanderers from the Lord, they go furthest from him, and of all impenitent
sinners are (hardliest) converted to him. For, the nature of drink in excess,
is by his fuming power, and while it is in and wit out, to make man as
unreasonable as a beast, August.
and as senseless as a block.

As (therefore) rain of long continuance does so turn the ground into mire
and plash, that no good tillage can be made, nor good husbandry done upon it
while it remains so: So, that drinking which is in excess, does so wash the
brain, and turn the body, with all the senses and powers of soul and body,
into such a plash and difficulty of spiritual tillage, that it is to small or
no purpose, for the Lords faithful Ministers (which are his Husbandmen) to put
the Plough of Admonition into a Soul so pusled with Drunkenness, so mired
with it, so a-sleepe in it, till that sin be repented of and left by a sober
soul.

If (then) eating and drinking in excess, cast men (wholly) into such a long
and deep sleep of the forgetfulness of God and all goodness: if it bring
men into danger, oftentimes, to destruction: if it waste the substance, and
(which is worse) consume the body: and not so only, but if (to proceed from
worse to worst) it most dangerously work upon, and oftentimes manifestly
prevail against the soul, it is time for such sinners to awake out of such a
sleep, and to open their eyes that they sleep not in death. Romans 13.11.13. 1
These 5.6.7.

A terror to all dainty seeders and intemperate drinkers. Use 2.
For, right it is, that the Lord should cut that cup from the drunkards mouth,
that so seldom departs from it, I^el 1.5. and turn that bread into bread of
gravel, which delicate feeders, by abuse, have (so wantonly) made the bread of
lust; and take away those fat things and excellent things, which they made
their Idols, whose souls lusted after them, Ap^c. 18.7. being lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.4.

It were no great matter for a poor man, that has always fared hard to bear
an hard estate: but it (needs) must be grievous and bitter to another man, one
that has fared of the best every day, to be brought from his cups of wine to a
cup of small drink, from his fat morsels to a dry morsel, and from the finest
bread to the coursest brown bread: yet this may be their portion of misery
from God, if a worse thing come not to them, who have sed Lust (not necessity)
with the sacrifices of eating and drinking; for, to morrow they shall dye, 1
Cor. 15.32. or, as if tomorrow they should dye. Christ (the truth) speaking of
such, says; They shall hunger that are now full, and wail and weep that now
laugh, Luke 6.25. His meaning is, they who now make it their exercise to eat,
and their trade to follow Drunkenness, drinking others drunken, and
themselves, artificially, drunken and sober again, shall come to great misery;
and they who rejoice in their days shall weep in their end; and who now have
their pleasures, hereafter suffer pain; being here comforted as Dives, and
hereafter tormented as Dives was. Lu. 16.25.

Solomon speaking of these outward things (which wise men regard not, and
fools abuse) calls them not only by a phrase of passive imperfection,
Vanity, Eccles. 1.2. that is, things that have a weakness of being in
themselves, but Vexation of spirit, verse 14. that is, things (though nothing
in themselves) yet able to inflict vexation and sorrow upon the souls of all
that abuse them.

How (then) can the Gallants of our time think to avoid this vexation of
spirit, for a just reward of their Luxury and Riot, who do nothing but pour
out themselves to these vain things? How can they but drink themselves out of
all, who drink so much, and so continually day and night? and leap at a
crust, who feed so chargeably, so delicately, and so daily upon the soft
crumme? So much for the first occasion of this young man's repentance; or door
into it, the necessity that he was in; the second follows.

Verse 17.
Then he came to himself, and said: How many hired Servants at my Fathers have
bread enough, and I dye for hunger?
IN this occasion, or second door to the young man's repentance, two things are
spoken of: as the work of his mind, he came to himself: and the words of
his lips; for he said, How many hired Servants? etc. We have heard what was
his first step or occasion to this his repentance, as namely, the great
necessity that he was in. The wolf of hunger had much already consumed his
flesh, and was ready now to seize on all that was left, to bring it down to
Rotennesse and Worms, for he said, I dye for hunger. This he well
considered, and beginning to think of his Fathers house and the plenty there,
came to himself, who before had gone so far and dissolutely from himself,
and was found of himself, who had so long been lost unto himself; and
remembered himself, who had so and so much forgotten himself. Now he began to
think, and in such debate with himself, to say; How many hired Servants of my
Fathers have bread enough? or, how many are kept there at the full rack, in
all plenty, and with all sufficiency and fullness, having bread enough and to
spare, and I perish with hunger? As if he had said; They are Hirelings, I am
the Son; they have abundance, I have nothing, they live in plenty, I dye for
hunger; they are many, I am but one; he is their Master, but my pitiful
Father, whom I have offended, and who, being so good to hired Servants, will
not be unmerciful to a penitent Son.

Thus he came to himself; and after, by opening, with this key, the Closet of
his heart where his Books of account lay, came to his Father. But he came to
himself before he came to his Father, and reckoned with himself before he
accounted with him, and considered what to do before he did it.

The Doctrines are many that might be gathered from hence: as that it is the
knowledge of Gods goodness, and out confidence in such his goodness, that
makes us to turn to him from vanity and the error of life.

And secondly, that particular faith gives us this boldness toward God, when
we can reason thus, He that receives sinners, will receive me a repentant
sinner.

And thirdly, that we must consider before we come into Gods presence, how we
should behave our selves in it, that we may do wisely.

Doctr.
But that which I purpose, with the help of God to observe, is; that our first
step to repentance is to take our selves aside for our former impenitencie and
straying ways. For, if we will repent kindly, we must consider particularly,
what we have done, Ier. 8.6. Which made the Lord coming to Adam after his
sin, as Judge and visitor, to bring him to a consideration of what he had
done saying; Adam, where art thou? Genesis 3.9. as if he had said, do thou know
what thou wast, and what thou art? I speak not of the place where, but
condition wherein thou now art a wanderer and stray from me. Thou wast
beautiful in my Image, thou art disfigured in the shape of Sin. So Nathan
took David aside in a familiar Parable, and held him the glass, till he
beheld himself, in one supposed like himself, 2 Samuel 12.1.2.3. etc. And
wherefore did Nathan so? but to make him to come to himself with this lost
Son, and with him, to arise, to go to his father? Lu. 15.20. What made
Ephraim to repent? Ephraim (himself) tells us, When I was instructed I
repented, Ier. 31.19. his meaning is, when he saw in what case and taking he
was whiles he colted from God (as wanton^ now do) he came to himself, and (
home) to God by conversion.

The want of this eyesight is cause why so many never see that gaping pit of
danger which is so near, till they fall into it by remediles ignorance. And
(therefore) as the careless Jews never saw (being without knowledge) that
captivity and those chainea they were led in to Babylon, till the enemy had
pend them up in Jerusalem, with a strait siege, to drive them out of their
own land, Esaias 5.13. So foolish Christians and careless, blindfolded with the
veil of irreligious negligence, never mistrust the like or greater
inconvenience, till, pent up with their last sickness, or the strait bed, as
it were siege, of their unquiet consciences, they be ready to be carried in
chains to hell, not by Nabuchadnezar and his Soldiers, but by the Devil and
his Angels.

I might be large in this field: but it is evident that who will truly
disclaim and amend their evil ways, must take themselves aside for them by
this blessed spirit of thinking what they have done.

The Reasons are. The heart is as a thing shut up, that must be opened with
some key, Acts 16.14. This key to the heart, locked up by custom of sin, is
this taking of our selves aside, with Faith for our dangerous hardnings. And it
is the Lords key (even) to a hard heart, by grace, to open it to better ways.
For, when a man shall consider with some remorse and yeelding^ in how dangerous
a way he walks, and in how damnable a state he lives, who lives in sinne^
and walks in the dangerous and broad way of Death with the worlds sinners;
and that the longer he so lives, and further he so walks, the more he
increases his just damnation, and runs further from the God of his help; it
cannot but make him to look back in some reasonable time, and while there is
hope of coming home to the Father by repentance, with this lost Son. An
unwise man will not know this, nor a fool understand it, Psa. 92.6 but he that
once comes to himself, will lay it to his heart, and be better by it.

Secondly, This point is further treated of by Mr. Rich. Stock, in his book of
Repentance; who has labored faithfully in the whole doctrine thereof.
the ignorance of a man's bad estate is seldom separated from a false conceit
of the ^ame man's good estate: for, he thinks he is happy, no man more: and
that he does well, no man better. And who, in such an error, so yielded unto,
will desire any change? He that thinks himself whole, though he be sick,
will seek no Physician: and he that thinks himself good, so good that he
needs no amendment, will spare thoughts and care of amending.

Thirdly, he that considers aright how sharply sin shall be punished, and how
righteous he is that will punish it without repentance^ must needs repent, at
least in fained manner, to save himself from so great wrath to come. Mat. 37.
very Nature will work in him a certain showing Repentance, as in Ahab, 1
King. 21.27.29. and nature sanctified, true repentance, as in Gods children.

Uses.
Use 1.
This teaches that there are few who have set one foot over the threshold of
true repentance: for, how many can be brought to this first step of wisdom,
wisely and with fear to look into themselves, to cast up their estate, and to
reckon upon the book for their debts to God, which are in so many sins, and
strange kinds of sinning against him, from their childhood till now? And while
men cannot be persuaded, nor drawn, thus to gage themselves for their faults
and doings, what hope is there that they will be sorry for them, with a godly
sorrow, to repentance? Will a man that knows not his estate, suspect it? and
can he, that suspects it not, fall into thoughts about it? So, who will be
truly grieved for his wretched estate; who neither knows his wretchedness
what it is, nor spiritual estate, how poor it is. S. Paul in the life of
nature, and sect of a Pharisie, knew not that Concupiscence was a sin, till he
beheld himself in the glass of that law that says; Thou shall not lust, Romans
7.7. till he cast up his books, he was alive, that is, seemed to himself and
appeared to others to be in very good plight and ^aking for this life, and for
eternal life. But when the Commandment came, and looked upon him, and he, by
it, into himself, he found that he was no body, a dead man, sold unto sin, and
laid in the grave of a dead body, or body of death; a man wo^ully and
pitifully miserable: and therefore cries out, as in great pain, to be
delivered from such a body, or from the body of such a death, To. 7.19.24. The
Church of the Laodiceans thought her self to be better gold then the Touch
could find her: for, she thought her self to be rich and increased with
goods, and to have need of nothing, where she was wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked, Apoc. 3.17. But this she knew not, or cared not
to know. The reason was, she never entered into her self with purpose of
inquiry, and search in what terms she stood with God, how short she was of
the welfare and good health she boasted of, and how near to that desperate
death which she never feared. And this made her to boast of her righteousness,
when she should have been humbled for her sins: and to think her self rich
she was poor. Our common people at this day (and not the worst sort of them)
look no further into their doings, then that they carry some good show of
opennesse to the world. And when vvil such be sorry for their imperfect and
hypocritical righteousness? And for desperate and bold sinners, they dare not
(like bank-rupt debtors) look with any eye of particular search, into their
poor and vvretched life, lest they be tormented too soon, or, (as the devils
cried out) before their time, with sorrow and horrible fear, Mat. 8.29. And
when will such come to repentance, that they may be saved? will they not
rather bless themselves in their heart, saying; they shall have peace; when
the Lord will not be merciful to such, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Let all Pharisaicall
Papists consider, who must needs be far from repentance, seeing, by resting
in themselves for salvation, they affect to be ignorant of that poor estate,
wherein the best are borne, that by man are borne of a woman. For, though they
be, and be borne poor in Grace, and corrupt in Nature, as all that came from
Adam, are: yet they so conceit themselves of a supposed wealth of natural
righteousness abiding in them, and of works of merit, proceeding from them, that
they can never truly know how miserable, how wretched, how naked, and how
nothing they are in themselves, that they may be beholden to him only for all
their spiritual increase, who gives liberally to all, and reprocheth no man?
Iam. 1.5. It is the feeling of a disease that makes us so to desire the cure
of it, and so to esteem of him that can cure it: and it is the feeling of
misery that makes mercy to be mercy: for, till we feel our misery and weak
estate, we will boast as he of whom it is said; There is, who makes himself
rich and has nothing. Prou. 13.7.

An admonition to Christians (that would Use 2.
be truly repentant) to reckon with themselves for their life past,
particularly, and upon special bill, at night before they go to bed, or in
the morning before they rise from bed; and not generally, and in gross only,
as most do. It is the exhortation of the godly, in the Book of Lamentations,
that men would search and try their ways, and so turn to the Lord, Lament.
3.40. that is, that they would not slightly and runningly go over their
sins, but pausingly and with standing upon them, seeking every sin, as with a
candle, till they find it, if it be to be found, and trying it by the touch of
Gods Words, when they have met with it, that they may come to amendment. This
is to turn to the Lord, when we (first) turn out Sin, and every sin; when we
sit down and account with our selves (impartially) for every disobedience,
that we can remember, be it in greater or lesser evils or, when we consider
our ways, and having run along goal of foolish vaniies, such as Ephraim ^an,
and this lost Son after him; do, with Ephraim, smite upon the thigh, and, with
the lost Son, come to our selves, for our returning to God, and for the
healing of all our errors past, that the Lord may have mercy upon us, and
receive his lost Sons in our conversion. Ier. 31.18.19. etc.

As (therefore) the lost Son here, so at the end of our stage, such as he ran,
we must (if we will repent soundly) come to our selves; and in particular
words, thus say to our selves, (as Mr. Dent, in his Sermon of Repentance.
a zealous Preacher sometimes taught) In such a place, at such a time, and in
such a company, I wr^tchedly and desperately offended GOD; my good conscience,
and the consciences of Gods children, by talking filthily, by swearing
horribly, by drinking excessiuely, and by ^ailing damnably, and bitterly,
against Gods word, and his Ministers. In such a private place, on such a day,
and in such a corner, in the dark, I committed fornication, or adultery,
closely, when the walls covered me, and no man's eye saw me^ I made no
conscience of a Lie, where I might be believed, if it had been for an
advantage, and to save my credit; and as little conscience to defraud my simple
brother, where I might do it cunningly and without blame. On the Lords
Sabbath, when others w^nt to Gods house, I went directly to an Alehouse, or
from Prayer to Plays, and from the Sermon to the Stage. The time, that was
given me for repentance, I abused to sin, and can give no good account of
time, that is precious, and should be redeemed, Ephesians. 5.16. For, how have I
redeemed it; that is, bought it out of Satan's hands, and the hand of sin, for
good employments? or, how (rather) have I wasted and powered forth the good
hours of time to vain pleasures, to idle talk, to much sleep, and
wantonness? If God should account with me for years, I can not with comfort
answer him for day^s: nor well for one day in a year, well and holily spent
in good duties. O, how many Items may be found written in Gods Books of
providence and last judgment, for pleasures, and sports, and fleshly
daliances, and worldly covetousness; and scarce a line seen registered in the
same for any good exercise, ways, and doings of good report? Thus should every
Christian make a kind of back reckoning with the compassing of his ways.
Thus should he retire himself for the due consideration of his life past; and
having opportunity, in secret, beat his sins upon his naked conscience by
aggrauation, and say: I have not only sinned, but most traitorously,
obstinately, carelessly, continually, and rebelliously sinned, and am not only a
sinner, but a most filthy leper and sinner: not an ordinary offender, but a
stubborn offender, and disloyal person; whose whole nature, soul and body,
will and affections, mind and judgment, words and deeds, are only evil, and
perfectly evil, and continually so, Genesis 6.5. Thus (no doubt) the lost Son
came to himself, and thus (without doubt) must we come to our selves, if we
will come home with him, confess with him, and triumph with him. So much for
the work of his mind: the words of his lips follow.

[ How many hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough?] This young man
considered, that the meanest servant, his Father kept, was in better case then
he: for, he was well provided for, having bread enough and to spare, where he
had nothing. And this made him, looking homeward, (it is like) with tears in
his eyes, and repentance in his heart, for his former lewd life, to say, how
many hired servants of my Fathers? etc. as if he had said, this necessity that
I am in, is caused by my self, who forsook the house of plenty for this land
of dearth, and my Fathers house, for the house where the dead are, Pro. 9.18.
Every one there is provided for, and I perish with hunger in my absence thence.

This being his meaning, Doctr.
the thing taught is, God provides all things necessary for those that serve
him. David never found it otherways, and therefore says, he never saw the
righteous forsaken, Psa. 37.25. as if he had said, he never saw any long
destitute, or unprovided for, who followed righteousness, and served the Lord.
S. John shows, that they who followed Christ, were fed, though Christ wrought
a miracle of Loaves and Fishes, to feed them, Ioh 6.9.12. And how did God
feed his people forty years in the wilderness, when they could not plow
the Earth, did not he plow the Heavens for bread? and vvanting ordinary food,
had they not Angels food? for the Wheat of the Land, the Wheat of Heaven? Psa.
78.24.27. the Text says, it rained down Manna, v. 24. and they had meat
enough, ver. 25. Elijah was zealous for the Lord, and his altars: therefore,
when men would not feed him, the Ravens fed him, 1 Kin. 17.6. and when men
forsook him, an Angel looked unto him, 1 Kin. 19.5.6.7. Did God forget the
widow of that Prophets son that feared the Lord, and died in some debt? did he
not strangely provide for her by Elisha, and so, as she had enough both to pay
her debt, and to find her self and her children with the overplus? 2 King.
4.1.7. To be short: of all the righteous it is said, they shall not be
confounded in the evil time, and in the day of famine they shall be satisfied,
Psa 37.19. that is, whosoever is ashamed, they shall not take shame, and when
others are famished, they shall have enough. Thus, nothing shall be wanting to
them that serve God: the reasons are: First, God has promised to feed al his
servants, Psalm. 37.3. Now, God will do what he promises to do; for, he is
faithful: and can do what he will; for, he is Almighty. Secondly, Gods
servants depend on his promise, and take his word for their whole estate:
their eyes are unto him, Psalm. 123.1.2. and their repose is in his providence:
and will he cause their eyes to fail? Job 31.16. Thirdly, if it be a just
thing that the Master of a Family should provide for all he has in his
family, whether the children of the house, or servants in the house: will not
the just God count it as just and fitting for him to do as much for his
Family and household: to wit, for the family of his Saints, and the household
of Faith.

Uses.
A comfort to all that truly serve God: Use 1.
for they shall have good wages for that they do, who faithfully serve him:
they shall want nothing that is good: that is, that is good indeed; or good for
them, Ps. 34.10. When means fail, God can, and will, without means, and
against them, provide for his. The Sea shall run back, and serve the Lords
providence, for the glory of his name, and safety of his people, when
Pharao, with his fierce army pursues them to the sea, Exo. 14.21. When men
can not make tillage, God can, and has given bread without tillage, as in the
days of Hezekiah, and Esa. Esa. 37.30. This Summer, the Lord laid his rod in
Water: the continual rain, that fell, did much weaken the force and plenty
of our common bread. Yet if all our Grain had been washed away with the
waters that so prevailed: God could have set, even in those waters, an Arc of
relief for his Noah's, that obey his word and sayings, to enter into. As the
waters rose, so rose the Arc, Genesis 7.17 and so as the markets rise (which are
floods to the poor, that lift up their waves, Psalm. 93.3.) God will arise to
the help of his people.

Use 2.
An admonition to live in Gods service, and not out of our fathers house, in the
service of sin, if we would be provided for, and not perish with want in the
day of famine. For, as they, who serve God in his House, and by his Word, are
sure to be fed: so (contrarily) they cannot expect with comfort, any such
assurance who serve their lusts, and sin in their mortal bodies. In our
service of God, the creatures are ready to serve us, the Heavens with their
blessing, the Earth with her increase: in our service of sin, all is
contrary. For, God will shut up the Heavens as a Purse, and turn a fruitful
Land into barrenness. Much rain shall destroy our fruits or lack of rain
much hinder them. The Earth shall yield nothing, or, but store of vveedes, good
for nothing.

Obedience, (I mean to God in his Service and Word) is the Chain that binds
all the creatures from hurting us; where disobedience breaks that Chain,
and turns them loose upon us, for evil, and not for good, in the day of our
necessity. In it, there is perfect freedom; and with it, assured riches, and
blessed contentment. To be called the servant of God, is an honorable title, a
title, given to Angels, Hebr. 1.14. and taken by Kings, Psalm. 116 16. but to
be, and not to be called only his servant, or to adorn the name with
obedience, as Abraham, David, Hezekiah, Iehosanha^, the Apostles, Peter, Paul,
and other Saints have done, is an honorable thing. Not to be signs without the
thing signified, is the true grace and perfection of true Christians: which I
speak, because many would be called servants, and servants of God, that are
Masterlesse, and be Christ's servants in sins service. But, if we would be
the servants whom God will protect in danger, and provide for in want, we
must serve our heavenly Master, not by bearing the name, but by doing the work
of his servants. In true sorrow for our sins past, and with an earnest
purpose never to return unto them, but unfeignedly to hate them, and utterly to
forsake them: our care must be to spend that small time, that remains, in
the fear of God, and in the obedience of that truth, which is according to
godliness. And if we know these things, blessed are we if we do them. John
13.17. This true and sound blessedness^, to know to obedience, he grant to us,
for JESUS CHRIST his sake, who is GOD, blessed for ever. AMEN.

ECCLESIASTES 11.9. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth: and walk in the ways of thine heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes: but know that for all these things, God will
bring thee to judgment.

FINIS.

