ALL THE ODES AND EPODES OF HORACE.

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE: By HENRY RIDER, Master of Arts of Emanuel
College in CAMEBRIDGE.

HOR. lib. 3. Ode 1. -- Carmina non prius
Audita, Musarum Sacerdos
Virginibus puerisque canto.
LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Robert Rider. Anno Dom. 1638.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes, R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.
November. 8. 1637.
TO THE HONORABLE ROBERT LORD Rich, etc.
The Author wishes all happiness here and hereafter.
My honored LORD:
TO show that your greatness in your self has not made me fearful unto
despair, nor your graciousnesse toward me, bold unto presumption, in a modest
confidence I now beg a long-since promised patronage: Horace, who either
learned from, or taught the Spheres a perfect musical harmony, and made the
language of Rome truly Roman, (if we may believe himself) was as meanly
descended as my own self; yet did not his meannesse deprive him of a
presidiarie Maecenas, a Roman Knight, high in Honors, and (which was the
greatest) in his Princes love: and it is questionable whether Horace were more
helped by Maecenas hand, or Maecenas more honored by Horace his pen: Horace
lived well under Maecenas protection, Maecenas yet lives in Horace kis Poesy:
Dignum laud Virum Musa vetat mori; Coelo musa beat. I now present unto your
Honors hand, the same Poet, but in an English dress; nor can it be more
difficult to find an English Maecenas, than to make an English Horace: It is
not unknown to those that have bent their studies this way, how hard it is to
be tied to the words and matter of another, especially in verse; and yet if you
please graciously to accept, and powerfully to protect my weak endeavors, I
was never so much bound to my Authors phrase, as I shall be to your Honors
favor. Vouchsafe a gracious aspect to these my labors, and I doubt not but
those comfortable rays darted from your eyes, will now give me life, as they
have heretofore given me heat. The lofty riding Sunce in his diurnall course
does shine as bright on a mean cottage, as a Princes Palace; and though his
beams cannot raise it to an equal height, yet they impart light and comfort
to both alike. I know the Nobleness of your disposition will accept of my
Translation as well in parchment, as if it had been wrapped up in plush; in
vellam as in velvet; considering the matter is still the same, as when that
Muses darling Horace wrote it: a curious Cabinet cannot make gold better, nor a
canvase bag, or iron chest diminish the worth of it. I leave my work and self
to your gracious patronage, and wish my self may ever be esteemed, as I desire
to be

Your Honors humble servant, HENRY RIDER.

The Translator to the Judicious Reader.
TRanslations of Authors from one language to another, are like old garments
turned into new fashions; in which though the stuff^ be still the same, yet the
die and trimming are altered, and in the making, here something added, there
something cut away: yet have I endeavored to set forth in public the Odes and
Epodes of Horace in English verse, with as little loss as may be, unless it
be of my own credit, who have presumed to make my gleanings more than another
harvest, and where he only gathered some few ears, I to bind up straw and
all together; for you will find many Odes which have little or no matter in
them, as being composed by the prime author only to show the excellency of the
Roman phrase, and verse; others mixed of words and matter; many materially
excellent. I know I cannot write without the committing of many errors,
somewhereof may pass undetected to many, which I my self may very much
mislike; and some may pick a good conceit in some things, where I intended
none: others may utterly dislike, what may indifferently please me, and
disaffect some epithetes which I did labor for: Thus tres mihi convivae prope
dissentire etc. Let me give you a tasle of one or two passages, wherein happily,
perhaps unhappily I may dissent from other judgments: in the fourth Ode of the
first Book: Quo simul mearis, Nec regna vini sortiere talls, which the
Commentators in my opinion do fail in, making talis vini the adjective and
substantive of the genitive case; whereas Talis is a substantive in the
ablative ease; for it was a custom among the Romans, at their feasts, to cast
the dice who should be the governor of their healths drinking; and this is
consonant to Horace himself in the seventh Ode of the second Book -- Quem
Venus arbitrum Dic^t bibendi: for Venus, or jactus Venereus carried away all:
Another thing which I would advertise the Reader of is this, when the same
word, of the same ease and gender shall bear two senses, both good; and the
Translator, that cannot in his verse render both, shall be thought ignorant in
the one, as in this place; Ode thirty five of the first Book: Regumque matres
barbarorum, Et purpurei metuunt Tyranni; where the word purpurei may be
understood of the cruelty of tyrants, whose hands are dipped in blood; or the
royal clothing of Kings and Emperors in purple robes: in the former sense I
have translated the words thus,

And barbarous Kings mothers are afeard,
And tyrants too with purple gore besmeared.
In the latter sense it may be thus rendered;

And barbarous kings mothers are afraid,
And Tyrants too with purple robes araid.
A third sort of mistake is in some whole clause or sentence, as in the fifth
Ode of the third Book, concerning Regulus his embasie to Rome, where he says:

-- Signa ego Punicis
Affixa delubris, and arma
Militibus sine caede, dixit,
Direpta vidi.
Thus far I understand of the base cowardice of the Roman soldiers: but for
that which follows,

-- Vidi ego civium
Retorta tergo brachia libero,
I wonder that all Commentators, that I have seen, should interpret it of the
slaverie of the Romans, which is spoken of the fearlesse walking up and down
of the Carthaginian citicens with their hands behind them, after their conquest
obtained: and this is evident by the next words.

Portasque non clausas, et arva
Mart coli populata nostro.
A fourth sort of mistake is in the different pointing of a sentence, as you
may see in the same Ode:

Si pugnat extricata densis
Cerva plagis, erit ille fortis
Qui perfidis fe credidit hostibus.
Which if it be read with an interrogation, I can see us sense in it: therefore
I read it as a mere concession upon an impossibility, that you may as well
make a Dear stay and fight valiantly, when she is escaped from the hunters
toil, as a soldier once freed from his captivity. The last sort of mistakes
may be in different readings, as in the seventh Ode of the first book (to give
no more instances) where some read, Undique decerptam fronti praeponere
olivam: I prefer that other reading, Undique decerptae frondem praeponere
olivae: since there the Poet speaks of preferring Athens, Pallas city, and
the Olive tree sacred to her, before all other cities and trees.

Take, gentle Reader, these my labors in good part; and if I in this shall
give thee any contentment, I hope hereafter to increase it to thee in some
other subject; whose study in this has been, to afford thee both profit and
delight.

Thine in the best of his endeavors, HENRY RIDER.

THE FIRST BOOK of the Odes of HORACE.
ODE I. TO MAECENAS. HORACE describes how several men are delighted with
several sorts of life; but himself only with the Name of a Lyrick Poet, as
that which will prove most for his glory.
MAEcenas, my protection, and sweet grace,
From great great-grandsire Kings that had thy race;
There Is some who love in charrets to raise high
Th'Olympick dust; and then the goal past by
By their swift heated wheels, and noble praise
The Lords of the earth up to the Gods does raise.
Him, if the fickle Roman rout contend
With trebly doubled honors to commend;
That man, if he in his own barns have heapt
What ever from the Libyan floores is swept,
Loving with his plow to cut his country field,
With richest profers you shall nere make yield;
That as a trembling seaman he should rip
Myrtilus sea up in a Cyprus ship.
The Merchant lauds his countries ease and rest,
Fearing the South-west-wind that dos contest
With Icarus seas, straight his torn ships does rear,
Being unskilful poverty to bear;
This man does love bowls of old Sack to taste,
And some part of the solid day to waste,
His corpse being now beneath some green tree spread,
Now near some sacred fountains gentle head,
Tents and confused dinne of fife and drum,
and matron-hated battles do please some:
The hunter mindlesse of his tender bride,
Dos under the cool-freezing air abide,
Whether his trusty hound did spy a Dear,
Or Marsyan Boar his round hol'd nets did tear.
Ivy, the learned heads meed, ranks me above,
With the high gods; me the coole-sh^ded grove,
And Nymphs and Satyrs nimble train divide
From the rout, if Euterpe do not hide
Her pipe from me, nor Polyhymnia
Refuse upon her Lesbian lute to play:
But if among Lyrick Poets you will prick me down,
He touch the stars with my advanced crown.
ODE II. TO AUGUSTUS CAESAR. He describes the tempest, and inundation of
Tiber, and intimates that they were sent for the slaughter of Julius Caesar in
the Capitol; complaining also of the civil wars that followed upon it; and
concludes with a prayer for Augustus.
NOw has our Father sent upon this land
Snow and dire hail enough, and, with fierce hand
Casting our sacred towers down, has dismayed
Our City; he the Nations made afraid,
L^st Pyrrha's woeful age (who did complain
Of new-sprung monsters) should return again.
When Prote^^ drove up all his herds to see
The tops of hills, and on the high elm-tree
The fishes clung (which was the doves known seat)
And fearful does on the tossed waves did beat.
We yellow-sanded Tiber did behold
With billows from the Tyrrhene Ocean rolled,
Hurrie to beat down our Kings monument,
And Vesta's temple, very violent:
While he himself a champion did display
For his too much lamenting Ilia,
And the wife-serving flood enraged dos slide
(Though love gainsaid it) ore his cursed side.
Our youths diminisht by their fathers fault,
Shall hear tell that our Citizens have wrought
Their swords, with which the Persians severe
Might better fall; they of these wars shall hear.
What God now shall our people invocate
Unto our ruine-fearing Empires state?
With what prayer shall our sacred virgins call
Vesta who now hears not our prayers at all?
On whom will Jupiter the office lay
Of wiping our impieties away?
Prophet Apollo, come, we pray, at last,
Thy shoulders with a white cloud being o'rec^st;
Or if ^ai^e Venus thou please to step out,
(Whom Mirth and Venus ever fly about)
Or whether thou our Father cast an eye
On thy neglected stock and progeny;
Thou (ah) with too long bloody pastime filled,
Whom clamor pleases, and the glittering shield,
And countenance of Indian swift to go,
Most violent against his wounded foe:
Or if that thou the winged messenger,
Thy form being changed, like our young Prince appear
Upon the earth, thou son of Maia mild,
Caesar's avenger pleasing to be styled;
May thou return to heaven again, but late;
And long live gracious to our Roman state;
Nor from us let ore-swift fate carry thee
Offended much at our impiety.
Here may thou purchase worthy conquests rather,
Here love thou to be styled our Prince and father;
Nor let the Medians unpunisht ride,
So long as thou, o Caesar, art our guide.
ODE III. To the ship in which Virgil sailed to Athens. He prays the ship to
deliver Virgil safe to Athens, then condemns the rashcesse of him that first
went to sea.
O Ship that ow'st back Virgil trusted to thee,
Restore him safe to Athens shoares, I woo thee,
And keep the one half of my soul: so, ever,
May Cyprus potent goddess thee deliver,
So Helens brothers, two bright stars, thee guide,
So the winds Father, (all else up being tide
Except the west-wind.) Oak and threefold brass
Went ore his heart, who first of all did pass
The slender ship unto the flood severe,
Nor rude north struggling against the south did fear,
Nor rainy Hyades, nor south-wests mood,
Than which the ruler of the Adrian flood
Is not more potent, whether he do please
To raise aloit, or to calm down the seas.
What step of death feared he, who with eyes dry
Did gaze upon the monsters swimming by,
Who did behold the Ocean still uneven,
And the ill-famed rocks whose tops touched heaven.
Foreseeing heaven has parted, all in vain,
The earth from the unsociable main,
(...) for all this these impious ships do go
Beyond those seas should not be reached unto.
"Mankind that dares do any thing, has run
"Into those sins forbidden to be done.
Iapetus bold son toth' earth has thrown
Fire by pernicious craft: this fire stolen down
From heavens court, Leanness, and a new trained band
Of fevers revelled in every Land.
Daedalus passed through the yielding cloud,
With pinions unto mankind not allowed:
Hercules labor did through Acheron sail:
Nothing's too hard for men: even heaven we seal
By folly, nor through our own sin will let
Jove his revenging bolts aside to set.
ODE IV. TO L. SEXTIUS. A description of the Spring, an exhortation to mirth
from the common condition of man's mortality.
BY Spring and West-winds gentle change about
Sharp Winter's gone; the engines now lanch on
The long-dry keeles, nor do the beasts desire
The stable, nor the husbandman the fire,
Nor do the fields with hoary frosts look gray:
Now Cytherean Venus leads the way,
While the moone'gins to shine, and sweet-fac'd Graces
Joined with Nymphs, shake the earth with mixed paces:
While the flame-scattering Vulcan now does fire
His Cyclops-toiling forges: now to tire
The head with myrtle green, and with the bud
Which the earth now unprison'd bears, is good.
Now fit to sacrifice in groves close hid
To Faunw, whether he crave lamb or kid.
"Pale death with the same foot knocks at the bowers
"Of the poor men, and at the Princes towers.
O happy Sextius, this our lives short scope
Forbids us to conceive a lasting hope.
Now, now will death, and ghosts held fabulous
Seize upon thee, and Platoes fai^ie house;
Whither being gone, you shall not at dice acquire
The rule 'oth' wine nor Lycidas smooth admire,
For whom our Youths now all on fire do grow,
And maids ere long in their desire will glow.
ODE V. TO PYRRHA. The misery of them that do^e on ber.
WHat tender boy upon a rosy b^d,
Being with liquid odours overspred,
Within some pleasant bower, does to thee sue
(^O Pyrrha) for thy love? for whom do you
Bind your gold locks, plain in your ornament?
Alas, how often shall the proud Boy repent
Thy false faith, and contemned deities,
And look with wonderment on those thy seas
Made rough with black winds, who (too credulous Boy)
(...) thee now as some golden prize enjoy?
Who hopes thou wilt still be free to him, still fair,
Ignorant of thy all-deluding air.
Wretched are they to whom untride you shine;
The wall, by sacred tables made divine,
Shows I have hung my ship-rackt robe on high
Unto the Oceans potent Deity.
ODE VI. TO AGRIPPA. That his battles must be sung by Varius; Horace himself
being fit only for meaner subjects.
THou valiant man, and conqueror of thy foes,
Shall be by Varius sung in hymns like those
Or Homers muse, what ere thy warlike forces
Under thy conduct did by ships or horses.
(Agrippa) we nor strive these things to welld,
Nor Peleus sons stout heart, who could not yield,
Nor yet the wandering of Ulysses sly,
By sea, nor Pelops bloody family.
We that are weak ones great things do not use,
While shame and our weak lyre ore-swaying muse.
Forbids me worthy Caesar's praise to stain,
And thine with the ill working of my brain.
Who worthily can with his pen denote
Mars armed with an Adamantine coat,
Or Merion with the Trojan dust besmeared,
Or Tideus son by Pallas aid up-rear'd
Equal toth' gods? We sing of Banquettings,
We sing of angered Virgins bickerings
Against young men with paired nails, being free to muse,
Or, if in love, not lighter than we use.
ODE VII. TO MUNATIUS PLANCUS. Diverse men extol diverse countries, the Poet
only likes Tiburtus grove, and exhorts to wash away cares with wine.
SOme will bright Rhodes or Mitylene extol,
Or Ephesus, or two-sea'd Gorinths wall,
Or Thebes by- Bacchus, or else Delphos high
By Phoehus, or those fields of Thessaly.
Some there are whose sole work it is to raise
The virgin Pallas town with lasting lays,
And to prefer the branch of the olive tree
Fore any boughs that elsewhere gathered be.
The most part do for Iunoes honor pitch
On horse stored Argos, and Mycaene rich.
Not Lacedaenion so inured to toil
Did ever so affect me, nor the soil
Of fat Larissa did me so much sway,
As the house of echoing Albunea,
And steepie Anio, and Tiburnus grove,
And orchards lav'd with streams that ever move.
As often the cleared north the darkness scoures
From the black heaven, nor breeds perpetual showers;
So thou, being wise, remember to confine
Thy griefs, and life's toil, Plancus, in mild wine;
Whether the Camps with banners glistring hold thee,
Or that thy Tibers shadie banks shall fold thee.
From Salamis and's sire when Teucer fled,
Yet it is said, that he did bind his head,
Well drencht in Bacchus, with a Poplar crown,
Thus speaking to his friends so much cast down:
Wherever fortune, better than my father,
Shall bear us, mates and friends we will go together.
Ye nothing need despair, while Teucer is
Your guide and aid: for Phoebus promised this
(Unerring he) that in a newfound land
A Salamis as good as this should stand:
O valiant men, and that oft-times with me
Have suffered far worse calamity,
Now do you all your griefs with wine restrain;
Tomorrow we will to the vast sea again.
ODE VIII. TO LYDIA. Concerning a young man wasted with her love.
LYDIA, speak, by all the gods I pray,
Why strive you Sibaris to cast away
For love? Why does he thus the wide field shun,
Being inured both to dust and Sun?
Why rides he not as soldier amongst his train,
Nor with sharp bits his Flanders steeds does rain?
Why fears he to swim yellow Tiber over
And shuns, more warily than vipers gore,
The Olive wreath, nor does his shoulders show
Now with the arms he bears made black and blew?
Often by the Discus being made renoun'd,
Often by the arrow shot clean through the bound:
Why lurks he as the sea-queen Thetis boy
(They say) did, 'bout the woeful fall of Troy,
Lest that his manlike habit should command
Him to the wars, and to his Lycian band?
ODE IX. TO THALIARCHUS. The sharper the winter is, the sweeter our mirth
should be.
See thou Soracte white with a deep snow?
How the bowed trees their weight cannot undergo?
And how the streams bound with sharp ice, do stand?
Dissolve the frost, laying with bounteous hand
Wood on the fire, and with a courage bold
Draw, Thaliarch, thy wine of four years old,
Out of thy Sabine two-ear'd pot: the rest
Leave to the gods, who when they have suppressed
The winds on the rude sea maintaining war,
Nor Cypres, nor old Ash-trees shaken are.
"Enquire thou not what shall to morrow be,
"And whatsoere day fortune gives thee,
"Put it upon thy gains; nor sweet love-glances
Do thou abhor, O bey, nor yet our dances,
While crabbed age forbeares thy youth a space,
Let both the ma^tiall field and wrestling place,
And softly-whispers when the night comes in,
At a fit season be revived agin;
And the maids pleasant laugh that her betrayed
Within some private corner closely laid,
Or favor being snatched from her arm
Or finger having done some trifling harm.
ODE X. An Hymn to MERCURY. The praises of him from several things.
ELoquent Hermes, Atlas daughters child,
That have reformed rude men's behavior wild,
Smooth in thy speech, and in thy mannaging
Of the neat wrestling place; thee will I sing,
Great Jove's and the gods Nuntius, and the sire
Oth'crooked harp, what ere thou did require,
Being skillful in a jesting theft to hide:
Whilst thee, a lad, Apollo terrifi^de
With threatening words, unless thou did re^
The kine that had been stolen away before
From him by thy deceitfulness; he smiled
When of his quiver too he was beguiled.
Nay Priam too (happy in leaving Troy)
Left Atreu^ proud sons, (thou being his convoy)
The Greek flames, and Troyes weak camps: thou disposes^
Blessed souls in pleasant shades, and thou inclosest
The airy drove in with a golden rod,
Loved from the highest to the lowest god.
ODE XI. TO LEUCONOE. That she should not trouble her self with future things.
(IT is a sin) do not thou seek to know
What fate the gods will on my self bestow,
What upon thee, Leuconoe, nor try
The Babylonian Astrology;
The better to endure what ere may be,
Whether more Winters Jove will grant to thee,
Or this thy last, which with opposed rocks
In thunder breaks the Tyrrhene ocean shocks.
Be wise, and rack thy wines up, and quite break
Thy long hope off in short space: "while we speak,
"Envious time flies: lay hold upon this day,
"Trusting the next as little as you may.
ODE XII. TO AUGUSTUS. Of Orpheus, of the gods, Heroes, and brave Commanders of
Rome, lastly of Augustus.
WHat man, or Demi god will thou aspire
(Cl^o) to celebrate upon thy lyre,
Or shrill-tun'd pipe? what god? what persons name
Shall the deluding echo reproclaime
Or in the shadie banks of Helicon,
Or Pindus, or cold Haemus tops upon?
From whence the forests wildly took their way
After harmonious Orpheus, who could stay
The floods rough current by his mothers skill,
And the swift winds, and to his music shrill
The then-quick-hearing trees had art to raise:
What rather than our parents usual praise
Shall I first sing? or him that dos command
The Affairs of men and gods, rules sea and land,
And dos the world by various seasons guide?
Than whom no greater power dos live beside,
Nor any equal is, or next in place,
Yet Pallas has obtained the nearest grace.
Nor of thee, Bacchus, will I silent be,
Valiant in quarrels; nor, O maid, of thee,
An enemy to savage beasts that art,
Nor thee, O Phoebus, feared for thy sure dart.
Alcides I, and Laedaes sons will sing,
The one renowned, for horseback conquering,
To'ther for handy-strokes; whose glorious stars,
When they appear unto the marinars,
The forced water from the rocks does flow,
The winds are laid, the clouds away do go,
And presently (because they so do please)
The threatening waves are still upon the seas.
Whether, next these, to sing of Romulus,
Or the serene reign of Pomp^lius,
Or of Tarquinius proud dominion,
Or Catoes noble fate, I stick upon;
I gratefully will in a lofty verse
Regulus and the Scauri next rehearse,
And Paulus prodigal of his brave blood,
What time the Carthaginian victor stood,
Next him Fabritius: crushing poverty
And a small field left from their ancestrie,
With a meet cell, him fit for war did square,
And Curious with his uncurious hair;
Camillus too: Marcellus fame is grown
Like to a tree, unto an age unknown.
Among all these the Julian star aspires
Like to the Moon among the lesser fires.
Thou father and preserver of mankind,
Begot by Saturn, unto thee assigned
Let all the care of Caesar's fortunes be;
Do thou reign chief, and Caesar next to thee,
He, whether he in a just victory
Chain the tamed Parthians foes to Italy,
Or he subdue the Seres and the Mores
Dwelling upon the oriental shores;
Inferior to thee, shall as partner take
The wide worlds rule; but thou alone shall shake
Heaven with thy ponderous charret, and shall cast
Thy vengefull thunders on the groves unchaste.
ODE XIII. TO LYDIA. A complaint that she preferres Telephus before him.
WHen thou the rosy neck of Telephus,
Telephus smooth arms (Lydia) praisest thus,
Ah, my scorcht heart with untamed choler swells,
Nor sense, nor blood in their due station dwells,
And sweat drops down my cheeks, at it would say,
With what slow flames am I consumed away?
I am intag'd, whether some ore-hot broile
Sprung out of wine, did thy white shoulders soil,
Or whether with his teeth the mad cap spark
Upon thy lips have set some noted mark.
You cannot hope, if you will yield to me,
That he will yours for everlasting be,
Who barb'rously dos your sweet kisses harm,
Which Venus with the Quintessence did warm
Of her own Nectar. "O thrice blessed are those,
"And more, whom an unsever'd band dos close;
"Nor their loves, by false scandals ren taway,
"Shall ere unknit until their dying day.
ODE XIV. TO BRUTUS. A perpetual Allegory against his civil war.
O Ship, new floods again shall carry you
Into the sea; o, what do mean to do?
Steare quickly to the port: do not you see
How destitute of oars your port-holes be?
And the maine mast, and saile-yard too do crack,
Being by the swift-wing'd North wind put to rack;
And ships without their tackling cannot prevail
On the rough sea; thou have not one whole sail;
Thou have no gods to whom thou out may cry,
Being again oppressed with misery;
Though thou a Pontick pine (the noblest breed
Of all the forest) boastest of thy seed,
And fruitless name; the fearful mariner
Trusts not in painted boards: then do tho fear,
Unless thou wilt be a may game for the wind;
(Thou that wast late my fearful grief of mind,
Now my desire and chief care) shun the seas
Winding among the shining Cyclades.
ODE XV. Nereus prophecy of the ruin of Troy.
Where that false shepherd brought by sea away
In Projan ships his mistress Helena,
Nereus with an unpleasing laziness
Fettered the winds, until he did express
His woeful fate. With an ill omen thou
Do bring her home, whom Greece, bound in a vow
To break thy match, and Priams ancient reign,
With many an armed band shall fetch again.
O what a sweat does horse and man annoy,
What slaughters for the nation of Troy
Do thou procure? Now Pallas ready has
Her helmet, Aegis, charrets, and stern wrath.
In vain shall thou comb out thy locks, being stout
On Venus aid, and warble thy songs out
Pleasing to women, on thy feeble lyre;
In vain shall thou fly from the javelins, dire
To beds of love; their shafts of Cretian reed,
Their clamourings, and Ajax swift of speed
To follow thee; yet thou, alas, though late,
Thy lecherous hairs in dust shall vitiate.
Do thou not think upon Laertes son,
The overthrow of all thy nation,
Nor Pylian Nestor? Salaminius,
And Teucer, and the war-skill'd Sthenelus
Fearlesse pursues thee, who, if need there were,
To fight on horse, is a swift charioter.
Thou shall know Merion too: Tydeus stern son,
Stouter than's sire, to find thee mad does run;
Whom thou faint heart with panting breath do fly,
As a Dear mindlesse of his prey, does hie
From the Wolf seen in the vales farther side;
Thou made not such a promise to your bride.
The furious navy of Achilles shall
Procure to Ilium an utter fall,
And to the Trojan dames: some winters past.
The Grecian fire the Trojan towers shall blast.
ODE XVI. A Recantation. To a maid whom he had libelled, and transfers the
cause upon rage, which he describes.
DAughter more fair than thy fair mother was,
Upon my libelling Iambicks pass
What ever doom you will; whether you please
To cast them in the fire, or Adrian seas.
Not Cybele, nor the inhabiter
Of Pytho, dos so much his Priests minds stir
From his hid cell, nor Bacchus his so much,
Nor Corybants their tinkling brass so touch,
As fell wrath us: which nor the Turkish blade,
Nor the devouring sea can make afraid,
Nor cruel fire, nor love himself keep under,
Rushing upon us with his wrathful thunder.
It Is said Prometheus, being forced to it,
Unto his curious piece of clay did knit
A portion cut from every thing, and pressed
The raging Lions fury on our breast.
Rage with a sad destruction overthrew
Thyestes, and the chiefest causes grew
In greatest Cities, that they perished all,
And the insulting foe drove on the wall
His hostile plough: stop rage; for my breast heat
Did in my flowing youth on me too beat,
And upon sharp Iambicks sent me mad:
Now with mild songs I seek to change what is sad,
And since my scandalls have recanted bin,
Be friends with me, and give me life agin.
ODE XVII. TO TYNDARIS. He inviteth her to Lucretilis, which he highly praises.
SWift Faunu^ from Lycaeum changing is
Oft-times to the sweet aird Lucretilis,
And parching heat, and cold winds does remove
Still from my goats unharm'd through each safe grove.
The strong-smell'd he goats mates wandering about,
The sheltring shrubs, and beds of Time seek out,
Nor the kid fold the green skind serpent dreads;
Nor martial wolves; when, Tyndaris, the meads,
And smooth-trod stones of steep Usticas ground
With the sweet-tuned pipe do through sound.
The gods keep me; my piety and Muse
Is grateful to the gods: from hence accrues
Unto the full, out of the plenteous horn
A wealthy treasure of the countries corn.
In a retired vale here shall thou flee
The Dog-stars heat, and of Penelope
And beauteous Circe both for one at suite,
Shall thou relate upon thy Teian Lute.
Here shall thou drink beneath a shadie tree
Goblets of Lesbian wine nere harming thee,
Nor Bacchus upon Semele begot
Shall any quarellings with Mars complot;
Not yet suspected shall thou Cyrus fear
So rash left he his rude hands up should rear
Against thee too weak, and rend thy fastened crown
Off from thy hairs, and tear thy harmless gown.
ODE XVIII. TO QUINTIUS VARUS. That the moderate use of wine makes men
pleasant; immoderate, turbulent.
BOut Tiburs pleasant pasture, and the wall
Of Catilus, plant thou no tree at all,
O Vorus, sooner than the sacred vine;
For Bacchus to the sober dos assign
All hard afflictions, nor otherwise
Can they avoid sharp-tooth'd calamities.
Who in's wine prates of tedious woe or want?
Who, father Bacchus, dos not of thee chant,
And thee, fair Venus? but lest some indeed
The liberties of moderate wine exceed,
The Centaures quarrels with the Lapythae,
Skirmished in their wine, admonish thee.
Bacchus advises thee, the Thracians foe,
When greedy of their appetite they go
Through right and wrong with small distinction.
Thee, gentle Bacchus, He not set upon,
Without thy leave, nor bring into the light
Thy secret rites with many boughs bedight.
Thy trumpets shrill, and Trojan horn restrain,
Which blind self-love succeeds, and glory vain,
The empty head more than is fitting swelling,
And glasse-transparent trust, hid secrets telling.
ODE XIX. OF GLYCERA: He is so tormented with love, that be cannot write of
war, but wantonness.
THe Cupids cruel mother, and the son
Of The bane Semele commands me on,
And wanton liberty, again to move
My mind unto my long forsaken love.
Glycera's beauty fireth me alone,
Shining more bright than Parian marble stone.
Her lovely skornfulnesse inflameth me,
And look too dangerous for me to see
Venus upon me rushing with her might,
Left Cyprus, nor would suffer me to write
Of Scythians, and of Parthians valorous
On wrong-turn'd steeds, nor what concerns not us.
Young striplings, lay for me green fresh turfe here,
Vervine and frankincense dispose me there,
With bowls of wine of two years old well filled:
She Will be more mild, the sacrifice being killed.
ODE XX. TO MAECENAS. He inviteth him to a mean banquet.
WEak Sabine wine in small cups shall thou taste,
Which in a Greek Pot closed my self had cased
Dear Knight Maecenas) when that the applause
Was given thee in the Theater; the cause
That thy own rivers banks, and prattling air
Of the hill Vatican, did again declare
Thy praises unto thee. Thou shall digest
Thy Caecube wine and grapes that have been pressed
Out of the Calene fat: nor Falern wine
Nor Formian hills adorn these cups of mine.
ODE XXI. He exhorts young men and maids to the praise of Apollo and Diana.
YE tender Virgins Dian sing,
Ye young men long haird Phoebus ring,
And Latona loved dear
Of the mighty Jupiter.
Sing ye her that pleased is
With rivers and the leaves of trees.
Which in cold Algidum do move,
Or Erimanthus shadle grove,
Or Cragus green: Ye young men raise
Tempe with as many lays;
Do ye also Delos hallow
Being the birthplace of Apollo,
And his shoulders dignified
With shafts and's brothers lute beside.
He woeful war shall chase from hence,
He wretched dearth and pestilence
From people, and from Emperor Caesar,
For the Persians up shall treasure,
And against the British nation,
Moved with your supplication,
ODE XXII. TO ARISTIUS. The integrity of life is every where safe, which he
proves by his own example.
THe sound of life, and from corruption freed,
(Fuscus) nor Indian darts, nor how does need,
Nor quiver full of poisoned shafts, though he
Through the patching sands to travel be,
Or the inhospitable Caucasus,
Or places which Hydaspes fabulous
Runs through; for in the Sabine grove from me
Being unarmed, a Wolf away did flee,
While I did chant my Lalage, and go
Beyond my bounds, being devoid of woe:
A monster which nor warlick Daunia feeds
In her large fields, nor Iuba's kingdom breeds,
The Lions dry nurse. Say you banish me
Unto those frozen lands, where never tree
Is recreated by the Summer heat,
Which part 'oth' world fogs and bad mists do beat:
Place me beneath the carre 'oth' too-neere Sun,
Even in a Land where habitation
Was never known; yet will I still love thee,
My sweet-fac't, and my sweet-tongu'd Lalage.
ODE XXIII. TO CHLOE. That she should not fear him, but forsake her mother,
being ripe for a husband.
LIke to a Hind thou Chloe do me fly
That seeks his dam upon the mountains high,
With a fond fear of winds and trees.
For if the springtime with moved leaves did rush,
Or green-skind Adder brustled through abush,
He trembles both in heart and knees.
But I not like a Tiger fell,
Or a Getulian Lion, will
Pursue to rear thee: cease at length to flit
After thy damme, being for a husband fit.
ODE XXIV. TO VIRGIL. Of the death of Quintilius.
MELPOMENE, thou unto whom thy fire
Gave a sweet voice together with thy lyre,
Sing thy sad tunes; what mean can be, or end
To the bewailing of so dear a friend?
Dos then an everlasting sleep possess
Quintilius? unto whom both modestnesse
And Justice sister (Faith from scandal clear)
And naked Truth when will they find a peer.
Bewailed of many good men died he,
Bewailed of no man, Virgil, more than thee.
Thou pious man (alas) but all in vain,
Demandst Quintilius of the gods again,
Not lent them to that end: but if that you
Should tune that Lute which trees did hearken to,
Better than Thracian Orpheus, yet agin
Life to that ai^ie shape can nere come in,
Which Mercury (who never could be won
To reverse faces upon petition)
Has once commanded down to his black guard
With his most dreaded rod; the case is hard.
But "that by patience is made more light,
"Which it is not in our power to set aright.
ODE XXV. TO LYDIA. He insulteth over Lydia, that now being old she is
despised of youngsters.
BOld youngsters thy closed windows seldom shake
With dobled blows, nor thy sleeps from thee take,
And still the door keeps shut, which heretofore
His oiled hinges moved ore and ore:
Now less and less thou art famed: whilst, Lydia,
I fall from thee, thou sleepst whole nights away.
In like sort, base old bawd, thou shall complain
For thy proud lechers down in some by-lane,
Whilst near th'eclipse the north wind blows more high,
When thy inflamed love, and lechery
That Is wont to make ma^es mad, shall rage upon
Thy diseased heart, with lamentation
That more in love each sprightfull youngster grows
With green leaved svie, and fresh Myrtle boughs,
And the d^le withered leaves dos dedicate
To Hebrus stream the frosts associate.
ODE XXVI. In the praise of Lamias.
I That unto the Muses am a friend,
My griefs and fears to rough winds will commend
Into the Cretick Ocean them to fling.
Nor will I notice take, by whom the King
Of the cold clime near the North pole's obeyed,
Nor what makes Tiridates sore afraid.
O thou harmonious Pimplaean muse,
That do a bout the full-b imm'd fountains use,
Compose together flowers newly blow'n,
O make thou for my Lamias a crown.
My praisings can do nothing without you;
It does behove thee, and thy sisters too,
Him with your new strung Lutes to raise on high,
Him with your Lesbian Harp to deifie.
ODE XXVII. To his Companions. Against quarrelling in drink: desiring M^gella's
brother to drink his mistress health, hearing her name, he pities him.
IT is the course of Thracians to fight
With cups made for increasing of delight:
Take that Barbarian custom hence, and stay
Your ruddie wine from any bloody f^ay.
From wine and midnight revels strange it is
How much the Median Cimeter disagrees.
Allay, companions, this tumult ill,
And lean upon your rested elbowes still.
And would you have mequaffe my part up too
Of quarrell-breeding Falern wine with you?
Let Opus-bred Megellaes brother say,
With what wound he blessed soul does pine away?
By what dart? what now, slacks your disposition?
I will not drink, except on this condition.
What love so ere thee quels, it burns thee yet
With no base fires; and with ingenuous heat
Thou still do fry; what ere thou have, impart,
Trust it with my safe ears: Ah wretched heart!
In what a vast Charybdis do thou tire,
My boy more worthy of a better fire?
What witch, or what inchanter can you free
With his Thessalian drugs? what deity?
Scarce Pegasus shall theo once bound at stake
From this three-shap't Chimaera ever take.
ODE XXVIII. An answer of Archytas, the Philosopher, to a Saylor, concerning
the common necessity of death.
THee the surve your both of sea and land,
And of the never to be numbered sand,
The small gifts of a little dust do stay
Thee, Archytas, near the Calabrian bay:
Nor dos it profit thee, (being to die)
To have searched heaven, and run through the round sky
In thy conceit. Why, Pelops father di'd,
Though the gods guest; Tithonus too beside
Caught up into the air: and Minos chose
One of loves privie-councell: hell does close
Pythagoras once more to hell resigned,
Though he the Trojan age calling to mind,
By his erected shield, did dedicate
Naught but his nerves and skin to cruel fate,
Who (thou being judge) could no mean author be
Of Physics, and of true morality.
But there is one night for all men tarrieth,
And the once-to-be-trodden path of death.
Fiends on stern Mars do some for sport bestow,
The sea's the greedy sailors overthrow.
Mixed funerals of old and young are heap't;
Dire Proserpine over no man's head has leap't:
The south wind western Orions rude mate too
Me in the Illyrian ocean orethrew.
But thou (though cruell-hearted) Mariner
Some of thy waste sand spare not to confer
Upon my bones and head unburied yet;
So whatsoere the south-east wind may threat
Upon the Spanish seas, while safe thou art,
Let the Venusian forest feel the smart;
And may much traffic (whence it best may prove)
Flow in unto thee from propitious love,
And Neptunes hallowed Tarentine diety;
But if you fear not to do an impiety
Harmfull unto thy harmless progeny,
My unpai'd rites and hard fate watch for thee;
And till my prayer be answered He not bate,
And thee no sacrifice shall expiate.
Though you make haste, (it will be no long stay)
Throw mould thrice on me, you may run your way.
ODE XXIX. TO ICCIUS. Wondering that he should turn from a Philosopher to a
soldier.
THE Arabians rich store thou now envi'st,
(O Iccius) and sharp artillery bui'st
Against the Sabean Kings nere conquered yet,
And for the horrid Mede thou chains do knit.
What barbarous virgin (her bettoth'd love slain.)
Shall tend on thee? what boy of courtly strain
With perfumed locks shall stand thy cup to fill,
Who by his native archery has skill
To shoot the Parthian darts? Who will deny
Steep rivers may run up the mountains high,
And Tiber turn, when as thou do assay
To change Panaetius brave works away,
Bought on all hands, and thy Socratick ware
For Spanish beles; once promising so fair?
ODE XXX. TO VENUS. Praying her to come to Glycera's Temple.
VENUS of Cnidus and of Paphos Queen,
Scorn thy forsaken Cyprus, and come in
To the neat Temple of my Glycera,
Who with much incense dos unto thee pray.
Let your most furious stripling com^ with you,
And loose-roab'd Graces, and the Nymphs come too,
And let youths goddess come, (that without thee
Is nothing beautiful) and Mercury.
ODE XXXI. TO APOLLO. Requiring only health of body and mind, being he loved
frugality.
WHat craves the Priest from Phoebus most divine?
What asks he, pouring from his bowl new wine?
Not the full ears of fat Sardinia,
Nor lovely herds of hot Calabria,
Neither the Indian gold, nor Ivorie,
Neither the fields which Lyris glideth by
(That silent river with his quiet stream)
They to whom fortune has given vines, let them
Prune them with hooks; and out of bowls of gold
Let the rich merchant suck is wines were sold
For Syrian ware: he to the gods is dear,
Because he three or four times in a year
Unharm'd the Atlantic Ocean can see.
Olives and Succory do nourish me,
And loos'ning Mallows. Grant Latona's son,
While I am strong, that I may feed upon
What next comes; and with perfect mind I pray
To pass a sweet and merry age away.
ODE XXXII. To his Lute. Praising it, from the comfort it yielded Alcaeus.
WE are desired, if we (alone) have played
Any thing on thee underneath some shade;
Proceed my Lute, a Latin song tune ore,
Which both this year may live, and many more.
Thou first tuned by that Lesbian citizen,
Who (valiant man at arms) though he had been
Amidst his troops, or else had lanched out
His navy from the washed shores tossed about,
Bacchus, the Muses too, and Venus sung,
And her boy too that ever on her hung,
And Lycus beautiful with his black eyes,
And his black hair: O Lute, Apollo's prize,
And loved at feasts of mighty Jupiter,
O thou my labors sweetest temperer,
All happiness be wished to thee from me,
When in a comely sort I summon thee
ODE XXXIII. TO ALBIUS TIBULLUS. Comforting him; that loving, was not beloved
again.
Do not thou grieve too much, bearing in mind,
(O Albius) thy Glycera unkind,
Nor tune sad lays, 'cause one more young than thou
Is more accepted, throw her cancelled vow.
The love of Cyrus does Lycoris burn.
Famed for her comely brow; Cyrus does turn
After rough-natur'd Pholoe; but first
Kids shall among Apulian Wolves be nursed,
Ere Pholoe sin with that loathed Sodomite;
For so to Venus it does seem most right,
Whom it delights in brezen yoakes to bind
With cruel sport unequal shapes and mind.
When once there su'd to me a love much better,
Myrtale held me with a pleasing fetter,
That slave that louder than the sea could roar
Of Adria curling the Calabrian shore.
ODE XXXIV. He forsakes the irreligious Epiturcan sect.
THe gods but scarce and seldom worshipper,
While skilled in mad Philosophy I err,
I now am made to turn my sails perforce,
And fall back to my long-forsaken course.
For with bright flames the cloud dividing Jove
His thunder-shod steeds, and swift charet drove
Through the bright air, with which the earth so great,
The winding floods, Styx, and the horrid seat
Of hated hell, and the Atlantic border
Is thorow-shaken: Jove can quickly order
Small things instead of great, the man of worth
He makes a beggar, bringing hid things forth.
The all-confounding fortune with loud cry
Hence had her height: on this she loves to lie.
ODE XXXV. To Fortune. Praying her to preserve Caesar in his expedition against
the Britains.
Goddess that pleasing Antium do steare,
Being potent from the lowest step to rear
The putrefying bod^, and to turn
The proudest triumphs ^o the funeral urne:
The Country poor swain with his trembling vow
Seeks thee; and who the Turkish seas does plow
With Greek ships, as the sea's Queen honors thee:
The Dacians fierce, and Scythians apt to flee
From place to place, cities and nations too,
And warlike Italy stands in awe of you,
And barbarous Kings mothers are afeard,
And Tyrants too with purple gore besmeared.
O do not thou wi^h a destructive foot
Our firm fixed pillar from his basis root,
Nor let the gathered rout to arms command
Our quiet troops, to arms, and waste our land:
Severe fate ever dos before thee pass,
Carrying sharp pikes in her hand of brass,
And wedges; nor from it is severed
The tort'^ing gibber, nor the molten lead.
Hope, and Faith (seldom found) being veiled ore
With a white vestiment, dos thee adore,
Nor thee for her companion denies,
When, as a foe thou leave great families,
With thy changed robe: but the perfidious rout,
And strumpetizing perjured crew slinke out;
"Friends, when our hogs-heads to the lees are dry,
"Failing to bear the yoke with us, all fly.
Guard Caesar (ready now to set upon
The Britain the worlds utmost nation)
And our young soldiers fresh-waterd powers
So Terrible to all the Fasterne shoares,
And the Red Sea: Ah, ah it shameth me
To think of homebred skars and cruelty,
And brother against brother. We, hard seed,
what have we shunned? we, most accursed breed,
What left untri'd? when did our young-train'd band,
In reverence to the gods, restrain their hand?
What Altars did they spare? would heaven that you
Would fashion over upon an vills new
Those weapons to be hammered out again
Against the Goths and the Arabian train.
ODE XXXVI. A gratulation for Numidas safe coming home, and an exhortation to
be merry.
I Love with frankincense and harmony,
And heifers vowed blood to gratify
Numidas guarding deities, who again,
Safely returned from farthest part of Spain,
Gives many kisses to his friends away,
But to none more than his dear Lamia;
Counting their youths spent under the same guide,
And their gowns changed both at the same tide.
Let not that glorious day want a white stone,
Nor stop page of the pierced butt be known;
And (as the manner of the Salis is)
Let not our feet have rest, nor Damalis,
Powerful to drink much wine, Bassus control
With the long'st breath exceeding Thracian bowl.
Let Us want no roses at our banqueting,
Parsley still green, ^ilie^ soon withering.
And all shall cast their eyes with lust to stained
On Damalis, yet shall not she he trained
Away by any new adulterer,
Though she more fond than clinging Ivy were.
ODE XXXVII. Exhorting his compeeres to mirth for the victory at Actium.
NOw must we drink, now freely dance, my mates,
Now it is time to deck with Saliar cates,
The table of the gods: it was a fault
Of late to fetch wine from the ancient vault;
When the Queen with a loathsome mustered breed,
(A most infectious hospital indeed)
Hammered the fancied death and funeral
Both of the Capitol and state withal;
Conceiting that she any thing could do,
And being drunk with her sweet fortune too:
But scarce one ship escaping from the flame
Pulled down her rage; and Caesar new did frame
Her soul, made drunk with her Egyptian crown,
To real fears, pursuing her strait down
By sea, when she escaped from Italy,
(Like as the Hawke at the poor Dove does fly,
Or huntsman swift after a hare does go
Through fields of Thrace quite covered ore with snow:)
That he in chains the fatal beast might lay;
But she, who sought to die a nobler way,
Nor woman-like afraid of swords did stand,
Nor with quick sails fled toth Egyptian stand;
Who brave soul, durst her ruined palace see,
With countenance full of serenitie,
And handle stinging snakes, that she might draine
Into her body their infectious bane;
Growing by her determined death more stout;
Scorning as captive to be borne about
In strong Liburnian ships in vaunting show,
Being a woman of a spirit not low.
ODE XXXVIII. He wills his boy to provide nothing but Myrtle to the setting
forth of his banquet.
BOy, I do hate the Persian nicetie,
Their garlands bound with ribands please not me,
And do not thou molest thy self to know
In what place the late springing rose does blow.
I chiefly do take care you should provide
To the plain Myrtle nothing else beside;
Myrtle will not shame thee my boy, nor me
Drinking beneath the shadowing vine-tree.
The end of the first Book of the Odes of Horace.
THE SECOND BOOK of the Odes of HORACE.
ODE I. TO ASINIUS POLLIO. He desires him to lay aside his admirable
Tragedies, concerning the civil wars that had been in Rome, and the
several occurrences therein, till he have selled the affairs of the
Commonwealth. Then he commends him, and his rare expressions of the war;
whereunto he adjoynes the deplorable calamity occasioned by their civil
dissentions.
THe civil war, waged when Metellus was
Our Consul, and each battles several cause,
And our corruptions, and State-alterations,
And fortunes sport and kings firm co^binations,
And weapons stained with blood unexpiated
(A work with dangerous hazard operated)
Thou take in hand, and thou on fires do tread
Under deceitful ashes buri^d.
Oh let the Muse of your sad Tragedy
A short time from the Theaters lie by:
When thou have ordered State affairs a while,
On to thy brave work in thy Atticke style.
Rare help to condemned souls oppressed with woe,
And thy-aid-craving Court, O Pollio,
To whom in the Dalmatian victory
The Laurel gave eternal dignity.
Now with the Trumps dread noise my ears you fill,
And now again the Fises sound very shrill;
And now the armors glistering terrifies
The praunsing horses, and the horsemens eyes.
Me thinks I now do mighty Captains hear
Besmeared with graceful dust ore every where,
And all parts of the universe suppressed,
Excepting Cato's never daunted breast.
Juno, and what ere Deitic more stable
Unto the Affricans, yet being unable,
Fled from their unavenged land away,
Our Conquerors posterity did slay
In sacrifice to Iugurth: Oh what field,
Manured with Roman slaughter, does not yield
A testimony of our wicked war.
Even from our graves; and the fame noised as fart
As to the Persians of Romes overthrow?
What Ocean or what Rivers do not know
Our woeful battles, or what Oceans bay
Have not our slaughters in Appulia
Di'de of a crimson color? or what shore
Has wanted any of our sluced gore.
But lest (bold Muse) leaving your sports you use
The office of Simonides his muse,
Upon a gentle r^string thy measures move
Alone with me under some lovely grove.
ODE II. TO C. SALUSTIUS Crispus. There is no goodness in the possession of
wealth, without the moderate use of it. He truly is a King, and a blessed man,
that can command his desires.
THere is no beauty in the silver found
While it is hid in the devouring ground,
Crispus Salustius thou foe to coin,
Unless it with a moderate usage shine.
Let Proculeius live time unconfined,
Famed toward his brothers for his fathers mind,
And his surviving fame him up shall bear
With wings that dissolution do not fear.
Thou shall more amply reign, if thou confine
Thy haughty spirit, than if thou Libya join
To furthest Cales, and unto thee alone
Both Carthaginians vow subjection.
The direselfe-glutting dropsy dos increase,
Nor slakes the thirst, till cause of the disease,
And all the waterish corruption
Out of the veins and the pale corpse be gone.
Virtue that ranks not with the vulgar breast,
Discharges from the number of the blessed
Phrahates settled in the Persian Throne,
And new instructs every nation
On false opinions not to relie^;
Giving him a Kingdom, and firm Royalty,
And perfect praise, who mighty heaps of gold
Can with an uncorrupted eye behold.
ODE III. TO GELLIUS. Since we must die, the mind must neither be dejected in
adversity, nor puffed up in prosperity.
REmember Gellius, since thou must die,
To keep a strong mind in adversity,
And in best state from haughty glorying free,
Whether thou all thy life time pensive be,
Or whether that thou do thine own self feast,
Being in some secret Arbor laid to rest,
With long stored liquor of the Falerne Vine
On every holiday, where the tall Pine,
And white leaved Poplar with their boughs do love
To knit in one an hospitable grove.
What Is here to do? the gliding river prides
To run with murmurs by his winding sides.
Go bid the boys bring wine and odours hither,
And fragrant buds of Roses that soon wither,
While our estates, and years, and black threed-skeanes
Of the three sisters do afford us means.
You purchased fields, and house, and farm shall lose,
By which the yellow-sanded Tiber flows;
These you shall part from, and your heir shall reap
Your riches raised to a mighty heap.
It skils not whether you be rich in store,
Descended from old Inachus; or poor,
And of the meanest rank in the fields do dwell;
You Are but a feast for all-devouring hell:
Thither we all are driven, all men's fate
Is shaken in one box, that soon or late
Must have an end, and us in Charons wherrie
To everlasting banishment must ferry.
ODE IIII. TO XANTHIAS PHOCEUS. That he should not be ashamed to be
captivated to the love of a maid.
XAnthias Phoceuss let not a maids love
Shame thee: the captive B^is^is did move
Achiues, stern at first, with her fair look;
The beauty of captived Tecmessa took
The Lordly Ajax, son of Telamon;
And Agamemnon too was madd upon
A captive maid, amidst his victory,
After the barbarous troops did slaughterd lie
By the Thessalian foe, and Hector slain
Laid open Troy now easier to be t'ane
By the ore wearied Greeks: you cannot say
Whether fair Phyllis princely parents may
Grace thee their son in law: for certainty,
She does bewail her kingly family,
And envious household gods: think not that she
From a dishonest stock was chose for thee;
Nor one so loyal, so averse from gain,
Sprung from a mother meriting disdain.
I, from suspicion free, do highly prize
Her arms, and face, and her smooth rising thighs:
Then scorn thou to suspect the man, whose date
Hastens his fortieth year to consummate,
ODE V. He dehorteth some one of his friends, from the love of Lalage, araw
virgin, and not ripe for a husband.
ON her tamed neck she yet cannot undergo
The yoke, nor office of a bedfellow
Can yet perform, nor bear the heaviness
Of the bull that unto his lust does press.
Thy heifers mind is for the flowrie fields,
That now near streams the toil some parching shields,
Now love's mong calves in osiers moist to play:
Put the desire of the sour grape away.
Ere long the Autumn will display to you,
His bluish clusters mixed with purple hue.
Are long she will seek you; for strong age mak's haste,
And those years, which it takes from thee, shall cast
All upon her; thy Lalage anon
With fretted brow her mate shall set upon;
So amiable, as not Pholoe
So swift of foot, nor Chloris ere could be:
She being with her ivory skin as bright,
As the clear moon shines in the sea by night,
Or Cnidian Gyges: whom if you would set
Mong troops of girls, he wonderously would cheat
The prying guests (the difference scarce found out)
with his loose hairs and looks still moving doubt.
ODE VI. TO SEPTIMIUS. He commends the sweetness of the air about Tibur and
Tarentum; that he would willingly end his days with Septimius in one of them.
SEptimius, that must go to Cales with me,
And to the Spaniards that unused be
To bear our yoakes, and to the barbarous shoares
Where still the Mauritanian Ocean roares:
Would Tibur, by the Argive builder laid,
Might be the mansion of my old age made;
Be that the bound to him that is wearied quite
With navigations, travelings, and fight.
Which if the envious destinies deny,
Unto Galesus pleasing streamesile hie.
Among the well fleeced sheep, and to the land
Ruled by Laconian Phalantus hand.
That plat of ground above all pleases me,
Whose honies no worse than Hymertian be,
And Olives with green Venafran contend;
Where Jove long springs, and winters warm does send;
And Aulon, loving to the fertile vines,
Yields but a little to the Falern wines.
That portion, and those glorious buildings too,
Together with my self, do wish for you;
There with true tears you the warm dust shall blend
Of me that am thy Poet and thy friend.
ODE VII. TO POMPEIUS VARUS. He congratulateth his fellow-souldier Pompeius
Varus his return from war.
POmpey the chief of my associates,
That to the utmost hazard of our fates
Have oftentimes along with me been led,
When Brutus of our Armies was the head;
With whom in wine I often the long day spent,
Crowning my bright hairs with my Syrian scent;
Who has restored thee a Citizen
Unto our gods and Roman air again?
with thee I tasted of Philippi field,
And swift flight (having basely lost my shield)
Where our foiled powers (and menacing before)
The foul earth with their bodies covere door.
But trembling me swift Mercury did shroud
Through my enemies in a thickened cloud:
But the flood, sucking thee to war again,
Once more committed to the raging maine.
Now then to Jove thy vowed offerings pay;
And thy corpse, wearied with long warfare, lay
Under my laurel tree, and do not spare
My wine tubs that for thee appointed are.
With care removing wine the smooth bowls fill,
The oil from the capacious Jarres distill:
Who will take order to make up for me
Wreathes of moist prasley, or the myrtle tree?
What arbiter will the Venerean throw
Allow us for our healths? I will not now
Be less wild then the Thradians: I delight
Now my friend's safe returned, to be foxt quite.
ODE VIII. Against BARINE a whore. It Is no wonder she fears not to forswear,
being she is nere struck by heaven for it, but rather grows more beautiful
after it.
IF any punishment of perjurie,
Barine, any time had harmed thee,
Were thou deformed in one black tooth or nail,
I should believe: but thou, when thou do bail
Thy perjured head with rows, shin'st much more fair,
And walkst abroad, our young men's public care
Your mothers hidden ashes you may flight,
And silent constellations of the night,
With the whole heavens and gods from pale death ty'de
Venus (I say) her self does this deride,
The plain nymphs smile, and cruel Cupid, framing
On bloody hones his arrows ever flaming.
Add here, that all our youth to you improves,
New servitors grow up, nor former loves
The house of thee their impious mistress quit,
Although they oftentimes have threatened ir.
Thee mothers, thee old fathers very ^eare,
In regard of their youthful sons do fear,
And wretched young girls wed awhile go,
Lest that thy breath their husbands should forest we.
ODE IX. TO VALGIUS. He counsels him to give over mourning for his young boy
Mystes.
FRiend Valgius, showers do not still abound
From forth the clouds upon the furrowed ground;
Nor rough storms on the Caspian sea do roar,
Nor stiff ice stand on the Armenian shore,
Nor Gargan woods are by the North wind shaken,
Nor are the Ash-trees of their leaves forsaken
All the year long: yet thou do still complain
In mournful lays for Mystes from thee taken,
Nor cease thy plaints when as the night does rise,
Nor when again it from the hot Sun flies.
But that old man who did three ages live,
For sweet Actilochus did not all times grieve;
The parent and the Ph^ygian sisters thus
^ewayl'd not alway^s beardlesse Troilus.
^ease thy soft plaints then, and lets rather raise
Augustus Caesar's newly purchased pra^se,
And strong Niphates, and the Median river
Mixed among the conquered nations, that deliver
Their currents weaker; and the Scythians tide
Within their bounds, in little closes ride.
ODE X. TO LICINIUS. That mediocrity and evennesse of mind, in both fortunes,
are the best things to make our lives happy.
LIcinius, thou shall live more uprightly,
If thou nor always do the Ocean try,
Nor, while you warily the tempests fear,
Too much along the uneven shore do steare.
Who loves the golden mean (secure) is free
From filth of a foul cell: contented he
Wants envie-moving towers: The tall pine often
^s shook with winds; and turrets reard a loft
Do with the greater ruin downward fall,
And thunder strikes the highest hills of all.
The wel-armd breast hopes in his adverse state,
Fears in fair weather a contrary fate:
love brings rude winters, he does them remove:
If it be ill now, 'twill not still so prove.
Sometime Apollo raises his still Muse
Unto his Lute, nor still his Bow does use.
Thy self courageous and valiant frame
In adverse matters, and being still the same,
Thou very wisely in again shall hale
In a too prosperous wind thy swelling sail.
ODE XI. To Q. HIRPINUS. That we should rather live merrily, then toil the
mind with thought of things to come.
QVintius Hirpine cease to enquire what
The warlike Spaniard and the Scythian plot,
Parted by th'interposed Adrian waves;
Nor be thou troubled for thy life that craves
But a few things for its necessity:
Smooth youth and comeliness away do fly;
While withered hoary heads away do keep
The wanton dallyings, and gentle sleep.
The spring flowers beauty is not still the same,
Nor does the bright Moon still with one shape flame.
Why do thou weary out thy soul that is
Too weak for the eternal my steries?
Under this tall Plane, or this Pine being laid
Thus carelessly, and our white hairs displaid
With roses, and being dressed with Syrian nard,
Why, while we may do it, do we not drink hard?
Bacchus dispelleth carping cares away:
What boy will quickly now our cups allay
Of heady wine, with the by gliding spring?
Who will the by lan'd harlot Lyde bring
Out of her doors? go and command that she
Do with her ivory lute make have come,
In a smooth combed knot having tied her hair,
So as the fashions of the Spartans are.
ODE XII. TO MAECENAS. Grave and tragic matters will not agree with the
wantonness of his lyricke verses: that Maecenas may better write the acts of
Augustus in prose.
Do not command that to the lutes soft strings
Cruel Numances tedi^us quarrellings,
Stern Annibal, or seas of Sicilie,
Made red with Punicke blood, should fitted be;
Nor cruel Lapy thae, nor Hyleus flamed
Too much with wine, nor the earths youngsters tamed
By the hand of Hercules, whence the bright sphere
Of ancient Saturn did destruction fear.
And thou, Maecenas, better shall dispose
The wars of Caesar in thy works of prose,
And necks of threatening Kings dragged through the street:
But my muse bids me praise the music sweet
Of my Licinia, and her eyes bright-shining,
And breast most loyal to our loves conjoyning:
Whom it nor misb: seemed her foot to fit
In dances, nor to sport in jest, nor knit
Her arms among comely virgins, being at play
On honored Dianaes holy day.
Would you exchange for my licinias hair
The wealth that rich Achemenes did share;
Or fertile Phrygias Mygdonian prize,
Or the Arabians full treasuries?
While she does yield her head to fragrant kisses,
Or with mild scorn denies; which yet she wishes,
More than the suitor, he from her would snatch,
And sometimes does prevent him, and first catch
ODE XIII. Cursing a tree with fall whereof in his own ground he had almost
been killed, he thence proves that dangers of death do compass men every
hour when they least think of them: the praises of Sappho and Alcaeus, whose
songs (especially Alcaeus his) moved admiration even in the Ghosts themselves.
TRee, he did plant thee in a day accursed,
And with a wicked hand, who set thee first
To the destruction of Posterity,
And to our towns disgrace; I believe he
Broke his own fathers neck, and did all over
Besineare his house with his guests night shed gore:
He Colchick poisons, and what ever sin
Can any way be thought on, traded in;
Who thee sad truncke set in my field, to fall
On thy lord: head not meriting it all.
"Men never can take heed sufficiently
"Of what at all hours every one should fly:
The Ca^thaginian Saylour fears the Straits,
Nor farther does he dread his hidden fates.
Our band the Parthians darts, and nimble flight,
The Parthian fears our chains and Reman might:
But yet he destinies unsearched power
Has swallowed and all nations will devour.
How near saw I black Proserpines whole stations,
And judging Aeacus, and sixth situations
Of holy souls, and Sappho who did carpe
Against her country dames on her Greek harp;
And thee Alcaeus, on thy golden strings,
Sounding out sea fights cruel sufferings,
The cruel suffering of banishment,
Wars cruelties with a more full conce^t?
The ghosts admire they both could chaunt upon
Things worth their hallowed attention;
But rather far, battles, and tyrants slain
The crowding rout do in their cares retain.
What wonder? when the hundred-headed hound
Hags his black ears, amazed at such a sound,
And ^ll the Adders woven in the hair
Of the Eumenides, refreshed are.
Nay both Proneth^us too, and Pelops sire
Are eased of torments by their pleasing quire,
Nor does Orion care to follow hard
The Lion, or the panting Leopard.
ODE XIIII. TO POSTHUMUS. Since death waits for all, Posthumus should not spare
those riches which his heir after him will waste-
Ah, Posthumus, the swift years glide away,
Nor can thy piety procure a stay
For wrinckles, swift age, and stern death; though still
You should, my friend, relentlesse Pluto fill
With full three hundred Bulls, through the years course.
Him who three bodied Gerion does force,
And Titvus in sad streams; the which indeed,
By all of us (who on the blessings feed
Of this earth) must be thoroughly passed ore,
Whether that we be kings, or pesants poor.
In vain we shall from stern death fly away,
And the dashed waves of bellowing Ad^ia;
In vain we from the Sou^h wind shall us arm
That every autumn does our bodies harm:
Foggy Cocytus we must all go see,
Which wanders with his streams thatlazie be,
And Danaus hated stock, and Sisiphus
The long toile-suffering son of Aeolus.
You land, and house, and pleasing wife must leese,
Neither shall any one of all those trees
Which you possess, save Cypresses ab^orr'd,
Attend on thee their quickly perished Lord.
A worthier heir shall drink thy wines quite dry,
Kept with a hundred locks, and he shall dye
His stately pavement with far better wine,
Then that at banquets of the Priests divine.
ODE XV. He condemns their great pride in building, and praises the frugalitie
of old time.
OUr princely edifices will allow
But a few acres for the ploughshare now:
On every side our fish ponds shall be seen
More spacious then the Lucrine fen has been.
The single Plane-tree shall the Elm excel:
Then violets, myrtles, and all kinds of smell
Shall odours in those olive yards afford,
That have been fertile to their former Lord.
A set of bay trees, thick with branches, then
The parching sunbeams out from them shall pen;
'Twas not decreed by the act of R^mulus
And unshav'd Cato, and the ancients thus.
The private wealth with them was very small,
The Common wealth was then the chief of all:
No Galleries of ten foot measured forth,
Among private men, stood toward the shady North;
Nor did the laws permit them to d^^daine
The homely grass; commanding them again
To build their Towns up at the public charge,
And the gods Temples with new stones enlarge.
ODE XVI. TO GROSPHUS. That all desire tranquillity of mind, but few obtain
it.
THe seaman prays to the gods for ease,
Being tossed upon the vast Aegean seas,
When a black cloud has hid the Moon, and Stars
Appear uncertain to the Marinars:
Furious Thrace for rest from war does sue;
The Medes, adorned with their quivers too,
Do beg for ease, o Grosphus, that is sold
Neither for gemmes, nor purple robes, nor gold,
For neither can the Magazines of store,
Nor Consuls officer thrust out of door
The consciences afflictive terrifying,
And cares about the fretted chambers flying.
He with a little does contented dine,
On whose small board his fathers salt does shine,
Neither despair, nor sordid coveting
His gentle slumbers ere from him shall wring.
Why do we proud souls in our span age plot
A many things? why unto lands made hot
With different Suns run we? who being banished
From his own soil, has from his own self vanished?
Vicious care the brasse-keel'd ships does scale,
Neither from troops of horsemen does it fail,
More nimble than the Roes, and far more swift
Then the East wind that sets the clouds adrift.
The mind that for the present time is light,
To care for what shall follow, let it slight,
And with sweet laughter temper all things tart:
There Is nothing prosperous in every part.
A sudden death did brave Achilles slay,
Ling^ing age pined Tithonus quite a way;
And time perhaps may unto me betide
The thing which it has unto thee de^ide.
An hundred flocks, and kine of Sicilie
Do round about thee bellow; unto thee
The Mare fit for the teeme does raise her cry;
Garments twice dipped in Affricke sca let die
Cloth thee: my never-failing fare did daigne
To me some small grounds, and a slender vein
Of Grecian poesy, and with it beside
The still-malicious vulgar to deride.
ODE XVII. TO MAECENAS being sick. That there is such union of souls between
him and Maecenas, that he nor can, nor will live without him.
WHerefore with thy complaints unsoul'st thou me?
Pleasing unto the gods it cannot be
Nor me, that thou, Maecenas, first should die,
My states great glory and security.
Ah, if a swifter fare snatch thee away
The one half of my soul, why do I stay
that ^m the other, that cannot survive
Tor dear unto my self, nor all alive?
The day shall work the ruin of us both;
N^ave not taken a perfidious oath:
'(...)
We Will go, we will go, when thou the ^ay shall lead,
Prepared companions our last path to tread.
Me nor the fiery Chimera's flame,
Nor hundred handed Gyas, if he came,
Shall ever part: it pleased on this wise
All-p^tent Justice and the destinies.
Whether the Scales or horrid Scorpion
(My birth-houres stronger part) looks me upon,
Or Capricorn the Western Oceans lord,
Yet both our stars in wondrous sort accord.
Thee Joves refulgent turelage took back
From impious Saturn, and the wings did slacks
Of swift fate, when the people, gathering round,
Thrice in the Thea'tre made a joyful sound:
A tree upon my head almost fal'ne down
Had murdered me, if Faunus had not thrown
The force of it aside with his right hand,
(The Governor of the Mercurrial band)
Remember thou thy offerings to pay,
And thy vowed temple: woe'l a meek lamb slay.
ODE XVII. That he lives content with his own lot, and mean fortune, while
others toil themselves in building magnificent Palaces, even with the
oppression of the poor; as if they had forgot that the same common necessity
of dying lies on them, that lies on others.
NOrivory, nor golden roof does shine
In any mansion of mine;
Nor beams, fetched from Hymettus, stay
On pillars cut from farthest Africa:
Nor have I ever (as an heir unknown)
Usurped Attalus his throne;
Nor do our lames that honest be
Spin their Laconicke purple wool for me.
But I have music, and a vein of wit
Ful-flowing, and the rich submit
To me a poor man: nothing more
Then this is do I of the gods implore;
Nor greater gifts of my great friends request,
In my one Sabine field well blessed.
Day is still expelled by day,
And new moons do increase to wane away.
Thou marble stones to be hewn out do hire,
Near upon thy funeral fire;
And, mindlesse of thy Sepulcher,
Buildst houses, and do strive the shoares to wear
Of the sea near the bathes making a sound,
Not rich enough on the firm ground.
Why? cause you your next landmarks waste,
And greedy over your tenants fences haste:
The man and wife is thrust out, at their breast
Bearing their gods and brats undrest.
Yet no house surer does attend
The rich lord, then devouring hels fixed end.
Why seek you more? "the earth alike must be
"For the poor man, as kings sons free.
Hels porter (nere with bribes oretane)
Cunning Promotheus has not freed again.
He the proud Tantalus close up does tie,
And Tantalus his progeny.
"Called, or not called, he prepares
To ease the dying beggar of his cares.
ODE XIX. TO BACCHUS. It is meet for him to sing Bacchus his praises.
I Bacchus in remotest rocks did see
Teaching his song (beleev't posterity)
And Nymphs a learning, and the pricked up cares
Of the Goat-footed Satyrs: with fresh fears
My soul does Evoe utter; and my breast
Fall gorged with Wine, does rumblingly egest
Evoe: O Bacchus spare me, spare me thou
All dreadful with thy fatal ivy bough,
It very fitting is for me to sing
Thy wanton Thyades, and thy wines spring,
And thy full stream of milk to chant again,
And honey dropping from the hollow cane:
It Is sit for me to descant on the Crown
Of thy blessed wife, among the stais fixed down;
And Penibeus house thrown down with no mean blow,
And Thracian Lycurgus overthrow.
Thou rivers, thou the barbarous sea do still,
Thou, thoroughly drench't on some retired hill,
Together in a viperous knot do charm
The Th^acian women's tresses without harm.
When as the Giants impious Company
Assailed your fathers kingdom through the sky,
You Rhoecus with his lions paws orethrew,
And with his horrid jaws: although that you
Being held more fit for maskes, and plays, and sport,
As one scarce fit for war had the report;
Yet thou wast found for peace indifferent,
And war too: Cerberus, then innocent,
Saw thee adorned with the golden Crown,
Wagging his tail full gently up and down;
And with his three-tongu'd chaps 'bout the feet did play,
And legs of thee when thou did part away.
ODE XX. TO MAECENAS. That he has got himself immortal glory by his poems,
and that he shall be famous with theremotest and most barbarous nations.
I A two shaped poet will not fly
With common and mean wings through the moist sky;
Nor to the earth will any longer cleave,
And above envy I the world will leave.
I the succession of my parents poor,
I, dear Maecenas, whom thou do implore,
Will not quite perish, neither will I be
Stayed in the Stygian poole continually.
Now, now rough skin upon my thighs does grow,
And I a silver Swan am turned unto
In all my upper parts, and gentle down
Upon my fingers and my arms is grown.
Now swifter than Daedalean Icarus
I Will see the shores of roaring Bosphorus,
(Being a sweet voic'd Cygnet) and the sands
Of Astricke, and the Hyperborean lands.
The Colchick and the Dacian me shall know,
Who at our Marsian troops a fear do show:
The remote Scythes, and Spaniard valiant,
And also Rhodanus inhabitant.
Far be sad tunes from my mean obsequies,
And squalid lamentations and cries;
Keep to your self all clamors, and defer
The needless duties of my Sepulcher.
The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK Of the Odes of HORACE.
ODE I. Blessedness consists not in wealth or honor, but in quietness and
contentedness.
I Do abhor the multitude profane,
And chase them hence: do ye your tongues restrain.
I priest unto the Muses, warble ore
To maids, and young men, songs nere heard before:
"Dreadful kings power is ore their proper drove,
"Ore kings themselves is the command of Jove,
Made famous in the giants victory,
And over ruling all things with his eye.
It may be one man than another, may
His trees more largely in his furrows lay;
This a more generous suitor may descend
Into the field; another may contend
Better in his conditions and report;
More store of client may to him resort;
"Death by the same law, high and low does take,
His spacious lotterie every name does shake.
Over whose vile head hangs a naked sword,
Neither Sicilian dainties can afford
A pleasing relish to him, nor the strain
Of birds and lutes reduce his sleep again:
Sweet sleep disdaines not country clownes low sheads,
And shadie banks, and Zephyre-fanned meade^.
Him that desires only what is enough,
Neither the Ocean sea, being made rough,
Nor cruel raging of the falling Bear,
Or rising Capricorn can strike with fear:
Neither his vineyards battered with the hail;
Nor plat of ground that dos of bearing fail,
While now the trees do at the waters carpe,
Now at earth-parching stars, now winters sharp.
The very fishes feel the ocean shrunk
With huge foundations in their bottom sunk
The busy purchaser, and landlord (grown
Weary oth'land) sends hither his hew'ne stone,
With workmen; but "despair and horror got
"That way their master dos; nor will black woe
"Depart from the brasse-armed keele, and it
"Even behind the horsemans back dos sit.
But if not Phrygian stone, nor purples shine,
More glorious than the stars, nor Falerne wine,
Nor Western shrubs can ease the grieved spirit,
Wherefore with pillars that may envy merit,
And in a new invented way shall I
A high exalted palace edify?
Wherefore shall I exchange my Sabine grove
For riches that more troublesome will prove?
ODE II. An exhortation to endure hardness and poverty.
LEt the tough youth in bitter war-fare try
Easily to endure hard poverty,
And like a dreadful horseman, with his spear,
Strike the ore-daring Parthians with fear,
And in the open field to lead his life,
And dangerous adventures; while the wife
Of the encounting king, and the ripe bride.
From off their hostile walls, having him spide,
She Id sigh (alas!) for fear her princely mate,
Unskilful of the wars, should initate
This same incensed lion with his blows,
Whom bloody rage through midst of slaughters throws.
"It is a sweet and glorious thing to die
"For our own country: Death dos even fly
"After the flying man, nor dos he slack
"From saint-heart youths heels, and the fearful back.
"Valor, that base repulses cannot know,
"With unstained honors dos refulgent grow,
"And by the suffrage of the peoples breath,
"Nor receives honors, nor surrendereth.
"Valor that dos set heaven wide open for those
"That merit not to die; its journey goes
"Through invious we yes, and with a soaring wing
"Bove vulgar troops and the dull earth dos spring,
There Is sure pay too for faithful secrecy:
I will forbid that he, who should descry
Night adored Ceres sacrifice, should be
Under the same roof, and lanch out with me
My slender bark: Jove, often, being slighted,
Has to the full the wicked man requited.
"Tourture with limping feet seldom gives ore
"The wicked man that trips away before.
ODE III. The power of justice and constancy: Juno's prophecy of the
stabilitie of the Roman empire.
THe just man, and unto his purpose standing,
Not rage of citizens had things commanding,
Not threatening tyrants frown, from his firm mind
Can startle him, nor yet the Southern wind,
The tumbling Adria's rumbling governer.
Nor mighty hand of thundering Jupiter;
Though the world fall on him, in sunder fylle,
The ruin on it shall him undaunted hit.
Pollux, and the far-wandring Hercules
Stearing this course on the bright spheres did ceize,
Among the whom Augustus being laid,
Drinks Nectar with his lips all purple made.
Thee, father Bacchus, this way meriting,
Thy tigers, on their rude neck carrying
The yoke, did raise thee: Romul^s did part
From hell on Mars his horses by this art:
When Juno pleasingly spoke in this sort
To all the Gods assembled then in court:
An evill-omend Umpire, and unjust,
And a strange woman turns Troy into dust,
Of me, and chaste Minerva too abhorred,
Both with the nation, and deceitful lord,
Ere since the time in which Laomedon
Denied the gods their due agreed upon.
The Spartan strumpers para'mour infamous
Now triumphs not, not Priams perjar'd house
Weakens the fighting Greeks by Hectors aid;
And the war by our discords tedious made,
Is ended; from henceforth my spleen severe
And hated kinsman whom that Nun did bear
From Troy descended, I will now bestow
Oa Mars again: him will I grant to go
Unto the bright spheres, Nectars juice to taste,
And'mong the gods blessed orders to be placed:
So a vast sea 'twixt Troy and Rome may rore,
O may this exile-breed on any shore
Reign glorious: so long as any drove
Over Priamus and Paris grave may r^ve,
And wild beasts fearlesse there their whelps may hide,
Refulgent may the Capitol abide,
And s^o^ne Rome give the conquered Medes a law;
Dreadful far off may she her knowledge draw
Even unto the farthest continent,
(What way the Ocean interjacent
Furopa from the Affrican d^s bound,
What way the swelling Nile the fields does drowned)
More valiant in despising unfound gold,
And so best placed when earth does it enfold,
Than in congesting it for humane using,
With a hand every ffollowed thing abusing.
What part of the world so e're stands out unknown,
That with her armies let her land upon,
Thi^sting to see what way the fire, and where
The cloud, and watery dewes do dominere.
But to the warlike Romans I present
These fates on this ground; if (too pious bent,
And too much trusting their own strength) they never
Will old Troyes Palaces anew upreare.
Troyes pride renewing with an ill stari'd fate,
With sad destruction shall be ruinare,
While I the wife and sister too of Jove
Will my victorious armies onward move.
Thrice should there rise again a brazen wall,
And Thoebus author on it; thrice should it fall,
Razed by my Greeks: the captive wife thrice over
Her husband and her children should deplore.
These things agree not to my sporting Lute;
Muse, whither will thou? wanton thing be mute
Th'orations of the deities to relate,
And brave things with base lays t'attenuate.
ODE IV. He is guarded by the Muses, and takes advice from them: power without
counsel perishes.
DEscend from heaven, O Queen Calliope,
And sound an everlasting harmony
Upon thy pipe, or, if you it desire,
With your shtill voice, or harps, or Phoebus lyre.
Do You hear? or d^s a pleasing lunacie
Enfatuate me? for me thinks that I
Do hear it, and do range through the blessed grove,
'Bout which the pleasant springs and winds do rove.
On the Apulian Vulturs hilly ground,
Beyond my fabulous nurse Apulia's bound,
Me, then a boy, with play and sleep misse-led,
The ring-doves with fresh green leaves covered:
That might seem strange to all those that possessed
The lostie seated Acherontia's nest,
And Bantine pastures, and the fertile ground
Of low Ferentum; that, my body sound
From poisoned Snakes, and Bears, I should sleep there,
That I with laurel boughs that sacred were,
And gathered myrtles overspread should be;
(An infant hearten'd by some deity.)
Your votary, ye Muses, only yours,
I Am drawn up to the craggie Sabine bowers;
Or whether the steepe-sited Tibur has
Delighted me, or the serene-air'd Bath.
Me friend unto your fountains and your train,
Our army from Philippi chased amain
O'rethrew not, nor that cursed piece of wood,
Nor Palinure in the Sicilian flood.
When you shall be with me, I willingly
The raging straights will as a sailor try,
And, as a traveller, I will pass over
The parching sands of the Assyrian shore:
Ple see the Britains cruel to their guests,
And Concanus with horses blood that ^easts;
Ple visit the Geloni quiver-arm'd,
And river of the Scythians unharm'd.
You recreate in your Pierian grove
The Mighty Coesar, laboring to remove
His troubles, when he in his garrisons
Has lodged up his war-spent legions.
You, heavenly souls, gentle advice bestow,
And glory in it, being so given: we know
How he with falling lightning overthrew
The impious Titans, and their savage crew;
He who with unmoved power the unmoved land,
And floating se^, and cities does command,
And sad-doom'd kingdoms, and the gods beside,
And mortal multitudes alone does guide.
Those horrid monsters on their arms relying,
Did strike in Jove a mighty terrifying,
And all their brothers also menacing
On shadi'e Olympus Pelion to fling.
I, but what could Typhoeus then have done,
Strong Mimas, and sterne-lookt Porphyrion?
What Rhoecus, and the Archer impudent,
Enceladus, with trees by th'roots up rent,
Rushing against Pallas shining Aegis? here
Stood greedy Vulcan, Matron Juno there,
And he who from his shoulders never will spare
His archery, who drenches his loose hair
In the pure fountain of Castalia,
Who dos the champian ground of Lycia sway,
And grove famed for his place of birth; Apollo,
Whom Delos and whom Patara does ballow.
"Power void of poli'cie sinks with its own waight',
"We'l-temper'd strength the gods do propagate
"To greater force: they do the powers detest,
"That raise up all infection in our breast.
The hundred-handed Gyas is well known
The witness of my truths, and Orion,
He who the chaste Diana injured,
And by the Virgins shaft was punished.
The earth cast on her own monsters, dos lament,
And grieves her children are with thunder sent
To s^orie hell, nor can the fires swist some
Aetna, injected on them, yet consume.
I, and the vulture never dos so bear
The heart of Tityus the ravither,
Being set the tort'rer of his lustfulnesse;
Three hundred chains lustful Pirithous press.
ODE V. Of Augustus his victory over the Britains: the d^shonourable condation
of Crassus soldiers taken captive: Regulus speech to the Senate, exhorting
them not to redeem their captives from Carthage.
WE believed thundering love reigns in the sky;
Augustus here a gracious deity
Shall be esteemed; now that the Britains be,
And fatal Medes joined to his empirie.
Could Crassus soldiers then with barbarous wives,
(Being dishonored husbands) lead their lives?
And; o our State and manners altered!)
Could then our Marsians, and Apulians bred,
Grow ancient men in the def^nce of those
Now fathers in law to them, once their foes,
Under a Persian king, for getting straight
Their divine thields, their glory, and their State,
And also Vestaes never dying fire,
love and our City Rome being still entire?
Regulus prudent mind this thing prevented,
Who from their base conditions dissented,
And from a president might ruin fling
Upon the after-ages following;
If that our captive-souldiers might not be
Without all pity lost. I saw, said he,
Our ensigns in the Punick temples hung,
And swords, without blows, from our soldiers wrung;
I also did their citizens arms behold
Behind their now-free-backs together rolled,
And gates not shut, and fields now tilled over
Dispoiled by our armies heretofore.
Sure our gold-ransom'd soldiers will agin
Come on more fierce; you add unto your sia
A detriment; "wool being dipped in grain,
"Can never after his lost hue regain?
"Nor dos true virtue, when it is once sunk down,
"Care to be lodged in men that worse are grown.
If the Stagge, from the thick laid nets got free,
Will stand to fight, then will he valiant be
Who to perfidious foes himself did yield;
Then will he vanquish in a second field
The Carthaginians, who (faint-heart) did wear
Thongs on his fettered arms, and death did fear.
He being ignorant from whence to take
His life, in midst of war a league did make:
O shame, O mighty Carthage, made more high
By the opprobrious falls of Italy.
It Is said, as one condemned to lose his life,
He put from him the kiss of his chaste wife,
And children small, and (looking sternly,) bound
His manly countenance upon the ground;
While he the faltring Senators set even,
With counsel, such as like it never was given;
And in the midst of all his friends aghast,
This noble exile to his journey past.
Yet what the barbarous hangman did devise
For him, he knew: yet he no otherwise
His remorating kindred did adjourne,
And all the people stopping his return,
Then if, the term being done, he did withdraw
From all his clients tedious suits of Law;
To the Venafran fields taking his way,
Or to Tarentum of Laconia.
ODE VI. To the Romans. The b^senesse of the present age, and the bravenesse of
the former ages.
O Roman, thou, although thou guiltless be,
For thy forefathers sins shall punished be,
Till thou the gods shrines, and their Fanes decayed
And statues, foul'd with black smoke, new have made.
"That to the gods your self you subject make,
"Therein you reign: henceall beginnings take,
"Hither each issue bring: the gods, neglected,
"Have many plagues on woeful Spain injected.
Moneses twice, and Pa^orus his powers,
Have battered these ill-fated troops of ours,
And are grown proud that they have ta'neaway
Them in their little fetters, as a prey.
The Dacian and the Moore have quice erased
Our cities with sedition near defaced:
The one being in his shipping formidable,
The other in swift-flying darts more able.
Our times, full-swolne with sin, first overthrew
Our marches, kinreds, and our houses too:
Destruction, from thy fountain running down,
Has over the country and the people flowne.
The new ripe girl delights to be taught
Jonick dances, and is nimble wrought
In all her joints, and from her tendes years
Her unchastelongings in her mind she bears.
Straight she more wanton paramours pursues
Amidst her husbands cups; nor dos she choose
One to whom she by stealth may deal about
Her lawless pleasures when the lights are out;
But before folks, being bid, she up does git,
And not without her husband knowing it;
Whether some Clerk, or Spanish-ship-master
(Dear buyer of disgraces) ^ummon her.
Our youngsters, from such parentage descended,
The sea with Carthaginian blood nere blended;
Nor Pyrrhus, nor Antiochus the great
And the abhorred Annibal did beat:
But a stout crew of rustic Camerades,
Skilled to dig up the clods with Sabine spades,
And to bear home their timber hewed down
By their austere mothers direction;
At such time as the Sun the shades did alter
Upon the kills, and did the yokes unhalter
From the roil'd oxen, making to approach
Nights, pleasing time with his declining coach.
"What dos not wastefull time bring to worse pass?
"Our fathers age, worse than our grand-sires was,
"Bred us far wickeder, who, by and by,
"Shall show a far more vicious progeny.
ODE VII. TO ASTERIE. Comforting her in the absence of her husband, and
exhorting her to constancy.
WHy do thou weep for him, Astorie,
Whom the mild west-winds will restore to thee,
By the Springs coming in, with Thine ware breast,
Thy young man Gyges of a loyal breast?
To Oricus he by the South-winds borne
After the raging stars of Capricorn,
The freezing nights, not without many tears,
Yet without any sleep, away he wears.
And yet a much-enticing harlots squire,
Telling how Chloe dos in sighs expire,
And how poor wretch she in thy fires does fry,
The cunning knave a thousand ways dos try.
He tells how a perfidious woman trained
Credulous Praetus with suggestions feigned,
Against the over-chaste Bellerophon,
To haste his death: then he proceeds on,
How Peleus was nie sent to death, while he
Magnessian Hippolyte did flee,
Being abstinent: and this sly knave brings in
Histories educating men to sin.
But all in vain: for he, as yet sincere,
More de afe than Icarus rocks his words dos hear;
Yet take thou heed lest, more than fit may be,
^ripeus thy near neighbor work on thee.
Though not a man, equally skilled to ^ide
Upon a horse, in Mars his field is spied,
No any man, equally swift like him,
^horow the Tuscan channel down dos swim.
At the nights entrance sh^t thy doors, nor gaze,
At his pipes sad sound, into the high ways;
And unto him calling thee often unkind,
Continue thou of an unshaken mind.
ODE VIII. TO MAECENAS. Exhorting him to mirth on the Calends of March.
THou being skilled in both tongues dialect,
Admir'st what I a bachelor project
On Marches Calends; what my flowers require,
And pot with incense filled, and coal of fire
Laid on the fresh green turfe; pomise I did
Sweet cates to Bacchus, and a milk-white kid;
Being near killed with a trees fall: This day
Sacred each New-yeares tide, shall take away
The pitch-clos'd stoppell from the kilde^kin
Ordained to keep the headie liquor in,
When Tullus Consul was. Maecenas taste
A hundred healths of thy saved friend, and waste
Thy watching tapers till the break of day;
All quarelling and rage be far away.
Thy strict cares for the city let alone:
Slain are the troops of Dacian Cotison;
The Median, to himself a deadly so,
With woeful wars dos all to pieces god.
Our ancient foe upon the shore of Spain,
The Biscaynere tamed in our lare-forg'd chain,
Is slave to us; the Scythians do dispose
To fly out of the field with unbent bows.
Then, in a remiss way, desist to heed,
Over much, of what the people stands in need,
(Being retired) and of the present hour
Receive the pleasures, and cast off the sour.
ODE IX. TO LYDIA. A dialogue for reconcilement.
HOR. AS long as I was pleasing unto thee,
And not a man, better esteemed than me,
His arms about thy ivory neck did fling,
I flourisht braver than the Persian King.

LYD. While with another thou wast not more fired,
Nor Lydia after Chloe was desired;
I Lydia of great fame did bear a sway,
Far brighter than the Roman Ilia.

HOR. The Thracian Chloe dos command me now,
Skilled in sweet songs, and well her Lute dos know,
For whom to suffer death I will not fear,
So fates will her surviving soul for bear.

LYD. ^alais, Thurine Ornithus his son,
^n flames me with a like affection;
For whom I will endure even twice to die,
^f fates will my surviving boy pass by.

HOR. What if our ancient love return again,
And binds us straglers in a brazen chain;
^f beauteous Chloe be cashiered away,
And door stands open for cast-of Lydia?

LYD. Although that he be brighter than a star,
Thou lighter than a cork, and fiercer far
Than the rude Adriatic sea; yet I
Would love to live with thee, would freely die.

ODE X. TO LYCE. Exhorting her not to be proud, but pitiful to him.
LYCE, did thou at utmost Tanais live,
Wed to a savage man, yet would you grieve
To cast me to your neighboring northern wind,
Being before your frozen doors reclined.
Hear you with what a creaking noise the door,
And how the grove against the wind does roar,
Being planted among the pleasant rooms; and how
love with pure air dos glaze the close laid snow?
Thy scorn ingrate to Venus, lay aside;
Lest the rope, when the wheel slips, backward slide.
A Tyrrhene father never begot thee
Harsh to thy wooers as Penelope.
O, though nor gifts, not prayers move thee yet,
Not lovers palen^ssest^in'd with violet,
Not husband d^ting on some singing maid,
Yet spare them which to thee are p^ostrate laid,
Thou harsher than the toughest oaken tree,
And bloudier-soul'd than Aff^ick Serp^nts be;
This body' of mine for ever cannot sustain
Thepavement, and the heaven-distilling rain.
ODE XI. TO MERCURY. Entreating him to mollify Lyde with his sweet music; as
h^ has done many others: Of the punishment of the Danaides, and the praise of
Hype^mnestra.
MERCURY (for thou being his schoolmasters,
Learned Amphson did the stones uprea^e,
With making melody,) and thou O Lute,
Skilled with seven s^rings to sound (in old times mute,
And no whit pleasing; at each rich-mans board
And temples too, now used,) such strains afford,
Unto which Lyde her deaf cares may raise;
Who, as it were, in frisking manner plays
Like a mare three years old in the wide field,
And being in the marriage bed ^nskill'd,
And for a full-veind bedfellow unfit,
Is fearful even to be touched as yet.
Thou Tigers, and their woods can lead away
Along with them, and make swift ^ivers stay:
Cerberus porter of the dreadful hall,
Unto thee making music low did fall,
Though hundred snakes did guard his furious head,
And loathsome breath and poison issued
Out of his three tongued chaps. Ixion too,
And Tityus with forced looks did smile on you;
The urne awhile stood dry, while thou did ease
With pleasing music the Danaides.
Those maids fact, and known torture, and their run,
Empty of water out at bottom run,
Let Lyde hear, and the flow-creeping fate
That ey'n in hell on wickedness does wait.
Accursed things: what could they do more? they,
Accursed, with sharp swords-could their husbands slay.
Amongst many, one worthy a nuptial fire,
To her false father nobly played the liar,
And to all ages lives a glorious maid;
Who, Rise, rise, to her youthful husband said,
Lest a long sleep, thou fear not, fall on thee,
Thy father in law, and my cursed sisters flee.
Who (out alas) have all their husbands slain,
Like Lionesses having heifers taken;
I, gentler sarre than they, will neither kill,
Nor in this castle will detain thee still.
Me with strong fetters let my father guard,
'Cause I kind heart my woeful husband spas'd;
Or let him in a ship send me away
To the utmost confines of Numidia;
Fly what way feet and winds can carry thee,
While night and Venus too propitious be;
Go with good luck, and on my monument
An elegy, mentioning me, indent.
ODE XII. TO NEOBULE. Of her violent love of Hebrus.
NOt to give love his sportive exercise,
Nor drench in pleasing wine our miseries;
Or to be out of heart, fearing the blows
Of Kindreds tongues, adds to poor virgins woes.
Venus winged son thy spindle from thee catches,
And Liparaean Hebrus beauty snatches
(O Neobule) thy tent-workes from thee,
And curious Minerva's industry:
A better horseman than Bellerophon,
Neither in fight, or for slow pace over gone,
As soon as he in Tibers streams has swill'd
His oily shoulders; being also skilled,
When all the herd is routed up, to wound
The Roe-bucks tripping over the champian ground;
And swift of foot the wild Boar to invade
Among the thick-grown bushes closely laid.
ODE XIII. The praise of the fountain of Blandusia.
OFountaine of Blandusia, that do shine
Clearer than glass, deserving pleasant wine,
Nor without store of flowers, thou with a kid
Tomorrow morning shall be honored;
Whose forehead, with his first horns fretted out,
For lust and war (in vain tho) hunts about.
For this same young ling of the wanton train,
Thy cooling streams with his red blood shall stain.
Thee the hot dog stars dire ti^^e cannot taint:
Thou gentle cooling ye^ldst to oxen faint
With ^lowing, and to stray beasts: verily
Thou shall be made a sacred spring, while I
The oaks set round thy hollow rocks will sing,
Out of the which thy murmuring waters spring.
ODE XIV. His joy for Caesar's victory.
YE people, Caesar who was lately thought
To go for conquest, would with death be bought,
In Hercules his way; from coast of Spain
Is to our gods come conquer our again.
Each matron, with one husband being content,
Let now proceed the just gods to frequent;
And sister of our famous General,
And, with their braided fillets decked, all
The mothers of our virgins, and young men
Lately returned safe to us again.
You youths, and maids that late have husbands tried,
Forbear all languages unrectifi'd.
This day, being truly festival, shall tear
My black cares from me: I will neither fear
Commotions, or to die by violent hand,
So long as Caesar governs the land.
Go boy, fetch oil and garlands, and that barrel
Which bears the true date of the Marsian quarrel,
If so be any vessel could be hid
From Spartacus having the land o're-rid.
And bid sweet-voic'd Neara to make haste
To bind her sweet hairs in a knot up fast;
If by the surly porter any stay
Be made at all, come presently away.
"Hair turning to be white dos calm the mind
"To quarrellings and paltrie brawles inclined:
For I would never have suffered this, alas,
In heat of youth, when Planous Consul was.
ODE XV. TO CHLORIS. To for sake lechery, being old.
WIfe of poor Ibyous, now at length fix
A period to thy lust, and whorish tricks.
Forbear, being nigh thy now-ripe funeral day,
Tosport'mong virgins, and a cloud di^play
Over such-bright stars: that will not become thee,
O Chloris, that may well fit Pholoe.
Thy daughter better young men's doors may threat,
Mad as the Thyades when the drums beat.
Nothus love makes her like a fond kid play;
Thee, the wool shorn nearefam'd Luceria,
^ot music fits, nor roses damask die.
^^^ing old^)nor hogsheads to the lees drawn dry.
ODE XVI. TO MAECENAS. Of the power and trouble of riches: the benefit of
contentation.
A Brazen tower, and strong gates, and stern guard
Of watchful curres, sufficiently had barred
Danae in it from night-lecher, locked;
If Jupiter and Venus had not mocked
The keeper of the virgin so enclosed,
(Fearful Acrisius) for they supposed,
The entrance in would sat and open be,
When that a god was turned into a fee.
"Gold uses through full guards to go, more fierce
"Than thunderbolts, and through stone walls to pierce^
The Arg^ve augurs palace down is shrunk,
Being for gain into perdition sunk.
The Macedonian victor clave in two
The gates of cities; and he overthrew
His rival Kings with presents: "presents snare
"Those who stout Generals of navies are.
"Care waits on growing wealch, and thirst of more.
I very worthily did fear therefore
( Macenas, glory of our Cheval ie)
To raise my head up, to be seen on high.
"The more each man bars himself of, he shall
"Of the gods get the more: I, stripped of all,]
Unto their cells that nothing covethye,
And shifting seek from rich men's gates to fly;
Being of a mean estate a braver Lord,
Than if I in my barnes were famed to hoard
What ere the toiled Appulian dos plow o'^e,
Bei'ng amids my mighty riches poor.
A spring of water pure, and a grove too
Of some few Rods, and my fields servicetrues
More blessed in possessing, is unknown
To him that shines in fertile Affricks throne.
Though nor Calabrian Bees me honey bring
Nor wine for me dos lie a languishing
In Formian pots, nor my fat-fleeced flock
(...) Gallick pastures dos increase my stock;
Yet urgent poverty from me dos live,
Nor, craved I more, would you deny to give.
My desire being pent in, I better may
Enlarge my final means, than if I should lay
Croesu his wealth to the Mygdonian store:
'Much wants to them that many things implore.
It Is well for that man to whom God has sent,
'With sparing hand, what is sufficient.
ODE XVII. TO AELIUS LAMIAS. His nobility; an exhortation to be merry.
O Aelius from ancient Lamus famed,
(Whence the first Lamiae, they say, were named,
And every house of your posterity,
Through all records yet kept in memo ie.)
Thou from that head draw'st thy original,
Who, being a King of large bounds, first of all
Is said the walls of For^iae to command,
And Lyris flowing on Marica's sand.
^^^mpest sent tomorrow from the West
^^ch many boughs s^all all the grove invest,
And all the shore with useless flags, unless
The weather wise old Raven miss his guess.
While you may, your dry wood together put;
Your corpse tomorrow you with wine must glut,
And with a porkling just of two months old,
With all thy men from labor bid to hold.
ODE XVIII. A prayer and sacrifice to Faunus.
LOver of flying Nymphs, pass gently through
My bounds, O Faunus, and my fair fields too,
And part thence kind to our small nurseries;
Since each years end, a young kid to thee dies,
And store of wine's not wanting to the cup,
Venus compeere; the old altar fumeth up
With many odours: on the grassie plain
All the beasts sport, when unto thee again
Decembers Nones return: the solemn town
In the fields with their idle droves sit down.
Among the then bold lambs the wolf dos go,
The wood her country boughs to thee dos strew,
The country man dos with his feet delight
Three times upon the scorned ground to smite.
ODE XIX. TO TELEPHUS. Not to study too much, but to be merry sometimes.
HOw long time Codrus lived from Inachus,
To die for's country no way timorous,
And Aeacus his stock you do us tell,
And battles that at sacred Troy befell.
You tell us not at what price we may get
A Tun of Chian wine, nor who may heat
Our baths with fire; who will make a feast for me;
What hour I may from Peligne colds be free.
Boy, quickly fill for the new Moon; fill up
For midnight; for Muraena fill a cup,
Late Augur made: with glasses three or nine,
Easy to take, let pots be filled with wine.
The Poet that loves the Muses odd, will crave
Thrice three cups, being in a vein to rave.
The naked sister-Graces yoked fast,
Fearing wars, charge no more than three to taste.
Why is the Berecynthian pipes tongue mute?
Why hangs the Fife up with the silent Lute?
I hate these sparing hands: strew roses there,
Let envious Lycus our loud roaring hear,
And his young mate no way commodious
For Lycus being old: O Telephus
Thee comely-looking with thy thick grown hair,
Thee representing much the evening fair,
(...) now ripe for marriage does require,
But me my Glyceraes slow love does fire.
ODE XX. TO PYRRHUS. His danger in drawing Nearchus from his love.
SEE you not with what danger you do press
The whelps of the Gerulian Lioness?
O Pyrrhus, thou a fearful thief shall flee
The dangerous combat, before long time be.
When she shall run through armed troops of young men,
Fetching the fair Nearchus back again;
A grand contention, sooth, whether the prize
Unto thy self or her would greater rise.
In the mean time while you do ready get
Your flying shafts, and she her dire teeth whet,
He that might arbitrate the war is said
The conquest under his bare feet to have laid,
And recreate with a mild-fanning ai^e
His shoulders covered with his powdered hair:
As beautiful as Nireus, or the Boy
Was stolen away from river-stored Troy.
ODE XXI. The praises of wine.
O Sacred tun that w^st bred up with me,
When Ma^lius Consul was, whether in the^,
Thou bea^est griefs, or jests, or quarrelling,
Or raging loves, or gentle stumbering;
By what so e're name marked thou clasp'st about
Thy Massick wine, worthy to be brought out
On a good day; when Corvine shall enjoyne,
Descend and yield us forth your gentler wine.
Though in Socratick precepts drencht he be,
Yet will he not severely scorn at thee.
Even ancient Cat^'s gravitie is famed,
Many a time with wine to have been flamed,
Thou do an casie to turing procure
To dispositions usually obdure,
With merry wine; the studies of the wise
Thou do disclose, and profound secrecies.
In desperate minds thou do a hope renew,
And giv'st the poor man strength and courage too,
That, after thee once tasted, neither fears
Kings angry looks, nor yet the soldiers spears.
Bacchus, and Venus, if she will merry be,
And Graces loath to break their unity,
And burning lights so long with thee shall stay,
Till Phoebus rising chase the stirs away.
ODE XXII. TO DIANA. He consecrates a Pine Tree to her.
VIrgin, of hills and forests part onesse,
Who being thrice invoked, do address
Thy self unto young women traveling
In childbirth, and from deaths-doore do them bring;
O thou three-formed god desse, let the pine
Adjoining to my mansion, be thine,
Which every years end gladly I will strew
With a Boares blood that side-way aims his blow.
ODE XXIII. TO PHYDILE. Mean sacrifices from pure hands, are most acceptable
to the gods.
IF, rural Phydile, thou raise on high
At the new-moone thy reared hands to the sky;
If thou with incense do thy Lares bow,
And with this years fruit, and a greedy sow;
Then neither shall thy fruitful vineyard bear
The noxious south wind; nor thy corn in the ea^e
The barren blasting, not thy younglings sweet
The dangerous season of the Autumn meet.
For the devoted sacrifice that is fed
Among oaks and elmes on hills with snow over spread,
Or in the Alban fields dos fatted lie,
The highpriests axes with his neck shall dye.
Nothing at all does it belong to thee,
Crowning thy little gods with Rosemary,
And with frail myrtle-boughs, a stir to keep
With a great slaughtering of thy young sheep.
"If a pure hand upon the altar lies,
"You cannot with a sumptuous sacrifice
"The displeased household gods more pleased make,
"Than with your hallowed corn, and salted cake.
ODE XXIV. Against immoderate riches.
THough richer than the Arabians wealth unknownes
Or of rich India, you with your hewn stone
The Tyr^hene and the Pontick ocean stock;
If dire fare on the loftiest crowns dos knock
His Adamantine nails, thy mind from fear,
Thy head from snares of death thou can not clear.
The wandering Scythians (whose carriages
Do bear their traveling tents, as their use is)
And the stern Getae do far better live,
Whose unmarked lands free herbs and come (...) give,
Nor tillage more than for a years food pleases,
And a supply with equal labor eases
Him that left work last: harmless stepdams there
Their mother-wanting sons in law for bear:
Nor dos the rich-dower'd wife her husband sway,
Nor for a comely trimmed adult'rer stay.
"The parents virtues, and their own chaste bearing
"In a firm league, a second suitor fearing,
"Is their great dowre; and it is a thing abhorred
"To play foul play, or death is the reward.
O, whosoever would remove from hence
Our impious broiles, and homebred insolence,
If he do cover registered to be
In monuments a Pater Patriae,
Then let him dare his wild desires to tame,
Famous to after-ages; since (O shame)
"We living virtue enviously despise,
"Admire it being once taken from our eyes.
What profit dos our mournful lamentation,
If sin be not suppressed by castigation?
What benefit can cobweb statutes do,
Not having our obedience thereunto?
If nor this part of the wo^ld girt with hot fire,
Nor continent unto the northward nigher,
Nor the snow frozen on the ground deters
The merchant man? if skillful mariners
Subdue the raging billows? Poverty,
A great disgrace, commands us both to tri^
And suffer any thing, and from the way
Of hard-to-be-found virtue makes us stray.
Or let us send unto the Capitol,
Whether the clients noise and train dos call;
Or let us send into the neighboring flood
Our gemmes, and stones, and gold for no use good,
The fomenters of our chief misery,
(If for o^^ sin we truly sorry be.)
The rudiments of our unlawful lust
Must be pulled out, and minds too render must
Be framed to tougher acts: the noble youth
Cannot tell how to back a horse forsooth,
Boing raw, and feare^ to hunt: more skilled to sport
With the Greek top, if you give preceptfor't,
Or, if you please, at diceby law forbid,
At which his fathers faith being perjured,
His fellow gamester and his guest does cheer,
And for his worthless heir does money get:
Thus ill got goods increase, yet evermore,
I know not what wants to his curtailed store.
ODE XXV. TO BACCHUS. That being inspired by him be will sing the praises of
Caesar.
WHither, O Bacchus, do thou hurry me,
Being in spired with thy deity?
To what groves, or what caves am I confined,
Being astonished in my new wrought mind?
Out of what cells shall I be heard, forecasting
Egregious Caesar's glory everlasting
Among the stars, and court of Jove to set?
I Will sing a new rare song, never sung yet,
By any other voice: no otherwise
The Bacchick priest from sleep amazed lies,
When from the mountains she does Hebrus see,
And Thrace all white with Snow, and Rhodope
Climbed ore by barbarous feet. How I desire,
The rocks, as I am wandering, to admire,
And silent groves! O King of Naiades,
And of the Bacchae that the tall ash rices,
Can pull put with their hands; No trivial thing,
Or in a low grown measure will I sing;
Nothing obnoxious to mortality:
A dangerous thing it is, yet sweet to me,
To follow thee god Bacchus, that do twine
My temples with the green leaves of the vine.
ODE XXVI. TO VENUS. A farewell to love-tricks: he prays her to make Chloe
love him.
PLeasing to maids I lived in former days,
And fought my battles too, not without praise:
Now shall the wall that is on the left hand
Of sea-bred Venus, all my arms command,
And lute weary of wars; here, here dispose
Your light, artillery, and bars, and bows,
Which against barred doors did use to threat;
Queen goddess that rich Cyprus make thy feat,
And Memphis nere vexed with Sithonian snow,
Once strike proud Chloe^ with a heavy blow.
ODE XXVII. TO GALATAEA. Dehorting her from going to sea by the example of
Europa.
LEt the ill omen of the hooting owl,
And whelping bitch, and brown wolf that does prowle
Ore the Lanuvian fields, and fox with young
Keep company the wicked crew among:
And let a snake their resolved journey stay,
When like an arrow it does horses fray
From the hedge side. I, wherefore should I fear,
Being a provident Astronomer?
Before the bird presaging imminent rain,
Shall to the standing pooles return again,
I will invoke from rising of the sun
The smooth voic'd crow to my petition.
O Galatoea, happy may thou be,
Where thou best like, and mindful still of me;
And let not the ill-boding pie, nor crow,
Wandering about, prohibit thee to go.
But do you see with what a blustering blast
Declining Orion does stand aghast?
I know what Adria's cloudy bay portends,
And wherein the clear westarne wind offends,
Let the wives and the children of our foes,
Feel the east-rising Goats insensat blows,
And the tempestuous oceans bellowing,
And sea-shores shaken with their battering.
Europa so herivory body threw
On a delusive bull, and pale she grew
At the ocean with monsters covered ore,
And frauds in the mids discride, though bold before;
Late in the meades for flowers being wholly set,
And the contriver of a coronet
Vowed to the nymphs, in an obscure night she
Nothing besides the stars and waves did see.
Who so soon as to potent Creet she came,
With hundred towns; O father, O that name
Disclaimed by me thy child O piety,
Being ore come with fury she did cry.
Whence, whither am I come? one death's too poor
For virgins faults: do I awake deplore
My fouleoffence? or does vain phantasy,
(Which through an ivorie portall passing by
^oth usher in each dream) thus mock at me,
Being as yet from all offenses free?
Was it to travel through the vast seas rather
Fitter for me, or the fresh flowers to gather?
If any one would now unto me show
This odious bull, I being incensed so,
I Would with a sword in pieces strive to pull,
And break the horns of that so late loved bull.
Impudent I my fathers court forsook,
Impudent I for hell do waiting look;
O, whatsoever god these plaints dos hear,
Would I'mong I ons wandering naked were
Before that ugly meagernesse shall stain
My comely checkes, or that my moisture drain
From me that will for a soft prey be put,
Faice as I am, I tigers wish to glut.
Wicked Europa, why do ceise to dye?
Thy absent father thus dos on thee cry:
Thou with thy girdle happily com'n with thee,
May break thy hanging neck from this ash tree.
Or if the rocks, or stones for death sharp'd fit,
Do please thee more: go, go, thy self commit
To a swift ^^orme, unless you more mind have
To card your mistress wool, and as a slave
To be confined to some barbarous dame,
Thou being of royal blood: To her then came
False-suiling Venus (while she did lament)
And her son also, with his bow unbent:
Anon, when she sufficiently had played,
For bear thy wrath and thy hot rage, she said;
Since that this heifer being by thee hated,
Shall yield his horns to be dilacerated.
To be the wife of unquell'd ^upiter,
Know thou not how? these sobbings then for be are:
Thy self to bear thy great fare bravely frame;
The world divided shall retain thy name.
ODE XXVIII. TO LYDE. That she should celebrate Neptunes feast with him.
DRaw lustic Lyde, thy hid Caecube wine,
And against abstemious wisdom force combine;
What else on Neptunes holy day shall I do?
You see the noontide hastens on, yet you,
As if the swift day stayed, spare to draw dry
Your barrel from your cellar, ha'ving lien by
Since Bibulus consul was: with altern share
We Neptune will extol, and the green hair
Of the sea-nymphs: thou to thy crooked lute
Latona, and swift Cynthias darts shall suite.
In our songs burden we will her express
That Cuidus rules, and the bright Cyclades,
And Paphos with her yoaked swans does view;
The night with fit lays shall be praised too.
ODE XXIX. TO MAECENAS. He invites him to a mean feast, which he hopes will
give him content. That mortals should not trouble themselves with the times to
come. His contempt of fortunes power.
MAEcenas sprung from Tyrrhene kings, for thee
There has been gentle wine long time with me
In a tun nere before now turned about,
With rose-buds, oil too for thy hair's pressed out.
Withdraw thy self from all occasion,
Nor do thou still moist Tibur gaze upon,
And fields of Aesula declivious,
And hills of particide Tellegonus.
Thy loathsome plenty at the length for bear,
And palace to the waving clouds son^a^e:
Do thou forbear to wonder at the fume,
And wealth, and tumult of enriched Rome.
"Enter change of-times please rich men well;
"And poor men's homely fare in a low cell,
"Have made the clouded for head smooth to lie,
"Without your Arrases, and purple dye.
Now dos Andromeda's translucent sire
Display unto us his long hidden fire;
Now Procyon raves, and the mad lions star,
While the sun brings the parching days from far.
The weary shepherd with his fainting drove,
Now seeks the shades, the river, and the grove
Of Sylvane rude; and from the wandering wind
The silent bank is free: Thou yet do mind
What state may fit the city, and do fear
(Being careful for thy country) what the Sere
And Bactrians which by Cyrus governed are,
And mutinizing Tanais do prepare.
"Provident God in a black cloud does hide
"The Event of future things, and does deride
"If mortal man farther than's fitting goes;
"Mind thou what is present calmly to compose:
Other things like the river on are driven,
Now in the mid channel gently gliding even,
To the Etrurian ocean, and anon
The eaten rocks, and rent trees driving on,
And beasts, and tents, with roating of the hills,
And neighboring woods, when the fierce deluge fills
The quiet streams: "Over himself bearing sway,
"And merry shall he live, that thus can say,
"I to this day have lived; let Jove o're-run
"Or with a black cloud, or a bright-raid sun
"All heaven to morrow, yet what once is past
"He never shall make void, nor ere uncast,
"Or make that thing of no validity,
"Which once the poasting hour has carried by.
Fortune unto her cruel work intent,
And to show her vain glorious sportings bent,
Her flitting honors up and down does wind,
Now to my self, now to another kind:
I praise her being constant; if she shake
Her swift wings, what she gave me, I forsake;
And me in my integrity do save,
And honest poverty without dowry crave.
It Is naught to me, when the mainmast does crack
With northern winds, to my poor pray'^s to pack,
And covenant with promises, for fear
The Cyprian and Tyrian ships should bear
My wealth unto the avaritious flood:
Then with help of a two-oard trough of wood,
The wind and Pollux twins shall bear me hence,
Safe through the Aegaean insolence.
ODE XXX. That he is immortalized by his poems, better than by statues and
Pyramides.
A Monument more durable than brass,
And higher than the princely structure was
Of the Pyramides, I have set forth;
Which neither eating storm, nor raging north,
Or the unnumbred rank of many a year
And revolutions of times can wear.
I shall not die all, and some part of me
Shall from the funeral Goddess power be free,
I fresh with after praise a^lory, shall grow,
As with the silent Nun the Pri^st shall go
Unto the Capitol: I shall be ren^^nd
What way the violent Aufid^^ does sound,
And what way Daunus, being of water scant,
Is ore the country rout p^t dominant;
That I from feeble rising being strong,
Did first of a I bring down the Grecian song
To the Italian measures: then inherit:
A stateliness acquired by thy merit:
And thou, Melpomene, my temples tie
About with Delphick laurel willingly.
The end of the third Book of the Odes of Horace.
THE FOVRTH BOOK of the Odes of HORACE.
ODE I. A complaint that Venus has made him a lover again: he dotes upon
Ligurinus, and desires Venus to forsake him, and go to the house of Paulus
Maximus.
O Venus intermitted many a day;
Do thou again wage wars? spare, spare, I pray.
I am not now as I before did stand
Under my lovely Cyaaraes Command.
Spare, cruel mother of all-plessing love,
A man bout fifty years of age to move,
Now hardened to thy soft commandments. go,
Where young men's pleasing prayers do thee woe,
In Paulus Maximus his palace you,
Being winged with Cygnets of a purple hue,
More opportunely may together feast,
If you delight to fire a fitting breast.
For he, being both noble and complete,
And for poor souls condemned, nere silent yet,
And a youth of a hundred tricks beside,
Shall spread the ensigns of thy war full wide.
And when he shall triumph, being of more power
Than the lare gifts or his competitour,
Near to the Albane springs he will setup thee
All marble, underue the Cition tree.
There with thy nose thou shall draw much sweet smell,
And there thou shall be pleased very well
With intermixed music of the late.
And Bear cynthian pipe and with the flute.
There youths with tender virgins twice a day,
While that they do thy deity display,
According as is now the Satians guise,
With their clean feet thrice on the ground shall rise.
Me neither woman now, nor boy does move,
Nor a too credulous hope of mutual love;
Nor does it please me to contend with wine,
Nor with fresh flowers my temples round to twine.
But why, O Ligurinus, why alas
Do my rare seen tears ore my cheeks thus pass?
Wherefore in silence, no way fit at all,
Amids my words dos my smooth tongue thus fall?
Now close-cling'd in my nightly dreams I woo thee,
Now through the grass of Mars fie field pursue thee
So swift of foot, and cruell-hearred thee
Among the streams that ever moving he.
ODE II. TO ANTONIUS IULUS. The praise of Pindarus, with the extenuation of
himself and therefore desires Iulus himself to sing of Caesan victories.
WHocuer strives to equal Pindarus,
(Julus) by the art of Daedalus,
With pinions waxed unto him, does frame
To give the glassie ocean a by-name.
Like to a Current running down a hill,
Which storms above his noted banks did fill,
So rages Pindarus, and rowles along,
Unfathomed in his profoundest tongue;
Fit to be crowned with Apollos bays,
Whether he tumbles forth his new made lays
In daring dithyrambs, and ca^ed be
In numbers from authority set free.
Whether that he of God, or kings does tell,
(The seed of Gods) by whom the Centaures fell
With a deserved destruction, and the fire
Of terrible Chimaera did expire:
Or whom the Elean victory home brings,
Being deifi'de, or of the champion sings,
Or of his horse, and with a gift worth
Than hundred ensigns, highly sets him forth;
Or wailes some young man from his sad wife taken,
And then his courage and his heart again,
And golden constitutions to the skies
Raises aloft, and sootie hell envies.
Much air does the Dircaean swan up-raise,
When, Antonie, it to the clouds high ways
Does soar aloft; I in the quality,
And the condition of a Matine be,
Gathering pleasant honey with much toil,
About the wood and watrie Tyburs soil,
Do warble out, being of slender vein.
My melodies of a laborious strain.
Thou poet, on an in instrument more shrill
Shall Caesar praise, when ore the sacred hill,
With his deserved laurel honored,
He shall the stern Sicambri forward lead:
Than whom the fates and the good deities
Have given the earth no more, nor greater prize;
Nor ever shall give, though our times unfold
Themselves again into the ancient gold.
The joviall festivals, and public sport
Of the whose city too thou shall report,
And every court from causes cleared out
For the obtained return of Caesar stout.
Then (if ^ought worth hearing shall begin)
A good part of my voice too shall come in,
And, O bright Sun, O worthy praise, He strain,
Happy that Caesar is come home again.
And all our city while he marches by
Not once alone will lo^ triumph cry,
O lo^ triumph, and will sacrifice
Incense unto the gracious deities.
Ten oxen, and as many heifers, thee,
A tender calfe me of my vow shall free,
Whose dam was late forsocke, which for my vows
In spacious meadows, yet more sportive grows;
The horned fires, upon his forehead showing
Of Luna her third change again renewing,
Where he has got a mark, white to be spide,
Being yellow in all other parts beside.
ODE II TO MELPOMENE. Whosover she looks upon with mild aspect at his
nativitie be becomes a rare Poet. And that he has gotten credi^ by poetry.
WHom thou Melpomene but once shall spy
Being near his birth, with a delighted eye;
Him neither Isthmian labor up shall life
To be a champion; nor the horses swift
In an Achaick charet bring from far,
Being a victor, nor affairs of war
Bring to the Capitol a captain dressed
With Delian bays, because he has suppressed
Kings swelling threatenings: but the stream that moves
In fertile Tybur, and thick leaves of groves,
Shall make him famous in Aeolian ditties:
^en so the youth of Rome the queen of cities,
Daignes me among poets pleasing troops to knit,
And now with envious teeth I less am bit.
O thou my muse, that of the golden lyre
Do ever temper the harmonious quire!
O thou that on mure fishes can bestow
The singing of the sw^n, if it please thee so!
It only is thy bounteousnesse, that I
Am marked with fingers of the passers by,
The Roman lutes musician that I breath,
And please (if yet I please) thou do bequeath.
ODE IIII. The conquests of Drusus Nero: some valiant acts of Claudius Nero,
with the fortitude and success of the Romans, in the battles against Annibal
and Asdrubal.
LIke to the bird the thunders harbinger,
(Upon whom love, the gods king did confer
The reign ore wandering fowls, experienced
That he was true, 'bout beauteous Ganymed)
Whose youth long since, and his fires courage pressed,
Unskilful then of labor, from his nest;
And the spring winds (tempests being now blown over)
Taught him (yet trembling) flights unused before.
His lively valian^nesse did by and by
Against folds of sheep send him an enemy;
Then love of food and fighting did anon
Against resisting dragone what him on.
Or like unto the lion being bear
From the milk of his yellow hair'd dams tear,
The kid intend on the sweet fields did see,
That straightway to^^ with his young teeth must be:
The Rhoeti and the Vandals saw afar
Drusus about the Alps maintaining war,
Whose custom how derived from all ages;
Their hands with Amazonian axes gages,
I have deferred to enquire of yet,
(Nor is it, to know all things, a thing fit.)
But their hands long ^icto io^s, and f^ll wide,
By our young captains counsel tamed, have tried
What wisdom, what an ingenuity,
Well fostered in a happy family,
And what Augustus fatherly care ^o^.
Upon the Neroes, being youths, could do.
"Strong things are bred of strong, and the fires forces,
"Are in the lovely heifers, are in horses;
"Nor do strong eagles the weak dove beget,
"But learning do^ the in bred goodness whet,
"And right instructions make the soul more strong;
"When manners fail, sins do good natures wrong.
What thou, O Rome, do to the Neroes owe,
Metaurus flood and Asdruhall cast low,
Are witness of, and that refulgent day
To Italy, when clouds were chac't away;
Which first in glorious victory did pride,
When as the fatal Affrican did ride
Our Roman cities ore, as fire through wood,
Ore the West wind through the Sicilian flood.
After this time, with prosperous success
The Roman youth did evermore increase,
Our temples had their gods anew erected,
Late by the Poem's impious bonds dejected.
Then faithless An^ibal at length did say,
We Deeres to rav'ning wolves being made a prey,
Pursue them of our selves, from whom to flee,
And escape from, is a glorious victory.
The valiant nation which from fired Troy,
Tossed on the T^s^an ocean, did convoy
Their sacred orders, and their progeny,
And aged fire, to towns of Italy,
Like to the oak with hard-edg'd axes pill'd,
In Algidum with shedy branches filled,
Through damages, through slaughters does afford
Glory and courage from the very sword.
Hydra with h^wn corpse did not more increase
Against grieving to-be-conquerd Hercules,
Colchos, nor Thebes yet by Echion builded,
A greater wonderment have ever yielded.
In the sea drown it, it will rise more glorious;
Wrestle, 'twill cast the conqueror victorious
With wondrous credit, and will wars maintain,
Fit to be sung of by their wives again.
Now unto Carthage I no more will post
My lofty messengers: all hope is lost,
And fortune of our family is dead,
Ever since Asdiubal was slaughtered.
The Claudian powers will any thing effect,
Which Jove does with his gracious power protect,
And consultations searching very far
Do carry through the very brunts of war.
ODE V. A prayer for Augustus return home, as being the health as safety of
his people.
BEst guardian of the stock of Romulus,
Sprung from blessed Gods, the art now too long fort
Return thou, having promised quick resort
Unto our Senators most sacred court.
Dear governor, light to thy country bring;
For when thy look smiles on us, like the spring,
The day more pleasingly does then decline,
And suns upon thy people brighter shine.
As does a mother call for her young son
With vows, presages, and petition,
Whom the south wind with envious blast does stay
Beyond the floods of the Carpathian bay,
From his dear home staying more than a years space,
Nor from the crooked shores does turn her face:
Just so our country Caesar back requires,
Being all stricken with sincere desires.
For now the ox treads safely ore the fields,
Ceres and sweet good luck our country shields,
The sailor ^ore the quiet seas do fly,
True loye feare^ to be vexed with jealousy.
The chaste house with no lecherie's defamed
Good life and law that spotted sin has tamed
Young folk with children like themselves are blessed,
Attending torture has that sin suppressed.
Who will the Parthian, who could Scythian dread,
Or who the brood rude Germany has bred,
While Caesar is entire to us? who will way
The wars of terrible Iberia?
^ach man in his own hills the day does spend,
and to the widowed trees his vine does bend;
^hence very jocund to his wine does hye,
and at next health makes thee his deity.
^hee with much prayer, thee he seeks with wine
^owr'd out of bowls and dos thy god head join
^o his house-gods, like Greece that mindful is
Of Castor, and the mighty Hercules.
^ayst thou, O dear guide, to Hespe^ia bring
^ong festivals; thus we all day do sing,
Dry in the morning; thus we sing being drunk,
When that the sun is in the Ocean sunk.
ODE VI. Asecular song to Apollo and Diana.
THou god whom all the Niobean kind
The scourge of her imperious tongue did find,
And lustful Tityus, and the Phthian boy,
Achilles well-nigh victor of great Troy,
Than all the rest a greater champion,
Yet weak to thee, though marine Thetis son,
Though he victorious with his dreadful spear,
Did the Dardanian palaces down tear.
He like a pine with the sharp axe cu^ down,
Or like a Cypress with the West-wind blown;
Did fall down prostrate all along, and thrust
His very neck beneath the Trojan dust.
Th'ill-well eased Trojans he would not have destroyed
And Priams court with dances overjoyed,
Not being at all within that horse remaining,
A sacrifice unto Minerva faining:
But (O abhorred, O) openly dire
Unto his captives, would with Grecian fire
Children that nere knew how to speak, consume,
And those yet resting in the mothers womb:
If the gods father, being by the prayer
Of thee ore-ruled and of Venus fair,
Had not permitted to Aencas state
Walls reared up with a far better fare.
Luce-master Phoebus to Thalia shrill,
That do thy hal^es in yellow Xanthus swill,
Smooth-faced Aguieus, O do thou maintain
The reputation of our Roman strain.
Phoebus the soul of verse, Phoebus the art,
And name of poet did to me impart.
Ye prime of virgins, and from parents rare
Ye boys derived, the Delian godesse care,
That with her bow swift pards and stags does wound,
Keep your Greek measures, and my fingers sound,
Praising Latona's son in a due rite,
The fire-increasing moon that shines by night;
In a due sort, to all fruits prosperous,
And swift to snatch the hastening months from us.
And when that thou art married, thou shall say,
I to the gods a pleasing song did pay,
When the full age our holy days had brought;
In poet Horace measures being taught.
ODE VII. Of the brevity of life, and the speediness of death.
THE snow is past, the grass returned is
Unto the fields, and leaves unto the trees;
The earth does change her courses; and the tides,
Being decreased run low on the bank side.
The Grace and Nymphs, and her two sisters dure
To usher in their dances, being bare.
The year, and hour which hence the sweet day flings,
Warnes thee thou should not hope immortal things.
Frosts melt with the spring-winds; the summer then
Th^usts out the spring, and that must perish, when
Fruit-bearing Autumn does her store power out;
And then again stiff Winter comes about.
Yet the swift moons their he venly waine^ can mend:
When we, where good Aencas is, descend,
Where wealthy ^^llus, and where Ancus be,
Then ashes and a very shade ^^e we.
Who can tell whether that the high gods may
A morrow add to this last present day?
All that on your ow^e dea^e soul you bestow,
Beyond your heirs all-catching graspe shall go.
When you're once dead, and Minos upon you
His rare determinations shall show;
Torquatus, nor your stock, nor eloquence,
Nor piety shall ere release you thence.
For nor Diana from infernal night
The chaste Hippolytus can ere acquit;
Neither has Theseus power to break in twain
From dears Pirithous his Lethien chain.
ODE VIII. That he can give his friends nothing but poems, which he esteems
the best gifts.
Bowls, and neat brass I Would give (O censorine)
Being bountiful unto all friend, of mine,
Tripods, the valiant Greeks reward I Would give,
Neither should thou my worst of gifts receive.
If I were furnished with those rarities
Parrhasius or Scopas did devise
This skilled in stone; in oily colors he,
To form a god now, now a deity:
But I have not such plen^ie nor indeed,
Dos your estate or mind such dainties need:
You verses love; we can give verses yet,
And on our present can the value set.
Not marble stones engraved with the public strain
By which the soul and life returns again
To brave words after death; not flights full fast
And threats of Annibal behind him cast;
Not impions Carthage fires more loud proclaim
The praise of him who having got a name
From conquered Aftrica, came thence away,
Than do the poems of Calabria.
Neither if histories do disregard
What you do well, shall you receive reward.
What thing would Ilia's and Mars son be,
If that repining taciturnitie
Hindered the wouth of Romulus? the sense
Of potent Bards, their smoothness, eloquence
Does consecrate unto the glorious woods
Aecus taken from the Stygian floods.
"A Muse will not let a man praise worthy die,
"A muse in heaven does him beautify;
So the untoiled Hercules draws near
To the desired feasts of Jupiter.
The glorious stars, the twin- Tyndaridae
Snatch battered ships from forth the oreprest sea:
Bacchus his temples decked with the green vine,
Does bring his wishes to a good design.
ODE IX. TO LOLLIUS. Of the immortality of poetry, and how many are forgotten
for want of the poets pens. He celebrates Lollius deservings.
Do not believe those songs can ere be dead,
Which I, at lowd-nois'd Aufidus being bred,
Did warble out, by arts nere shown before,
Upon the viols to be tune ore.
Although Maeonian Homer first place get,
Pindarus Muses do not lie hid yet,
Simonidaean, nor Alcaicks fierce,
No nor Stesichorus his ponderous verse.
What ere Anacreon did sport about
In former time, age has not yet razed out.
The love yet breathes, and still survive the fire^
Inspired to the Aeolian virgins lyres.
The Spa^tan Helen was not only fired
With an adulterers smooth locks, and admired
The gold on's robes laid ore and ore again,
And his majestic carriage, and his train;
Nor Teucer first, in a Cydonian bow
His arrows shot; Troy more than once felt woe;
Great Idomene and Sthenelus never fought
Such combats (only) worthy to be taught
By Muses; nor did Hector venterous,
Nor the most violent Deiphobus
Heavy strokes first of all men undertake
For their chaste wives, and for their childrens sake
Many brave men before Agamemnon lived,
But all of them are passed away ung^iev'd,
And in an everlasting night unknown,
Because a sacred poet they have none.
"Virtue concealed is little different
"From sluggishnesse within the grave up-pent:
O Lollius I will not suffer thee,
Ungrac'd, concealed in my lines to be;
Nor will I let black-tooth'd oblivion
Those thy so many labors gnaw upon.
Thou have a mind both provident in state,
And both in prosperous times and adverse straight;
Punishing griping coz'nage, and abstaining
From money all things to it self constraining,
And not being Consul only for one year,
But while he being a judge good and sincere,
Chose goodness above gaining, and forsook
The bribes of guilty men with a brave look,
And through whole troops of them that stopped his way,
Conqueror like his ensigns did display.
"The man that is of many things possessed,
"You cannot truly term him to be blessed,
"He better does the name of blessed enjoy,
"Who understands how wisely to employ
"The Gods gifts, and hard poverty to bear.
"And wickedness far worse than death does fear.
For his dear friends and for his country he
To suffer death will never fearful be.
ODE X. The poet tells Ligurinus, that when the flower of his youth is past, he
shall grieve to think he had not that understanding then which now he has.
O Thou, yet cruel, and imperious grownei
By Venus gifts, when the unhoped down
Shall steal upon thy pride, and thy hairs shed
Which now fly ore thy shoulders, and thy red
That Is choicer than the damask roses grace,
Being changed shall turn unto a wrinkled face
Thee Ligurinus; thou will cry (alas)
(When thou shall see thee, not thee in thy glass)
When I was young why had I not this mind?
Or to these thoughts why not sound cheeks assigned?
ODE XI. The celebrating of Maecenas birthday, Phyllis must not aim too high.
I Have a tun of Albane wine full-gaged,
(O Phyllis) that is more than nine years aged,
And I have parsely in my garden plot
To make us garlands: I have also got
I vie great store, wherewith when thou do twine
Thy tresses up, thou wondrous bright do shine.
With silver all my house does glister round,
The Altar with chaste Vervine being bound
With a slain elambe to be besprinkled joys;
Every hand now makes haste, girls mixed with boy^^
Trudge up and down; the flames do blaze about
From the house-tops whirling the thick smoke our.
But what delights you are invited to,
That you may understand, these Ides by you
Must be solemnized: which every tide
Dos April sea-bred Venus month divide.
Solemn indeed, and almost unto me
^o^e sacred than my own nativiri^.
Because that my Maecenas from this light
His years still flowing in to him does write
That Telephus, at whom thou do so aim
((...) young a man not of thy inferior fraime)
A wench both rich and sportive has obtained,
And in a pleasing fetter keeps him chained.
Burned Phoeton ambitious hopes does fray,
And the winged Pegasus does well display
A heavy president, falling upon
The earth-born horse-rider Bellerophon,
That things befitting thee thou should affect,
And counting it unlawful to expect
Farther than's meet, from thy superiors move;
Come then the Ne plus ultra of my love,
(For never after this time will I be
In love with other woman) learn with me
Songs which with thy sweet voice thou may express;
Black cares with melody will soon grow less.
ODE XII. He inviteth Virgil (conditionally) to a banquet.
THe Springs companions which the sea do still,
The Thracian winds do now our ship-sailes fill;
Now neither meadows freeze, nor rivers roar,
With winter snow being forced to swell ore.
The hapless bird, and the eternal shame
Of the Cecropian Court, her nest does frame,
Mournfully sounding Itys, 'cause that she
Kings barbarous lusts revenged wickedly.
The keepers of the rich-fleec'd sheep do raise
Unto their reeds in the soft grass their lays,
And recreate the God to whom the herd
And shed chils of Arcade are endeard.
These times breed thirst, but if you well on it think,
Virgil, my wine trod out at Cales to drink,
Thou crafficker with all our noble youth,
Must with thy ointments buy my wine forsooth.
A little oile-gill draws my vessel dry,
Which now dos in Sulpitian cellars lie,
Rich enough fresh hopes out for us to square,
And strong to drench the bitterness of care.
Unto these pleasures if your course you bend,
Come quickly with thy wares: I don't intend
Like to some rich man in a full stored house
To drench thee free from charge with my carouse.
But put delays of love and gain away,
And mindful of your funeral, while you may,
Mingle some short-breathed folly with your reason;
It Is pleasing to be foolish in due season.
ODE XIII. Against old Lyce, who would feign seem young.
LYCE, the gods have hearkened to my moan,
Lyce, the gods have heard: thou old art grown,
And yet thou beautiful wilt seem to be.
And thou do sport and drink audaciously,
And after Cupid flow to thee do seek
With palsied note; he in the be^ureous cheek
Of the now freshly colored Chian wench,
And thoroughly skilled in prick-song dos entrench.
For hasty he over the dry oaks flees
And runs from thee, because thy rotten teeth,
Because that those thy wrinckles, and the snow
Upon thy head do vitiate thee so.
Nor Tyrian purples now, nor glistring stones
Began fetch again those times to thee, which once
The winged day has very firmly closed
In memorable registers disposed.
Whither (alas) now is thy beauty gone,
Or where thy sweet face, where thy action?
What have of her, of her that breathed love,
Which did my self from my own self remove?
A handsome face next after Cynara's,
And famous too, and full of moving ways:
But fates gave Cyna'ra few years, keeping thee
Equal with some old ravens age to be,
That lusty youths might see with mirth enough,
Thy taper wasted to a very snuff.
ODE XIV. Augustus his glory, and Victories.
WHat care of Senators or Commoners,
By statues and recording registers
Can with full gifts of honor deifie
Thy worths, Augustus, to posterity?
O thou the chief of Kings which way so e're
The Sun the habitable shoares does clear;
The Vandals, Latian rites, unused to,
Have lately felt what thou in war could do.
For with thy troops brave Drusus did deface
More than at one about, an unruly race,
The Genovese, and Brenni swift of foot,
And t^wers upon the dreadful Aspes tops put.
The elder of the Nero's fought of late
A dreadful battle, and with prosperous fate
The savage natured Rhaetians out did fling,
Plain to be seen in's warlick combating,
With how great slaughters he put out of breath
Their lives designed to revell-keeping death.
As the north (when the troop of Pleiades
Rendeth the clouds) swells up the raging seas;
^o swift was he his enemies troops to tire,
And spur his foaming horse through midst of fire.
So is the bull-form'd Aufidus rolled out,
Which runs Apulian Daunus Realms about,
When it swells up, and on the field new sown
Threatens to power a horrid deluge down.
As Claudius did with a destructive power
The armed troops of the Barbarians scowre;
And as he (conquering) van and rear did mow,
Them without loss over all the field did st^ow:
While thou thy aids, advice, and gods did lend;
For what day th'Alexandrian port did bend
Humbly unto thee, and set open clear
Her empty court, from thence the fifteenth year,
Well-boding fortune did to thee present
Of the then war most prosperous event;
And did both praise and wished dignity
Procure to thy completed Emperie.
The Spaniard not before then captivate,
The Mede, the Moore, Scythian runnagate
Admire thee; O thou help assistant come
To Italy, and its chief ci^ie, Rome.
Nile that conceales the birthplace of his spring,
And Ister too, and Tig^is ravening,
The monster-bearing Ocean thee adores,
That 'bout the world-divided Britains roares.
The Land of France that does not death regard,
And of Iberia parched very hard;
Thee the Sicambri that in blood take pride
Do fawn upon, their arms being laid aside.
ODE XV. The praises of Augustus prudent government.
PHOEBUS rebuked me minding to suite
Battles and conquered Cities to my Lute,
Lest I should spread unto the Tyrrhene main
My little sails: Caesar, thy age again
Did plenteous fruits unto our fields afford,
And ensigns to our Jupiter restored,
Pulled from the Persians proud posts, and did bar
Romulus temple close, being freed from war,
And brought in a right-govern'd policy,
And bridles for our wandering liberty,
And our iniquities did quite subdue,
And did our ancient arts again renew;
By which again sprung up our Roman name,
And our Italian forces, and the fame
And glory of our Emperie forth spread
To the Suns rising from his western bed.
While Caesar is the guardian of our state
Not civil rage or power our rest shall bate;
Not indignation which swords does whet,
And wretched cities does at discord set.
Those who at deep Danubius do drink,
Shall not the Julian edicts e're unlink;
Not Getes, nor Seres, nor Persians infidel
Nor those who near the river Tana is dwell.
And we on working days, and holy tides,
Amids blithe Bacchus bowls, with sons and brides,
First to the god in right sort having prayed,
Of gen'ralls long since valorously decayed,
(As our forefathers manner was to do)
And of Troy also, and Anchises too,
And beauteous Venus progeny will sing
With songs to Lydian music answering,
The end of the fourth Book of the Odes of Horace.
THE EPODES of HORACE.
EPODE I. Horace desires to go with Maecenas to war.
THou, friend Maecenas, on Liburnians necks
Wilt go unto the ships high decks;
Being prepared to undertake alone
All Caesar's peril as thy own.
And what then shall I do,
To whom, so long as you
Do still survive, my life is pleasing,
But if contrary, it is diseasing?
Shall we, be'ing bid, embrace security,
Not sweet, unless it be with thee?
Or undergo this labor with that spirit,
As befits brave men to bear it?
And the Alps-hills clean through
With stout mind follow you,
And Caucasus by none possessed,
And utmost confines of the West?
You Will ask how with my pains I can ease your,
Being feeble and unsure;
Being with you I shall be in fear much less,
That dos the absent most oppress.
As the bird sitting o^^
Her unfledged young, dos more
When they are alone, the snakes twines fear,
Not that she could help, were she there.
These and all enterprises, we will prove,
Freely, in hope to gain your love.
Not that my ploughs, being made fast unto
My many teemes, much work may do;
Or that my cattle may
From Lucan pastures stray
To the Calabrians situation,
Before the fiery const^llation.
Nor that my upland Tusculums hot bower
May reach as far as Circestower:
Sufficiently has thy benignity,
And too much enriched me;
I will not crave that, like
Some greedy-griping tike
I in the earth may deep inhume,
Or like some riotous spark consume.
EPODE II. The prases of the courtrie life.
Blessed is the man, who, free from molestation,
(As were the mortals ancient nation)
With his own oxen tills his country ground,
From all usury unbound;
Nor, soldier like, with shrill alarms is raised,
Nor at the angry sea's amazed;
And flies the courts of law, and the proud gates
Of Citizens of great estates.
Then either with the fruitful stems of vines,
He the tall poplar trees conjoynes,
And, with his knife cutting the waste boughs out,
Graft in better roundabout;
Or tends on his oxens grazing drove,
In a close retired grove,
Or his pressed noney tuns in vessels clear,
Or his swelter'd sheep does sheare;
Or when the Autumn over the fields does spread
With ripened fruit his comely head,
How blithe is he his grafted trees devesting,
And grapes with purple dye contesting.
Wherewith, Priapus, he may thee reward,
And thee, Sire Sylvane, his lands guard.
Now under some old oak he loves to lie,
Upon the long grass by and by:
Mean while the streams along their high banks spring,
The birds do in the forest sing;
The Springs with flowing drops a whispering keep;
Which may call in gentle sleep.
But when the thundering Inpiters cold tide
Dos the storms and snow provide,
With many dogs he here and there besets
The fierce Boares against the toiling nets;
Or on his smooth hook hangs his slender snares,
Gins for the devouring Stares;
Or else the fearful Hares about pursues,
Or Crane a stranger to our noose;
(Delightful sports! who amids these will not
Forget the sad cares love has got?)
But if the chaste wife, for her part, does cheer
Her family and children dear;
(Like to the Sabine or the sun-burn'd bride
Of the Apulian swift to ride)
Dos with old wood a sacred fire begin
Against her toiled husbands coming in;
And in closed pens shutting her fair ewes by,
Milks their full-swolne udders dry,
And from her sweet pots broaching this years wine,
Makes him with unbought viands dine;
Nor Lucrine shel-fish'better shall me please,
Nor Rhombus, nor the Porpuses;
If that the winter swelled with eastern waves,
Any to our Ocean laves.
No Turkey-cock shall down my belly fleet,
Nor lonian Quail, more sweet
Than the Olive-betry that new-gather'd is
From the richest boughs of trees;
Or Sorrell-leafe that loves the meadow ground,
And Mallows good for bodies bound;
Or else a lamb on Terminus feasts slain,
Or a Kid from the Wolf new taken.
Amid these cates how I desire to see
How the full ewes bent homeward be;
To see the wearied oxen, as they hall'd
The o're-turn'd plough with necks all galled;
And, the rich houses swarm, the servants set
About the chimney trimmed near.
When as the Usurer Alphius thus had said,
Who straight a farmer would be made,
I'th'ldes he gathered all his money in,
Next month would let it out agin.
EPODE III. Against the eating of Garlic.
IF any one with hand accursed
His fathers aged neck has burst,
Garlic more fell than Hemlock let him eat.
O the strong guts of country swains!
What kind of poisons this that reigns
Within my breast? have Vipers blood (being h^^
Among these herbs) from me been hid aside,
Or did ^anidia these bad cates provide?
When as Medea did admire
'Bove all the seamen one fair Squire,
Jason with this she charmed, when he did tie
Yokes on the bulls to them unknown;
With presents stained with this alone,
Torturing her rival she away did fly
On winged Snakes; nor ere did such a smoke
Down from the stars the parch't Apulia choke.
Neither did that present crack
More ragingly upon the back
Of the laborious Mercules; but I pray,
O blithe Maecenas, if you crave
Any such like stink to have.
At any time, that then your sweetheart may
Her hands forth-right against your kisses spread
And lie on farthest side of all the bed.
EPODE IV. Against upstert Maenas, late a slave.
WHat hate 'twixt wolve and lambs dos use to be
So much i^ 'twixt me and thee,
Whose sides with Spanish whips are scarr'd
And whose legs with setters hard:
Though you with wealth do strut vaingloriously,
The fortune dos not change the quality.
See you, as through the sacred street you throng,
With a gown of six else long,
How the passengers free scorn
Their faces to and fro does turn?
He flayed with Bride-well whips, to th'whippers toil.
Tills thousand acres now of Falern soil.
The Appian way he with his Jennets beats,
And upon the chiefest seats
He sits as a doughty Knight,
And dos marshall Otho slight.
What profit is it that with a heavy load
So many ships bowed keeles are in the road
Against these pirates, and these slavish powers,
He, he being tribune of these bands of ours?
EPODE V. Canidia tortaring a boy, to make a love potion of him.
O O, what ever God in heaven does guide
The earth and all mandkind beside,
What dos thi^^^ rore mean, and wherefore be
All your stane looks against ^nly me?
^hee by thy children, if Lucina e^e,
To thy true l^^ou^s called, was there;
By this my purples fainting die I pray,
By Jove that will these thing gainsay,
Why like a ste^dame do thou on me look,
Or like a Whale struck with the hook?
While thus the Boy did stand, and did complain
With trembling voice, his ^obes being from him taken
A body very smooth, and such a one
As might the Thracians cruel breasts atone;
^onidra having think embroydered (...)
With little snakes her locks and uncomb'd head,
Commands that fig trees wild from graves up torn,
Commands that cypress sprigs at funerals worn,
And eggs with blood of a black toad made fouls,
And feathers of a nighty flying owl,
And herbs Iolcos and ^beria
(Fertile in poisons) dos transport away,
And bones out from a hungry curs chaps sp^^^d,
(...) Magic flames should be to ashes burned.
(...) busy Sagana the house throughout
^prinkling Avernall waters round about,
^^ke a sea Porpus, or a bristling Boar,
With her hair staring up, about does ro^e.
Veia with no fear stopp' dug out the dust
With her hard spades, grunting at every thrust,
That the boy rammed in might pine away
At sight of meat changed twice or thrice each day;
While he peer'd up with his head, as bodies sunk
Toth' chin in water stand; that his pith shrunk,
And liver dried might be a love-drink made,
While his eyes fixed on meats forbid, did fade.
Both lazy Naples, and each Village near
Thought Ariminian Folia was there,
(A man in lust) who pulls from the sky,
Stars and Moon charmed with spells of Thessaly.
Cruel Ca^^dia here biting away
Her long nails with black t^^th, what did she say,
Or what did she not say? --
O you that to my projects be
True helpers, Night, and Hecate,
Who the silence do command
While our night-spells are in hand,
Now come, and on these hostile bowers,
Throw your anger and your powers.
While beasts in their sad dens do creep
Wearied with pleasant sleep;
Let the Suburan dogs all snarle
At the old adulterous carle,
And (which all the town may jeere)
Besmeared with Spikenard every where,
"And such a one, as a more true
^st these my hands did never do.
Be^^ ma^'s hap't? why dos my direful charm
Than sell Medeas do less harm;
Wherewith having tortured fore
Creat Creons daughter, that proud whore,
Away she fled thence, when a gown,
A present over with potion strowne,
Carried from them all on flame
The but newly married dame.
Nor plant nor root, yet, hidden in
Sharp rocks to me unknown has bin;
Yet he in bed of all his whores,
Besmeared with oblivion snores.
Ah, ah, he walks freed from harm,
By some more skillful witches charm,
Thou Varus with no trivial potion
Back to me shall make thy motion,
(Thou whose head for this shall pay)
Nor shall thy heart, though called away
With Marsian spells, from me e're slide;
I Will a stronger draught provide,
I Will a pow'rfuller power out
For thee that at my love do flout.
First heaven beneath the earth shall lie,
The earth stretched over both on high,
Than you not flame in my desires,
Like brimstone in the sootie fires.
At this the Boy did not, as heretofore,
These damned hags with gentle words implore,
But doubtful how he might his silence break,
Did Thyestaean imprecations speak;
Poisons, a great help and harm,
Cannot humane courses counter-charme
I Will curse you all; a dire curse is
Removed with no sacrifice.
But when by you be'ing bid to die,
I shall give up the ghost, then I
A mighty terror will you meet,
And as a ghost your faces greet,
With crooked naises, (which is the power)
Of the gods in feriour)
And lying on your panting breast,
With horror drive away your rest.
You, loath some Witches, all the town
In each street shall batter down,
Throwing stones now here now there,
Then wolves and funeral fowls shall tear
Your unburied limbs in sunder,
Nor from my parents shall this wonder
Be concealed, who after me
Must (alas) survivers be.
EPODE VI. Against Cassius Severus.
WHerefore, O Curre,
Do thou the harmless stranger fright
Not daring against wolves to stir?
Why do not you this way
Your vain threats (if you can) display,
And seize me that again dare bite.
For Mastiffe-like,
Or like unto the brended hound,
(The shepherds loving help) I Will strike
Through she deep snow, full near
Unto thee with my pricked up ear,
What e're game shall before me bound.
When thou have filled
The forest with thy hideous cry,
Thou with one cast scrap art stilled:
O be warned, be warned then,
For I most fierce' against wicked men,
Advance my ready horns on high.
I like unto
That son in law held in disdain,
By Lycambes most untrue
Or the fierce foe of Bupalus,
If with black tooth one bite me thus,
Shall I like a weak boy complain?
EPODE VII. An execration of the civil war.
O Whither now, O whither
Run ye (ye cursed men) together;
Or why are your long laid-by swords made fit,
For your right hands? is there yet
Too little wasted of our Latian blood
Upon the fields and in the flood?
Not that our Romans might
Burn the stately towers down quite
Of Carthage vile; or th'unfound Britain tread
Our sacred way, being manacled;
But that unto the Parthians wish this Land
Might perish by her own right hand.
Amongst Wolves and Lions never
Was such a use, unless it were
Against beasts of different sort: dos hood-winked fury
Or stronger force, or sin allure ye?
Return an answer: they are silent still,
And palenesse wan their looks does fill.
Their consciences pierced through
Are all astonished: it is too true,
Sad destiny, and sin of brothers slaughter,
Our Roman race still follows after,
E're since just Remus blood o'th'ground did lie
Fatal to its posterity.
EPODE VIII. and XII. That obscenitis which cannot in fit words be covered, is
not fit in any words to be discovered.

EPODE IX. Foretelling Caesar's victory against Antonie.
O Blessed Maecenas, when shall I
(So please Jove) in thy palace high
Taste the wine kept for feasts most glorious,
When Caesar shall return victorious,
Be'ing merry with thee, while the lyre
Does mixed songs to the pipes inspire,
Upon this a Dorick tone,
Upon them a Barbarous one?
As of late we did when (he
That would Neptunes bastard be)
The Captain of the Ocean chas't
With his fired ships away did haste;
Threatening fetters to our city,
Which formerly he, taking pity,
Knocked off from slaves turned renegate;
A Roman Squire, now captivate
To a female creature, bears
Her trenching engine and her spears:
(Ah posterity, you will say
This never was) and can obey
Eunuchs with their wrinkled face;
And the Sun (O vile disgrace)
Amongst ensigns fit for chevalrie
Dos look upon a canopie.
But the French-menturn'd together
Two thousand foaming horses hither,
Singing Caesar; and there lie
The hostile navies sterns close by
In harbor, looking a wrong way:
Io Triumph thou have brought
Us a general back from war
Exceeding Jugurths victor far,
And Affricks conqueror, whose glory
Over Carthage raised his story.
Our foe by land and sea o'rethrowne
Has put on a homely gown
For his scarlet, and now he
With winds against him means to see
Creet for its hundred cities praised,
Or sails against the quicksands raised
By the South, or's tossed aloft
On the Ocean varying often.
Boy, bring larger glasses hither,
And Chian wine, or Lesbian either,
Or Cecube liquor for us fill,
That may the rising stomach still.
All care and fear for Caesar's State
In sweet wine I must mitigate.
EPODE X. An execration against Maevius.
THe ship's lan^h'd out with fate unprosperous
Carrying in it that stinking Maevius.
R^^ember, South Wind, that thou both sides batter
With horrid waves: let the black East Wind shatter
The racklings and the oars all burst in twain
With the tossed sea; let the North swell again
As high, as when upon the mountains great
The trem^ling oaks it does in pieces beat.
Nor let propitious Star that dark night shine,
When storm presaging Orion dos decline.
Nor calmer sea let him be born upon
Than was the Grecian Captains legion;
When Pallas had her indignation turned
Against Ajax impious ship from Ilium burned.
O what a sweat dos on thy seamen stand,
And on thy self a palenesse swarthy-tann'd,
And that same (not a man beseeming) crying,
And prayers unto love they suit denying!
When the lonian creek 'ginning to rore.
Against the moist South Wind has your vessel tore.
But if, as a rich prey, being laid flat
On the crook'd shore, thou shall the crows make far,
A lustful hee-goat and a lamb besides
Shall offered be to the tempestuous tides.
EPODE XI. That he is lovesick, and cannot write verses.
Petty, it does not me delight
Verses, as before, to write,
Quite through thrust
With deeply wounding lust.
With lust, the which does me desire
'Bove all men else to set on fire
Or for young boys,
Or for some female toys.
This the third winter off has tore
The forests dress, since I forbore
To pine away
For my Inachia.
Through town O what a sport was I?
(For I Am shamed at such foolery)
And I repent
My feasting-merriments
In which my grief and silent tongue,
And sighs from my hearts bottom sprung,
Argued me
Inamorate to be.
And mourning to thee, I did cry,
A poor man's candid ingenie
Was all but vain
To stand against her gain;
When as the uncivil power
Of raging wine, had from its bower
My secret thought
With stronger liquor wrought
But in my breast if free rage boil,
That to the winds it may assoile
My sighs ingrate
Which my sore wound cannot bate
Then my modestnesse cast by
Shall give over presently
To strive so long
With rivalls over strong.
When (vexed) I to you had enlarged
These things, to hie me home being charg^d;
Along I went
With feet full imporent,
To those posts (ah) unkind to me,
And doors (ah) full of cruelty
Where mightily
My loins and sides bruised I.
Lyciscus love me now does press,
Boasting that he in tenderness
Dos far surpass
Any young married less.
Whence nor the free-spent consultations,
Nor the rigid increpations
Of my friends ere
Me off again shall tear:
But some other flame, in sooth,
Of some fair maid, or some plump youth,
Knitting up fair
His long grown head of hair.
EPODE XIII. From the present storm to take occasion to be merry.
A Horrid storm does cloud heaven over,
And rain and snow do even unthrone love:
Now the sea, and now the grove
With the Thracian north wind rore.
Friends, let us catch opportunity
Even from this very time; and while our knees
Are lusty, and it seemly is
Let age from cloudy brow be free.
Broach the wine made when Torquat was
My Consul; cease to speak ought of the rest:
Jove perhaps with change full blessed
Will these things into order pass.
Now I desire with Persian oil
To bespred over, and with Mercuriall lyre
from all pertur bations dire
My cogltations to assoile.
As the brave Centaur sung unto
His Pupil ^all; Morrall unconquered,
Boy by goddeste Thet is bred,
The Land of Troy does wait for you.
Which small Scamanders cool streams lave,
And Simois smooth; whence Fates with destined third
Thy return home again forbid
Not thy sea-mother home shall have.
Then being there do thou suppress
Every ill thing with wine and melody,
The sweet-easing company
Of deformed distractivenesse.
EPODE XIV. An excuse for not finishing his Iambicks.
WHy a feeble laziness
Dos so great oblivion press
On my de^p senses, as if I
Had swallowed down, with chaps parch't d^ie,
Drinks Lethaean slet pes in piring,
You me kill with often enquiring,
(O Macenas dear) for why
That god, that god dos put me by
My lambicks (some part pend,
A song long promised) e're to end
In no other sort they say
Anacreon of Te^a
For Samian Bathyllus burned,
Who on his hollow Lute often mourned
In careless measures his desire;
You poor heart too are all on fire:
But if that flame was not so bright
That burned besieged Troy down quite,
Joy in your choice: Phryne made free,
Nor with one man content, pines me.
EPODE XV. A complaint of Neaera's perjurie.
IT was at night, and in the cleer-brow'd sky
The moon among the lesser stars did shine,
When thou, about to blast the majesty
Of the great gods, swar'st to these words of mine,
(Clinging more closely with thy arms twined round,
Than the tall oak is with the ivy bound)
While the wolf to sheep a foe,
And Orion to seamen so,
Should irritate the winter swelled sea,
And the wind should every way
Apollo's uncut locks display,
This our love interchangeable should be.
Naera that much for my resolves shall grieve,
(For if there is ought of man in Flaccus yet)
He Will not endure thou all thy nights should give
To a rival; and being vexed a mate hee'il get.
Nor shall his constancy ere yield agin,
To thy false face, if fixed grief once step in.
And thou blessed man who ere thou art,
That struttest proudly army sma^t
Though thou be rich in cattle and much ground,
And Pactolus to thee flow
And thou Pythagoras secrets know
(Thrice born) and Nireus do for face confound,
Ah thou will weep to see her love to steer
Another course, but I'mean time will jeere.
EPODE XVI. A deploring of the eivill wars, and an exhortation to forsake their
country, as untuckie.
A Second age with civil wars is spent,
And Rome it self with her own powers is rent;
Which bord'ring Ma^sians could not waste away,
Nor Tuscan band or threatfull Prosena,
No^ Capua's emulo is strength, nor Spartacus
So violent, nor French perfidious
To new affairs, nor savage Germany
Had ever wasted with her painted fry,
Nor Anni' bal by his parents cursed still,
We wicked brood of cursed seed will spill;
And now our land again shall be ore-spread
With savage beasts; the barbrous victor tread
Upon our ashes, and the horseman greet
Our city with his horses sounding feet;
And proudly scatter (O abhorred to see)
Romulus bones from wind and sun set free.
Perhaps you all, or best part pitch upon
What must, to escape these wicked wars, be done:
Let no advice than this be prized more high;
As did the Phocians cursed city fly,
Fields, household gods, and temple, too forsook,
By boares and cruel wolves to be next took.
Let Us go where ere our feet can carry us,
Where ere the south or north wind boisterous
Shall call us through the seas: what? dos this like?
Or has some else a better stroke to strike?
Wherefore do we delay our ships to st^are
With prosperous fate? but lets to these things swear:
When rocks, raised from their deep seas up, shall flow,
Then back again it be no sin to go,
Nor be a shame our sails toward home to set,
When Padus shall the Matine hill tops wet.
Or towering Apennine sink in the main,
And strange love with new lust shall monsters chain,
That Tigers shall to mate with Bucks delight,
And Pigeon shall adulterate with the Kite
Not credulous herds from yellow lions shall move,
And the smooth goat the brinish floods shall love:
Let Us swear to these things, and what ever may,
Take all our sweet hopes of return away.
Let our cursed city all at once go our,
Or some part better than the untutored rout.
Let the hen-hearted and despairing wretch
Himself in these ill fated chambers stretch.
The girdling sea calls us; lets seek out strait
Those fields, blessed fields and Islands fortunate,
Where the earth until each year her fruit does give,
And vineyard never prund does everlive;
And the nere-fuling olives branch does sprout,
And the ripe fig her native tree sets out.
From hollow oaks drops honey; from high hills
The nimble spring with rattling feet distills
There goats uncalld unto the milk pailes come,
And the fair flock their full swollen bag, brings (...);
Nor evening bear about their fields does yell,
Nor dos the fertile land with vipers swell.
And we blessed men shall more admire, as how
The wet south don't the meads with large storms mow;
Nor the far seed is parcht in furrows dry;
The heavens king both so well does qualify.
No ship with Argonaures does hither steer,
Nor impudent Medea sets foot here,
No Tyrian sailors hither their sails bent,
Not yet Ulysses long-toil'd regiment.
Jove for a pious stock these shoares selected,
When he the golden age with brass infected,
With brass, then iron hardend the age; whose flight
To those blessed souls by my presage stands right.
TO CANIDIA. An ironicall recantation.
NOw to thy strong art I my hands assign,
Humbly, and crave byth' realms of Proserpine,
And by the unmoved power of Hecate,
And by the books of spells which able be
To call the loosned stars down from their sphaere,
Canidia, yet thy damned charms forbear,
And wind, O wind thy nimble spindle back:
Telephus so did Nereus grand child slack.
Against whom proud he his Mysian troops had bent,
And against whom he had his sharp darts sent.
The Trojan mat ons murdrous ^ector ointed,
To ravenous birds and dogs before appointed,
When that the King, descended from the wall,
Down (ah) at proud Achilles feet did fall;
Ulysses gally-slaves, when C^ree pleased,
Their bi^^^led members of their hard skin eased.
Then was their mind and voice restored again,
And glory in their countenance most plain.
Thou much by sailors and by factors loved,
Enough and too much penance I have proved;
My youth is vanished, and my comely red
Has left my bones with swarthy skin o^espred.
My hiar's turned white all over with thyoile,
No intermission quitteth me from toil.
The night on day, and day on night does seize,
Yet nothing can my wind-swoln intrailes ease,
Therefore poor wretch I am captlv'd, that I
May credit what I did before deny,
That Sabine charms could do a body wrong,
Or wit be crazed with a Marsyan song.
What would you more than this? -- O earth and seas!
I flame, as neither poisoned Hercules
By Nessus foul blood, nor Sicilian fire
Raging in burning Aetna can flame higher:
Thou even a shop of Colchick witchery
Do^t flame so long, till I, being ashes day,
To the rude winds shall shatterd be: what end?
Or what amercement dos upon me tend?
Speak, I will truly bear my imposed task,
Prepared to expiate, whether you ask
A hundred bulls; or on my false lute you
Will flattered be; you modest dame and true,
Being a golden constellation,
Even the stars themselves shall tread upon.
Castor, and mighty Castors brother shamed
At the report of Helena defamed,
Or-come with supplication, did again
Restore the eyesight from the poet taken.
And you (for you can do it) free me from madness,
O thou nere tainted through thy fathers badnesse,
Nor old hag skilled from poor men's sepulchers
The dust scarce nine days covered to disperse;
Thou have a loving breast, and righteous hands,
And yet thy womb for childbirth sitting stands.
And the nurse washes up your blood-staind clout
When thou a lustic childbed wife leap'st out.
CANIDIA'S answer.
WHy power you prayers into my lockt-up cares?
The winter-swelled Neptune never tears
The rocks more deaf to sea men ship wracked
On the rough sea: should you untortured
My (by you published) baudy rites despise,
The nor-to-be-wrong'd Cupids sacrifice?
And censor of my spells on the watch-hill,
(Unpunisht) with my name the town should fill?
Where in will it avail you rich to make
The Pelign hags, or quicker poison take,
If flower destinies on you attend
Than your desires? you wretch must to this end
Spin out a loathed life, that so you may
For new found torments evermore find play.
Tantalus wanting his still furnished feast,
( Pelops his faithless father) begs for rest;
Prometheus craves it, to his eagle tide;
Sisyphus begs to make his stone abide
On the hill top; but loves decrees deny:
So you may wish to leap from turrets high,
And other while with a Bavarian blade
To ri^^^ entrails up; and you may braid
Halters for your own neck, and all in vain,
Being distracted at your tedious pain.
Then I Will in state ride on your hateful back,
Beneath my insolence the earth-shall crack:
Shall I that can make waxen pictures go,
(As you your self ore-curious fool do know)
Can with my cha^^s the moon from heaven constrain,
Can raise the burnt dead bodies up again,
And make a drink of love, the event deplore
Of all my art that has on thee no power?
A secular Hymn for the protection of the Roman Empire.
PHOEBUS, and Dian president
Offorrests, heavens bright ornament,
Still worthy praise, and still adored,
Afford
Those things for which we pray
Upon our holy day.
On which the Sibylls books ordained,
That virgins choice, and youths unstained
Should to those deities rehearse
A verse,
With whom our seven hills
Have purchased good wills.
Bright Sun that in thy charet pure
Do clear the day, and do obscure,
Seem various, yet still in one wise
Do rise,
O may thou nothing see
Greater than Rome to be.
O Ilithuia truly mild
To bring forth the ripened child,
Protect our matrons whether thou
Allow
To be Lucina famed,
Or be amid wife named,
Goddess do thou our stock increase,
And give our senates laws success,
'Bout marrying wives; and that, law then
For men,
That married they may breed
A new increasing seed.
That the world informed clear
Every hundred and tenth year,
May make solemn hymns and plays
Three days
Bright-shining, and by night
As long, with all delight.
You destinies too propagate
To our past fortunes a blessed fate,
Let the firm determinings
Of things
Keep safe what once it is sea'd
You Have firmly prophes'ed
Let the earth full-stor'd with corn
And cattle, Ceres then adorn
With a coroner of wheat,
And let
Sweet rain and breath of Jove
Our nurseries improve.
Apoll^ mild and pacified
(Thy artill'rie laid aside)
To our suppliant youth give ear:
And hear
Thou horned Queen of the sky,
(Luna) our femall fry.
If Rome be a charge of yours,
And the Troy-descended powers
Have kept the Roman shoares, some few
By you
Being bid with course secure
Their gods and land t'abjure;
For whom through Troy all-fired
Chaste Ae^eas, not expired
With His country, without loss did lay
Free way;
Willing to give them more
Than all they left before.
Ye gods bestow conditions sage
On our trained youth; to sweet old age
Give rest: both wealth and issue too
Give you,
And all Majestic grace
To Romulus his race.
And he that offers' you white kine,
(The posterity divine.
Of Venus and Anchises) let
Him get
Power ore his warring foe
Mild to him when brought low.
The Mede now fears our potent band,
And Roman arms by sea and land,
The Scythians now our answers wait,
Of late
That were so full of pride,
And the Indians beside.
Now Faith and Peace, and Honor too,
And Chastity famed long ago,
And long-scorn'd Virtue dares agin
Come in,
And blessed Plenty here
With full horn does appear.
And Phoebus future things divining,
Adorned with his bow bright-shining,
And beloved of the nine Muses,
Who Iooses
With health-restoring arts
The bodies toiled parts;
If he our Palatine altars see,
Romes weal, and glorious Italy,
Being propitious, let him still
Fulfill
Them to a longer date,
And fate more fortunate.
And let Diana who does hold
The Aventine hill, and Algid cold,
Our fifteen rulers prayers attend,
And bend
Her cares of mild condition
Unto our youths petition.
And I a skillful Chorister,
Phoebus and Phoebes praise to rear,
Bring home good hope, and nere to move,
That Jove
And all the Deities
Assent unto our cries.
FINIS.

