Life and Death.

FOUR SERMONS. THE FIRST TWO, OF Our Preparation To DEATH; and Expectation OF
DEATH.

THE LAST TWO, OF PEACE, and the Judgment AFTER DEATH.

Also points of instruction for the ignorant, with an Examination before our
coming to the Lords Table, and a short direction for spending of time well.

By ROBERT HORN.

Auspice Christo.

AT LONDON Printed by John Pindley and John Beale, for Francis Burton, and are
to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the green Dragon.
1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL GEORGE WILD Esquire of the Inner Temple: and one of
his Highness counsel in the Marches of Wales: My good Uncle: Grace and peace
be multiplied.
SIR. These first fruits of my public labors in print, I presume to offer to
the Church by You, (to whom above others) I owe them, and the whole crop of
that that God has dealt unto me. A very poor increase (I confess) compared
with that seed of relief, which it pleased you with so full a hand to cast
upon me, for some years together at Oxford, as the alone Christian Founder or
Mecaenas of my younger studies there. And yet because I would not have all lost,
or accounted so, I have (like a barren field, of which men do not receive
their seed again) sent forth these few blades of public acknowledgement: in
which my meaning is to confess publicly under mine own hand, that bond and
debt of thankfulness which I will ever confess to be due to your person and
house, for the beginning and success of those means, which in this calling in
the Ministry I have received to edify with. And this I have done in four
Sermons, which contain matter for our turning to GOD, and walking in the
Spirit. A matter (if any and at any time) needful in this age of so great
ungodliness and unrighteousness among men. For was there ever (I speak of
such as know God) greater turning from him by impiety, and walking in the
flesh by diverse strange lusts, then at this day? The thing is manifest, and the
Sodom of these times does (too plainly) show it. Esaias 3.9. For, as it was in
the days of Noah and of Lot: so is it in these days of the Son of Man. They
eat, they drink, they marry, and give in marriage. That is, they who do
these things, are excessiuely and above measure, given over unto them: or, they
do them securely, sinfully, and for worldly respects, not once remembering God.
Luke 17.26. 27. For what no care to marry in the Lord? And what excessive care
to marry for living, or parentage? Religion is no question, nor want of
religion or setlednesse in a false religion, any stay or impediment in such
matters. Men cry peace (says the Apostle) and destruction comes as the
travel upon a woman with Child. 1. These. 5.3. She thinks not of her pain
till it come, and they forget the flood that is coming. Further, men buy and
sell, as if their were no other end of their life: they build and plant, as if
their houses should continue ever. Luke 17.28. and there is no remembrance of
death in all their ways. This is the security that Christ spoke of, and these
are the days of which Christ said: but when the Son of Man comes, shall
he find faith on earth? Luke 18.8. The Apostle Saint Paul has told us, that
in the last days shall come hard times. 2. Tim. 3.1. We know not when the last
hour will come, or last quarter of that hour. But, if hard times be the last
times of the world; then we are already in them: For, where iniquity abounds
in so great an ouermeasure of sin as we see at this day: where there is so
great and corrupt worldliness, not only in wicked persons, but in the
professors of the truth: where appears so general and great a dropsy of
getting, by right or wrong: such oppression and cruelty in all estates: such
extortion, and such spoil without mercy of the poor and needy, how can such
times be called other then Hard times? What carking, and caring, and pining of
the heart with causeless fears? are not many so pinching and miserable,
without fear of God, or common honesty, that no liberality can be seen in
their hands, nor justice in their lives? and a number so laden with worldly
dealings, that God and religion (if they come at all) come seldom or late into
their minds? seldom and coldly do they pray by the word, read and meditate
in it. Often and hotely do they pursue the world and worldly trash, even with a
Horse-leech tooth of greediness: Pro. 30.15. Their heart is a grave for money:
and they bury their neighbors living (sometimes life) in their unlawful
covetousness. Are not such times Hard times? Our times are such: and such the
men who live in them. These and such like forerunners of the last day, bid the
wise to prepare for it. Indeed the day so much spoken off is not yet come:
and, I fear, many believe it will not come at all, because it staieth so long.
But, what God has spoken, shall, and must stand, though it were delaied,
besides the years past, six thousand years to come. And there are certain
signs mentioned in the new Testament, by which we may know, both that it will
come, and that it will come shortly. All which signs (such I mean as we
appointed to go before that great and notable day of the Lords coming) are
(all of them save one, viz: the calling of the Jews) either past, or in being.
The first is, the preaching of the Gospel through the world. Math. 24.14. This
has been done successively, and at several times. The second is the
revealing of Antichrist. 2. These. 2.3. who was, ever since the year 607.
discovered more and more. For, since that time the Lord has breathed upon him,
and stricken him (of late time) in a maruailous consumption. The third is a
general apostasy from the Gospel. 2. These. 2.3. which came to pass under
Arrius and Antichrist for diverse hundred years. The fourth is a general
corruption in the manners and lives of men. 2. Tim. 3.1.2. which sign has
been in all ages, and is to be found in ours. The first stands in diverse
great calamities and troubles that were to come upon the christian world. Math.
24.4.16. which took effect and begun in the ten first persecutions, as it
were plagues of Egypt inflicted upon Christians by Rome heathen, and has
further been cruelly prosecuted and continued, by the Rome that now is. The
sixth is a general contempt of the Gospel, or deadness of heart in the
hearers of it. Luc. 17. And when more generally contemned, or carelessly heard
then at this day by Schismatiques and Libertines? Former ages have, and we who
live in this, may see plainly the Sign of the coming of the Son of man, in
the small fruit that the Gospel is able to bring forth, or beget in the lives
of men. And now, that so many signs of this great day have appeared to the
world, and are manifest to us; why should we arraigne the Lord of any
slacknesse, or make question of the day that is so far spent already, in the
signs that we have spoken off? But these matters are further opened in the
Sermons that follow, to which I humbly pray you, and the Christian Reader in
you, to have duerespect. Not for want of better treatises in this kind, for
there are many, after some of which I have gleaned with poor Ruth in this
small work, as after the men whose hands were full: Ruth. 2.15. but because
they contain nothing, in persuading to the power of godliness, but what is
written, and what the word (which is written) does teach for instruction to a
godly life. Accept therefore (I pray you) what is here offered by you unto
many: and take in good part my endeavor therein. So with many unfeigned prayers
for your true and full welfare, which I (unfeignedly) wish to you, your
yoke fellow, and all yours, in the world and in the Lord; I rest.

Your worships poor Nephew, humbly at commandment for all christian duties:
ROBERT HORN.

THE FIRST SERMON.
ECCLES. chap. 12. verse. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
before the evil days come and years approach wherein thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in them.


THis Book of Ecclesiastes was written by Solomon after he was fallen from
the good way of virtue to the high way of sin and profaneness, forgetting
his God and forsaken of Wisdom, whereof he had great gifts when he was young,
and when he followed the wisdom which is of God. And, he calls it the
Book of the Preacher, as if he should have called it the Book of his
Retractations. His end of writing it was, That it might remain in the Library
of the holy Ghost, as a testimony under his own hand, of his turning from
God by error of life, and of his returning to him by repentance: where he
shows (having seen all things in his wisdom) that men can never be happy
in, or for these things, wherein the men of the earth repose chief happiness.
And this he teaches by his own deere-bought experience: for having tried all
things, as mirth, and wives, and buildings, and beauty, and riches, and
honor, and the like; he confesses, that as a Horse in a mill, after he had
gone in his long circuit or blind maze of twenty years, proving conclusions,
and trying novelties, he found himself to be where he was at first, and
further from God and goodness at the end of his weary course, than at the
beginning; wherein he had proceeded to destruction, if God by his merciful
arrest had not stayed him. Therefore, returning into the favor of God, and
wearied with the errors of his foolish way, he concludes in this Book, that
all is vanity under the Sun. More specially in this Chapter, having in the
former dissuaded his young man from that folly that had almost undone him, and
reigns in young years, wishing him not only to flee the concupiscences of
youth, and all habit of mind in them, but to give no way to his corruptsenses,
lest they prove baits to catch him, and hooks to choke him (being taken) with
present destruction and certain death: he here shows him the mean by which
this young man and all men may escape so great danger, and that is, a careful
walking in the sight of God, and obedience to God in the sight of men,
furthered by remembrance. For as the forgetfulness of God is a great
attractiue to sin, so they sin not so commonly, nor greedily, that remember
their Maker. So much in general for the occasion and author of this worthy
Book, and subject of this Chapter. So I come to the words now read.

And they contain an exhortation, and the reasons by which it is amplified:
The exhortation is to remember: wherein two things may be considered, the
person to be remembered, and the time of remembering him The reasons are
(likewise) two: the first is taken from the impediments that old age gives to
Gods service: the other from the incommodities of man's last sickness.

The exhortation stands thus, If thou will constantly do the works of
holiness to God, never let it slip out of the meditation of thy heart that God
does require of thee by right of creation that thou godlily serve Him all the
days of thy life. And the doctrine from hence is: remembrance of God, that is
the having of Him always before us, in His infinite holiness, wisdom, goodness,
power, truth, is a special mean for religion, and His true fear in our
ways. Thus David reasoned: I have set the Lord always before me, that is, God
was ever in my mind to serve Him and fear Him; therefore I shall not slide,
that is, God has set my feet upon a rock, and in the slipperie ways of such
as forget God, I shall not be moved. He considers that, at all times and in
all places, God was present with Him; both (as a Lord) to surnay His ways,
left he should slip grosely, and (as a Father) to comfort Him, when He slipped of
infirmity; therefore He kept his heart in continual awe, preparing it for
the Lords presence. The Lord all sufficient requires of Abraham that He would
walk before Him, Genesis 17.1. that is, that He would make Him the Arbiter of His
thoughts, the Interpreter of His words, the Lord of His ways, and commit all
His doings to Him; and then will Abraham, without all question, make the Lord
His fear, and do all His works in His name. In Micah this is the Question;
wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
Mic. 6.6. that is, how shall I please God in my ways, and rest on His will?
and the answer is made by Micah, or rather the Lord by Him: He has showed
thee O man what is good, and that is, to humble thy self to walk with thy
God. verse 8, the meaning is, that thou should always set Him in thy sight,
believing that He does guide and govern thee. And surely when we behold the
Lord in His promises of reconciliation, that He is at peace with us; of
sanctification, that He will renew us; and of providence and safety, that (for
our good) He will watch over us, being at our right hand by His Angels, and at
our left, by His creatures, we cannot choose but reverence and love Him, at
least fear to sin against Him because of His infinite goodness and power. In
the 116. Psalm, the Prophet David, after some notable cause of thankfulness for
His deliverance from death so near by Saul's pursuit, because He would
remember, by obedience, what God did for Him in that woeful hour; does promise
to walk before the Lord, that is, diligently to attend and do His
co^mandeme^ts, in the Land of the Living: that is, always on Earth, and
specially in His temple. It is evident (therefore) that this having of God in
our sight, and before us by remembrance, is a notable spur to virtue and
godliness, and strong bit from vice and prophanenes. The reasons. As the wicked
are said not to serve God because they forget Him; Ps. 9.17. and 106.21. so the
godly are said, purely to worship Him, because they remember His name. Also,
the remembrance of the end makes wise, as the forgetting of it causes sollie.
Secondly, the Masters eye keeps the Servant in awe: so, while God is
remembered, we live in fear, as (on the other side) when He is out of our
minds, we run into sin.

By this it appears that memory (holily employed) is a most excellent
faculty, behold Him near, as the Angels, who see Him in the glass of His
presence; but further off, in his word, and the large Table of His works. And
yet, by this blessed faculty of remembrance, He is, after a sort, present to
us, as to the Angels, in His great works and properties: which is the cause
that, in the reckoning up of those scruices which are taken up and commanded
for God in the scriptures, remembrance is the first, and the first commanded.
Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 9.7. and 11.2. and 25.17.19. Hebr. 10.32. Jude 17.

A reproof to those who quell memory under the burden of worldly cares, have
God to remember thee in the evil day; forget Him not in thy good days, nor
what He did for thee in the day of thy affliction. The godly, in the
captivity, wished that their tongue might cleave to the roof of their mouth
if they forget Jerusalem. Psalm. 137.6. what punishment (then) do they deserve
who forget God, the King of Jerusalem? And what are they worthy, who strive to
forget Him, lest the remembrance of His great power should awake them in their
sins, and hinder them in their pleasures; being like unto sleepers who would
hear no noise, lest they should take no rest? Men would sin without fear,
which they cannot do so long as God is remembered: therefore God must be
forgotten, that they may securely offend.

More particularly, remember (here) signifies a premeditation of death, or,
wise numbering of our days, that we may remember our end. From whence we learn
to spend well our short time, and to remember wisely our certain death. Moses,
the man of God, in that this excellent petition, Teach me so to number my
days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom, Psalm. 90.12. What meaning can
he have, but to beg grace of God, so to consider the shortness of his time, and
transitorinesse of his short time, that he may take all occasions, and omit no
means for the bending of his heart to the true knowledge of God and of
himself, wisely to lead it in the ways and true fear of the Lord, which is
the beginning of wisdom? For, shall we think that by the numbering of his
days, he meant the numbering of them after the account of the Church-booke, and
not a holy and fruitful consideration and premeditation of the shortness,
frailty, and vncertaintic of them, that so he might cast how and which way he
might best pass them to Gods glory, and the good and profit of the Church and
Commonwealth wherein he lined? The want of this husbandry of precious time,
Christ does mournfully pity in the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, O if thou
had even known, at the least in this thy day, those things that belong to
thy peace, Luc. 19.42. as if he should have said, Though thou have bi^ a great
unthrift of time and a great waster of good hours heretofore, yet if thou
had held precious this last parcel and commodity of time offered to thee
for repentance, and turning to GOD, thou might have avoided these miserable
calamities and deaths that will most surely come, and severely execute
vengeance in thy streets; or thou might have had peace, but now thou shall
have wars Neither did Jerusalem only, in the days of Christ, thus let time
go, which she should have redeemed, but long before, in the days of Jeremy
the Prophet, it was objected, that she remembered not her last end, and forgot
her account, and that (therefore) she came down wonderfully. Lamen. 1.9. that
is, because she grew worse and worse, therefore was she punished more and
more. The reasons. 1. We live no longer the^ we live well; and wise men regard,
not how long they have lived, but how well and profitably. David desired to
live, that he might so live: Psalm. 71.18. and Hezekiah is bold, because he
had so lived. Esaias 38.3. Secondly, we must not only die in the world (for so
do natural men, and beasts without reason:) but we must die unto it; by our
dying to the world, Christ lives in us, Gal 2.20. and by our dying in the
world, we go to live with Christ. We must die to the world, that we may die
Christians; and we shall die in the world, whether we forget death as Natural
men, or remember our end, that we may die in Christ. It is therefore
necessary, soberly to apply our minds to the numbering of our days; which is
the wisdom that teaches us to live here and hereafter. Thirdly, that which
foolish Men do in the end, wise men do in the beginning: and therefore with
Noah they prepare the Arc of repentance while the season is calm: Genesis 6.12:
but fools neglect it till the waters enter, and storm come (and that of
despair) that carries them from first death to second death. It was a good
saying (being the speech of one that was forth of Christ) who drawing to his
end, Sen^^. Epist 62
said: when I was young, my care was how to live well; now that I am old, my
care is how to dee well.

A reproof to those, God has numbered thy kingdom, and has finished it. Dan.
5.5.26. Now to number our days, or, by numbering of them, wisely to prepare for
our end, is to fear the Lord, and in his fear and word, to serve him, Job
28.28. to love the good and hate the evil that oursoules may live. Am. 5.15.
we can encourage one another in wickedness and say; let us eat and drink,
for to worrow we shall die: Esaias 22.13 that is, we remember our end, but we
remember it not wisely, but as beasts to eat and drink; or we put off, and
make our end long: but who prepares for it? and who is wise and of an
understanding heart, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
to consider it? The rich man makes his small barnes big, as if he would make
his short life endless. Luk 12.18. The evil servant says, my master
deferreth his coming, as if that, which is put off, would never come. Math.
24.48. Nabal (he that yet lives in the carnal churles of this age) applies
all his mind to riches, and forgets his sudden end. 1. Sam. 25.10.11.38.
Absalons whole study is to mount, never thinking of his destruction so near,
whose body, though it stand at the lower end of the presence, yet heart
sits under the cloth of estate, practicing for the kingdom. 2. Sam.
15.1.2.3.4.5. etc. In the days of Noah, they eat, they drank, they builded,
and remembered not the flood. Luke 17.27. In our days, men feed themselves
without fear, and forget their end. Let us therefore be warned, better to
remember our few and evil days, Genesis 47.9. and to do the works of God while
it is day, Ioh. 9.4. before the long night of sleep come, out of which there
is no awaking till the last great trumpe call us up to judgment. Behold, now
is the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation. 2. Cor. 6.2. the rich
man in hell once might and would not hear Moses and the Prophets, afterward,
that is, too late, he would, and could not. Luke 16.25.29. The enemy that is
prepared for, hurts less: and he that makes himself ready for the last
enemy, which is death, need not fear, to such it bodeth no danger; for such
it has no sting nor breath that can do hurt. If we first see this Basiliske
death (armed with repentance and with the shield and target of faith in our
last hour by preparing for our end,) there is nothing in it that shall not be
for our preferment, and the full conquest of our troublesome life: for, then we
may take it by the hand as a most welcome guest, and as that last servant whom
the Master will send to bring us to his great Supper, and that at supper time,
when all things are ready. Luke 14.17. when our warrefare is accomplished, and
our iniquities are pardoned: when our weary course is finished, and joy comes
after the night of life, which life was not properly nor can be truly called
life, but the shadow of death. The person to be remembered, follows.

Thy Greatour, etc.] The person, in whose eye, Solomon exhorts his young Man
to walk reverently, is God his Maker. By which name or title he does secretly
imply the great power of the Maker of all things, and of man's Creatorr and
shows that the end of Man's creation is to glorify (continually) God, his
Creator: as if he should have said: He that gave us breath is Mighty, and if
he take away his breath, by stopping our mouth and nosthrils, we are gone: and
wherefore did he put his spirit of life into us? Was it to give us some large
liberty to live as we list? or was it not rather to provoke us to seek his
glory that made us? This is Salomons meaning, where we first are taught, that
the Al-mightinesse of the Creator, and the work of our strange and fearful
creation should make us fear to live in any forgetfulness of God, by an
impenitent and obdurate heart. By such an argument the Prophet Amos stirs up
a careless people to turn to God by repentance, saying: He that forms the
Mountains, and creates the wind; which makes the morning darkness, and
walks upon the high places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name.
Ames 4.13. as if he should have said, if God, who is your mighty Lord and
shall be your righteous Judge, be able to create the winds, to form the
Mountains, and to turn the morning into darkness; then is he able to
persecute you with his storm, to tumble the Mountains upon you, and to cover
you with the darkness and shadow of death, and to prepare an eternal
judgment of confusion for you to the destruction of soul and body. For he
that made hell, can cast into hell, and he that causes darkness, punish with
utter darkness. David, by a like argument, inureth himself to the fear and
reverence of his wonderful Maker, saying, I will praise thee: that is, I will
acknowledge thy goodness in all my life; for, I am fear fully and wonderfully
made. Psalm. 199.14. the meaning is; if he should go on in sin, the God who
is fearful, can open hell to devour him, and can show himself as mighty in
his judgment, to his destruction, as he was great in his love to give him
being, when before he was not. So in Psalm. 119. ver. 37. the Prophet has these
words, thine hands have made me and fashioned me, give me understanding
(therefore) that I may learue thy commandments: and he reasons thus: Lord
thou have made me in thy image: therefore new-make me by thy word: and, as
thou have given me the shape of man, so, by teaching, make me a new-man in the
shape and soundness of a true worshipper. Our Creation (therefore) should
teach us the life, not of liberty, but of repentance and holiness in the
fear of God: The reasons. Our life is nothing but a little breath; and how
easy is it for God to take away our weak life, when weak man, by stopping
our breath, is able (suddenly and most certainly) to send us to our dust? Gal.
2.22. Psalm. 104.29. And should not this weak and poor life, fed with a little
breath, breath forth continually the praises of that God that so feeds it
from the shop of his providence? Secondly; God having greater power over us,
then the Potter has of the clay which he fashioneth, who yet has power to put
it to some service, or (if it content him not) to break it to fitters. Rom
9.21. Esa. 45.9. should not this Clay and Dust, (Man) strive to please him in
newness of life, who has power to bring him to glory in his presence, or (if
he be in no conformity with his righteous will) has like power to break him
in pieces, like a Porters vessel?

This condemns those who set out no time for the duty of meditating on their
fearful creation that the strange work thereof may warn them to fear
always to do evil. because they forgate his wonderful works. Psalm.
78.10.11. And it is said that the works of God are sought out of all that love
them. Psalm. 111.2.5. the meaning is, that this diligent search of Gods power in
the register of his noble works, is one excellent mean of godliness, and
sign of one that is godly. But what shall we say of those who take liberty to
do evil, because they are made great, as if he that made them, were not
greater? Psalm. 76.12. and, who walk stubbornely in their sins, because they
may walk quietly in them without any man's check, not caring for, nor dreading
his judgment of rebuke, who has power, and is strong to bring sinners to
destruction? To such I say: Do ye provoke the Lord: and are ye stronger then
he? 1. Cor. 10.22. if he touch the Mountains, they smoke, and if he strike
hard shall they not burn? The Sorcerers who ascribed so much to the finger of
God, Exodus 8.19. what would they have said of his whole hand? what is stubble
to fire? and what are we to God? Our God is a consuming fire. Heb. 12.19.

But God is our Creator; sin in them. Romans 12.1. And secondly, their mind,
by renewing of it; that is, by seeking to make it, of old, new; of fleshly,
spiritual; of profane; noly; and of evil, good and acceptable to God in
Christ. ver. 2. But was this written to them, or for them only? or does it not
also concern us, seeing that he who made them, made us? and who saved them,
must be our Savior? The same Apostle, writing to the Collossians, charge
them, and us in them, whatsoever they do in word or deed, whether they use
their tongues, or labor with their hands; to do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, that is, thankefully to ascribe all to God the father of Christ, and our
father in Christ. Col. 3.17. And wherefore so? but because the Father has made
us, and the Son has redeemed us? as he also says in another place:
glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit: for they are Gods, as all are
his. 1. Cor. 6.20. The reasons. No tradesman but would have all, that he
deuiseth or makes, to have some use: and that use to his mind and liking: and
what Man of occupation can abide that the tools, and instruments by which he
works should by one coming into his shop, be used to a wrong end? and will
not he who has created all things for his glory and service, have Man (his
principal work) more principally serviceable to his will and glory? or, can
he abide that one of his chief tools, that which was made to be to his
praise, should turn to his dishonor, becoming an instrument of
unrighteousness to sin, which was made a weapon of holiness to God?
Secondly; Man's body is called the Temple of God, or House made by God. 1. Cor.
6.15.19. and shall we not keep Gods House clean? If a man, having a fair
Dwelling House whereinto he means to receive his Prince, should convert the
same into a stie or stable; would not men say that he did greatly abuse both
his House and Sovereign? So, if we make that, which should be a Palace to God,
by swearing, lying, drunkenness, adultery, and such unclean pranks, a stie of
Hell, and stable for the governor of this world, would not good men say, that
we reproach our Creator, and dishonest the House of Him that made us?

An instruction to make conscience of every sinful way, fit for nothing, let
every thought and purpose make us blush, which does manifest that we can be of
no use to God, when we go on in sin, let us reason against such proceedings
and say; Surely God made us to another end: and this is no good use of our
creation. This is not to make our body a vessel for God, but a stie for
Devils, or heard or drove of swine for unclean Spirits to enter into. Math.
8.31. And surely the more filthy a man's body is, the more fit it is to become
a lodge and hold for Devils and sin. We have eyes to see the Heavens, and
the soul in Gods image, has other eyes to look into heaven. Al other
creatures go with their eyes and bodies depressed to the ground; and where
other creatures have but four muscles to turn their eyes about, Man has a
fifth to pull His, up to Heaven. And what is this but to teach us, that
(howsoever we necessarily seek other things) yet we should first and chiefly
respect, and respecting, seek the things of God in our salvation. But at this
day, though Men go upright, outwardly in face, and hypocritically in shows;
yet look into their lives and work, and they may as well go on all four. Is
this to remember thy Creator, and remembering Him as thou ought in fear and
with obedience, to set thy heart to His commandments, and to adorn thy
creation with good works, serving God? So much for the person to be remembered:
the time of remembering him follows.

In the days of thy youth etc. As god is to be remembered, so we must begin
betimes to remember him; For many make a show and will seem to walk with God,
who walk in no awe nor reverence of His word; and many also forgetting with
the common Parents of the world, that they who transgress, shall die, be it in
youth or age, eat the forhidden tree of putting off from day to day, to turn
unto the Lord: Genesis 3.2.3.6. and so (thinking it too soon to begin in the
flight age of youth, or, at Man's estate, carefully to serve God) turn all
their terms into vacations, and like bad borrowers, when one day or term of
life is past, crave a longer, and alonger till they be stayed by the arrest of
death, and sent to the prison of hell, and their lie bound in fetters of long
night and death eternal. Therefore Solomon gives his young Man counsel,
early to begin repentance, that is, in the prime and bud of his life while he
is fresh and gallant, and not to tarry till the dead winter of age cause his
buds to fade, and lease to fall: or till the brawne of his strong arms fall
away: or till the keepers of the house the hands which defend the body,
tremble; or till every thing be a burden, seeing even the grasse-hopper shall
then be a burden: or till they wax dark, the eyes, that look out at the
windows: or till the grinders cease, that is, teeth fall out of his head: or
till the door of his lips be shut, and ^awes fallen: or till the daughters of
singing, the ears, be abased, being unable any longer to hear the sounds of
voice or instrument: or till it be too late to knock, when the Lords door is
made fast, and their shall be no more opening. Eccles. 12.3.4. Math. 25.10.12.
And, lest this young man should think the term of his age (which Solomon here
calls the evil day or time) to be the most convenient time and term of
beginning remembrance; in the verses that follow, he brings in the old man,
deaf, and blind, and lame, and short winded, and full of aches, and sundry
diseases in his body, trembling upon his staff, his lips and hands shaking,
without memory and almost robbed of sense: as if He should say; look my
Son, Is this man fit to learn, who can neither hear, nor see, nor speak,
nor go, nor remember. Thus Solomon schooleth his young Man. From whence this
Doctrine may be gathered; that it is good to bear the yoke, young, and
(betimes) to arquaint our selves with the way and trade of godliness. To this
purpose, the wisdom of God in one of the wise sayings, which were Salomons,
(speaking to Parents and Overseers of youth) says: Teach (...) child in the
trade of his way, and when he is old, he shall not depart from it. Prou 22.6.
where He speaks of teaching, not a Man, but a Child; and of a teaching fit
for Children: which is a teaching by little and little, as it were by some few
small drops; and not a pouring in of hard doctrine, as by showers. So it is
said to be good for Man, that is, a happy thing for that Man that bears the
yoke, or acquainteth himself with the nurture of the Law, young. Lam. 3.27.
And Ephraim makes this vnbridlednesse of coltish youth, a great impediment of
conversion in himself and others: for he seems to say, that because, as an
unbroken Colt not handled of men, He was suffered to go at large, so long, and
was not brought young to the Lords furrow; therefore he could do him no service
at more years, and when the Lord began to yoke him by his word, he flung off
all. This stands to be read under his own confession, the report whereof is
taken and published by the Lord himself in these words, I have heard Ephraim
lamenting thus, Thou have corrected me, and I was chastised as an untamed
calfe, etc. Ierem. 31.18. As if it had been said, I have heard him
attentively, as it were with both ears. Further, God requiring the first borne
for his offering, and the first fruits for his service, does (no doubt) require
the prime and maidenhead of every man's work, and that we should serve him
with our first and best means. Exodus 13.2. and Leuit. 23.10. It is for young
men to believe; and therefore the ordinary Creed which is both for young and
old says, I do believe. In the Leuiticall temple there was a
morning-offering, as well as an evening sacrifice; and when the Angel of the
Covenant stirs the poole; that is, offers salvation, not he that is
oldest, but he that steppeth in first, (young or old) is healed. Ioh. 5.2. Some
say, youth must have a time, but Christians must redeem the whole, both of
youth and years. Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5. For here, God will not be satisfied
with the first fruits, as in the legal Priesthood, but must have the whole
croppe of time offered to him in his service, and the performance of his
commandments: The reasons. As men learn their trades young: so in youth, as
in the fittest time, we should learn the science of all sciences, the trade
of our way: for, bodily exercise profits little; but godliness is profitable
unto all things. 1. Tim. 4.8. Secondly, early instruction perfecteth memory,
and that does long continue that is taught in youth. As (therefore) if Parents
teach good things to their children whiles they be young, they will taste of them
in their age: so (contrarily) if they Nurse them up in vice and wantonness,
the evil sent of the same will continue to gray hairs. For as their caskes
are at first seasoned, so they will preserve long, or corrupt soon the
instructions that are put into them. Thirdly, young years are as young trees,
more pliable and sooner bended then the old are. Fourthly, long custom
becomes another Nature in matters: and as we see it to be a very hard matter
to reclaim an old Sinner, and inueterate Papist, and as there is small hope
that they who are deformed young, will prove well favored old: So when the
mind is planted in sin, and becomes old in wickedness, there is small
hope that with little ado, it should become virtuous, or forget nature, which
with cords of custom is thus tied unto that which is utterly naught, and
sinful. For, if being to try our strength but with one sin that we are
accustomed unto, we find our selves too weak for it: and therefore use to
say, It has bin our use, and we cannot leave it: how much less able shall we
be to overcome our selves in many, and then specially when all our vices are
become customs? Fifthly, the day of youth is as the day that was commended to
young Rehoboam, 1. King. 12.7.
by his wifest counsel: a day wherein to get favor or to loose it: and so, a
time wherein to be ever good, if it be taken; or hardly ever good, if it be
neglected. For, as the tree that buddeth not in the spring is dead all the
year: so (commonly) he that proves not in youth, does with much ado, bear
the blossom of grace in the autumn of ripe affections and winter of age. We
have a proverb. That a ragged colt makes a good horse; but we ill apply it,
when by it, we go about to prove that a cursed boy will make a good Man. For
though it sometimes so fall out, yet it is but sometimes, and seldom, and it
oftener proves otherways, then so. And therefore it is an evil speech that
men have so much and commonly in their mouths, while they say; Young Saints,
old Devils. For, the contrary is rather true; either young Saint, or old Devil,
either good betimes, or when good, and at what time?

An instruction to Parents and other Overseers of youth, Abraham rose early to
sacrifice his son. Genesis 22.3. So for their sons, and daughters, and young
fry, they should give them to God in a sacrifice of early instruction. They
should whet the commandments upon them, and write the Law in them, even in
their hearts, as in tables of long continuance. Deuteronomy. 6.7. they should dedicate
them, from their tender age, to God; as Samuel was. 1. Sa. 1.28. and sanctify
them, that is, by their prayers for them and teaching of them, see that they be
sanctified from the womb, as Jeremy was, Ier. 1.5. that they may serve God
from their first breath, to their last gasp. For, to say the truth, who should
offer this morning sacrifice but Parents, who are bound to set their Children
in the good way young, that they may suck the milk of the Gospel, with the
milk of their Mother? But to move such to do this duty with more
thankfulness, let it be considered (first) that such instruction so given by
Parents, is more natural and kindly, then that which is given by strangers.
For as a tender plant will sooner take nourishment and thrive better in the
soil, wherein it first grew and sprung up then in any other ground, because it
likes it own soil best: so tender children will sooner take instruction and
good teaching from the Parents, with whom they best agree, as with their best
and most natural soil, in whose loins they seeded and took their first
root, then they can or are like to do from strange Teachers, when they shall
be transplanted (as it were) into an other stock and family, or be exposed to
grow up in another soil of people then that, in the which they had their first
nature and sap of being. Secondly, who but Parents have such as be very young
and tender under their charge and direction? Now while they are young, one may
work in their youth as in the day, Ioh. 9.4. but when the night of their
stubborn years comes, that season for good things is commonly lost.
Thirdly, as Plants set in the Spring, grow and prosper better then they which
are set in Winter, or Autumn: so the instruction that is given in the spring
of youth better prospers and does more edify, then that which is given in
the Autumn of manhood, or winter of gray hairs. Fourthly, as Parents have
brought forth their children, the children of wrath by nature: So it concerns
them, by the doctrine of Regeneration, as by a second better nature, in all
good conscience to help to make them the sons and daughters of God by faith.
Fifthly, Parents will (betimes) put their children forth to good trades; And is
there any trade of their life, for honor, delight, or riches comparable to the
trade and way of godliness? Is the trade of wisdedome as other common trades,
which is a tree of Life to all that lay hold of it? Prou. 2.18. The meaning is,
it increases and strengthens life, where worldly trades if they be well
followed) spend and diminish it: and where other trades are uncertain, it has
the promises of this life, and of that which is to come: and where other trades
are subject to the course of this world, being sometimes better, and sometimes
worse, this is not so, but always good: for God has sealed up his promise to
it that it shall never fail: which being so, how careful should Christian
Parents be not to put off to put out their children carely, and (as it were) at
break of day to such a profitable, certain, and happy trade of life, by
which they shall be sure to live ever with the Lord? But if Parents will not
(betimes) bind their youth by precept upon precept, Esaias 28.10. as by
Indenture, and by Christian discipline, as by Indenture sealed to so good a
trade; I beseech their Christian youth to offer themselves unto it. Sixthly,
Parents should remember that they help to build or pull down the Christian
world: for in their children, they beget and bear Parents to posterity. And
if they learn no good while they be children, how shall they teach it when
they be fathers? Seventhly, Parents are Gods Husbandmen, and their children his
seed and husbandry. 1. Cor. 3.9. as therefore in the husbandry of this world,
the good Husband before he reap or inn one crop, will plow and prepare for
another; yea and get the best and purest seed, that at the time of harvest, he
may receive some good increase. So God having made religious Parents his
husbandmen, and their children his seed and husbandry, they should see that
the harvest of Gods church be in some good proof, and well coming forward in
their seed and posterity, before their own croppe be inned in their own
blessed death. For Gods husbandry must not die, nor be given over till death
be vanquished, which is the last enemy they must deal with. He that has, or
means to have and preserve a good Orchard, will have a nurserie also of young
trees to feed it with, and of these tender trees he will be more careful
then of those elder in his Orchard of fruits. The reason is, they may sooner be
bitten or nipped, or the canker may sooner take them then the other trees. God
loves and makes much of the Orchard of his Church in the old store, but he
is tender of it in the nurserie and new store, that consists of babes in
Christ, growing to holiness, because the canker of evil things may soonest
breed in them; herds, not of Beasts, but of Devils, may soonest bite and nip
them, and so the Vineyard, that God loves so well, may for want of supplies
from the seminary of young men and children begotten to the Gospel, become
desolate and wast for ever. Now, is God thus tender of his spiritual Nurserie,
and shall Christian Parents, his husbandmen, neglect it? Do they not know that
the old trees cannot stand always, and that, sooner or later, they must be cut
down with the axe of death? should they not (then) look well to the nurserie
of the younger impes in their charge, by hedging with good nurture and
discipline the young men, and young women whom they mean to set, as trees of
righteousness, in the Orchard of the Lords Church? should they not water them
with good teaching; dress them, in good and due manner, paring away their riot
and superfluities of apparel, of pleasures, of play; and provide that no
dangerous worm eat into them by any carely habit in evil vnmet with? or, if
they shall despise or post of this so important a duty, what can we call them
but profane, and such as leave Gods Church in worse case then they found it?
The hope of the Church is in the youth that now have being; for, if they be
well brought up, they will be careful that such as proceed from them shall
have good bringing up also, that age will commend this good education to
another, the next to them that follow, and they to others by an inviolable
tradition till there be an end of all generations on Earth. And, as this is a
lesson for all Parents; so specially for Parents of great Families; for, the
greater the ship is, and the better merchandise it carries, the more need it
has of an expert and careful Pilot. And so the greater a child is by blood
and possessions, the more need he shall have of some special Ouerseer, and one
that greatly fears God to be guide to his youth. The contrary, careless
nursing up of such in vice and idleness, is cause of these great wastes that
we find to be made so ordinarily in the best patrimony of the common wealth;
for, as the fattest soil brings forth the rankest weeds, when it is not
plowed: so great houses, not well ordered, bring forth the greatest Masters of
vice and Guides to wickedness; and, as a weed, if it grow in a rank soil,
will grow out of measure noisome: so the tender youth of great families,
brought up in ease, and pampered with the delights of gentry, if they prove
weeds, must needs riot most vnmeasurably, and prove most hurtful members in
the Commonwealth; and not members, but diseases in the Church. Lastly, to
excite our gentry to train up their young Gentlemen to the fear of God, and to
good sciences, let them remember, that a gentleman without virtue and learning,
is like a dark heaven in the night, without moon or stars: and let them not
forget, that if they would have the blessing of being blessed fathers of a
blessed seed, they must bring them within the covenant, endeavoring to make
their sons by nature, the sons of God by grace. The like for their daughters,
if they would have their daughters by birth, to become the daughters of Abraham
by new birth and godliness.

An admonition to young persons, to fear him: and can none fear him, but such
as arm against the impediments of his fear? then where are most, as in youth,
and where most are hindered as tender youth, there must this armor chiefly be
put on. The first impediment of early godliness in young men, is a reckoning, but
without their host, that they shall live to be old; which causes the^ to say,
peace peace. I^r. 8.11. til with Sisera, they fall into their last sleep of
destruction. Judge. 4.21. and go from their house to grave. Psalm. 49.14. But who
can be ignorant that, on the stage of this world, some have longer, and some
shorter parts? and who knows not, though some fruits fall from the tree by a
full and natural ripenes, that all do not so? nay that more are pulled from
it and wither upon it in the tender bud or young fruit, then are suffered to
tarry till they come to their perfect ripenes and mellowing? so, do not mo
(without comparison) fall from the tree of time, young; either violently
plucked from it by a hasty death, or miserably withering upon it by a long
death, perishing in the bud of childhood, or beaten down in the green fruit
of youth, then come to their full age of ripeness by a mellow and kindly
death? Further, does not God call home from his work, some in the morning,
some at noone, and some at night? For as his laborers enter into his vineyard,
so they go out; that is, in such manner, and at such hours, Math. 20.1.2.3
etc. Some dye in the dawning of their life, who pass but from one grave to
another. Some dye in youth, as in the third hour, some at thirty, and some at
fifty, as in the sixth and ninth: and some very old, as in the last hour of
the day. Yet more dye young then old, and more before ten then after
threescore. Besides all this, the fresh life which the youngest have here, is
cut off or continued by the same decree and finger of God that the oldest and
most blasted life is prolonged, or finished: For, say that a man had in his
keeping sundry brittle vessels as of glass or stone, some made forty,
fifty, yea threescore years age, and some but yesterday; we will agree, that,
that vessel will soonest be broken, not that is made first, but which is first
stricken, or first receives a knock: So for these brittle vessels of our
earthly bodies, they that soonest receive the blow of death, though but made
yesterday, first perish, not that were first made, and have longest lived. What
then is our life, and how vain and false is our hope of long life, seeing no
man can tell who he is that shall receive the first stroke or knock, to the
destroying of this his mortal tabernacle? In a prison where are many condemned,
should some riot and forget death, because they, first, are not drawn out to
die? or, because one goes before another to execution; shall he that comes
last, come forth pleasantly with Agag and say; Surely the bitterness of death is
past? 1. Sam. 15.32. because we die not so soon as others (and we shall not
all die at once) shall we therefore count our selves immortal? If we be old
we may be sure our turn is near; and if we be young, it may be as near:
for, they that be old may travel longer; but we that are young may have a
shorter way home. Seeing then this hope of living till we be old, is so vain
and deceitful; we should make as great haste to God at twenty, as at
fourscore. When we hear a solemn knell we say some body is departed; and
why should we not think that the feet of them who carried out that body, is
at the door ready to carry us out also? Act. 5.9. He was not an old man, and
he had much peace in his days, to whom it was said, O fool, this night they
will fetch away thy soul, Luc. 12.20. So death works in us whether we
prepare for it or no. Mr. Perk. in his right way of dying well.
A certain writer uses this comparison: A man pursued by an Unicorn, in his
flight falls into a dungeon, and in his fall hangs by the arm of a tree; as he
thus hangs, looking downward he sees two worms gnawing at the root of the
tree; and looking upward, he sees an hiue of sweet honey, which makes him to
climb up unto it, to sit by it, and to feed upon it. While he thus feeds
himself and becomes secure, or careless of what may come, the two worms
gnaw in sunder the root of the tree; which done, both man and tree fall into
the bottom of that deep pit. This Unicorn is swift Death, the Man that
flies is every son of Adam, the pit over which he hangs is hell, the arm
of the tree is his short life, the two worms are day and night, which, without
stay, consume the same, the hiue of honey is the pleasures of this world, to
which while men wholly deuote themselves, not remembering their last end, the
root of the tree, that is, temporal life is spent, and they fall, without
redemption, into the pit and gulf of hell.

Another impediment of godliness in a young man is his strong constitution,
which persuades him that he shall live long, and that (therefore) he may at
leisure enough turn to God hereafter: but no constitution in man can enlarge
his Charter of life one poor hour. Indeed, the good complexion of a man may
be a sign of long life, but he that prolongeth our days on Earth, he only
can make us to live long. Exodus 20.12.

A third impediment of godliness is parentage abused. For, some think that
God never required nor looks for preciseness, and exactness in matters of
religion at the hands of Gentlemen and Noblemen; and that such drudgeries are
to be imposed upon vile and abject persons, for so they speak of the poor
that receive the Gospel; but what say such men to David, who set himself with
his whole heart to seek the Lord? and what will they think of Solomon, who in
this book of his repentance, calls himself Ecclesias^es, or Preacher? Are
they better then David? and wiser then Solomon? or, do they think, because
they live better, that is, in better estate, then poor men, that therefore
they shall live longer? and what difference, concerning death, between a
Nobleman and a Beggar, Eccles. 3.20
when both go to one place? when in these Acts and Scenes of seeming life, as
at a game at chesse, the highest (now) upon board may (presently) be the lowest
under board? and when the breath in the nostrels of the Rich, may as soon be
stopped, and they, as soon, turn to their dust as other Men?

A fourth impediment is taken from the pleasures or lusts of youth; things that
bring repentance and sorrow, like sweet meats of hard digestion, for, what are
they when they come to the shot and reckoning? are they not dear penniworths
to all such guests as will needs be Merchants of them? Solomon in this book
tells us, that though they be pleasant to the eye, ear, mouth, and senses of a
young man, yet in the mind they leave behind them an unsavory after-taste, or
loathsome disdain. For, like an unclean spirit in him, they cast him, now
into the water, and now into the fire. Mark. 9.22. And these are the lusts of
youth, by children so earnestly desired, and by old folks so much lamented.

A fifth impediment of godliness, is that beauty in youth which is too
delicate and tender to wear the rough garment of repentance and a strict life,
but, how soon is it blighted and stricken, as the fair flower of glass
blasted with an eastwind? for beauty is but a flower, which, if some sickness
strike not suddenly, yet the autumn of ripe years impaireth, and the winter
of old age kills; and what cares death (which is indifferent to all) for a
fair and goodly complexion? And is not a beautiful face as mortal as a foul
hue? The like may be spoken of health, strength, and stature of body, for, what
are they? and of what time? In their own nature, they are fickle things, and
without good use, crosses; for, concerning health, the deuowring vulture of
sickness does, after some short time, waste it to nothing: strength is common
to us with Beasts, and there are many beasts stronger then we, and for our
comely stature, it may as soon be brought down to death, and as deeply be
buried in the coffin of the Earth, as a meaner cize shall. Further, if men have
not used these to Gods glory, but to pride and vain glory, nor have made them
helps to godliness, but have given them their head at sin, it will be said
after death of such, that a beautiful person, a strong young man, a goodly
tall fellow, and one that never knew what sickness meant, is gone to Hell.
Therefore of beauty and h^^ attendants, as health, and strength, and a goodly
stature, that may be spoken which is spoken usually of fire and water; that
they are good servants, but ill Masters, where they are ruled they do good
service, where they overrule they make foul work.

A sixth impediment of godliness is the bad fellowship and example of those,
who (being themselves drunken with the pleasures of youth) seek to drown
others in the same perdition and destruction; and therefore offer to them the
full cup, that they (likewise) may stagger and fall from God by the like error
and disobedience. But Christian young men must turn away their eyes from very
seeing the enchanted cup, of such carnal Counselours. And though they beat
their ears every day with such foolish sounds as these are; that it is too
soon and unkindly, in youth to be religious, that such years are for the lap
of the world, not for Ezras Pulpit, that youth must have a time, etc. yet every
day they should set Joseph's lock upon them of not harkening unto them, nor of
being in their company, Genesis 39.10. for it is a true saying: he that touches
pitch, shall be defiled with it: So, he that will touch the pitch of such,
must look to be defiled with the company. If a man that had wallowed in the
mire, and tumbled in the filthy chanel, should offer to company with us, would
we not loat^ and shun him? and why would we so avoid him, but because quickly
he would make his filth to cleave unto us? And do not bad and wicked persons
set their marks and sins upon those with whom they company? Do they not,
where they come, leave of their filth, that is some print or badge of their
profaneness behind them? And shall we sit so close to them, who have so
plunged themselves in the mire of sin: who should either labor to draw them
out of filthiness, or withdraw our selves, that we prove not as loathsome and
filthy as they are? Should we not rather say; if any will be filthy, let him
be filthy by himself, and if any will be beastly, let him be beastly alone:
the filthy person, and beastly man shall not have me for a companion, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him? Heb. 10.38. Pro. 1.10.15. and 4.14.15. Now,
where these corrupt perswaders will tell a young man that makes conscience of his
ways, That other young men do not so: that young man (if he will be Christ's
young man in the Gospel) must answer him and say, That young men should
consider, not what the most do, but what the best do, that shall be saved,
whose way is narrow, and walkers in it, not many, Math. 7.14. Also, that it is
to be regarded, not what the world does, to which we must not be fashioned,
Romans 12.2. but what Christ did and the Saints, whom we have for leaders, and
who (young) kept the path of virtue, and walked not in the common rode of
sinners. These and such like impediments of sanctification in young men, and
they who mean to give their young time to God, must strive to overcome young, by
fighting that fight of faith and a good conscience to which their Baptism has
sealed them. 1. Tim. 1.18.19.

Then, and there be no place to repentan^^. Let such consider that the custom
of sin, causes a hardening in sin: For so the Apostle speaks; thou after
thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath. Romans 2.5. and let them remember that custom will
add to nature, and turn it unto it self. Which is the cause, that a Preacher
shall as soon take Nature from a man by his words, as sin to which he is
accustomed. Besides, Satan is not easily cast our, where he has long dwelt,
and if Satan be in, sin will not be out: if Satan have possession, sin
that attends upon him, will not loose possession: if one dwell in us, both as
well as one, will and must dwell in us. So much for the Wisemans exhortation,
his reasons follow.

Whiles the evil days come not, etc.] These are the reasons, for which,
Solomon would have his young man not to put of, in the age of youth, (which is
most prime and teachable) the remembrance spoken of. And they are taken from
the many infirmities and withdrawings that are to be found in old age, when
youth is abused: as much as if Solomon should have said: Well, my son, thou
art now young, lusty, and active, of good apprehension, and sharp conceit,
endued with fresh and strong faculties of wit and remembrance, thy feet are
nimble, thy sight is good, and thy hearing perfect: now (therefore) serve God
whiles thou may, the time may come when thou will be old, weak, and sickely,
dull in apprehending, and of bad capacity and remembrance; without a good
leg to bring thee to church, without a good ear to hear at Church, and
either without all eyes, or dark sighted, and so not able to read, or not
able to read long, nor a good letter, but through spectacles: then it will be
too late to do any good service to God thy Creator. This I take to be the
Wise-(...) meaning in these words: and the doctrine from hence is: Malachy,
That they offered the blind for sacrifice, and the lame and sick for a^
hallowed thing. Mal. 1.8. He that would not have a beast that had no eyes in
his service, would have the^ whiles thou have eyes to serve him. The sick and
the lame were no good offerings then; and be they good ware now in the sick
and lame body of a man that has desperately put off his turning to God, till
he can neither draw wind nor leg? Moses knew this, and therefore bore this
burden young, and while his legs were able to bear him. For, the Text says;
That, when he was come to age, he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, that is, would not live in delicacies, while he had strength to live
unto God. Heb. 11.24.25.26. Joseph (also) in his beauty and fair person,
turned his back to his tempting Mistress, and his face to the Lord. Genesis
39.10.12. He would not put off to serve God till old age had made choppes to
his beautiful face, and till his skin was withered. Josiah a good King, in the
eight year of his reign, and sixteen of his age, (when he was yet a Child)
began to seek after the God of David his Father: and in the twelfth year of
his reign, and twentieth of his age, made a famous reformation. 2. Chro.
34.3.4.5.6. What? so soon, and so young? So says the Scripture, and so it was
without controversy. For Gods Children take the good days of youth, for good
duties, and not the evil of sickly, and saplesse old age for them, as
(commonly) the worlds children do. Samuel served God in his minority, and
grew in spirit as he shot up in years. Samuel was a good man, and (the
better) be^^^^ a good young man. The reasons, Repentance; as it can never come
too soon, where sin is gone before; so it must needs, with much ado, and
not without some special work of God, overtake so many sins of youth, and
manhood: so far, and much before it. Secondly, old age is full of weariness
and trouble: and where we have elbow-roome in youth, we cannot turn us in old
age. Perhaps we shall neither hear, nor see, nor go, nor sit without pain
and torment in all parts: and is this a fit condition of life, and age of time
to serve God in? Or do we think, seeing we will not know God in youth, that
he will know us at these years, and in this case, and state?

A reproof (therefore) to those who bestow on Satan the beauty, the flower of
their young years to Gods enemy, offer to God, (who will have the first and
deserves the best) the dregs and leauings? To such I say: if thou will not
know God in thy youth, he will never know thee (for ought thou know) when
thou art grayheaded. If (as has been said) thou will not give him the young,
and sound, and that which is without blemish, he will never take in good part
the old, and sick, and evil favored, which no man will give to his friend,
nor dare offer to his Prince. If thou will not when thou art quick-witted; when
thou art come to years of dotage, he will not. If thou will not bear him in
his day, thou shall cry in thy day (that is in the evil day) and not be heard.
Prou. 1.28. It is too late to sow, when thy fruit should be in, and no time to
leave sin, when sin must leave thee.

An instruction, being holy as we are called to holiness: 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. but
in the days of our youth, as the years of plenty, to provide with Joseph in
Egypt, for a famine of hearing, a famine that may come by infirmity of years.
Genesis 41.49. For holiness is a gift, and the grace of holiness is the gift of
God. Psalm. 51.10. Now a gift must be taken when it is offered. It is offered
to day, to day if you will hear his voice. Psalm. 95.7. And therefore we may
not come for it many years hence, being promised to day. What folly is it to
challenge it, thirty or forty years hereafter; But, if men have neglected in
their youth, (thus) to remember God, it is high time in their age to remember
him. Which would be considered of those who have (already) put foot within the
doors of that age, in the which the Almond tree flourishes, and the hairs are
turned white to the harvest of death. Eccl. 12.5. For, is it not time for such
to be renewed in their minds, and reformed in their lives? Ephesians. 4.14. And
though they have been children long, having so long and much forgotten God in
the ignorance of childhood and vanity of youth, should they always be so? or,
should they not grow to be men in Christ, and strong men in the salvation of
God, wisdom being their gray hairs, and an undefiled life their old age? 1.
Cor. 16.13. The Israelites gathered twice as much Manna the day before the
Sabbath as they did any day before, because on the sabath they might gather
none. Exodus 16.22. and should not the hoare head that looks every day, for
the last sabbath of mortality and long sabbath of glory, in an age and day so
near unto it, hear twice as much? pray twice as much? do twice as much good?
and be more fruitful then in all his life before, using, not legs as youth,
but wings of repentance? yet, as young men think they have a long time, and so
put off remembrance: so old men do hardly believe that their time is so sho^^
or end so near, but that they (...) take leisure, and do that hereafter which
they should do presently. And who is there almost (though having lived very
long already) that thinks not he may live one year longer? we read, that
threescore and ten is a great age: Psa. 90.10. but when we our selves are past
it, we forget what we have read, and look not to that which is gone, but, as
covetous persons, who only live upon that which they expect, not which they
have, do only number the years to come, and build upon seven years, when
(perhaps) there are not seven months behind, peradventure not seven days, not
hours. Little thought he to die before the morrow, who promising many years
of ease to himself, said, he would pull down his old barnes, and build new.
Luc. 12.18.19. The like condition in sudden death, may steal upon the like
foolish numberers of their days. For, he ^as a young man that so reckoned
^misse; and shall they that be old, so ^ckoning, think to reckon well? We say,
commonly, Young men may ^e; and when we turn it to old ^en, we say with good
warrant, Old ^en must die. And yet, as men by ^a thinks another ship goes
fast, and their own stands still, where ^eirs makes as great have to the ^ort
as the others does: so old men ^inke that other old men wear a^ace, and go a
maine to death, as if ^eir own years did never a whit ^reake, nor move to the
waine of ^se; where the truth is, that they ^aue as swift a gale and flight to
the ^ort of all the living, as the other ^aue, who seem in their eyes, not ^o
move softly, but to fly to their and. So much for the first reason, ^he second
follows.

Nor the years approach, wherein ^hou shall etc.] This second reason, gi^en
for remembrance, is drawn from ^n age in a nearer degree to death by ^o^mon
course, then the age that was spoken of, though it may well be called old age,
compared to the times (...) young men and children: For these yee^ take all
pleasure from our life, when in affliction follows affliction, (...) the
clouds return after the rain, E^cles. 12.2. The reason may be draw^ from the
less to the more, thus; (...) if Solomon had said, It is an v^^ time in old
age to begin repentance much more at these stooping yere^ where every step is
in death: a^^ they may say with Barzillat, wh^ are come unto them, How long h^^
I to live? Sam. 19.34. The Doctrine is, If in old age, then much more in that
age it is very late (...) consecrate our time to God, when our houses are
turned into our prisons, and we have no taste in that (...) eat, or in that we
drink, 2. Sam 19.35. Of Ephraim it was said, The gray hayres were here and
there vp^^ him, yet he knew it not, Hos. 7.9. tha^ is, he had the marks of
age in (...) face, and upon his head, and yet ((...) one that would still be
young) he^ considered not that he drew nee^ ^o the grave, and had tokens upon
^im of a blasted life. What would ^t have been said, if being ready to ^ye
down in the grave, he had fared ^s one that had come into the world but
yesterday? And that he thought not of putting off sin, and putting on
holiness, in an age when he could neither put off nor put on his own clothes?
The reasons: This ^s the last time, or rather hour, and how shall we hope to
be good, if we begin but now? And, if it be somewhat late where memory is
stronger, how can it be but very late where memory is quite gone? Secondly,
repentance should be voluntary, and not extorted, as at these years, by
bitter grief and the fear of hell. Thirdly, our repentance then, will be late
repentance, and late repentance is seldom, or never, true repentance. Also
those repentances that men frame to themselves at the last hour, are but false
conceptions that come not to bearing: For in such repentances men forsake not
their sins, but their sins forsake them.

A reproof to those desperate sinners, Luc. 13.25.28. The foolish Virgins that
came not for mercy whiles the Lords door was open, that is, whiles he was
before the door to give it, and they in the way to receive it, did stand
without, and had none to open unto them: Matthew. 25.10.12. So he was taken away
to damnation, that prepared not his wedding garment before his coming to the
wedding feast: Matthew 22.11.13. Let these examples of reprobate putters off,
move us to prevent the devils hour of turning to God, which is the last hour
of life, an hour when Gods door of mercy is made fast, and all hope is cut
off for entering. It is an eu^ll servant that puts off all his work to the
last hour. Eccles. 12
And who knows not (that has understanding) that when those years approach,
and that ghastly hour is come, there is business and work enough in the mind
and external man, of deaths condemned prisoner to resist and prepare against
the extremity of that combat, which (because it is the last of the day) is
like to be the sharpest. Besides, the last sickness brings trouble enough with
it, when death, the devil, man's vnremitted sins, Gods intolerable wrath, and
the gaping pit and deep lake of hell do (altogether) with greatest terror and
astonishme^t, present themselves to man's sorrowful and sore encumbered soul.
Object. You will say, that a thief was saved at the very last cast of life, or
some short time before he departed, from the Cross, to Paradise: Luke 23.43.
Answ. I confess that the Scripture speaks of such an one, crucified at the
right hand of the Son of God, who craving with faith, mercy to salvation,
received this answer; To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. But, it
speaks but of one that was so saved. And it speaks of another in that very
place, and at that very time, that was damned. And here a Father says: We
read of one, that no man should despair; and but of one, that no man should
presume. This example (therefore) is a medicine against desperation, and no
cloak for sin. Let us therefore pass the time of our dwelling here in
fear, seeing we are redeemed from our vain conversation, not with
corruptible things, as with gold and silver, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot: 1. Pet. 1.17. To whom, with
the Father, and Holyghost, be all glory for ever. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON.
JOB Chap. 14. Verse. 14. All the days of my appointed time I would wait till
my change were come.


THese words were spoken by Job, of whose patience and prouocations to
impatiencie, this whole book and the testimony of Saint James are lively
proofs. Iam. 5.11. In the thirteen verse of this chapter, Job having (as it
seemed to him) beheld Gods anger in the chastisements that his soul felt,
wherein (as he said) the Lord wrote bitter things against him, desiring to be
hid in some secret place of the earth, till the Lords face were changed toward
him, and till he might see those frowns to go out of his countenance, that
had cast such knots upon his soul. In this verse, he professes, that if he
could perperswade himself of any hope yet behind (God showing himself to be
an enemy, and setting him up as a mark for all his arrows) he would wait for
it even till death. And this I take to be the occasion of these words of Job
in this Scripture. Where it may be thought a strange thing, that a man
commended for such patience, should so distemperately plead the cause of his
affliction with God. But no man (merely man, and clothed with the garment of
mortality) could ever so wait upon God, as not to be led aside from his
attendance for a season, when he saw the Lord to fasten in him his sharp
arrows, and to let him up as a Butt to shoot at. And in this respect it is
that this glorious pattern of patience could not bear his grief in a mind
so battered with sorrows. For, the body of sin (which in our weakest times
and estate, thrusts into the motions of our mind diverse carnal distrusts
and fleshly fears) will never cease to molest and keep us down, so long as we
live here; and, a wounded spirit who can bear? Pro. 18.14 Nevertheless, Job
still waited on God for a good end in these matters, and lost not his hope as
appears by the last chapter of this book, where he receaueth the crown of
his patience, and is exceedingly blessed in his person and children. And
therefore, though in the storm he spoke with some distemper, yet his meaning
was that he did, and would wait for Gods help and deliverance, though it should
be deferred till he must put off this tabernacle, and change mortality for
immortal. Where let us consider the attendance spoken of, and the term or
continuance. The term is expressed by the midtimes, or extremity of natural
life. The mid times are called (largely) days, and with limitation, the
appointed days. The extreme point of this is called a change. The attendance
is in respect of the season, wherein he attended, or of the attendance it
self.

The attendance was in a time of trouble and much anguish which he quietly
endured: My soul faints for thy salvation. Psalm. 119.81. His affliction was
great, and, through the infirmity of the flesh, he fainted: yet he waited on
Gods promise for deliverance, and believed his word, by which he was delivered.
David opened not his mouth in great troubles to any impatience, because God had
sent them. Ps. 39.9. The same Prophet, Psalm. 37.5.7. exhorts others to a like
silence and yielding in trouble, because God has done it, and therefore says;
Commit thy way to God and trust in him: And again, Wayt patiently on the Lord
and hope in him; His meaning is, reason not in your affliction with God, but in
patience possess them under his mighty hand, seeing you have sinned against
him: then shall you see your hope, and God will surely bring your soul out of
adversity. Also, the speech of Moses to the Israelites at the red sea, and
when they had the sea before them, the Egyptians (their enemies) behind them,
and steep mountains and high hills on every hand and side of them, was: Stand
still and you shall see the salvation of God. Exodus 14.13. As if he had said;
Go not back by despair, nor forward by presumption; and though you see
nothing but death in men, and destruction in creatures, you shall see life in
God, and the salvation of God (for life) to every one of you in your present
help and deliverance, if you faint not. The reasons further proving this
doctrine are; first, we have deserved the pains of Hell by our sins, much
more the sharpest pain temporal. Now, if God inflict a light chastisement,
and we deserve the chains of hell, if he punish for a short time, and we
deserve for ever to be afflicted; have we cause to complain, though the
arrows of the Almighty stick in our flesh, and his hand lie heavy upon us?
Psalm. 38.1.2. etc. Secondly, it is the Lord, and we must patiently attend his
work. He does not devise, and leave the execution to another, but whatsoever
is done, he does it himself in the point of correction and sense of pain; his
head and hand go together. Act. 4.28.2. Sam. 16.10. Thirdly, we must be
followers of Christ in affection to Gods will. Now Christ (seeing his father
had so appointed) desirously entered into his bath and passions for our sakes,
yea, thought the time long, and was grieved till he fell into his last agony
and cold sweat, in the which he was covered (after a sort) with clodded blood
that ran abundantly from his face down to the ground: Luc. 12.50. and 22.44.
and shall a little so trouble us, who (as the thief said to his fellow)
receive things worthy of that we have done, where Christ suffered innocently
and so much for us? Luc. 23 41. or, shall we see the son of God all in goare
blood, and all in a sweat, though no man touched him, though no man came near
him, and in a cold night when he lay out in the open air, and upon the cold
earth, to sweat so plentifully; not a thin faint sweat, but a sweat of great
drops, and those of blood and water so strong and forcible, that they ran
down his clothes, and streamed to the ground; and yet to say, Father, not my
will, but thine be done. And shall we live at ease in Zion, and feed upon the
mountains of Samaria; that is, desire an easy and pleasant life when his was
so bitter to him, and full of deadly troubles? or think it much to feel a
little of the sharp air, when the whole storm was upon him, a storm so
fierce and percing that it rent the veil of his body from the top to the
bottom? and be unquiet in a small shoure who are commanded to possess our
souls in the mids of our troubles, when whole floods of his bitter passion
could not carry him to the least unquietness in all his agonies and bloody
sweats? Fourthly, it is the trial of our faith tried, or tried at all; but
where is gold better tried then in the furnace? and faith (which is more
precious then gold) where is it tried so as in adversity, or in the furnace of
trobles? The courage of a Soldier is more seen in war then in peace, and the
skill of a skillful Pilot better discerned in a storm then in a calm: So the
courage of a Christian is better known in the war of the cross, and when
the calm of the soul is turned into a storm of tentations, then when the
body is in health, and the soul in no great adversity, or when all things
go well with a man, and he has even what heart can wish. And as his courage,
so his wisdom may better be perceived in a rough Sea, then in a calm River,
that is, in a troublesome, then in a quiet estate.

A reproof to those, Behold this evil comes of the Lord, wherefore should I
attend on the Lord any longer? 2. King. 6.33. as if there were any crown
without a conquest, or conquering but by that which is the victory that
overcomes the world, the grace of patience, and work of faith in those who
say with Job, in another place; though the Lord kill us, we will trust in him:
Job 13.15. as if they should say: whatsoever comes, we will still praise him; and
howsoever he do, we will yet wait upon him. Psalm. 43.4. If God will have Daniel
to be the ruler under King Darius, Daniel must for a time, be in the Lions
den, and the Kings seal must be upon it. Dan. 6.16. So Gods children shall
see their hope, but first they must be committed to close prison, and have the
seal of sickness set upon the door of their chambers out of which they
cannot pass: their soul shall be among Lions: and, the word of the Lord shall
try them before they go out: before Lazarus be carried by the Angels to
Abraham's bosom, blessed Lazarus must be laid at the Rich man's gate, full of
sores and diseases. Luke 16.20.22. So Gods children shall be freed from misery,
in the kingdom where is no sorrow nor woe, and pass from their body of
death, to the bosom of Abraham: but they must first taste of the cup of
misery at the door of death, and be filled with sores, and prepared by
sickness before they can put on this change. All tears shall be wiped from
their eyes, Apoc. 21.4. but then they must shed them here. Also, except the
wheat corn fall into the ground and there die, it brings forth no fruit.
Ioh. 12.24. So Gods children shall flourish for ever: the seed of their
bodies, shall grow before the Lord in the garden of his presence, but both it
and they must receive this increase and preferment by the help of corruption:
It, and they must be kept in the coffin of the earth and there putrify (as
does the seed of corn) before there can be any putting on of the green
garment of the resurrection to eternal life. For, since the fall of Adam, no
man passes to Paradise but by the burning Seraphins, Genesis 3.24. nor to the
holy City, but by the Rivers of Babel, which must enter into his soul. And
thus God will try the patience of his children, before he work their full
deliverance. Much (therefore) are they to be condemned, who if they may not
have their heaven presently and in this life, will rake into a hell of sins,
and world of lusts, to have those delights which they love better then heaven,
the pleasures of sin for a season; and so forsake God, to inherit desperation.

An admonition to store our hearts with faith, All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3.12. In the drowning of the old
world, as the waters rose, so did the Arc: and in the deluge of this world,
the Arc of the faithful soul should be lift up to confidence, and arise to
God, as afflictions lift up their waves. That is, as sicknesses, and troubles,
and afflictions, and the whole train of hell fight against us: so we should
fight against them by that victory that overcomes the world. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
Christ upon the Cross, as a Doctor in his Church, did by his own example and
in his great patience (then) commend his truth unto us, who relied upon his
fathers deliverance, when the snares of death compassed him, and the pains of
hell caught hold of him, and when he found trouble and sorrow. Psalm. 116 3.
Luke 23.46. Esaias says, Peace shall come. Esaias 57.2. but to whom? to every one
(says he) who walks before the Lord. That is, it shall surely go well with
him at the last who keeps his uprightness, and continues to do well, who
persisteth in his good course, meeting the Lord in a ready heart, and prepared
soul, Psalm. 108.1. and who (when Christ says I come quickly) does reply and
make answer, with all Saints saying; even so come Lord Jesus, Apoc. 22.20. that
is, do as thou have said, whatsoever pleases thee, contenteth me. Some
tainted with hypocrisy, can abide some short and small troubles, but if they
continue long, and receive increase, they forsake their patience and further
their pain, by beating the air and themselves with their raging and unquiet
sounds, till they cause the Lord to lay heavier penalties upon them, and to
chain them faster with linkes of longer and more perplexed troubles. And so,
as the Bird that is caught with the Lime-rodde, and the Fish that is taken in
the Net, the more they strive, the more they entangle themselves. So the more
impatient men are of Gods corrections, the more stripes they purchase to
themselves in the snare, and under the net of that their humiliation: the more
intolerable also they make the tie of their cross, and the more improbable
their issue and going out. He that carries a weighty burden, the more he
stirs and moves it, the more it oppresses him: and so the more unquiet and
unruly we are under the heavy burden of the Lords chastisements for sin, the
more we gall our souls and bruise our flesh in vain, where, by our patience,
we may avoid such needelesse vexation and tirings out, it being truly said
(which is commonly spoken) that of sufferance comes ease. Some have no faith
more then sense teaches them, who believe as far as they can see, and
further then their sight leads them, they will not set one foot down toward
faith. Some know not the word, neither what God has promised in it to those
that fear him: and therefore when they come into trouble, they despair of
help themselves, with shifts and fetches of their own head, not attending the
Lords help, because they know not his power by his word, nor what mercy he
will show to those who put trust in his salvation as the word does teach. Job
knew his mercy and power, and therefore did not fume against the Caldeans, nor
murmr against the Lord, but bore his loss quietly and thankefully, trusting
in God. Job 1.21.22. David meditated much often in the Law, and therefore
fretted not against Shimei, who railed against him, but searched his
conscience, and went unto his sin, making the Lord his hope. 2. Sam. 16.10.12.
And He, who was like a bottle in the smoke, forgate not Gods statutes, that is,
knew Gods promises in his word, and truth in his righteous testimonies, and
therefore received comfort, that is, that word, or rather the truth of God in
that word, sustained him in all troubles. Psalm. 119.147. So much for the season
of his attendance. The attendance it self follows.

I would wait, etc.] The action of Jobs attendance, is delivered by a word that
signifies to wait; or to wait by hope, for a thing, or to tarry and abide the
deferring of it till it come; and to look as servants for their Master, when
he will return in the evening. His meaning (therefore) is, that he will wait
and be ready always for his happy death till it come, how long soever it be
in coming. their Master when he will return from the wedding: which was in
the night, as is evident by their receiving of him with lights: and by the
custom that was observed in marriages then, which was, to bring the Bride from
her fathers house, to the man's house in the night: Luke 12.35.36. And so,
modesty was the mufler of the maids of those days. Now, they that wait for
their Master, that is, that wait diligently for his coming home in the night;
will set up lights in the house, and have some in their hands. These lights are
the Word, which as a light shines in a dark place. This world is a
wilderness, and we (naturally) blind, that is without understanding: and
therefore we must have the light which is put in the lantern of the Law to
guide and direct us still in the dangerous ways of it, Psalm. 119.105. and this
light must be burning in us, that is, we must add zeal to our knowledge; for
it is of no use if it want fire and burning: And it must be in our hands, our
hands must handle the word of life, 1. Ioh. 1.1. and we must not be hearers
only, but doers, Iam. 1.22. Secondly, they that wait for their Master stand at
the gate, or before the door, looking for his return: So they that wait for
the day of their redemption, must stand with Abraham in their tent door, and
with Eliah in the mouth of the cave, waiting for it: Genesis 18.1. and 1. King.
19.9. that is, they must dwell in the world as in tents, and as strangers in
these caves of the earth, wait for their house above. Thirdly, they that look
with attendance for their Masters coming, will have his house in a readiness
against his coming to it; and whatsoever may offend shall be taken out of the
way: so they, that look for Christ, and wait by hope, for the day of his
coming, will purge, by repentance, all the rooms of his spiritual house, put
away sin and bring in righteousness into every power and member of soul
and body. Fourthly, they that wait for their Master, with a loving and
cheerful desire of his coming, will take up the time with talking and
thinking of him: so they that look for Christ, will reverently talk of Christ
and as Christians, think thoughts of Christ and have Christian musings; or
think (much) of death, and (often) that they shall die: which must needs
keep them in a continual love and expectation of Christ and of death. In the
book of Esaias one of the exercises of the godly is said to be their waiting for
God, or (which may have this meaning) their waiting for his salvation, by
death, that they may go to God. Esa. 25.9. where it is intended that they did
not only rejoice in his salvation, but so live, that death might bring them,
in the Charet of their godly life, to the God of their salvation. Thus did
Simeon that embraced Christ, and thus did Joseph that embalmed Christ, wait
for the kingdom of God, Luc. 2.25. and 23.51.
and their salvation by death. Luc. 2.25. and 23.51. They lived not contented
with their present estate, but waited for a better; and as Elijah came out of
the cave when the Lord came to him, so they were ready always to come out of
the cave of their bodies to meet the Lord. 1. King. 19.11. And thus they stood
in their door, who waited for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor.
1.7. that is, thus they waited, who waited for the day of their death wherein
they might go to the Lord, and for the day of the Lords appearing, wherein he
would come to them. Lastly; this is the property of the sons that they wait
for the adoption, that is, look for the fulfilling of it, in death, by their
own full redemption. Romans 8.23. The reasons. And that the faithful ought thus
to wait and be prepared for death at all hours, may further be proved.
First, they know not when they shall die, and, if they cease from attendance,
the Master will come in a day when they think not. Math. 24.50. Therefore they
should always look for that, which whether looked for or unexpected, will most
certainly, (though stealingly) come. Secondly; Christ appears unto salvation
only to those that look for him. Hebr. 9.28. that is, that so live, as,
whether he come in the second watch, or in the third, he shall find them
waiting in their door for Him, by continuance in well doing. But, do they
look for him, who continually serve sin in their mortal bodies, and
continually and ordinarily are holden in those cursed lusts of the world and
flesh, wherein is nothing but death and hell? I speak of fornicators,
covetous, drunkards, daily swearers, and other monstrous sinners, do they
look for him? or, would they curse and swear, and riot on the Sabbath, and
steal, and whore as they do, and drink so many healths till they have left
no foundnesse in them, if they thought presenttly to die, and presently to come
to their terrible account, and they may presently come unto it? Thirdly, we
serve a prentiship of attendance for our worldly freedom, and (to reason from
the less to the greater) will we not attend seven years (perhaps we shall not
wait seven days) to be free for ever? For by the portall of death the godly
pass from bondage to liberty, from the land of Egypt to the land of
righteousness, from the vale of tears to mansions of glory.

An instruction to keep always in mind the day of our death, Iehu furiously
came upon Iehoram, 2. King. 9.23.24. be made with all speed to his charet,
thinking to fly, but the arrow that Iehu shot, prevented him: So some thinking
to fly from the flying arrow of death, by running to their accustomed refuges,
as it were Charets of vain delays and hopes further to avoid it, have
presently received into their bodies the fatal dart of death, and have
presently died. That we may thus remember death, we must not be careless to
spend our short time well, as they are whose comfort stands rather in an
uncertain delay of death then in any certainety of life eternal after death.
Our care must be to live well, so shall we without our care, have good
assurance to die well. If we continue and increase in goodness, we are well
provided for death, and need not to fear the bitter effects of second death.
Blessed is that Servant, whom the Master, when he comes shall find so doing.
Mat. 24.46. The Apostle Paul might well say, he was ready to be offered, to wit
by that end of all the living, death, seeing he had fought a good fight in the
battle of his life, finished a good course in the race of his pilgrimage, and
kept faith in a good conscience. 2. Tim. 4 6. He considered his life, as a
woman with child reckons her time as near as she can, because then she hopes
for deliverance, the nerer the day of his last Iubilee or last breath drew, the
more his joy increased, being sure that (then) he should go out of prison.
Leuit. 25.41.54. Thus had he joy in death who had so well and long prepared
himself to die.

A charge (therefore) upon careless persons who, Math. 24.48. My Master does
differ his coming, fall into a deep sleep of false peace without all regard
of awaking to righteousness. 1. Cor. 15.34. till death come to cut them off
with sinners. Christ, speaking of the days of Noah, does not say that the Men
(then) were unmerciful, extortioners or idolatours, but that they are, they
drank, they married till the flood came; that is, were first drowned in
security, and (after) in water Luc. 17.26.27. Further, speaking in like manner
of the days of Lot, he says of the men of that time, that they ate, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built. verse 28. but were
these things unlawful? No not in themselves, but in their manner of using
them: for, they intended nothing else till God rained fire and brimstone from
Heaven upon them, and destroyed them: verse 29. That is, nothing could warn
them till death came that gives no warning. And here our Savior sets down
three sorts of men, the first followed their pleasures, only they ate, they
drank. The second followed their profit only, they bought, they sold. The
third (and worst of all) followed both their pleasure and profit: for, they
builded for their pleasure, and planted for their profit. And do not some of
these, or all of these lusts of the world hold careless Christians (if we may
call such Christians) so in the love of earthly things at this day, that there
is no remembrance of death in their ways. Do not worldlings, entering into a
dream of an Heaven upon Earth, dote so upon things that perish with the use,
that they never think of things eternal, whether life or death everlasting,
till they must (no remedy) pass from this world to another? The foolish
Virgins thought not of their oil till the Bridegroom came and there was no
opening. Mat. 25.8.11.12. And foolish sinners so flatter themselves with a
slumbering opinion of preparing (time ^inough) for death when they go on their
last hour, that they will know nothing till the flood come. Mat. 24.39. nor
look toward heaven till they be in hell. Luc. 16.23. nor have oil in their
vessels and repentance in their hearts, with it to meet the bridegroom,
Christ, till the gate of mercy and of all hope be shut. Math. 25.10. Mean
while, what do they but follow the pride, covetousness, whoredom,
drunkenness, and lusts of their own heart, not remembering Joseph? But pray we
(beloved) for a waking conscience, and let not this keeper of the house, in a
heart past feeling, so drowse and sleep in us, that our house be broken,
dug through and rifled before we have time, or will, to say Lord have mercy
on us. So much for the attendance spoken of, the term or continuance follows.

All the days of mine appointed time, etc.] The time of Jobs attendance or
waiting on God for his help, is the whole term or act of his life, which he
calls, not years, but days. So he measures his short time by the inch of
days, rather then by the span of months, or long ell of years. the shortest
division in nature to express it by; as that it is the life of yesterday; Ps.
90.4. A life which is gone as soon as it comes, verse 9. a life of few hours,
as a watch in the night, verse. 4. the life of a thought, whereof there may be
a thousand in an hour, verse. 9. a life of nothing, Psalm. 39.5. that is, of no
time, or of vanity, which is next to nothing. Jacob in his time brought it to
a short account, that is, from diverse hundreds to an hundred and thirty; Genesis
47.9. But Moses, coming after him, gathers it into a shorter sum or
account, even to an account or count or total of threescore and ten, or of
fourscore at the most, with labor and sorrow. Psalm. 90.10. David measures it
with his short span: Psalm. 39.5. and this excellent Saint compares man, borne
of a woman, ^o a flower that is soon cut down, and to a shadow that
continues not. Job 14.2. Finally, our uncertain short life is in Scripture
compared to a thought that is presently gone, Psalm. 90.9. to a dream in the
night that is forgotten in the morning, to a bubble upon the water, to a ship
under sail, and to a weauers shuttle. So soon passes our life and it is
gone. The reasons. First, Iniquity now abounds, and more in these latter
times, then in forme^ ages: Math. 24.22.2. Tim. 3.1.2. which must needs provoke
God to cut shorter these our days, then those better days wherein our fathers
lived, who lived more simply and in fewer sins then we their children do at
this day. Secondly, our time is short, that our short time might move us not to
defer to do good as the manner is, seeing even the Devil himself is busy
because his time is short. Ap^. 12.12 17. Thirdly, our life is as nothing, that
Gods Children might sooner be delivered from their burdens, and from those
that burden them in this life, and that the wicked (the children of this
world) might have a shorter time to keep in bondage and under the whip of
malice those poor ones, who desire to sacrifice their life to God in a
conscience of his service, and to walk in faith, before him. For if man's life
might now extend to the years which were before the flood; when men lived six,
seven, eight and nine hundred years; This cruel age, in which we live would
too long torment, and too vilely deal with Gods faithful ones, there being no
hook of short time in the jaws of the wicked to keep them in fear; as now,
when death is such a tyrant, and short life such a curb unto them, that they
dare not, or cannot do as they would. And indeed, how can they do that in
their forty and under their fourscore, which they might do and would be hold
to do, being men of might, in their hundreds? Also, how could the poor
Church, hold up the head and continue in good case, that should have so strong
and long-liued enemies to encounter with?

An admonition to run the way of Gods commandments, Amos 6.3. and 2. Pet. 3.4.
Therefore the Lord does commend our life to us in this Scripture, and in other
Scriptures, in a short abstract of days, and not in a volume of years, as in
the book at large. So Christ says to Jerusalem, in this thy day. Luke 19.42.
not granting a longer term then the term of one poor day unto her. Which was
to teach her, and us in her, to think every day to be our last day. And
therefore to do that this day, as in our time, which we are not sure to do
the next day, as in a time that God has taken to himself and from us, as
being more properly his, then our day. A worthy Soldier warring long under
Adrian the Emperor, after that long time returned to his house, and lived
Christ's soldier. Where, and in which manner, after he had lived seven years,
he yielded to death: and being ready to die, commanded that it should be
written on his tomb: Here lies Similis (for, that was his name) a man who was
many years and lived but seven: counting that he lived no longer then he
lived a Christian. How many war after the flesh under the Emperor of the air
(not under Adrian,) who yet (I cannot say seven years) I would I could say
that seven days or hours before their death, they did cast away these weapons
of sin that it might be engraven upon their grave stone for their Epitaph,
that seven days before their last day, or seven hours before their dying
hour, they not only had a being, but a life in the world, and not only were,
but lived? Such desire, not to remember but to forget their short time: nor to
hear of their end, but to suppress it, because the remembrance of it will
make them sparingly to offend, and the fear of it alter affections. And from
hence it is, that he who has peace in his days, and is besotted with the
flumber of long life, being loath to leave his possession for an uncertainty,
or to live and be where he cannot assure himself that he shall or can,
either live or be as here he may, and does; says to death, as Ahab, to Eliah;
Art thou here mine enemy? 1. King. 21.20. When (the preferment of it
considered in the sweet peace of the righteous, and happy death of the Saints)
he should rather say; Welcome my friend, or the welcome day of death, come
near.

A reproof (therefore) to those who put off the time of amendment to some long
time hereafter not remembering their short time and few days here. Though here
they be but Tenants at will in their Clayforme, whose foundation is in the
dust, whose strength is a few bones tied together with sinews, as with small
strings, whose life is in a little breath quickly stopped, and which (howsoever
we patch and piece it, with helps of Art, and supplies of Nature for a time)
will, they know not how soon, fall into the place of darkness, when the wind
of death has passed over it. Yet they think not of their enduring house, and
house from heaven, or they so much delight in the momentanie gourd of their
short life (which yet has her worm of speedy corruption) that they forget
the days everlasting, and change that is to come. Ion. 4.6. Of such we read:
Chapter 21. of this book: Who, because their houses were peaceable to them
without fear, their wealth came in unto them without fail, and they were
great in their posterity: Therefore their hearts were all set in pleasure, and
they rejoiced in their days and substance that was so great, not remembering
their time, how short it was, till they suddenly went down to the grave. When
the Disciples were in the Ship, and the Ship was in the mids of the Sea,
tossed with winds, and covered with waves; they came to Christ and awoke him,
saying; Master, save v^, we parish. Mat. 8.24.25. But they had Christ with
them in the Ship. But some think not of Christ to awake him to their salvation
(being strangers to God through the ignorance that is in them) til the ship of
their body, tossed with the tempests of their last sickness, be ready to
sink into death, and by many leakes and wearings, begin to receive into
their souls that dead sea that must needs drown them in perdition and
destruction, before the Lord for ever. For, how many (thus) think of him, till
they can think no longer? how many begin to live, that is, truly to live,
till they be ready to die? and how many call to mind that Time of Times, till
there be no more time, at least to them, and till that last time and hour of
the day come unto them in the which they must come to the bar, to receive
their doom and judgment? The reason of all this backwardness to a new life
in the fear of God, is men's ouer-hungrie desire to follow those pleasures of
sin, into which Satan puts himself as he did into the Serpent, to beguile
Heue. The subtle enemy knows with what bait to take a worldling to all
forgetfulness of God, and of the judgment to come. And therefore as the hunter
minding to take the Tygres young one, is said to set up certain looking
glasses in the Tygres way, that is, in the way that she passes to seek her
straying brood, that finding in such glasses a perfect resemblance of her
self, the same may cause her to leave the pursuit, and to loose her whelpe: So
this old huntsman Satan, observing what care man ought to have (which care but
few men have) to save from hell and destruction his stray soul, does set many
goodly shows, or false glasses of pleasures (which seem, but are not) in the
way of his Christian walk, that by holding his sight in these deere-prized
delights, he may more willingly leave the care of that one thing which is
necessary, the salvation of his soul. Therefore, that we may not be taken
in this Hunters snare, our short life should be often thought of: When we go
to bed we should remember our grave, and when we rise in the morning, consider
that we shall rise out of the grave of the earth at the last day. With this key
of meditation we should open the day, and shut in the night: And what befalls
others in the dust of their bodies, we should think must come to us (we cannot
tell how soon in our own dust and mortality. Here (therefore) as the third
Captain sent from the King of Israel to Eliah, to bring him, and perceiving
that the other two Captains with their fifties were devoured with fire from
heaven, at the request of Eliah, grew wife by their experience, and therefore
fell down and besought favor for himself and his fifty, 2. King. 1.13. So
we, seeing or hearing of so many fifties, young and old, that in these late
years of mortality have ended their lives in a fire of pestilence sent from
the Lord, should make supplication day and night, not as that Captain to the
man of God, but as true Christians to the man and God Christ Jesus, that our
lives and deaths may be precious in his eyes; and that we may not forget, that
what is done to others may come to us. And if God have knocked by many
infirmities, as by so many messengers, at the door of our frail bodies, we
should not def^^re (then chiefly) to open to him by present repentance, lest he
break in by incurable plagues, and make his way by our certain destruction,
and death remediless.

An apology or defense of those good Christians, in their short (though
troublesome) life because they have bestowed it well, and because they are
become, by such redemption of time, citizens, in title, of a city that cannot
be shaken. And therefore though their time be short, their short time here is
very comfortable unto them, seeing, as Noah's dou^ upon the waters, they wait
daily till God open the window of his heavenly Arc, to take them to rest from
their labors. The wicked, who have spent their short time evil, must needs
greatly fear at the end of their short time, seeing when they see death, they
may doubt if it be peace, having never yet loved the God of peace: 2. King.
9.22. The righteous are in the world as the Israelites in Babylon, who being
captives in this prison of life, care not how soon they be delivered, that
they may sing the songs of the Lord in their own Land; Psalm. 137.4. The
wicked, like spiritual Babylonians, and as men at home in their own natural
soil, desire no other life, and know no better, and therefore it exceedingly
grieueth them so soon to depart from this, and so much against their wills. To
the godly, by reason of good hours well employed, 1. Cor. 15.
death is the last enemy: and to the wicked, by their profane life, the
first: Gods Children count nothing their own here, every day they gather
Manna, and have but from hand to mouth, till the long Sabbath come, when they
shall eat the fruits of the land of heaven. Therefore their loss is nothing
when they have lost all here: only they loose misery and find salvation, and
what loss is that? Surely such as they are glad of, and the sooner they make
the change, the better for them. The worlds children are here at home in their
Mothers lap, here they have their pleasure. Luke 16.25. and receive their
portion, having great things for themselves, and to leave to their Babes when
they are gone. Here they wasted time, the fairest and best part of it, upon
their profits, and lusts, and little of it they bestowed, if any of it, well:
and what marvel then if they cry out to come to their account for time so
precious, so much abused? The godly, because their affection is to do good, and
God does so mercifully bless them that they constantly and heartily do it:
therefore they are, and are reputed servants in Egypt, and strangers in the
wilderness, being unhappy, to wit in the opinion of worldly men, till they
come into their happy land, and receive those mansions which are prepared for
them. The wicked, because they serve sin in their members and short time, are
happy till they die, being (for that) Lords in Egypt and Citizens here. Here
in pleasures, after death, in torments. Here Lords of the earth, and hereafter
brands of hell. No marvel (then) if short life trouble the wicked, as it
comfort the godly. That which is added by Job, to his time of attendance,
follows.

All] Job says that he would wait all his days, because he knew not the day
nor hour when God would command his appearance by death, and send him to his
dust. As if he should have said: Of my departure hence, I know not the day nor
hour, or I know not when I shall die, 1. Pet. 1.17.
and therefore every day shall be as my dying day, and I will live in continual
expectation of that which will come, I know not how soon. Luke 21.35. And
Matthew, to show how little we know the coming of it till it come, compares
it to a Master from home, who returns to his house in a day that the servants
look not for him, and in an hour that they are not ware of: Mat. 24.50. And
in the 43. verse of the same Chapter, he compares it to a thief in the night.
For, as a thief gives no warning, so no more does stealing death. He that
keeps the house, knows not when the thief will come; and he that looks
for death knows not when he shall die 1. These. 5.2. The reasons. If we knew
the day of our death, we would put off all till the coming of that day.
Secondly, as it is the glory of a King to know some things that no man else
can know: so it is a part of Gods glory to hide from men and Angels, the
particular hours of man's death, and this worlds doom, which he has closed
up with the seal of secrecy, and put in his own power. Now, God will give no
part of his glory to (...). Thirdly, if we knew the hour or certain time of
our death, it would give us too great boldness to wallow in sin, till that
time or hour came. The whorish woman, because she knew the rust time when her
husband would return, who went into a far country, did by such a certain
knowledge of the appointed time of his coming back, the more liberally pour
out her soul to vice and wantonness. Prou. 7.20. Therefore it is counsel to
us, when we shall die, that all the days of our appointed time we may wait
for this day, and in all our time, look for this last time.

To make good use of this point; long life, have not had a minute of warning
given them to call for mercy. The houses of their bodies were presently dug
through, when they judged their time endless: and when they thought to have
run a long race of scores, Job. 21.23.24.25
their graves have met them in their setting out, and they have ended their act
before they had plaide one full part on their stage. The consideration hereof
should make us careful to do good while we have time, seeing we are so unsure
of it. Gal. 6.10. The time of making peace with our Adversary is while we are
in the way. Math. 5.25. And because we know not the day, we should watch by
doing good, every day, sitting with Abraham in our Tent door. Genesis 18.1. And
watching death, that watches us. One light before does more good then many
carried after: So one forethought, is better then twenty after wits. Death
looks for us every where: therefore (as one says) we should every where
look for him: Luke 12.35.36. But further, to incite us to this Christian
watch, let us remember that where the tree falls there it lies, in the East
of life, or West of second death, where the Sun of peace sets upon
reprobates for ever: Eccles. 11.3. As the last day of our life leaves us, so
shall that last day, the day of Christ's coming, August.
find us. How good were it (therefore) before we run into desperate
arrierages, to cast our bills of account: the rather, because we shall be
warned out of our office we know not how soon: Luke 16.2 Some Emperors among
the Heathen were wont (as books say) to be crowned over the sepulchers and
graves of dead men, to teach them by the certain, but unknown end of their
short life, to use their great rooms, as men that must one day be as they then
were, whose graves they trod upon. The old Saints, who lived in a continual
meditation of their short and uncertain time, were wont always (like wise
Merchants) to think of their return homeward: And therefore took up their
treasure by bills of payment, not where they were, but where they would be,
and meant to make their long abode, that is, meant to be for ever. And the
Philosophers (who saw not beyond the clouds of humane reason) when they
perceived how much men did decline by course of years and wastes of time, were
wont to say: that the life of a wise man, was nothing but a continual
meditation of death. And were it no more but that it is enacted as by an
everlasting Parliament, that all must once die: Heb. 9.27. This were enough to
cast a cloud, yea a whole dark sky, over the fairest day we see here and pass
in our fairest pleasures. But when we shall consider that after death comes
the judgment, it must needs move us to turn our laughter into mourning, and
to think how to live and die well in so short and certain, but uncertain time
of our expectation of such a day, a day of such dread and tertour to careless
livers, a black, hideous, and dismal day. But careless persons, like those
officers in the Kings house who (having their allowance of lights) consume them
in wantonness, and go to bed in the dark, do consume on their lusts those
good graces (as it were lights, which they have received for salvation, from
the father of lights: Iam. 4.3. which is cause, that when their bodies must go
to their bed of death, they go to it in utter darkness, where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. So far for the time which is called (largely) days, that
which is limited, called the appointed time, follows.

Of mine appointed time, etc.] By appointed time, Job here means, his bounded
life, which can no more be extended beyond the appointed time, then the Sea can
pass her bounds. Ps. 104.9. Paul told the men of Athens; for, having taxed
their superstition, who would bound the boundless presence of God to a temple
made with hands, and to Idols the work of men's hands: he she wecht, hat the
Almighty Maker of this Worlds-masse, is not to be straightened, who has shut in
with the straites of time, fore-se^ by himself, all men and creatures, having
assigned their times, and the bounds of their habitation. Act. 17.26. And in
this Book of Job, it is moved by a question, but taken for granted, that there
is an appointed time to man upon Earth. Job 7.1. or a set time of man's
warrefare here: that is, he is a Soldier, and his life militant: but how long
and for how short a time, he shall be, and continue in this field of his body
under corruption, fighting against the strangelusts that are in the world, it
is ordered by him who has summed up all the number of his days, and measured
his short time with a decree or Law which he cannot pass: after, it is said
that God has set Man's days, and numbered his months, and limited his time:
that is, that he has set bounds to all the moments of his life here. Job 14.5.
By which it is plain that the maker of man has in his hand the whole number
of man's time, such as it has pleased himself to add to the Months and
years that he has given him in this vale of misery. The reasons. First, if
God had not numbered the days of man upon earth, they who love the world would
never leave it, nor they who suffer in it (without special grace) wait till
God should work their deliverance from it. They who live in pleasure would
never resolve to die, and they would presently seek their own death, and find
it who live in pain. Secondly, as we are not borne at our own pleasure, so
it is reason we should live and die at his pleasure, who has formed us in the
womb. Thirdly, God takes small matters into his hands to order them: Mat.
29.30. and shall we think that he has not taken to himself the great matter of
life and death to dispose of it?

A confutation of those who think that man can either shorten his own life,
what is given him: as when either the spite of time, or sin of Man, shall
accomplish what God has purposed. Ioh. 19.11. So Christ told Pilate; who
because he had the sovereignty of judgment, thought he had (also) the
sovereignty of life: verse 10. But he had no power, but what the decree of God
and determined moment of man's salvation had then given unto him. If then the
Magistrate save a man who is judged to die, it is secretly to fulfill Gods time
concerning him which is not yet come; or if he cut him of, it is because the
time appointed to him by God is first come, and he is Gods Minister to do what
God has purposed to be done.

An instruction, Sam. 12.20.21. etc. So for our own death, we must willingly
bear it, seeing that God has appointed that we shall once die, and that once
must once come. Hebr. 9.27. It is (I confess) natural to all to be loath to
lay down this tabernacle: but our obedience to the will of God must correct
nature in so direct an opposition to his decree that has made us we must call
to our remembrance, not what we could wish, but God has purposed, reasoning,
every man apart, and privately in his heart thus: I must needs die because it
is Gods ordinance, and I will willingly die that I may show my obedience to his
will. I must needs die to put of corruption, and I will willingly die that I
may see God. Or, I must needs die, Look Deerings 11. Lecture on the Epistle to
the Hebrews.
that sin may have his pay ( the wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.) and I
will willingly die that sin may be no longer, and death may loose his sting
and power. So much for the mid-times of that natural life in which Job became
attendant, and did wait for a better life, the period of time which he
expected, follows.

Till my change were come.] Here Job shows how long he would wait, by hope,
in his afflicted estate^ even till that period of time should come (which he
calls the time of change) when he should finish the days of his warre-fare
on Earth, and receive the Crown of his sufferings in glory. And here, by the
day of change, he means the day of death, which is (therefore) called a
change: because it is the remove of the faithful from labor to rest in their
bodies, and from an Earthly to an Heavenly life in their souls, which are
taken up to God. Somewhere it is called the losing (as of a Prisoner) from the
Prison and fetters of the flesh, that he may be with Christ: Philip. 1.23.
Also, the godly in their blessed death are (for this) said to be taken away.
Esa. 57.1. In their bodies from their house to grave, from fear to security,
from sense of pain to ease, and from their bodies of labor to their beds of
rest: in their souls, from an house of clay to an house not made with hands,
from Men to Angels, from Earth to Heaven, from prison to liberty, from
mortality to immortal, and from death to live. And we read of the gathering
of the righteous (as of things scattered and straying from home) to their
people and fathers. Genesis 25 8. Judge. 2.10. Thus we have heard why Job and other
scriptures call the death of the godly a change.

From whence the doctrine is, Philippians, verse. 21. the Apostle calls this
alteration by death, not the loss of our body, but the change of our vile
body, that it may be facioned like to the glorious body of Christ. And is
there any thing in this but what is excellent, and worthy (if any thing be
worthy) our travel and best pains here? John, speaking of the Saints
glorified, says; All tears shall be wiped from their eyes: Apoc. 21.4. His
meaning is, that as soon as death shall let them out of the world, they shall
have no more sorrow: that is, sorrow that causes tears. And the same John
says: Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: Apo. 14.13. that is, they who
having lived righteously, die well in him, are in the hand, and by the help of
death, lead presently to blessedness. The Saints militant, did always with
the eyes of faith, in the Gospel, behold this great honor and preferment by
death, in the happy ends of the righteous, and therefore sighed, desiring their
house from Heaven. 2. Cor. 5.2. for, they knew, that, if it were an honor to
be removed from a base cote to a Princes court; it could not but be a double,
that is, singular honor to be translated from the Cotes of the Earth to the
Court of Heaven. Therefore they sighed, that is, could not be merry, till that
change should come. Paul says that to be losed, to wit, from the bonds of his
corruptible body, was best of all. Philip. 1, 23. which he would not have
said, if any preferment had been better then that by death, which is from
baseness into the glorious liberty of the sons of God The reasons. And
(further) that there is so much good in the godly man's death (which is his
change) may be and is evident. First by the things to which that their happy
and blessed change by death is compared, as, to a haven that (after they have
passed the troublesome waves of the sea of this world) carries them to their
own key or back in the which they ride safely to their iourneys end, after
which they come home to their own house, being strangers here. 1. Pet. 2.11.
to the medicine that cures most perfectly the sickness of life, to the
messenger that bids them to the marriage dinner of their great King. Mat.
22.2.3. to their return from banishment, into their own country and natural
land; to their deliverance from the jail of sorrow, where, they are taken
(with Joseph) out of prison to be set with Princes, to the laying down of
their tabernacle, and to the putting on of their house from Heaven; to a
deliverance, like that out of Egypt, from the bondage of corruption to the
liberty of saints; from a land of darkness to a land where the sun never
goes down: and from a land of destruction to the land of the living. Now,
what is there in all these, that is not perfitly good and desirable? Secondly,
death abolisheth in the faithful departed, all power of sinning and sting of
sin. Thirdly, the body feels no more pain, nor shall ever again be
sensible, but of that which is excellently good: desirable, and comfortable:
and for the soul, it shall presently be glorified. Luc. 16.22. Fourthly, death
is but the door of the soul out of an earthly dungeon (such as the body is,
that must be destroyed before the worms) into an heavenly kingdom, or passage
from death to life, from a short death to a long life. Lastly, God executes
his judgments upon the damned, and purges his Church by death.

An instruction to correct all unreasonable and faithless weeping for our
godly friends and brethren departed in the faith of Christ. Thessalonians
exhorts Christians, if they sorrow for such, not to sorrow for them as men
that have no hope. 1. These. 4.13. When Hester was taken from Mardochay (who had
brought her up as his own daughter) to be married to King Assuerus, and to
receive the crown of Queen in the kingdom, did he either bewail or envy
that her great preferment? the faithful are taken from sorrowfullmen to be
espoused to Christ, and to receive the crown of glory: and shall they, that
live, by such unmeasurable sorrow and taking on, as is too commonly used at the
graves of their friends, vnwish to them, in a sort so great happiness? Will a
father be sorry or can he without imputation of envy repine, that his son
or daughter is (with Joseph) taken out of prison to be set with Princes? when
thou give forth thy child to nurse, and she has kept it long enough; should
she, because thou take it home again; complain? thou will say, she has no
reason for it; Then what reason has any father to murmr against the owner of
the child he takes, for taking of his own? Parents that so lose their
children (if they may be called lost that are so found) are but nurses to them,
in their absence from their own fathers house, to nurse them with the milk of
the Gospel, and religiously to nurture them for the Lord, who by death sends
for them home to himself, when he sees time: and when he so does, have they
cause to complain of wrong? father, mother, son, wife, husband, brother, are
but lent goods, which we must restore when the creditor, and he that owneth
them, calls for them. And shall we count our selves spoiled or undone,
because they are required? If one should lend us a thing of price or thing that
is costly, would we (for a recompense of the use of it) vpbraid the owner
because he sends for it? or, if we should, might not he, who was the lender,
justly say: is this my thanks? and shall I be recompensed with so great
impatiencie for my so great good will? So if God should lend us ten dear
children, as he did to Job, and we should be made to part with them all in one
day, would it become us with rough words to receive that supposed loss? or
would we complain of wrong, where none is offered? and where our good is
sought and our childrens gain, be unthankful? if we should, may not the Lord
of them and of us, justly tax our unthankfulness and complain of wrong? May
he not say: did Job, my servant so, from whom I took ten children in one day,
and, in a few days, all the honor and substance that he had? did he not
rather confess my unquestionable right in such moueables, and say; the Lord
gives, the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord. Job 1.21. If a
great Lord should call us and our child, promising to both much honor and
great wealth, would we weep and take on, because our child is gone before, and
we, our selves, must shortly follow after? would we not rather, with much joy,
so order our journey and affairs, that we (also) might (with as great dispatch
as might be) receive such preferment as (we know) our child has entered on
already? And why are we unquiet, seeing the Lord of Heaven and earth has
called our child from a base condition to nobleness, to bestow honors upon
him and riches that shall not fail, promising the like to us by the way of
death? should we not rather so dispose our occasions and life, that we may
ioifully follow him whom we have not lost but sent before? But you will say,
my child was young and died in his flowers? well, be it so, yet they who die
young, so they die well, are old enough to go to God: besides, did not
Ieroboams child in whom were found good things, die young. 1. King. 14.13. And
did not Josiah die old, whom the Lord, in a battle at Megiddo, took from the
filthy will of Judah to plant him, before himself in the garden of his own
presence, in glory. 2. King. 24.29. Neither can they be said to die young,
whose perfection is grown to a blessed ripeness before the Lord. But young,
or old, if you have reioiced in your child, as in the Lords interest, you will
not think it much, and why should you, that the Lord should have his own? or,
will you (with Phurao) offer to hold in the prison of life (as in Egypt) any
servant of his, whom he shall send for by death, his last messenger, and that
a^ supper time when all things are ready? Luc. 14.17. While he lived, God gane
him to you, as a pledge of his favor; now that he is taken away, you must
freely resign him as a pledge of your obedience. But you will say, He was my
only child. Indeed the death of an only child is very grievous to the
Parents. Zechar. 12.10. Am. 8.10. yet Abraham was ready to have sacrificed his
only son Isaac at Gods commandment: Genesis 22.3.10. and God gave his only
son (Christ) to death for our sal^ation. Ioh. 3.16. wherefore, as Elkanah
said to Annah, so, and much more may the Lord say to us: am not I better to you
then ten sons? 1. Sam. 1.8. or, are not our ten sons, and all the children
of the womb, his gift? Ps. 127.3. Then, though he be your only child and all
you have, whom God thus, by death, takes from you, there is no cause of grief
or of complaint, seeing the Lord has but his own when he has taken him, and
seeing (also) that he takes him, and you give him, but as your pledge and
earnest to bind unto you the right of that inheritance that you look for; or
as your Feof-fee of trust, gone before, to take the possession for you.

A reproof to those, Amos, who put the evil day of his coming (that which
they judged to be evil, and the godly judge to be happy, no day happier) as
far from them, as they could by carnal delicacie and wantonness. Amos 6.3. So
did Belshazzar look upon him, whose heart would not serve him to read the
handwriting of his own end so near. Dan. 5.5.6.30. And Nabal had no heart to
die: who, when he must needs die, died as a stone: that is, died blockishly,
and so faintly, that he was as good as slain, before death slew him. 1. Sam.
25.37.38. He had no comfort in death, which he could not see one that was as
righteous, but as churlish and profane. And no marvel: for, this Adversary,
death armed as Goliath, and vaunting as that proud Giant of Gath, comes
stalking toward such in fearful manner, infulting over weak dust, and daring
the world to give him a man to fight with. Therefore, at the sight of him, the
whole host of worldlings bewray great fear, turning their backs, and going
backward as men ready to sink into the earth, with abated courages and looks
cast down, stained with the colors of fear and death, trembling like leaves
in a storm, and stricken with the palsy of a sudden and violent shaking
through all the body. 1, Sam. 17.10.11. But the true Christian armed (as
David) with trust in God, and expectation of victory by the death of Christ,
who by death, overcame death, as David cut off the head of Goliath, with his
own sword: dares and does boldly encounter with this huge Philistian, death
(supposed invincible and seeming great) but neither with sword nor spear, but
in the name of the God of the host of Israel, by whose might only he
wounds, and strikes him to the earth, trampling upon him in the return of
his soul to the place out of which it first came, and singing over him this
ioiful and triumphant song of victory: O death, where is thy sting? 1. Cor.
15.55. He has Steuens eyes to look into heaven: and therefore cannot but
have the tongue of the Saints who say: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Apo^
22.2^^ For the joy that is set before him, he (with his good Savior,) endures
the cross of death, and despises the shame of corruption, to which the dust
of his body must be turned. Heb. 12.2.

Ob. Romans 6.23.

Ans. Aristotle.
it is simply fearful and evil. Which made an heathen man to say, that of
all terrible things, death was most terrible. He saw in the dark, that death
had much evil in it, and that it was properly evil, and but accidentally
good; but he could not see through the dark cloud that which made it so evil.
Therefore evil it is (I confess) and fearful. And to this we have a greater
witness then the witness of man. For, the Apostle says, the sting of death
is sin. 1. Cor. 15.56. Now, so far as it has a sting, and is in it
strength, it is to be feared. The reason is: so it is properly death, and death
in kind: But we speak not of death, considered out of Christ, or considered
in it self, but of death altered by the death of Christ, and which by such a
change, is made our passage from death to life; for so, it is no dreadful
thing, but a thing desirable: and so the sting is taken from it, which is of
force, and carries an edge of second death against all the workers of
iniquity, who dying out of Christ, die miserably, hellishly, and with horrible
fear. By Christ the door, death is made a door out of spiritual death into
spiritual life, out of unhappiness and pains mortal, into all happiness,
and joys eternal. Further, they who are set in Christ (in whom they live, to
whose glory, they desire to live and die) seeing they behold death, not with
carnal eyes, but with the eyes of faith in the Gospel, do (as has been
said) get heart and rejoice against death, in their good consciences, and all
the terror of it: and so to them it is a disarmed enemy, or enemy of no
power and hurt. For how can that Scorpion hurt, that has no sting? Or why
should that enemy be feared, that has neither hand to strike, nor weapon to
kill? Such a Scorpion is death, when we take sin from it: and death is such
an enemy, when once we have set it down by reformation of life. Contrarily,
natural men fear death exceedingly, death that brings so much good to the
righteous, and takes so much evil from the Saints, because death in them, is
not joined with a godly and well reformed life. They have not done the good for
which they came into the world: and therefore they fear to di^. They apprehend
death as a strong enemy, finding in it (through their continual wickedness)
no likelihood of salvation, nor sign of peace, and therefore desire not to be
dissolved, but fear to be dissolved, nor think death to be a change, but a
plague. Or, they have all their pleasure and peace in their days here, nor
caring for the days of heaven, nor fearing the long night of hell. Here, they
are well, and they know not where is better. Therefore, not hoping for a better
life, no marvel if they leave this against their will. Death to such is the
beginning of eternal death, and no port-way to Christ, but a portall-doore to
destruction. Let us therefore so live, that we may not fear death, and so
learn to die, that we may live ever, not with Devils in torments, but with
God in his kingdom. That we may so do: we must remember how it was said,
that death (as it is an effect of the fall) has a sting, which sting of death
is sin. This sting we must pull from it, by taking sin from it in our daily
repentance, and daily turning to God by newness of life. He that has an
enemy will do what he can to weaken him, and if he be fearful, because he
is well armed, he will do what lies in him, to disarme him, that he may not
fear him. This enemy is death, the last that shall be destroyed. Let us
therefore do all we can, by putting off sin, and putting on righteousness,
to bring down his strength; and by taking away from our hearts, and the
conversation of our lives, the sin and sting of drunkenness, whoredom,
blasphemy, pride, lying, and other abominable lusts; let us put no weapon of
malice or edge into deaths hands to fear us with, when we should leave this
world with comfort, and go to God in peace. So shall we neither fear death,
nor feel the gripes of second death.

Object. But the godly have feared death: else, why did Eliah fly from it in
the persecution of Iezabel? 1. Kin. 19.3. and Christ teach his, to decline it
in the persecutions of men? Math. 10.23. and Christ himself pray against the
bitter cup of it in in his agony, and before his apprehension? Mat. 26.39.

Ans. I answer briefly. These Saints did not, nor were to fly from death, as
it is the end of life, and blessed end of a good life, but used the meants of
flight (only) to prevent violent and hasty death, till the hour appointed
should come that they were to give their spirit in peace, into the hands of him
that made it. And because such untimely death was enemy to the good they had
to do, and course they were to finish; therefore they went aside by flying,
for some time, and till the time of their departure came, that they might do
the good, to which they were appointed, and finish the course for which they
were sent. But where it is alleged that Christ himself prayed against the cup
of death. I answer, two ways. And first that he prayed, without sin, and
without having sin, against it: seeing that in that his supplication of
tears, and much fear, he submitted always to his fathers will: and seeing also
death was not to him, as it is to us. For, to us the sting of it is conquered,
and the force broken; but to him it was in full power: He felt the sting of it,
and wrastled with the force of it in soul and body. Secondly, I say that it
was not merely a bodily death (though unsubdued, save where himself subdued
it) that he trembled at, but by the burden of our sins, which he was to
undergo, in which he beheld the whole. There he saw his fathers countenance
turned against him, and there knew that he must bear his wrath, because he
bore our sins. Besides, Christ feared death, being clothed with our flesh,
to show that he took our infirmities, and bore our sorrows, and was perfect
man. And so death in some case may be feared, and at some time prayed against,
but ever under the correction of Gods will. Esaias 38.2.3. For the rod of death
turned into a Serpent, made Moses to fear, Exo. 4.3. and the best have
moderately declined, and shrunk at the stroke of death when it came in some
tempest. And who does not dread all Gods terrors, whereof death is one? And
fear that which is the punishment of sin and curse of sinners? And decline
that which is the destruction of humane Nature? and shrink at that which has
made the strongest, the wisest, the richest, the greatest to fall down flat
before it? Therefore the fear of death, thus reproved, is not the natural
fear of it, which is in all, but the servile fear of it, proper to evil
doers, and common to those who can have no hope in death, because they never
cared to live, till they were compelled to die. And now that we have heard
what fear of death it is, that Gods children must not be stained with; as
namely, that which is servile and cowardly, we will show (and that briefly)
why such fear of death should fall upon none of Gods servants, who in so great
peace, leave this world, and for so precious a crown of glory. For, if we
have no better resemblance of death, then when we sleep, nor better rest, then
at that time: why should it be counted so hydeous a thing, when the body is
toiled and much spent with labor, to send it to the sweet and deep sleep of
death, or to lay it in the quiet bed of the earth, where no sounds or fear can
disease it? And if to Gods Children, death be not only a departing from pain
and euril, but an access to all good, nor the end of life, but the end of
death, and beginning of life eternal: can Gods children think it any
disadvantage to exchange the sense of pain, for the fruition of that which is
perfectly pleasing and good? Or, to change death for life? Or, to pass from a
weary pilgrimage to their desired homes, where they shall not only never
feel misery, but be ever happy and blessed, with the full sight of that,
the glimpse whereof shining upon the face of our Savior, in his
transfiguration, made Peter to say: Master, it is good to be here? Math. 17.4.
Solomon says: Better is the day of death, then the day in which we were
borne. Eccles. 7.3. And why better? except because when we are borne, we come
into misery, and when we die, we go out, our death, being changed by the
death of Christ, and made unto us, not a death as the Law makes it, but our
path and midway between this life and the other which is eternal; or our
door and little wicket out of this world into that world and kingdom, which
is prepared for the Saints, inhabited of the Angels, and receives honor from
God, who is the light and temple of that Cirie? Lastly, death has lost his
sting, his hell, his victory (I speak in regard of the righteous) that which
remains (if we live in the spirit, and die in the Lord) is profitable for
us. For, it shall bring an end of all our labors, and give us up into the
hands of Jesus Christ. Now what fear is in all this? Let them fear
(therefore) who have (given unto them) a spirit of bondage and of fear, in
which they tremble at their own estate, and which makes them to carry in
their breast tormenting furies that hold them day and night, in the fear of
endless death: Let them fear who rest in sin, live in error and ignorance,
follow the lusts of the world, and walk in all the ways of death; but let
not them fear, who are at a covenant with themselves, to have no pleasure in
such fond courses, and direct ways of death, but to have their pleasure,
(only) in the word of God, to understand it, and in the mystery of Christ to
be lightened with it; who hate sin, that they may have hope, and walk in
righteousness, that they may walk with Christ. Let not such fear: for the
power of death and Satan is broken before such, and such may have boldness,
when they go out of the world, that they shall go to God.

A comfort (therefore) to the faithful, Hebrews, the Apostle shows what
great troubles the servants of God endured, and how joyful they were, as at a
royal feast, in all those troubles and sufferings for Christ, that they might
enter upon the comfortable death of the righteous. They were so far from
fearing death, as worldlings fear it, that they ran gladly to it, in their
hope of the resurrection, and reioiced in the welcome day of death, as in a day
of the greatest good that could befall them. The reasons were; they knew with
Sampson, that they should slay more at their death, then they slew in their
life: Judge. 16.30. As first, that they should slay their last enemy by death,
which is not slain but by dying. And secondly, that they should kill the spawne
of all enmity, sinne's sin, which bred death, (...) 4.7.
and the miseries of eternal death. Which death in the Saints, bred by sin,
as the worm in the flower, kills the corrupt flower that bred it, that is,
that sin that caused death. And this made I doubt not but the Prophet here
sinned by impatiencie: but his hope was in death.
Eliah to desire death, not life, and rather to die, then to live, saying; It
is enough: 1. King. 19.4 It made David to lay up his flesh in hope: Psalm. 16.9.
It made Paul to say, I am ready not to be bound only, but to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: Act. 21.13. And as Simeon said, Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace: Luke 2.29. So the godly have such
comfort in death, that they say with old Simeon, and all Saints: Come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly: Apo. 22.20. apprehending death, as their only way to
Christ, and guide to happiness, and applauding death as Jacob applauded the
Chariots that Joseph his son sent for the bringing of him out of a land of
misery, into a land of plenty and fullness, where he should have food
enough, the best in the land: Genesis 45.27.48. The hope of Job, and expectation
of the Saints is, that they shall see God, and come to Christ by death
presently in their souls, and in their bodies at the last day, when all the
bones in Golgotha shall rise at that voice that shall say, return ye sons
of Adam. Psalm. 90.3. For though death shall swallow them up, as the Whale did
Jonah, and shall bind them as the Philistims did Sampson, and the shroude did
Lazarus, hand and foot; Ioh. 11.44. yet the Whale of the earth shall not hold
them, nor the snares of death and shroude of darkness prevail against them,
when God shall speak, by his last trumpet, to the graves of the earth, and
they shall cast out all the Lords Ionahs. Ion. 2.10. The bands of death shall
fall asunder, as corruption and rottenness in that day, in which Christ shall
command the holds of darkness to deliver his Saints, saying, loose them and
let them go. Ioh. 11.44. This (then) being all that the righteous shall loose
by their gainful death: For they shall loose a short miserable life, and
receive a long ever blessed life in glory; what loss can there be in death,
and what greater advantage then by dying? This the godly know, and therefore
rejoice in death, as they that find great spoils. They find that their
body, such as it is now in the estate of corruption, is an image of gold,
which is disfigured, that it can be brought to no shape, till the owner melt
and refound it to a new similitude: Even so, the body that at first, was
beautiful, having such a grace and majesty set in the face of it, that (after
a sort and outwardly) it resembled the Creators image, fairer then any of Gold,
they find so to be trodden in the mire, and so misshapen by sin, that it can
never receive the beauty and condition of the first work, till it be
dissolved and new-moulded, by the hand of GOD at the resurrection of all
bodies: and therefore they desire death, as the first necessary and blessed
workhouse of this their repair from deformity to fashion, and from
corruptible to eternal. So death was Saint Paul's advantage: and how can it be
our loss, if we make Saint Paul's end? If we had no hope after death, we
might fear indeed. But GOD having made their first Adam a living soul, not a
dying soul, and all the sons of the second, glorious souls, not reprobate
spirits: Why should we dread or fear to receive our crown and glory? Or, why
should we be unwilling, with a joyful shout, to salute our port and haven,
after so many tiring storms as we have endured upon the raging sea of this
world? And why be sorry that we are going to our house of peace, and home of
long life, which is at the right hand of God, where is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore? Psalm. 16.11. Does any man fear to fall a sleep at
night, that has labored hard all day? What is the death of the faithful, but
their sleep of refreshing after the toiles of their life, when the night is
come in which no man can work? Ioh. 9.4 To this blessed sleep of peace, the
Lord for his mercies sake, lay every one of us, whom he has purposed to take
to rest from labor, in his time appointed.

Amen.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE THIRD SERMON.
ESA. Chap. 57. Verse. 2 He shall enter into peace, and they shall rest in their
beds; every one that walks before him, or, that walks in his
righteousness.


THis scripture is a scripture of much comfort bringing Genesis 8.11.
an olive leaf of peace in the mouth of it to the righteous that perish, and
to merciful men that are shut up with the flood of death in the Arc of their
graves, that they might not see the evil, the great evil to come, when they
should see their enemies in the habitation of the Lord, and Judah, with her King
and inhabitants, lead in Chains of bondage to Babylon. The words
(particularly) and those of the five verses immediately before (four of them
in the former Chapter, the fifth and sixth at the beginning of this) contain two
things: as a complaint and comfort. The complaint, which is joined with a
threatening, concerns the ungodly that lived in their sins, the comfort
pertains, to those that should be taken away in peace, walking before the
Lord, that is, in paths of righteousness before him. In the complaint, the
Prophet speaks of a lamentable and very universal destruction or plague that
the Lord was preparing to send shortly upon that wicked Rebel Judah, which was
come to such a brimme of sin and senseless wickedness; and that is, he would
call for the wild beasts of the field and forest of Babel, (meaning those
Gentiles and Nebuchadnezar, their King) to devour them, and to execute the
Lords judgments upon them, eating their flesh and inuading their land.
Therefore, where, in a figurative speech, at the 9. verse of the former
chapter, he calls the beasts together, as to some royal feast: he means
to forwarne the people of some grievous judgment, prepared for them, and
coming toward them, even a judgment of desolation and slavery intended
against them by the King of Babel and his great host. The like we read, Ier.
9.22. and Ezech 39.18.19. And because it might appear that the Lords
judgments are ever righteous, (as he himself is most righteous and holy) in
the three verses that follow, he speaks of one maine cause that moved the
just God to send so great a storm of affliction and death, in the captivity
then threatened: and that was, their watchmen who should have told them of their
sins, and given them warning, with the Lords trumpet at their mouth, of a
plague so near, neither kept watch nor gave warning: but lived delicately and
fed without fear, being also covetous and greedy dogs that could never have
enough. And indeed, when a kingdom is overrun by such, in the form and
calling of Teachers, it is a blazing-starre to that people and kingdom of some
alteration at hand. For, if the Sun be set upon the Mountains, what show can it
make in the valleys? or, if the blind lead the blind, must not both of them by
the darkness that is in them of sin and ignorance, fall into the ditch of the
condemnation of the Lord. Mat. 15.14. But, all the fault (though the greatest)
was not in those dumme and greedy Dogs, the not teaching and ill ruling
Ministers of that time; the people them selves had their sin also (spoken of
in the first verse of this Chapter) and that was a careless regard of the
deaths of the righteous, beside their festrednesse, and more then stand, in
sin and wickedness wherein they continued and went on carnally, not feeling
any stroke of Gods hand in that judgment, which he begun at his own house,
by taking away, suddenly his best men. And now, if this complaint may be urged
against us and our coldness in a like case, at this day, as it was against
them, and if it shall make us no wiser to God, nor more careful of our last
end, then it could them; let us prepare our selves to a like justly deserved
misery, and to pledge these in the cup in which they have drunk before us, or
begun unto us, to destruction. Thus far the complaint. The comfort intended
only to those who should walk before God in their goodness, fidelity, and
truth, (for such should be sure upon the remove of their souls, in soul to
enter possession of an everlasting and present peace, and in body to rest most
sweetly in the common bed and house of the earth till the last great day) has
two things to be considered in it: as a promise made, and the persons to whom
the promise is made. The promise is in two things: peace to the soul, and rest
to the body, so soon as the soul goes out of the body. The persons to whom
this promise is made, are just men and merciful men that walk before the
Lord, that is, that do his commandments that they may live. Luc. 10.28. and
keep his sayings that their part may be in the tree of life. Apoc. 22.14. The
text may be resolved thus: (as a learned man resolves it:) He, that is, the
righteous, shall enter into peace, or upon peace; and they, namely the godly:
shall rest in their beds: to wit, immediately and presently upon their
deaths: for, as their bodies go to rest, so their souls shall enter into
peace: as Apoc. 14.13. and Luc. 16.22. Every one, that is every godly one: God
is no accepter of persons, and there is a generality of giving in him, as
their must be a particularitie of receiving in us, that walks before the
Lord, that is, that has his conversation in the Lord, walking in no way but by
him, nor in any course but after him. This being (as I take it) the true, both
resolution and sense of this verse, the first thing, in it, promised to the
righteous, is peace: by which (as was said) is meant the peace of their souls,
as by rest is understood the resting of their bodies in their chambers of
peace, and this peace, as by the knitting of this sentence to the former, with
the tie of reference, may appear, does come presently unto them upon their
going hence. The meaning is: righteous persons so soon as they die, and
merciful men upon the instant of their change, enter into a more excellent
state both of peace and rest, then ever they had here. So says the spirit:
blessed are the dead from that time, that is, they are immediately and
presently upon their death, blessed; not some time after, nor at any time
before, but, so soon as they die, who die in the Lord, or for the Lord. Apoc.
14, 13. And this we have confirmed by that which we read of Lazarus, Luc.
16.22. who was carried imme diately upon his death into Abraham's bosom: before
his end no man regarded him, at it, the Angels came from Heaven to fetch him.
Job calls the days of man, that is, his days on earth, the days of an
hireling; Job 7.1. as if he should call them, days of labor and wearines:
and, speaking of the life of man, his life here; he calls it a life of short
continuance and much trouble. Job 14.1. Months of vanity, and nights of
sorrow. Job 7.3. Solomon says, all things are full of labor, Eccles. 1.8.
that is, all things here. And he that is greater then Solomon has said,
speaking of the righteous; in the world, that is, so long as ye walk in it as
men, and soiourne in it as Pilgrims, ye shall have affliction. Ioh. 16.33. The
words are plain, and the meaning is, there is nothing in it to, or for Gods
children but sorrow and misery. The reasons of this doctrine are. First, the
spirit says so: Apoc. 14.13. the spirit of truth, and the spirit which is
truth. Secondly, there is continual enmity, as it were daggers drawing
between us and Satan, and between Gods children and his cursed children. Genesis
3.1^. Apoc. 12.13. Now, what may be looked for in the field of a life full of
deadly braules, skirmishes and battles? Surely, as it is said, there is no
peace to the wicked. Esa 57.21. So we may say truly, nor peace to be had with
the wicked. Thirdly, experience in all the ages of man's life teaches this
truth. For, from the first scene of our coming up upon the stage of this
world, to the last act of our going down, what part of our life is not full of
vanity and vexation of spirit? Eccles. 1.14. The first scene is of our
infancy when we are in our nurses arms, and does not that begin with
tears? and is not all that unhappy, save that we want reason, that is, the use
thereof to apprehend that happiness? when we come out of our nurses arms, to
go in our nurses hands, or to go by our selves in our next age, do we not
weep long under the rod, and presently fall into the subjection of a Teacher?
when we come out of the prison of boys and girls, and are set at some more
liberty in a young man's life, are we not tossed, as upon a sea of
unquietness, sailing between reason and passion, as between two contrary
waters and cross winds? then comes perfect age, or man's age, and what have
we here but blasts, and storms of greater unrest then in any age before? from
one travel we pass to another, never ending, but changing our miseries. And,
when we come to old age, or, have lived so long that we are come to dotage, is
there any thing in these ages exempt from misery, and the travel that is
under the Sun? Surely our infirmities do now, if in any age before, come upon
us in multitudes, yea, so load us with their weight and number, that they make
us to bend and go double under them to the earth. And can there be any comfort
in these diseases (as I may call them) and days of evil, wherein do meet
and flock together so many vultures of life, the weakness of infancy, the
servitude of childhood, the sickness of youth, the carkes of man's age, all
which come again, and come all together, as so many storms upon one poor old
house that is sore shaken already, violently in death, to overthrow it for
ever? Here the excess and riot of youth is recompensed wi^^ goutes, palsies,
and sundry fearful aches, the watchings and carkes of manhood are punished
with loss of sight, loss of hearing, and loss of all senses, except the
sense of pain. There is no part in man which death (in that age of years)
does not take, in hope to be assured of him, as of a bad play master, which
greatly fears, and would put of his days of payment, and therefore it
brings him low in all parts, that he may have power in none to avoid his
creditor, and end so near. Quest. But is there no peace in this life? Answ.
Yes, a kind of peace there is in this life: but it wants two things which
should make it sound and happy, to wit, perpetuity and wholenesse. For it is
not long not entire, but by fits, and with mixture of crosses: and so may be
called a kind of truce, rather then true peace. And good it is for us, that we
have these outward good things thu^ scanted, and (as it were) weighed out unto
us. For the mind, cloyed with them, would loathe even the honi^ combs of peace.
Besides, all earthly things are full of variableness and change: which having
no peace in themselves, how can they give any to us? I speak of outward peace,
or peace in these outward things. For, the peace which the children of god
have, is in inward matters, and every way sound, though imperfect, many ways.
This is that peace of their consciences, whereby they receive contentment, and
practice patience in all their troubles; by it, they are all one with God and
with themselves: at one with the good Angels, and with good men, and have peace
with all the creatures. The reason is: In the flotes of this life, they cast
their anchor as deep as heaven, finding no fastening for it upon the earth. The
peace they have or seek to have, is in God, and from him, in the comfortable
testimony and peace of their consciences, which they desire to lay up, as a
treasure, in all the worlds frowns. 2. Cor. 1.12. Therefore, whatsoever
comes, their heart is not moved. And, hereby they take sieson below, of which
they shall not fully be possessed of till they receive their inheritance.

An instruction to the faithful, followed, is presently altered from happy to
miserable. He that rose upon the wheel of honor, when it turns, it turns
him out of his heaven of peace into a hell of shameful and raging
unquietness. And the fellowship that the world makes so much of, and calls
good, when it is evil, what is it, and what strength has it of sound
continuance in the whole band of it, when death has unloosed it? When it is
sick and dying; the pleasures of it, are they not either forgotten as vain,
or remembered as grievous? Lo (therefore) the peace of worldlings, and what is
that they lean unto, who make not God their stay, and therefore are they
chafe which every wind of change scatters: Psalm. 1.4. where the peace of
Gods children is not in these crakling blazes of corrupt happiness, but in
Angelical ioies, and joys of the palace; nor earthly, but such as the Saints
have, and which passes understanding. And if that peace (which stands upon
stronger proppes and likelihoods then any, which is carnal and (merely) of
the world, does) be many times broken off by the unquiet blasts that come from
this earthly sky: how shall that peace, that is set but upon rotten posts of
casualtie and brittlenesse, be able to stand in so continual a tempest of
trouble and alteration, as (day and night) beats upon it? Therefore our rest
is placed in the things which are above the sphere of changeable mortality,
and not in transitory matters. All is vanity and vexation under the Sun.
Eccle. 2.11. And there is no perfect peace, till we dwell before the God of
peace. Honors have galls in them, and riches pricks. In labor there is no
profit: and ease slays fools. Prou. 1.32. After mirth, comes heaviness,
as a cloud after a fair sunshine. In laughter the heart is sad: and there
is much error in laughing. Eccles. 2.2. The difference (then) between this
life which we have, and that which we look for, stands in this; that this
life is our sea, and the other our haven, and that here we ride upon
tempestuous waters, and there at anchor in our road and port of peace. For,
here we sow in tears, there we reap in joy Here we are burdened, there we
lay down our burdens. Here we are abroad in our Inn, there at home in our
fathers house. Luke 15. Here are our years of bondage, there our years of
Iubilee and perpetual redemption. Here is our leading into captivity, there
our going out. Here is the battle, there the Crown: Here the Church
trauelleth, there she is delivered. Here she cries out, there she
remembers her pain no more. He that here begun, saying to his Church I have
afflicted thee, will there make an end, and say unto her, but I will afflict
thee no more. Naum. 1.12. And how is the day of death, better to us then the
day in which we are borne, Eccles. 7.3. and why does the voice that came from
heaven, say; they that die in the Lord rest from their labors; and why does
the spirit in the hearts of Gods children, say as much; for even so says the
spirit; that is, it is just of the same mind, Apoc. 14.13. if they, who go
hence, come not out of labor, but exchange it? Nor better their estate, but
alter it? Nor end their misery, but to remove only from such miseries?

A confutation of that Legend of Popish purgatory, their death, or says the
spirit, if they must continue for some years after their blessed death in
burning fire, as terrible as the fire of hell, save in respect that the one is
eternal, the other but for a time? And not end their miseries, but prolong
them? Or, is there any rest in the fire, or peace in the fire and water? Or
remission of punishment, in a place of punishment? Or ease in labor? Or
blessedness in misery? Has Christ said, It is finished? Ioh. 19.30. and
shall men say nay, but we shall feel more of it in Purgatory? He has done
it: and shall any undo it? Or think to do it better? The blood of Christ is
our purgatory 1. Ioh. 1.7. It, and nothing but it purges our sin, and
prepares places for us in heaven. We need no other sacrifice but it, nor
advocate but him. A pitiful digression (therefore) from the blood of Christ to
the blood of Hales: From the fire upon the mount, to the painted fire of
purgatory: from the living to the dead. Esaias 8.19. Purgatory (then) what is
it but an impudent check to the merit of Christ, and quiet of the Saints? And
for these who stand for the Kitchen, in which it burns, and chimney whereout
it smoketh, or rather Kitchen for which it burns, and chimney that it makes
to smoke, let them tell us where the place is, when it began, how long it must
continue, who are there punished, what is there punishment, and who the
tormentor, that we may believe them. In these points they are at odds with
themselves, and how (then) can they be at even with us, or with the truth. But
this is more largely discovered by a worthy preachor, upon this very place, in
print. And so for this lie of Purgatory, let us leave it to the inuentors; to
the Mowles, and to the Buckes, Esaias 2.20. that is, to the Egyptians from whom
it came, and the old Greek Poets, of whom Plato first received it, and Virgil
after him, and diverse heathen Philosophers and Poets, after them: and let us
come to the first of these comforts, that are expressed here.

Peace, etc.] By peace the Prophet means the peace of the righteous, in the
full joy of their souls after death. As if he should have said, they shall
(then) in their souls receive (immediately) perfect prosperity, and
consummation of bliss. So much the word, translated peace, John, in those
earthly similitudes of gates of Pearl, of walls of Jasper, and of a street
whose pauement is gold. Apoc. 21.18.19.20.21. and 1. Cor. 2.9. David calls
them joys, and fullness (...); also, pleasures, and pleasures eternal: Psalm.
16.11. that is, blessedness without end, and the same without want. Paul
calls them, an eternal weight of glory: 2. Cor. 4.17. as if he should call
them, glory endless, and the glory that waigheth down; there is such
fullness in it. And they are called the well and river of life, Apoc. 22.1. as
being always full, and having springs, that come from God, to feed them. Or,
an inherit^nce immortal. 1. Pet. 1.4. An inheritance, and therefore, a
possession in the best tenure; and an inheritance immortal, and therefore, not
for years, but for ever. Life, in it self, is good, good life is better, but
eternity makes it excellent.

Object. But in heaven, some shall shine as the firmament, some as the stars
for ever. Dan. 12.3. Now the firmament, has not so much light as the stars
have, that lighten it, and the stars have less light then the Sun has, that
lighteneth them. It seems therefore, that in heaven there should be to some
rather some want, then such fullness of heavenly glory.

Ans. I answer; though in this condition of our heavenly life there may be
degrees of glory, yet there shall be no want. Some may be like the sky, some
like the stars of the sky, yet all shall shine. Some vessels may hold more,
some less; and yet all be full. One may have more joy then another: and there
are sundry measures of more or less glory in heaven; but no measure shall
lack his fullness of life, or glory there. He that has least shall have
enough. The reasons are; Hell is contrary to Heaven. In hell there is a
fullness of torment: In he (...) therefore there must be a perfection of
glory. Secondly, earthly kingdoms and the Kings thereof have as great an
absoluteness, as earth can give them; and shall we think that heaven, which
can give an entire, will give an imperfect crown of righteousness? Will not
the Kings of the earth dwell in base cottages, but in royal courts? And shall
these Kings of a better kingdom want glory, where mortal Kings have so great
glory and power? Princes on earth dwell in royal palaces, and sometimes in
Cedar and Iuorie. Apoc. 1.6.
But they whom Christ has made Kings and Priests to God his Father (who dwell
in tabernacles not made with hands) shall reign in a city whose twelve gates
are twelve Pearls, whose wall is of Jasper, and building of Gold, and whose
streets shine as clear glass. Apoc. 21.18.19.21. So said he who saw all this
glory but darkely; or as Moses saw the land of Canaan, in a very short Map or
Card, a far off. Deu. 34.1.2.3.4. We see but the outward wall of this
heavenly city, new Jerusalem; and yet how glorious is it, and how decked with
stars, as with sparkling Diamonds? What would we say if we could see into
it, and behold, (though with Peter, James and John at a glance and blush
superficially,) the goodly pauement of heaven within, whose floor is of gold,
and wall about, is garnished with precious stones? Apoc. 21.19. Thirdly; if
Adams paradise and garden was so pleasant and delightsome; how pleasant and
glorious is Gods own garden, and seat of his own residence? He spoke of it
with a wondering tongue, whose finite heart could not comprehend so infinite an
excellency: very glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. Psalm
87.3. For, though in the letter, this worthy Prophet spoke of that earthly
heaven, which he confessed to be in the material tabernacle, because of Gods
presence, and the godly exercises of Gods people performed there, yet his
meaning was, under the cloud of the phrase, to direct Gods children to a higher
tabernacle, and house of greater glory, then that which was earthly, and under
the doom of time.

An instruction above all things, Col. 32. For what place have we here, but of
trouble? There we shall have our place of peace. The joys of our earthly life
do much affect us, sometimes too much, which yet have their gall of bitterness
in them, and cross of short time. For, no sooner do they begin, but their end
borders upon their beginning, and many times, they rather seem to begin, then
begin indeed, being like to a false conception that comes not to bearing. Many
are unwilling to leave this world, because of the acquaintance they have in it,
and which, (when they die) they must leave behind them in it. And yet in this
worldly fellowship, there is much sour joined with sweet. But if there be so
great a portion of content, in this worldly fellowship, what pleasure is there,
and how perfect in the society of glorified souls, the ancient worthies of
the old world, and the flower of this: when we shall see but with other eyes,
and in a spiritual manner, Abraham, of whom we have heard so much, Isaac,
Jacob, Job, Samuel, and the Prophets, whose names we have loved: When with
Eliab, we shall see Christ clothed with our flesh, who has immortality at his
right hand, and shall make us reign for ever? We admire the building of
Kings, and he was a Disciple, who said to Christ, speaking of the temple; see
what stones and what buildings are here. Mar. 13.1. But as Christ to him: so
let me say to all that wonder at these things; are those the things ye look
upon? Luke 21.6. The sumptuous buildings of Kings and stately Nobility, though
all the rich entrals of the earth had conspired to give them varnish and
glories, what are they but base Cotes, compared to this frame, not made with
hands? And do we so much wonder at mortal, lime and stone, and so little care
for our eternal house? The three Disciples, who in the transfiguration, saw
but a glimpse of this heavenly glory shining upon the face of their Savior,
would needs build taberbernacles in it: what, if we saw the whole Sun of it,
and not some glimpses only? Math. 17.2.4. Moses saw God but a little in the
mount and with mortal eyes, and his face so show that the people were afraid
to come near him. Exodus 34.30. How (then) shall they shine in roabes of
perpetual glory, who do behold (not with these, but with other cies) the face
of God for ever? Lastly, to draw our affections to the place where our life is,
and directly to God in whom we live; let us consider the honor and pleasures
of this City. Where^^ greater honor then in sovereignty? and where are more
pleasures then at feasts? this estate of heavenly life is both a kingdom, and
a feast. A kingdom, for they that are in it, have overcome and shall sit on
thrones. Apoc. 2.7. A feast, yea, the marriage feast of the son of God, in
which he shall ever be espoused to the Church his wife. The contract is made
below, the marriage shall be consummate above with solemnities unspeakable.
But, if these excellent things, spoken of the city of God, cannot win our
love thither, remember we the rich man in torments, Luc. 16.23.
and by this burnt child learn to dread the fire of hell. The places are
contrary, and all things contrary that be in them. As therefore Heaven is a
place of joys, and honor eternal; so hell is a kingdom of shame and
perpetual contempt. Dan. 12.2. And now, if so great glory and pleasures, so
many and so endless, cannot please you, do but a litte cast down your eyes
into that deep lake, where are nothing but flaming fire, palpable darkness,
and perpetual burning: and nothing but tears, shrikes, and outcries, of
hopeless and reprobate consciences: and nothing but torments, and places of
torment prepared for damnable sinners, where is no intermission of complaints,
nor end of pain: as far from ease, millions of years to come, as at their
beginning. The rich man in torments, craved but one drop of water, when whole
rivers of water would not quench those rivers of brimstone that fed that fire;
and could not have it. Luc. 16.24.25. And, if the rods wherewith God chastneth
his children in this life, be so smart and galling, that they have brought them
down to the brimme of despair, and so low in affliction, that they have
wished for death: what smart and galling plagues do the damned suffer in the
torments of hell, who are beaten, not with rods of chastisement, but with an
iron rod of destruction: in whose confusions remediless, the Lord will say,
even he whom here they despised; I will ease me of mine ad^ersaries, and avenge
me of my fees. Esa 1.24. And thus the fear of hell may be reason enough to
draw our affections from these things below, if the love of heaven cannot. But
neither the love of heaven, nor fear of hell, can work in some any little
distaste of this worldly Egypt, that they may eat of this Manna that is hidden.
Apoc. 2.17. That is, of the bread of heaven, in the kingdom of heaven.

A reproof (therefore) to those who altogether mind the earth and earthly
things, Sodom, and hoof in Egypt, and so stick to the place of their
banishment, in which they take case, and purpose continuance, that they never
mind their country, nor affect their remove unto it. They cloy their stomachs
with the gross dinners of this present world, and so have no appetite to the
Lambs dinner, where, Christ being governor, keeps his best things last. Ioh.
2.10. When we speak to them of peace, they prepare themselves to battle. Ps.
120.7. In heaven is peace, and here on earth is nothing but war, within and
without; within, in our selves, without in the world: and yet men had rather
live in a field thus swimming in blood, then, by walking before God, dwell in
tabernacles of peace. A sign that heaven is not there city, nor Christ their
head. For, they that belong to the city of peace, will seek heavens peace;
and they that belong to Christ, desire to be with him. Colos. 3.1. Where the
head is, there would the body be. If (then) we do not ascend to heaven by a
spiritual life, but dig down to the hels by a carnal: if covetousness
hold us in the world, and the love of God cannot draw us out: if, to be thus
absent from Christ, be our happiness, and we count it our greatest
unhappiness to come unto him by going hence; Christ is not our head, but he
that has the Dragons head; the world is our city, and heaven our strange
city, to which, either we mean not to come, or would not willingly but by the
violence of death, when we can live no longer. For, can Christ be our head
whom we care no more for? and heaven our country which we seek no sooner
after? Therefore, while we are on the earth in our bodies (if we will be the
members of Christ and the citizens of heaven) let us dwell before God in our
souls, framed in the form and manner of a ship, which is close downward and
shut to the world, but open above, and enlarged to heaven where our treasure
is, and expectation ought to be. So did our fathers, who walked with God, to
whose righteous souls this peace is come: and who now are most safe under the
shadow of their Altar, Christ upon whom (whiles they lived) they offered all
their spiritual sacrifices, and now being taken up to heaven in their souls,
praise him with ioifull lips continually, and follow him in white whether
soever he goes.

A comfort to those, Zacheus upon too low a ground to see Christ, do therefore
climb up in their affections, above earthly matters, and worldly desires
(treading the Moon under their feet) shall hear one day, perhaps this present
day, their sweet Saviors voice, saying: Come to me at once, for this day is
salvation come to your houses. Luke 19.5.9. And then as God said to Abraham;
Arise and walk about this Land, this is the country that I will give thee.
Genesis 13.17. So he will one day say to every child of Abraham; Behold thy
heavenly land, that is, the place of thy perpetual abode, come to it, walk
about it, and live in it for ever. Then we shall have that blessing, that all
our prayers, hearing, readings in the word, and other godly striuings (like
that of Jacob with the Angel before he blessed him) labored unto. Genesis
32.26. Herod promised much when he promised half his kingdom. Mark. 6.23. But
Christ both promises, and will give a whole kingdom. Math. 25.34. And where
among men, the elder only does inherit; here, all sons are heirs; and all
receive, not some few Manors, and small Lordships, but crowns of
righteousness. Romans 8.17. O (then) what should let our desires, with the
tribes of Renben and Gad, to pass over this Jordan of death, by the parting
(not of waters) but of soul and body, to come to our Land of promise. Number.
32.3.4.5.6. Jacobs 7. years seemed light unto him, in regard of Rahel for whom
he served. Ge. 29.20. And why should the labor and travel not of 7. years,
for it may be (as was said) we shall not serve 7. days;) and we serve not a
churlish Laban, but a most bountiful redeemer: I say, why should this short
labor of ours, and travel of so short time, seem any thing, in respect of
that fair Rahel and life to come. So much for the first of those comforts that
are promised, namely peace, that properly concerns our souls; The second,
which is rest and belongs to our bodies, follows,

And they shall rest in their beds etc.] By beds, the Prophet understands the
places, into which the Lord bestows the bodies of his servants in or after
their death, whether water, or fire, or the panches of wild beasts, or the
chambers of the earth, or sea, or air. And these he calls beds: because they
shall rest quietly in them, as men in their beds, till the morning bell, or
loud trumpet of the last great day, warning all flesh to rise, shall raise them.
Therefore it is an usual thing in the scriptures, so soon as men die, to say
they fall a sleep. Whereby is meant, that they are laid in their beds of
peace, whether Churchyard or Church, and that (before their bodies are carried
forth for burial thither) the places in which God takes their souls to his
presence, are their beds: and so the beds of their death, are the beds of their
peace: Beds made for them by God himself, in the which after their last long
sleep of death, they presently enter into their last sweet sleep of peace. The
Papists say otherwise, who hold that the righteous take no possession of their
beds of rest, till the Priest have put them into their beds of earth. Indeed
men give them burials then; but God does, provide for them their bed of burial
lat their death. And they are called beds of rest, to put difference between
these beds of our nights-sleepe, and those of our sleep in death. For here,
be our beds never so soft or well made, we often take no rest, by reason of
some disorder in our bodies, or fancies in our head; but in these sleeping
places which the Prophet calls beds of rest, we may lay us down and sleep
in peace. Psalm. 4.8. the Lord of life being our keeper, who will make us dwell
in safety. Indeed, in it own nature, the grave is an house of perdition,
rather then bed of rest; but being altered to the Jews in promise, to us, in
performance by Christ's grave, who was buried in the earth to change the nature
of it, it is made to us a chamber of rest, and bed of Down. The point here
taught is: they sleep, not, they die; As if he should have said: they go to
their beds, and not to destruction. 1. These. 4.15. And the same Apostle,
speaking of the death of the righteous, calls it, not a death, but a sleep:
1. Cor. 15.51. as if he had called it, not rottenness, but rest. For this
cause also is our death, in heathen Authors, called a sleep, as the Scriptures
call it, and our grave our bed. At night we take our chambers, and lie down
in our beds: so when death comes, which is the end of life, as the night is of
the day, we go to the chambers of the earth, and there make our beds or lie
down in bed, till the day of refreshing (which is the day of rising) come,
that comes from the Lord. The reasons are; This was figured in the embalmings
which the Jews used. And this figure (as al other figures of the old
Testament) must be performed in one, which one is Christ. As therefore their
embalmings did perfume the graves, in which they laid their dead, for a season:
so the most precious blame of Christ's burial did for ever sweeten to the
Saints their graves of corruption. Secondly, as the end of Christ's death was,
that he might vanquish death; so it was one end why he was buried, that he
might (after the manner of conquerours) subdue death at his own home, and (as
it were) pluck him out of his own den and cabin: Thirdly, the bodies of the
godly are parts of Christ's mystical body. while they are in the grave, and
when they are turned to corruption, and therefore cannot but be precious in
his eyes, and graven upon the palm of his hand, till they be restored. For, as
the Husbandman does make no less reckoning of that corn, which he has sown
in his field, and lies under the clod of the earth, then he does of that which
he has brought into his barnes: So Christ does as highly esteem of those
bodies, as it were grains of corn, that are sown in corruption, as of those
that yet never saw corruption, nor came to the grave. Therefore, we shall not
rest in death, though we rest in our graves: For that God, who raises the
Sun daily out of his den, will one day, raise us out of our graves, to stand
before him for ever.

A confutation of that fancy that has so long deluded the simple world, Phil.
1.23. How can there be any death, when soul and body are not parted, and when
the man is not dead, but lives? But this fancy came from Pithagoras a
Philosopher, and is but a Philosophers dream. Pithagoras told his dream to
the world, which was, that the souls of men departed, did enter into the
bodies of other men: good souls into good men's bodies, bad, into bad men's. The
world (then) believed him: And, since that time, Satan, who can turn himself
into all forms, did, in the dark night of Popery, (to deceive that ignorant
age) change himself into the similitude and form of some person that was
lately or had been long dead, and was believed, by such a transformation, to
be the party, man or woman, that he made resemblance off? So entered the
error that Spirits did walk: and that dead bodies, came out of their graves
and haunted sundry houses in the night, which were not the bodies of the dead,
but the Devil in those bodies; or shapes, as is to be seen in Samuels
counterfeit shape, raised by the Witch at Endor. 1. Sam. 28.8.14.15. And this
error, as it deceived the blind world, and somewhat troubled the seeing; Math.
14.26. Act. 12.15. So it is still in the mouth and faith of credulous
superstition at this day. But God having given eyes to us to see his truth, and
the light of judgment to see it by, let us not walk in so great darkness as
they who know not the truth, nor whether they go.

Here (also) we learn to put difference between the condition of the
righteous, resurrection of death. Ioh. 5.29. as malefactors to their execution.
And where the godly, (as honest men of the country) shall stand before the
Judge without fear: they shall stand (as the guilty Prisoner) at the bar of
shame, to receive the sentence of their just condemnation in soul and body.
And what comfort can this be to shameless sinners, in the night of the putting
off of their tabernacle, seeing they go not to their beds (as do the
righteous) but to their dungeons of darkness and horrible fear? For, as, if a
man should be bidden to go to his rest, that after he had slept and was risen,
the punishment of some terrible death might be inflicted upon him: So is the
state and condition of all impenitent sinners in their death. For, they must
lie down, for some time, in their beds of dust, and rise again, that a
second fearful death may be inflicted upon their souls and bodies. Now,
could any poor man go comfortably to his bed, that is bidden so (as we have
heard) to go unto it? with what comfort (then) can desperate sinners remember
their graves of earth from which they must pass to their graves of fire for
ever? Indeed as a man, that is outlawed, may take his pleasure and walk at
large for a time, but whenever or wheresoever he is taken, he must yield to
the punishment that law has awarded: so the wicked, upon whom sentence of
damnation is past already by an out-lawrie and judgment that cannot be
revoked, may (for a season) go untaken, taking their liberty, and fetching
their friskes, as if it would never be otherwise, or as if that just God (who
is their creditour and must be their Judge) would never serve an execution upon
them by death his Minister; but the time will come, when they shall be arrested,
and, after some short repriuie of their bodies in the jail of the grave, be
violently haled to the prison and pit of hell, from which there is no
redemption. It were well for such, if they had been cast into their graves, as
a dog into a ditch: for, though his burial be homely, yet his case is much
better then theirs, who are buried gorgeously and go to hell. The dog ends
his misserie with his death; but when such die, they begin their misery, and
end their ^oyfull days for ever. For, man shall not die like a beast, though
he live like a beast; nor be senseless of pain hereafter, though here he was
sensles^e of sin, and free from pains and smart that others felt.

As before in respect of their souls that presently enter into peace;
hereafter to wear it, will he mourn and be sorry, that it is so kept till
there come a high day to wear it? So the faithful, concerning their bodies,
which are the vesture of their souls, are shut up, by death, in the coffers of
the Earth. And shall their friends take on, because their friend has his best
clothing so preciously laid up, that every soul, upon the highest day of the
days of the year, may have the several robe and vesture of it own body to
be put upon it? or, will any man think much, that his friend has put off his
old rags, to put on robes of glory? This is the very case of the righteous
when they lay down their bodies. They put off vile bodies, to put on glorious:
and their bodies are but chested in the earth when they return to their dust,
that in the solemn and high day of resurrection, they may be brought forth
again and restored, but with far greater beauty and shining, to the souls
that were owners of them? So much for the comforts promised, The persons
follow, to whom such comforts are promised.

Every one that walks, etc.] The persons whose souls shall enter into
peace, and bodies be put in their sepulchers, no otherways then if they should
be laid in their beds of rest, so soon as they go hence, are, they who walk
before the Lord, or walk, that is live, as in his sight. And here the Prophet
sets down two things: the generality of the promise, every one; and
condition under which it is made, that walks before Him, that is, the Lord.
For the generality, and where the Prophet says, every one; his meaning is,
that neither country nor parentage, nor diversity of sex and calling, nor
any outward thing shall make his end unhappy, whose life, by reason of his
godly life, is happy; where learn, That, in man. Whosoever believes in him,
or has received the grace of faith to put faith in him, and to live unto him;
let him be borne, wheresoever, and let his degree be, whatsoever: such an one,
says Amen, shall not perish. But so it may be, that is, one may not perish,
and yet miss of peace; therefore it is added, and have everlasting life: as if
it had been said: he shall not be miserable, and he shall be happy ever; he
shall not die, and he shall live (eternally) in glory. Ioh. 3.16. Peter
perceived this, and in a vision, coming from heaven, saw this: and therefore,
as God opened the vision; Act. 10.15. so he opened his mouth and said; Of a
truth I perceive, or to say the truth, I now know, that God is no accepter of
persons, or God does give his grace indifferently to one and other, whether
born in Iewrie, or fearing God in Caesarea: and therefore in every nation, he
that fears him and works righteousness; no matter what countryman, so he
be a good man: he that reuerenceth him shall have his part in him. Act.
10.34.35. whether Jew or Gentil, circumcised, or uncircumcised, rich or poor,
bond or free, he shall have life, if he walk before the God of life: Blessed
is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. Psalm. 128.1. All
that walk in the sunshine of Christ, shall receive the die of his favor,
as all that walk in the Su^ are tanned. They shall gain peace and find rest,
where others meet with shadows, and shall live in miferie that live in
unrighteousness. The reasons. The things that cause error in judgment and
accepting of persons, are, imperfect knowledge, and respects in the world, of
good to our selves, or of our bond to others. But these are not in God, whose
knowledge is wonderful, who needs no man's good, and is no Man's debtor. Ps.
139.3.4.5.6. and 16.2. Math. 20.15. Secondly, God forbids his Servants, who
are the Judges of the Earth, to accept the persons of men, and commands them
to judge indifferently not accepting faces. 1. Sam. 16.7. 2. Chr. 19.7. It was
Iehosaphats charge to his Judges, or rather the Lords by him. And so, being
Gods law to others, and a law of great justice; will he (himself) break it?
and will not the Judge of the world do judgment? Genesis 18.25. Thirdly, God
has made many promises to those that walk before him and (uprightly) in his
commandments. The scriptures plentifully speak of this. And, will an honest
man keep his word? and shall God falsify his truth. Ps. 51.4. shall he say it
and shall he not do it? God forbid we should so think.

As Gods promises are general to all that walk before him: and every man
live by his own faith. Habac 2.4. Another good life will not be imputed to
us, nor another faith save us. Therefore all that thine hand shall find to
do, do it (says Solomon) with all thy power. Eccles. 9.10. He says, thine
hand, not, another hand. For, he that will not do good but by a deputy;
shall go to heaven by a deputy, and to hell in his own person. Some say let
Ministers live precisely, and let Divines walk before God; but for themselves,
because they are not in that calling, they take liberty and give themselves
leave by a dispensation sealed by themselves to walk other wise; as much as if
they should say; let Ministers be saved, and divines go to God; but for us,
let us perish, if we must perish, and because God will not have us let the
devil have us. This is fearful: and their case no less fearful who post
off goodness to others. Let this confute superstitious popery, and careless
Atheism. One says well: why art thou proud of another man's gift, and thou
give nothing? Every one that will have peace, must walk upon his own feet,
and work with his own hands. Ephesians. 4.28. And Papists who, with the foolish
Virgins, trust unto the store of the wise, shall receive answer; we have not
enough for our selves and for you. Math. 25.9. But some fear too much, as
others fear too little: who, though they have lived orderly, and are sorry
(with the sorrow of true repentance) where they have not, yet are short-handed
in receiving what God has promised to those who walk before him. But will a
condemned malefactor, at the bar, not fail to apply the Kings general
pardon to himself for life: and shall a justified sinner fear to make the
general promise to all believers, particular to himself, who is a believer,
that be may live? Paul says, Christ came to save sinners of whom I am chief.
1. Tim. 1.15. He pleaded the Lords general pardon, though a sinner and the
chief of sinners. So the father of John the Baptist, Zacharias, in his
canticle, puts in for the horn of salvation, Christ, drawing that great
redemption, in him, to himself, as he applied it to others, saying; for us,
that is, for others in Israel and for Me, an Israelite. Though in other cases,
a man cannot, with good manners, be importunate in matters, and for things
which concern himself, in commodity or preserment: yet here a godly man can
never be too earnest, nor lay too much upon such a foundation. Sometimes we will
apply hastily and catch where we should not, but if we would be prouidently
captious and without offense, let it be here. And as it is written of the
servants of Benhadad who were sent to the King of Israel, that they took
diligent heed, if they cold catch any thing from him, towit, for his advantage
who sent them: which made them, when the King of Israel had said, Is Ben-hadad
yet alive? he is my brother. Presently to reply, saying; Thy brother
Ben-hadad: so let faith and hope (our servants,) confessing guilty with humbled
necks, and ropes about them, watch what the King of the Kings of Israel has
spoken and set down under his hand, in his word, concerning repentant sinners,
and we shall find it written in the volume of the book concerning them. Is he
yet alive? he is my brother; That is, Does the hungry soul pant for my
salvation, and the thirsty for my righteousness? Does it yet trust in God?
Does it still believe? Behold (says the merciful King of Christendom, Christ
Jesus, and he that saves us from our sins) I have brought many brethren to
my father, and many sons to glory: and this is one. Let us now well observe,
and diligently mark what he says. Benhadad is the Kings brother. Therefore
say we, thy brother Benhadad, and catch him in his words; that is, God my
father, and Christ my elder brother. The father will not cast away his penitent
child, nor one most kind brother betray another to death. 1. King. 20.33.
Indeed, the dejected soul of man cannot always, being laden with troubles,
thus raise up it self into confidence: and some, in the brunt, have complained,
that they have been cut off from God, whose voices in their fear, have been
these, or such as these. Christ (indeed) came into the world to save sinners,
but not such as we are; and was appointed a Savior, but not for us, singling
out themselves. Some in their have, have said: Here is the fire and wood, but
where is the Lamb for sacrifice? Ge. 22.8. But let such remember, that peace
shall come to every one that walks before God, or that would, (that is
unfeignedly would) walk before him. We see not the Lamb for sacrifice, but God
will provide, nay God has provided it; and open we the eyes that blind
distrust has shut up, and we shall see it. Christ spoke as one forsaken; and
a man would think that he had despaired when he twice said; My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Math. 27.46. But if we dig through the bitter bark
of the letter, deeper into the words, we shall find an honey comb in them of
perfect consolation. Judge. 14.8. For he calls him (yet) his God, and as if he
would add another cord of faith to his first, and make it a twofold cord that
cannot be broken, he calls him again, the second time, his God; that is, the
God, in whom he trusted, in whom he will trust. If God shall fashion any of us
to our head in the similitude of such a sorrow, ever let our eyes be upon
Christ, and upon those whom God has scaled to be faithful, and we shall not
be confounded in the perilous day. Let us but say with Isaac, my father. Genesis
22.7. And (though we can say no more) God will presently answer: Here I am my
son. For, this is a trne saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. The Apostle says, it is
worthy the marking, and let us mark it well: 1. Tim. 1, 15. For, it is as
true, as worthy to be received; and teaches, that though we be sinners, and
great sinners, or chief of sinners; yet if, as repentant sinners, we can
believe the remission of sins by Christ, and not too popishly, harp upon a
satisfaction for sin by our own doings, our part is in his great salvation.
For, Christ came to save sinners, and the chiefest sinner. There wants not a
hand to give, but we want hands, who should receive his gift. The blood of
Christ is able to cure (as most sovereign physic) all infirmities, and sins
repented off. If we be never so great sinners, and have a hand of faith in our
hearts, to receive that grace of God that has brought salvation. Tit. 2.11;
neither we nor our sins can disanull the promise of God, which is, that he
will be merciful to our sins. Then, let our sins be never so many, and
those many sins never so great, being truly repented off, God is greater,
who has forgiven us all our sins. The voice that says to all, come; Apoc.
22.17. excludes none; and shall we, being bidden to the great Kings wedding,
by turning the point of cruelty upon our selves, strike our own names out of
the roll of the guests that are bidden to the Lambs feast? Math. 22.4.5.
Therefore, sin does not simply hurt us, but impenitencie in sin, hurts
the wicked. For, Herod had rather loose John, then his brothers wife. Mat.
14.3.5. And some had rather part with their preachers, then with their sins.
So, they hinder the effect of the physic, which in mercy by good application,
is appointed to heal them. Salvation is come to their houses, and into their
houses, but they judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life. Act. 13.46.
Thus the godly in temptation dare not apply Christ, and the wicked in sin,
cannot.

But, Psalm. 82.6. should not in causes be partial betwixt man and man. For,
they execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord, who is with them in
the matter of judgment. 2. Chro. 19.6. The Magistrates seat must be the
throne that judges right, and when he gives sentence in a matter, he must lay
judgment to the rule, and righteousness to the balance. Esaias 28.17. as if
he would weigh out an equal and even proportion of justice to rich and poor.
Deuteronomy. 1.17
And this measure must be scaled at the Lords standard, with testimony of an
upright conscience. Therefore, one sets forth a good Judge, with a sword in
the one hand, and a pair of scales in other. The meaning is, that he must not
strike by judgment til the cause to be judged, have received an indifferent
balance in hearing. Though a Noble man speak by a letter, and a rich man
entreat by a gift, he must not hear, to pervert the straight steps of
justice. To be short; as God is no respecter of persons; so these Gods should
know no difference of person, where right is one: nor bend their cares to credit
a tale that first is Prou. 18.7.
told them: nor corrupt their judgment with their censure before they hear the
cause: nor separate between their verdit, and the truch of their knowledge,
which should go together: nor use sudden resolutions: nor be hasty in
judgment. So shall justice be free: not partial nor hired, which God detesteth.

A reproof of those proud christians who grace religion in a velvet hood,
having the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons. Iam. 2.1.2.3.
or, who bid rich religion home unto them, but will not take poor religion by
the hand: for either they turn from it as strangers, or against it as enemies:
So, the poor is separated from his neighbor, Pro. 19.4. that is, his carnal
friends will not help him; the godly, that are poor, cannot. And hence it
is, that they who want wealth and countenance, though never so religious, are
despised as abiects: They who have riches and favor, though never so profane,
are admired as Angels. But it is a mark of the heir of life, to respect the
virtue, not the riches or person of a man. Ps. 15.4. And he who is such an one
will be affected toward men, as he perceives men to be affected toward
God: if they contemn God, he will not regard them, though never so
honorable; and if they fear God, he will make much of them, though never so
vile. This is to judge righteous judgment, and not according to the
appearance; which judgment Christ the Judge has forbidden, Ioh. 7.24. So S.
Paul charge Timothy in his ministry, to do his duty without preferring
one to another, to wit, for outward matters, and to do nothing partially, 1.
Tim 5.21. that is, not to spare to reprove for affection, nor to rebuke
bitterly for displeasure and evil will. A good item for the partial in the
ministry among our selves at this day, who will scarce give counsel but such
as shall please, where they love, and yet draw out reproofs as salt as brine,
and the same (many times) causeless, where they spleenishly hate. Which, what
is it, but to make God himself their officer to revenge their quarrel, and to
scrue their malicious humor? To spare some for great faults, and bitterly to
inuey against others for no fault, because they be our carnal friends, whom
we spare, and suspected foes whom we so fiercely prosecute, and falsely reprove:
Is it not to make the word it self, and the author of it, God himself,
partial, and to profane that which is holy? Which may be spoken of private
persons as well as of public ministers, who in their enemy can see the mote of
a small fault, and have no eyes to see the beam of a great one in their friend
and lover, Math. 7.3. If he offend, whom we malice or like not, it is horrible;
but if he greatly offend, whom for kindred, or wealth, or acquaintance, we
esteem of, it is nothing. What is this but to affect for respects, not of
virtue or vice, but of kindred or person?

A comfort to the poor that be godly: David says, That God has chosen to
himself a godly man; Psalm. 4 3. he says, not a rich man, if he be not godly.
And he further says, be sure of this: as if he should say, believe it, or
make full account of it that it is so. The same Prophet speaking (as we heard
Psalm. 15. ver. 4.) of a citizen of heaven in one of his properties, says; that
he honors the godly, that is, loves and reuerenceth Christ, whom they love
and honor. Then, howsoever they be despised in the world as the scum of the
earth, and of-scouring of all things, yet because they honor God, good men
will reverence them, and take them out of contempt, as gold out of the mire, to
make them their treasure. They are fellow-heires with the righteous at the
inheritance of heaven. And therefore do the righteous perform all good
offices of love and fellowship toward them in this vale of want and scorn.
Though evil men make them their mock, they make them their fellows; and
where bad men take away their right, good men enrich them. Great (therefore) is
the consolation of the righous, who though contemned in the world, yet are
precious to God, and to all the sons of God. So much for the generality of
the promise, the condition under which it runs, follows.

That walks before him.] We have heard of the promise what it is, tho persons
to whom it is made, and to how many: The condition under which it runs, is,
that such persons must be, and continue godly; which is expressed by a phrase
of walking before God. Where we may consider two things: as the act of
walking, and the object before whom. By walking, the Prophet means according
to an usual Metaphor in Scripture, a common usual course of men's behavior,
or their ordinary trade of life. And by walking before God, a scruing of him
without hypocrisy, or doing of all our matters, as in his sight. The word
which is here translated, walks, is rendered in a tense or time, which in the
own tongue, notes a continuance of walking, or walking forward unto the time
when God should take them hence. And the meaning is, that peace shall come to
all those who continue to serve God in their outward behavior and in their
hearts, or who, living and dying, are found so doing, Not that begin well, and
go one for some time, but that continue and increase in well doing, from the
time of their enlightening to the time of their last breath.

From whence the doctrine is, Math. 20.2.8. So in the vineyard of the
new birth, none must be idle from the first hour of their entering in, to the
last day of their going out by death: and to these God gives the penny of his
endless peace in glory. For this, the Spirit is called wind, Ioh. 3.8. and
they spiritual whom that wind drives forward to salvation, with a divine
gale; who wax not worse, nor keep at a stand in godliness, but strive to be
better and better, by going on in the good way of eternal life. So did the
Apostle S. Paul, who (therefore) forgate that which was behind, and endeavored
himself to that which was before, and followed hard toward the mark, to the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13.14. He was not as
a vain foolish man, who running in a race, will be ever and anon looking
back to see how much ground he has rid: but his eye was always upon the mark
or goal to consider how much he had to run: how far off he was to
perfection: and what was further to be done to an absoluteness in his
Christian course, that he might finish the same with joy. And as the Apostle
himself did, so he would have the Philippians to do, and all Christians in
them: that is, he would have them to proceed in that grace to which they were
come. Phil. 3.16. as if he should have exhorted them to abound more and more,
in all wisdom and godliness. Romans 15.14. And to go forward therein, not to
fit down or go back. If we have prayed once a day in private and coldly, we
must (after) pray twice, or oftener, and more fervently. If we have read and
meditated in the word seldom, and with great weakness, we must mend that
seldom, and use those exercises more frequently, and with more spirit. If we
give something to the poor this year, we must give more the next, as God
shall bless our increase. If we do some good now unwillingly, we must
hereafter do much good and with great pleasure. So then, we must continue to
walk before God as we ought to walk, and to please him that has called us,
growing in grace, and increasing in goodness. 2. Pet. 3.18. 1. These. 4.1. The
end makes all: and, he that endures to the end shall be saved. Math. 24. So
says he who saves us, whose words are true and faithful. He says not, he
that endures for a season, or for some days, but that continues to the end:
and not, he that runs (for all run) but who so runs that he may
obtain: 1. Cor. 9.24 Apoc. 2.7.
and not he who fights (for we may fight and be foiled) but he that
overcomes shall be saved, and receive this prize of peace, and crown of
life. The reasons; He is not crowned, that proves masteries; but he receives
the crown who does Master. 1. Cor. 9.25. Not he that comes into the field,
but he that overcomes in the field, is praised: And who will give him the
garland of a good runner, who sits down, or gives over before he come to
the Goal? Now, will not men, and will God praise those, or give salvation to
those who shall begin only to do well, and not continue in well doing? Will
he crown those that give over? or save those that fall away? It is certain,
and these comparisons, used in scripture, show plainly and conclude soundly,
that he will not. Secondly; The way of the righteous, is compared to the way of
the Sun that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Prou. 4.18. Now the
Sun is not in full glory till full noone; Neither perfect, till he have run
his course like a Giant: So, Christians receive not their glory at their
morning, and nine of the clock, but when their Sun is come to his full point;
nor when they begin to believe, Romans 13.11. but when they come to the end of
faith, 1. Pet. 1.9. Apoc. 2.10. nor when they are baptized, but when they die
in the faith of their baptism. Thirdly, that we must continue, and not begin
only to walk before the Lord, is plain by the word, which in the tense
wherein the Prophet uses it, signifies to continue walking, not giving over
till we come to our ways end: or to walk as they who walk to a City, and
therefore go on till they come thither. So must Christians do, and not faint
by the way, else their labor of setting forth is vain and fruitless. For as
in our way to a place, he that goes not forward nor to his ways end, is
never the near, though he have gone half the way, or (almost) the whole way:
so in the course and way of godliness, he that walks not forward with
increase, or continually to the end, loses his labor, and finds nothing.
Lastly, if we eat daily that we may live, we must do good always, if we will
live for ever. If a man should give over eating, and think to live, his hope
were vain: and as vain is their hope, who give over to do well, and think
to be saved.

A reproof of their folly, who, exercises, as prayer, hearing, reading,
receiving of the sacraments, and the like, that may set him forward in the way
and to the power of godliness. Does any hate wickedness? he must avoid all
temptations to it. More particularly: does any man hate swearing? he must avoid
swearing, by avoiding the company of swearers. Does he hate Popery? he must
hate to be among Papists. Does he hate whooredome? he must not keep company
with suspected persons, nor haunt suspected places. Does he hate drunkenness?
he must shun, as hell, the rooms, nay sties, where drunkards be If (then) the
exercises of religion do not affect us so much as vain exercises: if we had
rather be in an Alehouse then in Gods-house; and at our wake-dinners then at
Christ's supper; and at the hearing of an interlude then at hearing of the word;
and abroad in pleasures, then at Church in prayer: or, if we be weary of an
hours preaching, and not weary of a days play: and sleep at prayers, but
watch in vanities: and refuse to sup with Christ, to take a supper with
worldlings: how shall we keep the path of grace, or, not walking in it, assure
our selves that we walk before God, and that peace shall come? So if we strive
not against sin, to master it, but only wish we could: if we find only an
unwillingness in us to commit sin, and no care to resist it: or if there be
a strife, and it be but natural, like that of the twins in Rebekahs womb, a
strife and fight, that we rather wonder at, then know how to deal in: Genesis
25.22. that is, if shame, or fear, or both, rather then conscience of sin,
make us bashful to commit that sin openly, which we boldly do in corners,
waiting for the twilight, and if this be all our strife and resistance, not
striving till we overcome, how shall we be crowned? and what difference between
us and those Soldiers, who are loath to be overcome, and yet will not strive to
conquer? He (therefore) is a Christian conqueror, and he only, who strives
against sin till it be subdued, and loves righteousness, in a godly life,
beginning well, and daily going forward, till he receive the crown of
righteousness. But he that keeps no constancy in the work of
mortification, and is good but by fits, being hot at hand only, and humble
for a day, Esa. 58.5, is no conqueror, that is, man of spiritual valor, but
a slave, and that to the devil, the basest slave. He that masters not anger,
but sometime holds it in: nor subdueth his lusts, but restraines them only:
nor loves chastity, but will not be an adulterer for fear, is a weak
warrior against sin, and in goodness an hypocrite. Which may be spoken of
those professors that are off and on, and who, because they never had
foundation well laid, stand in no weather, nor change. Math. 7.27. Such houses
are blown down with every wind. And if such perish, how shall they think to
be saved who love sin, and hate godliness? if they that go to meet the
bridegroom be shut out, because they are not in the way at his coming: how
shall they think to enter, who cannot abide those that but seem to meet him,
and are never in the way, nay that wickedly deride the way of his coming?
Math. 25.1.12. If those hearers withered away in destruction, whose blade
continued not, Math. 13.6. how shall they prosper, upon whom never plough came,
and who never were tillable, but a wild waste? If painted tombs, having rotten
bones, be odious to God; how shall sinkes please him, that are foul without,
and foul within? Math. 23.27. And if they be far from salvation, who, having
walked in the good way, go out of it before their death: how far are they,
who never were in any such way, neither before their death, nor in all their
life, that they might have some hope to be saved? A doubt resolved.
But where it has been said, that they who continue not in goodness, shall
perish and be damned, I would not be mistaken, as if I had said, that they
cannot be saved, who have left their good beginnings for a season, or, being in
this way of life, have gone out of it by humane slips, and after (upon better
aduisement and further grace) have come again unto it by righteousness, and
to the Lord by repentance. For whenever a sinner shall so turn to God, and
by such a course, God, who embraces penitent sinners, will receive him.
Neither would I be conceived to say, that they who, a long time, have run a
large race of sin, if they find mercy in their life time at the Lords hands
to be converted, are excluded from salvation. For even they who at, or not long
before their death shall be found penitent, shall enter into happiness. But
let none adventure so dangerously to tempt God, or thus to put all to the
success of the last battle, having no better weapons then those, wherewith so
many millions of slumbering christians, have before them lost the field.

Here, an answer for them, and that also which teaches them to answer for
themselves, who meet with the thrusts of the world for their zeal and care
(precisely to hold the way of life.) O, say some; this is too much niceness,
and what needs all this ado? To whom we may say again, that all this is
needful, and much more, that we cannot do, if we will wait for peace, in the
ways of peace, and not in the broad way of liberty, as they do, of whom it
may be truly said, the way of peace they have not known. O, we are men and
not Angels, say some. A little to tread awry, and (a little) to go out of the
way, is but a humane frailty: and an inch breaks no square: But to such we may
say: it may be our frailty thus to do. But if we presume we may so do, or
if we strive not to do otherwise, it may be our destruction, that we so did,
and the loss of our peace for ever. Indeed, we are men by nature; but we must
correct nature by grace, and labor to be good men. We are not Angels; it is
true: yet we must imitate the Angels: and an inch in finne may so far break
square, as it may send us square and roundly to hell. Be perfect (says our
Savior Christ) as your heaneuly Father is perfect. Math. 5.48. It was spoken
to his Disciples, and it is spoken in them to us. We can not, neithes could
they be perfect in the same measure; yet as they were charged, so are we
commanded to be perfect in the like manner, by a kind of conformity and
imitation. The meaning is, we must endeavor to be, what (perfectly) we cannot
be. And how can we (then) justify any limping in the way, or little going out
of the way of grace by small infitmities? It is pardonable in Christ, but not
justifiable by us. Therefore where we make such littles of sin: as a little
oath, a little meriment, a little of the fashion, and a little must be borne
with: let us know, that Satan by such littles, makes his kingdom great. For,
as a covetous man gathers by half pennies, and by pence till he come to
pounds: so the devil gets his wealth from some by littles, here a little,
and there a little. Prou. 6.10, till finne be full, and many litles in finne
make a great total. There is no dalying with God, nor playing out and in our
progress to salvation: which is to heap wrath upon wrath, til it come to a
mountain, or from some small heaps to come to a treasure. Romans 2.5. The way
is, to give the water no passage, to pound in sin, and to give no way to
occasion, to take heed we be not led away from our stedfastuesse in knowledge
and grace. 2. Pet. 3.17.18. not to trip, (if we can choose,) but to make
straight steps in the way, and to hold on our fellowship in the Gospel from
this day and hereafter. Philip. 1.5. Blessed is the servant whom his Master,
when he comes, shall find so doing. Math. 24.46.

But, it is said here, that they enter into peace and come to rest, that walk
before the Lord, as it were upon two legs, the right, of sound religion, and
the left, of an undefiled life: for, where one of these is lacking, there is
halting in the way, as also where they be severed, and where both go not
together. The doctrine is: good death, and they who live well here, shall live
well, that is, blessedly, hereafter. David made this question, Lord who shall
rest in thy mountain, that is, in heaven, not as Pilgrims for a time, but as
heirs for ever. Ps. 15.1. and God makes this answer. He that walks
uprightly and works righteousness, verse 2. that is, he that lives holily,
shall die purely, and live for ever. He that loves the face of God in his
Church, shall see the face of his pleasures in his kingdom. The same Prophet
with some small alteration of the words, asks the like question, to which the
like answer is made. The question is: who shall ascend into the Lords
mountain? Psalm. 24.3. that is, who shall be taken from their pilgrimage to
their country, and from this mortal vale, to the hills of immortal rest? and
the answer is. He that has innocent hands and a pure heart. verse 4. The
meaning is, he that lives charitably with men, and holily with God: or that is
not unjust to men, nor an hypocrite to God. He that professes the Gospel and
is careful of his ways, not walking upon a leg and a stumpe, as they do, who
seem religious, and live ill; or appear righteous, and are profane; he
shall stand before the Lord for ever. Esaias (likewise) makes a question and
answer to this effect: Who (says he) shall dwell with the devouring fire? who
shall dwell with the everlasting burning? Esaias 33.14. His meaning is, who shall
abide the presence of God, who is a consuming fire? Heb. 12.29. and dwell safely
before him? This is the question; and the answer is; He that walks in
justice and speaks righteous things, etc. ver. 15. that is, whose ways are
without offense, and words without guile, he that says well, and does well,
shall dwell on high, ver. 16. or rest safely in the mountain of peace. And
Christ (our blessed Savior) telling us, who shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven, as the hypocrites of heart, who make a stir with their mouths,
and put no good work into their hands, who prophecy in Christ's name; and do
nothing for for his name, and call him Lord, but make their lusts their Lords;
tells us, that they shall enter into heaven, who do his fathers will which
is in heaven. Math. 7.21.22. All desire to rest in the holy mountain of God,
but few behave themselves as Pilgrims in his tabernacle: Yea, all desire with
Balaam, to die the death of the righteous, when there are few who take care to
live the life of the righteous, that they may so die; Number. 23.10. Therefore our
Savior shows that our talking of salvation will not bring us to it, nor our
wishing to be in heaven send us thither. If we will be saved (then) we must
live as the heirs of the grace of life, that is, as the sons of God, not as
brands of hell. The reasons; Though nothing be due to a good life by desert on
our parts, or by debt on Gods; yet it being his merciful promise, that all such
shall be happy both here and hence, in this world, and in Gods kingdom; Psa.
112.16 etc. 128.1.2.
he will not, and (because it so pleases him) cannot call back his word,
whose promises are all yea, and Amen; that is, no sooner made, 2. Cor. 1.20.
but as good as done: Therefore they that live godly, shall die blessed.
Secondly, they who live well, live in obedience to God. Now, they who obey a
good master, are in favor, and increase in wealth, and shall the servants of
God live in misery, and die unrewarded? Also, they who conform to Gods
commandments are his faithful scruants, and loyal subjects, whom a good
master and gracious Prince must needs countenance. Thirdly, the Apostles words
are plain, that godliness has the promises of this life, and of that to
come. 1. Tim. 4.8. As much as if he had said; They who walk according to this
rule, shall be blessed here, and blessed in heaven. Indeed the godly do not
always prosper in these outward things; yet wanting them, or their fill in them,
they have Gods blessing, inwardly in the peace of a contented mind, outwardly
in so much as is sufficient. The wicked, who have them in greater measure, have
them not under Gods hand nor as his blessings, but as stolen wares that they
shall answer for, because they have no right unto them by Christ, nor hold
them in Capite, that is, in him. Therefore, their table is a snare unto them,
and their prosperity their ruin. They live to the increase of their
damnation, and they die to take possession of it. Fourthly, they who with the
glorified virgins, wait for Christ in the life of the righteous, are always
prepared for death, when it knocks, Mat. 25.10.
to open unto it. And what is a prepared death, but an happy death? And what
follows an happy death, but an happy life, never to die again? Such go in
with Christ, to his marriage of everlasting life.

We see (then) that the last hours repentance (the common refuge of
worldlings) as it comes short of a sanctified life, in the place where it
falls, there it shall be. Eccles. 11.3. That is, as we live so we (commonly)
die. Or, shall we think that men can easily begin righteousness at their last
hour, and that repentance in that hour is (ordinarily) good and sound
repentance? Let them well consider this who put off their conversion to God,
and send away, by hope of repenting old, all those good motions that knock at
the door of their hearts for a sanctified life. One says well: While the Lord
speaks to thee make him answer: and while he calls, let there be an echo
in thy heart, such as was David's, who, when God said; seek ye my face,
presently answered, thy face will I seek. Psalm. 27.8. The Lord has promised
pardon to him that repents, says another, but that he or any other shall
live till to morrow, he has not promised. Many in their puttings off, fare as
if they should say: Lord, let me sin in my youth, and pardon me in mine age.
But where, in the mean season, is their walking before God young, that peace
may come when they are old? And is it not a just thing, that men (dying) should
forget themselves, who (living) never remembered God? Surely, let them look for
no better, who watch not the stealing steps of death in their tower of
repentance, and in the life of the righteous. And if more things belong to
repentance then can be done in an hour, and (well) in a man's life, as to
bring forth the buds of it young, to bear fruits of it at more years, to
ripen it being man, and to gather it toward death in the autumn of fruits; how
can they think one poor hour to be sufficient to bring the seednesse, the
spring, the summer, the autumn and full crop of these things together, in so
short time? and how can they hope in such a span of life, to prepare themselves
for the Lord, when so many else of long l^fe afford so scant measure to the best
men to set them in a readiness for him? Let us (therefore) while we have
time, laying up treasures in heaven for our souls, store up in the summer of
life, for the winter of death which will come. Prou. 6.8. In our last
sickness, and upon our deathbed, we are fitter to seek ease for our bodies,
then mercy for our faults, and grace for our souls. Besides; how fearful
will it be to be taken (then) by sudden death as by some unexpected Officer
without bail or warning, and by it to be brought to the goal of the earth in
the body, and in the soul to perpetual prison in the torments of hell? Of
this more was spoken in the first Sermon, and use of the last doctrine there.

But shall they who live well here, blessedly? then their desperate and cursed
error is confuted, who blaspheme the way of righteousness, saying, that it is
to no purpose to be so devout and godly, and that they are most wise, who give
themselves most liberty in the pleasures and iollitie of life. So say the
wicked in Malachy, it is invaine to serve God: Mal. 3.14. And the wicked in Job
say, what profit to pray unto him? Job 21 15. As if they should have said: we
may serve God, and we may pray to God, but there is nothing gotten by it: or,
they speed as well, and are as wise that are cold in these matters as they who
kindle and are hottest in them. But they Prophet here says, that peace shall
come: that is, they shall see the peace of God in heaven, who make peace with
God here: and they that serve him shall reign before him. The wicked are as
the chafe which the wind drives away. Psalm. 1.4. That is, so soon as God
punishes them with the wind of death, their hope is gone. But the godly have a
sure foundation: and no storm either of death, or of man's ill will can blow
them to destruction, whose house being builded by God, not on the sand of
time, but upon a rock immovable, stands fast in all changes. Math. 7.25.
The builder up of Sion is the wise God, whose work abides for ever. Let the
ungodly oppose themselves never so much, they shall not be able to beat down
Gods house, and death is their advantage. Phil. 1.21. Or, if the Princes Palace
be safely guarded, we must not think that any of Gods houses shall be left
without their keepers, and sufficient watchmen: and the righteous shall
flourish, when the horns of the ungodly shall be broken. And thus it is no
vain labor, nor gamelesse service to serve the Lord.

Does a good life bring a good death? Godforbid: The meaning is, he will not.
Romans 11.1. Neither can man's changeable tongue, alter the decree of God, that is
unchangeable. Romans 3.3.4. And we must not judge of the estate of any man before
God, by his behavior in death, or in a troubled soul. For there are many
things in death which are the effects of the sharp disease he dies of, and no
impeachments of the faith he dies in. And these may deprive his tongue of the
use of reason, but cannot deprive his soul of eternal life. Which may be
spoken also of a troubled soul. For as in a troubled water, the face in the
water cannot be perceived, which, when it comes to be clear, is manifest:
so in a troubled spirit, the face of Gods mercy seems to be changed against
us, and to be quite gone, which out of temptation, and in a calm time, shines
wonderfully in our eyes. Besides, for these outward things, whether they befall
a man in life or death; all things come alike to all. Eccles. 9.2 And so, one
may die like a lamb and go to hell; and another die in exceeding torments,
with lamentable unquietness, and shrikes of slesh, and go to heaven. But you
will say; They both say and think that God has cast them off. And I say
again, that it may be their speech and opinion, and yet nothing to the
prejudice of their salvation by Christ. For when and why do they so speak and
think? It is not then, and because they are sick of that despair which
arises either of the weakness of nature, or of the conscience of sin,
toward death, And what marvel if then in that taking they utter some
distempered words, and have strange and unquiet thoughts? Therefore though they
should think they are damned, and speak it in such a disturbance and at such
times, it can be but the voice and opinion of their sickness: and a sick man's
judgment of himself is not to be regarded. So much for the act of walking;
the object. before whom, follows.

Before him.] The object of our conversation is God: and the righteous walk
before him, or have him before them in all their life, looking upon him, as
upon a God of glorious majesty, that will not justify the wicked; of gracious
mercy that pardons sinners; of special providence that numbreth our steps;
and of infinite knowledge that sees all our ways: or, they have God before
them in Christ, and Christ in God, beholding his justice behind the skreene of
his mercy, and perceiving his mercy through the dark cloud of his justice.
And they who so do, Eliah, who (therefore) says to Ahab: As the Lord lineth
before whom I stand. 1. King. 17.2. Where he confirms his speech with an
oath, and, lest Ahab should think, he made no conscience of what he said,
adds this clause, that he stood in the presence of God. As if he should have
said: I set God before me in my sayings, and therefore make conscience of that
I say. Cornelius in like manner, considering that he was before God in Peter's
ministry, provoke himself and others with him, to a solemn hearing of what
should be spoken from God unto them; and therefore said: We are all here
present before God, to hear all things that shall be commanded us of God. Act.
10.33. His meaning was, as if he should have said to Peter; though we much
reverence thee, yet we more reverence a greater in place, then thou art, to
wit, that terrible God and consuming fire that speaks by thee. And indeed,
who is he that (setting always before him the God, who is of pure eyes and
cannot behold evil; Habac. 1.13.) will not loath the practicing of iniquity,
if he have any spark of grace in his heart, or blood of shame in his face?
for, what Subject would dare to walk indecently, and not fear to do evil,
in the eye of his Prince? or would a man steal in the presence, and before him
that must judge him for his theft? And how (then) can we sin presumptuously,
if we set him always before us, Qnest.
who is judge of quick and dead? But how shall we set the Lord before us, that
we may live so as is here required, and bridle sin that it have not the head
among us? I answer. him as our dreadful judge: and this will much restrain
us from sinning against him. The evil Steward, when he remembered that he had
a Master who would shortly take his office from him, did wisely (though not
justly) in it. Luc. 16.4.8. The contrary for getting of the judgment to come,
and Judge that will come, is the cause why so many so much differ to knock
at the gate of Heaven with the hand of repentance, and voice of their prayers,
putting off till there be no opening Math. 25.11. And (therefore) as riotous
persons, who having little in their purse, do in their Inn call for all
sorts and variety of Cates, forgetting that a reckoning and shot will come:
so these graceless spenders in their Innes of ease, forgetting or putting off
the shot and doom of the last day, do nothing but bath themselves in the
delights of sin, and put enough upon the reckoning and account to come, that
they may walk securely acording to the course of this world in all manner
lusts and unrighteousness, contemning God. Am. 6.3. Secondly, we must set the
Lord before us in his word: for so shall we do wisely, and not go out of the
good way till he come unto us, in our death, or at his great day. Ps. 101.2.
Ios. 1.8. and largely in the 119. Psalm. throughout. For this cause, the word
is called a treasure; Mat. 13.44. A treasure which is to be found only in the
field of the scriptures of the old and new testament; that we may hide it in
our hearts, as we safely lay up a treasure. Papists (therefore) who walk in
their own inventions as in by-waies, and Protestants that walk not in the way
of Gods commandments, but in the blind-way of their ignorant and foolish
hearts, that are full of darkness. Romans 1.21. Set not the Lord, but all
manner sin and concupiscence before them, to work the same with all
greediness. Ephesians. 4.19. Thirdly, we must set the Lord before us in his mercies
and loving kindness: and this will bridle a good nature from sinning against
him. For, the kindness of a father, many times, overcomes a bad nature; and
then, what is it not able to do with a good nature? Gods kindness to us, and
tenderness of us, is more then the kindness of any father, and tenderness of
any mother to the child whom they dearly love, Esaias 49.15. And if we doubt of
this, remember we the stories of David and of the prodigal son. For, how did
the fatherly compassion and motherly pity of the Lord work, nay exceed toward
both of them? David committed two great sins, not repenting for them, but
lying in them, and adding diverse other great evils unto them. The Lord did not,
for all this, reject him, but had great care of him, and when he sought not his
pardon, sent it home unto him by Nathan, in these words: The Lord has put away
thy sin, thou shall not die. 2. Sam. 12.13. The prodigal son had run a
long and wild course of error; yet did the pitiful father at his coming
back, not drive him away, but meet him in the way, nor speak roughly to him,
but deal kindly with him, nor run from him, but toward him, to bid him
welcome, not to bid him be gone. Luc. 15.11. etc. His very misery was
sufficient matter to work upon his fathers heart, would not this overcome a
man? the Lord is kinder to us: and how can we, setting him before us in so
great love, but break of the course of sin, and with a yeeding heart return
to our father? Fourthly, we must set the Lord before us in his providence, not
only general to all, but particular to us, which, being well considered, must
needs do something with us for a better course. For, who will not seek to
please him, or her upon whom he must rely for all the turns of life? Seeing
then we depend on God for all things, and that our life is at his only
pleasure, who breath in the air of his mercies: how can we think of this, and
think indeed, and earnestly thereof, and not strive to obey him in his word,
of whose providence we move, and have being? Acts 17.28. Fifthly, and lastly
(for it were infinite to speak of all) we must set the Lord before us in
Christ: in whom he so loved us, (not then friends, but enemies. To. 5.8.10.)
that he gave his Son to death for us: Ioh. 3.10. Now what enemy will not be
reconciled and dearly love him, who shall but offer to die for him. Christ
died, and made not an offer only to die for us: and is not this sufficient,
being well and deeply thought of, to reconcile us to God by submission, to
Christ by spiritual life?

By all this we may easily judge why God is so little regarded among us.
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Job. 21.14. So did
David's enemies, of whom he makes complaint in diverse Psalms. For, he says,
they sought not God: and (which made them more securely to do evil) they
thought there was no God. And (after) he gives this for a reason of their so
desperate and bold madness: The judgments of God were high above their sight:
that is, they set them so far off, that they never looked after them, nor did
remember them. Ps. 10.4.5. Further, speaking of strangers that rose up against
him, and of tyrants that sought his life; that which made them so cruel (as he
says) was: they set not God before them. Ps. 54.3. and 86.14. God was not in
their thoughts, nor the fear of God before their eyes: therefore they kept no
measure in sinning. Let us, for our selves, remember this, who have the Lord
set before us in the preaching of the Gospel every sabbath day. Let us
remember him in his Son, and not forget him in his judgments, specially in
his last judgment. The end of our days and the beginning of that, draws on:
the Sun is (long since) past the meredian line: and death (we know) will not be
answered with an I pray thee have me excused. Luc. 14.19. Let us not therefore
put off till the flood come, not of waters, but of insufferable fire, or till
the Lord come with devouring fire, and with his tempest of the last judgment
to kindle it. Let us rather frame that course for our selves now, that
(hereafter) may prove, in our dying hour, or at this worlds last hour, an
arc for our bodies, and a tabernacle for our souls. If we would set the word
before us, or God, in it, we should see our dangerous ways, and by so clear a
light better direct our steps. Ps. 119.105. If we would well remember Gods
providence over us and care for us, we should not do as we have done, we would
bear evils more patiently, and do evil more unwillingly, seeing whatsoever
comes to us comes by his appointment, and whatsoever evil is done against
him by us, is done against his bounties and love. And, if we would set him
before us in Christ, how could we sin against the sacrifice of such a
Redeemer? or if we would set Christ before us, in that day, wherein this world
(that must be destroyed) shall crackle about our cares, being all on fire, and
the large Jerusalem of the earth be brought down by him who will send forth
his voice, and that a mighty voice; Ps. 50.3.4. how little would we regard the
short and deare-prized pleasures, of this our momentany and fading life? But,
because God is so far out of our sight, and so late in our hearts, therefore
do offenders so multiply among us, and sin so abound that the regions begin
to grow white, and we cannot but think, that the Angel will shortly thrust in
his sicle. Men are at no pains, and bestow no care in Gods service. Men are
merciless, without natural affection, false accusers, and despisers of them
which are good. 2. Tim. 3.3. Men want faith: and some go clean against it,
both in word and in books written. Sin is full ripe now, which in our fathers
days, was but green in the ear: and iniquity, that then strove with
righteousness, has (now) gotten the upper hand: what do all these show but
that God is forgotten, and that the fearful God is cast behind us in this age
of so great liberty and fulness of sin? The Lord give us the due consideration
of these things, and pardon our great sins for his own great names sake: to
whom be praise and glory for ever.

The end of the third sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
IVDES Epistle verses 14.15. Verse. 14 Behold the Lord comes with thousands of
Saints.

Verse. 15. Togiue judgment upon all men; and to rebuke all the ungodly among
them of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and of all
their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him.


THis prophecy was ancient; for he to whom this testimony is ascribed, was the
seventh from ADAM. And it is like, it either passed as Enocks, from hand to
hand, by tradition, or was found, in the days of the Apostles, extant in some
book bearing Enochs name. For the Jews had some unwritten truths which were
profitable and good for instruction, and yet were not made articles or rules of
faith to salvation. This prophecy of Enochs, and testimony of Iudes might be
one: yet was it as common water, till it passed through the sanctuary. Ezech.
47.1. Till the Apostle Jude, or the holy Ghost by him set it down in scripture,
it was to be received but as other truths, which are to have their allowance
from the book of faith. But now that the Lord has brought it into his
treasury; among the other golden plates which bear (for letters of credence)
the stamp of his Spirit, we must take it for his own coin and sacred
metal, distinguishing it from baser metal that has received but common
impression, and is marked with the finger of man. That which the Apostle would
prove by this testimoni^, is, that those seducers of Gods people, of whom he
had spoken already in the fourth verse, should perish, being fore-written to
condemnation. As if he should have said: God will give judgment to
destruction, against all ungodly men: And of this number are these deceivers.
Therefore they also shall perish and be damned. This is the Apostles drift in
the allegation of the prophecy. Wherein, (to say nothing of the preface to
it,) we have speech of the last general judgment, ver. 14. and of the ends
of the Judges coming, ver. 15. In the first, the Apostle speaks of the
certainty of the thing, and with what solemnity it shall be performed? The
ends of the Judges coming are general, and surely as concern, the wicked;
first, in their deeds, whereof they shall be judged; and secondly, in their
words, for which they shall give answer. In the certainty of this last
judgment two things may be considered: as first, who shall be Judge, the
Lord, and secondly, the manner of propounding this judgment, in the word
comes. He that is judge, is the Lord, to wit, the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall hold the Court of assise in the clouds, and cite all nations before him
with the sound of the last trumpet. He shall be judge, who is of pure eyes,
and cannot behold evil: Habac. 1.13 Who judges the world with righteousness,
and his people with equity: Psa. 98 9. And who is gracious to his servants,
and terrible to Sinners.

From whence this point is taught; the father judges no man. Ioh. 5.22. To wit
directly, but by the son, to whom he has committed all judgment: that is,
to whom, only he has given the hearing of the last day. Peter, in his Sermon
to Cornelius and his company, says as much, saying, that Christ is ordained of
God a judge of quick and dead. Act. 10.42. His meaning is: it was the decree
and will of God from eternity, that Christ properly should be judge: and that
he should condemn the world, who was condemned in the world, and save his
own who died for his own. And the Apostle Paul charging Timothy, by the
charge of an adiuration, to preach the word; gives him a commandment so to
do before God, and before Jesus Christ: whom he describes by a proper effect,
which is, that he shall indge the quick and dead, at his appearing and in his
kingdom, that is, in that day of his great glory. 2. Tim. 4.1. Also the same
Apostle Paul tells the men of Athens that God will judge the world by that
man, to wit, Christ, God and Man: whom he has appointed, or whom, by a decree
elder then the world, he has made judge. And he (says the Apostle) shall
judge the world in righteousness. Act. 17.31. Others may sell judgment, but
he will give true judgment, and execute judgment with righteousness.
judgment is an action belonging to all the three persons in Trinity, but the
execution of it is proper to the Son, by whom the Father and holy Ghost do
judge the world. shall sit upon Thrones and judge the tribes of Israel, Mat.
19.28. and that the Saints shall judge the world? 1. Cor. 6.2. that he is both
a Savior, and a Judge. Our conversation (says the Apostle) is in heaven. He
speaks of himself and of the Saints, whose conversation and life is not
carnal, but spiritual. And from thence, we (says the same Apostle) that is,
all the godly, look for the Savior, meaning Christ the Lord, who is a Savior
to the righteous, and a Judge to the ungodly. Phil. 3.20. Also, the grace of
God that has appeared (as the bright sunneshine) in our salvation, teaches us
to live soberly, righteously and godlily, as they that look for the appearing
of their Savior, Tit, 2.13. that is, for the coming of Christ, who will save
his people, and judge the wicked and sinners. So he is called the Savior of
his body, which is the church, Ephesians. 5.23. because at the last day, and at
his last coming, he will come as a Savior to it, as a Judge to the enemies
of it. And that this will be a terrible day to the wicked, and day of as great
reiolcing to the righteous, appears in Psalm. first, and verses 3. and 4.
Where that Prophet, speaking of the different estates of the godly and sinners,
in their apparances at the great Sessions of the last judgment, says, that
the leaf of the righteous shall not fade, but the chafe of the ungodly, shall
be driven away. Christ says that it shall be a day of such tribulation to the
ungodly men, that their hearts shall fail them for fear, when they think of
it, or look after it. Luke 21.26. But speaking of and to the righteous, by
showing what manner day it shall be to them, he bids them (for the peace
it brings, and joy it promises to all such) to look up, and to list up
their heads; for it is the day of their redemption (says he) draws near.
ver. 28. And the Prophet Daniel aims at this, where speaking of the diverse
manners and ends of their rising, who sleep in the dust of the earth, says
that some shall awake to everlasting life, some to shame and perpetual
contempt. Dan. 12.2. as if he had said; all the dead shall not have a like
resurrection; for some shall be raised to life, some to condemnation, some
shall have a joyful, some a dreadful rising, to some it shall be a bitter
day, to some their marriage day. Ioh. 5.29. Thus the righteous shall rejoice
when he sees the vengeance. Ps. 58.10. But the strange children shall shrink
away and fear in their privy chambers. Ps. 18.45. saying to the mountains,
fall upon us, and to the hills, cover us. The godly shall appear with
boldness, coming before Christ, who will be their advocate, not Judge, except
to acquit them and to give them the crown of righteousness. The wicked not
so: for, the wicked shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the assembly
of the righteous. Psalm. 1.5. Thus the doctrine stands fast, being proved in
every part, particularly. Other reasons may be given for further illustration.
The reasons. And first, there is great reason that Christ should be Judge
himself. For, he alone is the Savior: and therefore he alone must be Judge.
He that saves his elect, must condemn the world. Secondly, he is the head of
his Church to save it from harms, and to wring out the dregs of his wrath upon
their heads that harm it. Ephesians. 5.23. Esa. 63.1.2.6. And how can he thus
deliver his Church, if he be not her Savior, and thus be revenged on his
Churches enemies, if he be not there Judge? Thirdly, it shall be a day of joy
unspeakable to the godly, and of terror importable to the wicked. For, the
godly shall meet the Lord in the 2 1. These. 4.17.
air. The furnace, that is appointed to purge the world, and to consume
sinners, shall have no power over such, nor the smell of it come upon them.
Dan. 3.27. The Judge will be their Savior. The witnesses, the Angels, the
Saints, and the great inquest of all the creatures will clear them. And, who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect. Romans 8.33. The things that
they shall be judged off, are condemned in Christ; and the sting of conviction
is departed from them to his death, who has conquered all the power of the
enemy. The tribunal, that face of it that is toward them, shall put off
fear, and become a session-house of mercy and of plentiful redemption. The
sentence pronounced shall send them to their houses of joy and bliss endless,
and their father will give them the kingdom. Luc. 12.32. But, as the godly
shall (thus) hear a most blessed sentence of absolution, so the wicked shall
(then) hear their just sentence of separation from God. Where all things shall
make them to melt away with an horrible dread, and minister great matter of all
fear and terror in that day For first, it shall be a most fearful thing to
see and consider the number of them without number, that shall run hither and
thither to hide themselves in the holes of the earth. The place and ground on
which they must stand will be fearful: for, it shall be all on a flaming
fire. The Judge will be fearful: for, God is Judge himself. The things that
they shall be judged off will be fearful: for, their secret and dark
ungodliness shall then (every thought of it) come to light, and be judged in
the sight of fire, in the sight of water, in the sight of Angels, in the sight
of all the elements, in the sight of men, and presence of God, the Judge of
quick and dead, on whose head are many crowns, and who is clothed with a
garment dipped in blood Apoc. 19.11.13. The witnesses will be fearful, which
will be their own griping conscience, and Gods all-seeing providence, the
accusing Angels, their offended brother, and millions of creatures abused by
them. The bench will be fearful; for, it shall be to them a tribunal of
judgment without mercy. The sentence will be (if any thing) most fearful, as
that which shall proceed against al unrighteous persons in the fearful form.
Go ye accursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
And the fire, that to which they are appointed, shall have no end of fear. For
this fire is a far other thing then the fire of the chimney, the fire of
Gehenna, then material fire.

The uses of this point concern the godly, and sinners. the godly that Christ
shall be Judge: and they who have followed him in the regeneration, may lift
their head to their redemption at hand when he comes, who will judge his
people with equity, that is, with savor. For he must be Judge, who has
communicated to all his servants the sweet and loving names of his Mar. 33.
mother, sisters, brethren, Cant. 4.9 10.11.12.
spouse, John. 15.14.15.
friends. Now we are his mother if we bear him in the womb of our hearts by
faith, as Marie bore him in the womb of her body. And we are his brethren and
sisters, if we love him as brethren, and cherish him as sisters, in his weak
and despised servants among us. And if we keep our selves to him alone by
matrimonial faithfulness, we are his spouse and wife. And, we are his
friends, if we do whatsoever he command us. We being these, and doing thus,
what need we fear? for, if we be his mother, may we not come to him with as
great boldness and expectation of success, as did Bath-sheba to Solomon, the
natural mother to her Son? 1. King. 2.19. If we be his spouse, shall we
fear to make him our Judge, who is one with us in spiritual marriage, and by
the espousall of faith our husband and friend? or, will one kind brother, fear
to make another his Judge? Can he condemn us to death, who has redeemed us
from death eternal? He is our Judge, who (also) is our advocate at his fathers
right hand, and makes intercession for us. Art thou afraid that thy Judge
will be unmerciful? O what a vain fear is that, seeing he is thy Judge, who
condemned himself to save thee from judgment? who emptied himself for thy
filling? bestowed and spent himself for thy restoring? and gave his life,
which passed out at all the gates of his bodic, for the life of thy soul? Can
the sentence be sharp that comes from the throne of grace, in the hand of a
Redeemer, from whom comes salvation? or, will he, who stood at the bar to
deliver us, go up to the bench, and sit down in the throne to condemn us?
Romans 8.1. or, shall we fear any longer when our advocate is made our Judge?
And when he who came to save us, may save, or condemn?

But shall Christ be judge? Whoremongers, and Adulterers ( whom God will
judge. Heb. 13.4. to receive sentence of death or absolution from his mouth,
who (himself) was born of a pure Virgin, and has those for his followers, who
were not defiled with women. Apoc. 14.4. Or to the unmerciful, to be tried by
him, who when many dogs come about him, prayed for his persecutors, saying;
Father forgive them they know not what they do? Luke 23.34. Or to murderers,
to stand in his presence, who being reviled, reviled not again, whose coming
was to save the life and not to spill it. If thou had a cause to be heard in
some court of justice, and it should be told thee that the like in that very
Court, had been judged against another that morning; would thou not rather
agree with thine Adversary, then adventure thy matter in that Court wherein,
and the presence of that Judge before whom the very same matter had been
already condemned in another man's case? Even so then, seeing it is most
certain, that sentence has passed already against all kinds of sins and
degrees of sinners, as it is to be seen in the assise book of the word of
God; Should not the wicked and sinners dread to appear, in their evils, and
those evils unrepented of, before that terrible judge, who has already
condemned to destruction so many millions of sinners and reprobates, men,
women, bond, and free? Should they not rather go back by confideration?
Entreat the judge by prayers of repentance? Submit by a better course? be
reconciled by amendment? And please him by obedience who is Lord of all? Men
must not think to sin, and to be called to no account for their sins, or
to offer wrongs to their innocent neighbor, and not to suffer as wrong doers:
For Christ is Judge: And though all men were corrupt, and seats of judgment
partial; yet there is a God that judges right. A day will come, when Naboth
shall have his vineyard: when the Martyrs who lost their lives shall find
them: and they who are railed on for the name of Christ, shall have praise of
their enemies. Christ will honor those who have honored him, raise up those
who died for him, restore those sums which in deeds of charity, and works
of mercy, have been lent to him, and liberally reward those who served him.
But for the wicked, though they were glorious in their life, and pompous in
their death; they shall be nothing so in their rising, and there shame shall
come, when their judgment comes. He that has so much pleasure here, as to
be clothed in purple, and to fare well and delicately every day, Luke 16.19.
could not have in hell torments, one drop of water to cool his tongue
tormented in those flames. verse. 24. Neither could he have the presence of
Lazarus for a moment, who cared not for the cry of Lazarus, when he was in his
ruff, and Lazarus in his rags. ver, 26.29.31,

A reproof of their madness, have a good purse, or because the Judge is their
friend; or because the country will stick unto them. For what though no
mortal Judge condemn them? The righteous Judge will. Though men execute
partial sentence, he who is judge of all men, will execute righteousness in
the clouds, from which there is no appeal. On earth, there are means to
acquit and set free from bonds, and death, a guilty prisoner, as, the abusing
of the Judge, the corrupting of the witnesses, acquaintance with the Jurors,
favor with the Sheriff, and many such shifts. The Judge may be deceived by
certain pricks in the law that destroy justice. But there are no such, either
pricks or points in that undefiled law by which both quick and dead shall be
judged; The witnesses cannot be stopped: For, the book of our consciences will
not lie, and that book of evidence which God himself keeps, cannot. The
Jurors (the creatures) are the Lords servants to whom they shall give glory in
their true and honest verdicts, not respecting the arm of flesh, or face of
man. No persuasions or windings will then serve; For God is judge himself, and
his Sherifs are the mighty Angels of his presence: The high acts of God are in
their mouth, and a two edged sword is put in their hands to execute vengeance
upon the heathen, and corrections among the people. Psalm. 149.6.7. Or, if the
Sherifs, Jurors, and witnesses could be corrupted with money (which were
unspeakable folly to think of) what shall we have to give them, when all shall
be destroyed with fire? And for favor: how can we look for any in a day, not
of mercy, but of judgment? Further, to avoid an earthly sentence, we plead
an appeal or retraction: but here can be no appeal: For, all appeals are to
an higher. But what Judge is higher then God, or court above this of the last
day? And for reuersing of judgment once given, there is as little hope. For,
there shall not be any more sitting or second judgment. Let us not think then
(because we can escape man's sentence) that no sentence to come, shall condemn
us. Or that there is no judgment, but man's judgment, or Judge, but man. For
where men end, God begins; and where men are partial, he will do justice.
Here men break the Sabbath and are drunken, here they whore, and swear, and
deceive, and do vilely, and answer not unto men for these riots of sin
Shall they therefore go free? O nothing less, hereafter they shall answer
them, and in hell pay dearly for them, except they repent. So much for the
person of the Judge, the manner of propounding the judgment follows.

Comes with, etc.] The tense or time, that the Apostle speaks in, notes
the certainty; or, (as I may say) presentnesse of the Judges coming. Where he
uses the time present, for the future, he comes, for he will come. And this
is to teach us, that a judgment will, and must (most certainly) be. So it is
said that the great day of the Lords wrath is come. Apoc. 6.17. Not will come,
but is come: as if that had been come a thousand and sieve hundred years a go
that is not come yet. The like speech we have in the 13. of Esaias and ninth
verse, when it was further off. In the time of the Prophet Zephanie it is said
to be near. Zeph. 1.14. and Malachi, another Prophet, and the last of the
Prophets, speaks (as Enoch here,) it comes. Peter says it is at hand,
though no man can show the fingers of this hand. 1. Pet. 4.7. Christ says, he
comes shortly. Apoc. 3.11. nay, that he stands at the door, as if he were
come already. verse 20. And indeed, as the day will most surely come, so it
cannot be long in coming. It is not in the fadome of man's head to tell, or
heart to know how near or far off the day is; only God knows, and Christ
as God, in what year, month, and day, this frame shall go down. In an age
long since, the day was near, now the hour is near. But curiosity is to be
avoided in a concealed matter, and in this forbidden tree of knowledge. It is
sufficient for us to know that such a day will come, and it shall be our
wisdom, always to be ready for it, that it come not upon us, as the snare
upon the bird. The reasons of the certainetie of this day of judgment, are.
First, it is the will and decree of God; for, the Apostle says: He has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness. Act.
17.31. Now the will and decree of God is unchangeable. His counsel shall stand
Esa. 46.10. Secondly, it is an article of our faith grounded on the word of
God. But the articles of our faith are all certain, and most certain.
Thirdly, the scripture says that God will make manifest every man's work, and
judge the secrets of men. Eccles. 12.14. Luc. 8.17. Romans 2.16. This is not done
here: and here many matters are cloked and carried in a mist, that deserve
judgment and merit condemnation. Therefore, and that God may be just in his
sayings, there must be a sessions of gaol-deliuery, which we call, with the
scriptures, the judgment of the last day. Fourthly, the godly do here groan
under many miseries, and the ungodly wallow in delights: the rich live
delicately, and Lazarus is in pain: therefore, is it necessary (as it is
certain) that a day should come wherein the Lord may make known his
righteousness, and magnify his justice before his glorious throne: that they
who have lived merrily, dishonouring God, might live in torments of fire; and
they whose life has been miserable, serving the Lord, might be comforted for
ever. Some have offended deeply, and have not been touched by the Magistrate,
some have suffered great rebuke, sometimes death, deserving favor: therefore a
day must come, and is appointed, wherein the Lord, that is just, will
recompense tribulation to all that have troubled the righteous, and to such as
were troubled by them, rest. 2. These. 1.6.7. On the other side, would it not be
hard for the godly, who here have endured the cross, for the joy that was set
before them, if there should not come a time of refreshing from God? and would
it not too much indu^rate the wicked, who drink iniquity as water, if they
should escape all punishments and vengeance, here, and after death. Fifthly,
this is shadowed out in that householder, who, when even was come, called the
Laborers, and gave every man his hire and penny. Math. 20.8.10. And, if a
wise Master will reckon with his servants: Math. 25.19. shall we think that
the wisest will not (one day) reckon with sinners, and call them before him for
his money, that is, precious graces of wit, learning, authority, wealth, and
other ontward and inward ornaments of life, which they have consumed on their
lusts? Sixthly, every wicked man's conscience does, by a trembling fear, as in
Felix, at one time or another, justify this point of a judgment to come. Act.
24, 26. And, therefore, as the flood of waters once drowned the world, except a
few who were saved in the arc: Genesis 7 1.7.2. Pet. 2.5. So it is certain that
the flood and tempest of the last days fire shall burn it, and all in it,
except such as Christ has, or will (then) gather into the little arc of his
Church. In the evening of this world, and when there shall be no more time, he
will call the laborers before him, giving them the penny or pay of
everlasting life; but for the idle and loiterers, forth of the vineyard and out
of Christ, he will let them go with sinners to the place prepared for them: as
they have lived without the Church or idly in it; so when the laborers
receive their penny, they shall hear; depart from me ye that work
iniquity, I know you not. Math. 7.23. Thus it is proved, not only to be
certain, but necessary that there should be a judgment.

But some will say:

I answer; Sessions, that an open or solemn assise. There, much of their
shame is hid, here they shall be shamed to the full. And if our own laws do
not condemn, and execute malefactors in prison, but for their greater shame,
in open place, and manner: It is great reason that wicked sinners should not
privately in their graves, as in prison, be judged and led to execution, but
be brought to the public scaffold and bar of solemn fession, there to
receive their shame and sentence together; and not to be executed by a close
death in the goal but be brought forth to suffer upon the high stage of the
world, in the sight of Saints and Angels, where all eyes may see them.

But is not Christ judge in this life?

Indeed, securely despise, or scornefully deride this judge and judgment seat:
but it gives them many secret gripes, though they profit not by them.
Oftentimes, Gods children themselves, because that the noises and sounds that
the ring of the world makes in them, do too much neglect these loud calls of
their consciences to amendment of life. But this is the judgment that the Lord
begins here, with which they must well be acquainted, who mean to stand
before Christ the judge at the last day. And this, one well compares to our
Quarter Sessions, which are kept for mulcts, and meddle not in matters of life
and death, as Sessions of goal delivery do. For in this mid-space between
these Sessions, and that day of assise, the Lord executes a kind of judgment
among his household people and enemies, by taking his grace from his servants
for a season, from the wicked for ever; Or, by taking something from his
children that they loved to much and did hurt them, and that from the wicked
that they seemed to have. The first, to prepare the righteous for a better
world, the other, to make the wicked ready for the sentence of their last and
just damnation begun in this world. That we may be fitted for this
comfortable meeting of the Lord in the air, and not live in sin, as those
workers of iniquity do^, upon whom these mid-Sessions have passed sentence,
binding them over to the close sessions of their death, or more public assise
of the last day, when all prisons must be rid, and graves emptied; let us not
slightly pass over those several penalties that the Lord inflicteth at his
quartersessions in the twitches of our conscience for some good omitted, or
evil done: But when he thus calls us, let us answer, here am I. A learned
Father compares conscience (which is the knowledge that we have with our
selves of some good or evil) to water in a Well, which, when it is troubled,
shows no image of any face, but waxing clear, does. So if we suffer this
crystal of our conscience to be mudded with foul trespasses of habit or
impenitencie, we shall never see our natural face in it, neither perceive how
deadly we sin against God and our own souls: Where if we purge daily for
our daily offenses, and greatly for our greater sins; if we have an eye always
to the Lord and his proceedings in us, making good use of those privy and
secret pinches that our consciences give us, when we do amiss; we shall in
so clear a fountain of our good conscience (as in a true glass) behold with
sanctified profit, the many faults of our life, and so the sooner and more
conveniently be humbled for them. Or, if when our consciences reprove us of
our ways, we listen unto them, and make present good use of the strokes of
our heart for evil deeds, and that, while we be tender and sensible of sin;
we shall avoid the plague of a foolish heart, or heart past feeling, Ephesians.
4.19. and not go desperately on with bold sinners, in the way that leads to
destruction. Thus may we profit greatly by the judgment that is begun in
us, in these mulcts of our consciences or mid-hearings, preparing us, with
comfort, to the hearing of the last day.

A confutation of all Atheists, Pet. 3.4. that is, what is become of it, and of
all this talk about it? So there were in Esaias, who said, when they heard of
such a day. Let him make speed, let him hasten his work, that we may see it;
as if they should have said; if it shall be at all, let it be now. Or, he had
need to hasten it, if we shall believe it. Esaias 5.19. And in Amos time there
was a large fellowship of these mates, who put the evil day, the day of their
death and judgment which they called evil, far off. Amos 6.3. But have we
none of this knot and conspiracy in our own time? Yes, too many: whom I leave
to the mercy of God to be amended; or, as the dross of the earth, to be
consumed with the fire of his coming, who will come with fire and his chariots
like a whirlewinde. Esaias 66.15.

A reproof of their security, Cor. 5.11. Scholars who come to render to
their Master the lesson or part given them, do it not without fear: and shall
we not fear to think of that day in which we must give account to Christ the
judge for all the things that he has put in our hand and keeping? When Paul
willed the men of Athens to repent, it was upon this ground that the Lord had
appointed a day wherein he would judge the world in righteousness. Act.
17.31. As if he had said; ye shall be sure to be judged; and therefore,
repent. And yet we live in sin, and our hearts are not turned. If we were
sure that Christ would come to judgment the next May day: what an alteration
would it work in many of us? and how would it change us, and move us? who
would set his heart upon riches? who would deceive and oppress? who would
spend so much in apparel, and so many days in vanity? who durst be drunk?
who durst swear, and lie, and commit adultery? what would become of our
May-games, dancing greenes and bowres, and such conuenticles of spiritual
fugitives from God on his Sabbaths? who would not (rather) pass the time, that
remains, in Gods service? and run to sermons? and read and pray devoutly?
and bestow good hours well, and not spend time in chambering and wantonness?
But we are not sure that that day shall tarry till May next. And we know not
that Christ's day will come, this week, or the next, or this present day and
hour, or while I am speaking of it: and yet we walk in as great security, and
as desperately in sin, as if we were certain it would not come in our time.
If we hear a sudden cry of fire, fire, we are astonished out of measure: and
yet hearing by our Preachers (the Lords trumpets) so many and fearful
threatenings by the word, concerning the fires of hell and judgment, when, not
a few houses, but the whole world shall burn like an oven, we are not moved.
Every one (almost) will give his best help for the quenching of a material
fire: but who regards to save himself, or to preserve others from the
unquenchable fire of hell, and terrible fire of the Lords coming, that will
most certainly, (we know not how soon) flame out to the burning of this great
Sodom of the Earth, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, the
elements shall melt with heat, and all things corruptible shall be dissolved
most speedily, as if they did flee away? 2. Pet. 3.10. Apoc. 20.11. Christ,
even now, stands at the door of thy Christian heart, to wit, as a guest and
stranger that would be entertained. Apoc. 3.20. and thou by continuing in
sin, deniest to receive him. He threatens by the law, he reproves by the
law, and condemns by it all impenitent sinners. By these he knocks ernestly
and cries vehemently at the door of thy heart to open unto him: and will thou
tarry till by thy death he break in, or by his particular coming? If a great
man should knock at our door, what stirring would there be to receive him
presently, and as is me^te? Is there any greater or more worthy guest then
Christ, who knocks, by the ministry of the Gospel, at the gate of our
heart, who reaches forth the hand of his threatenings, to beat upon our
consciences day and night, that we might turn with all speed, which is our
opening to the son of God: and shall we give him no entrance after so long a
time of waiting at our hearts for our conversion? A great man will not be so
abused: and shall we think that the mighty God will take it well, that, after
so many knockings and long standing without, he should find no door of
admission into us, or opening by us, and should still be deferred and put off?
or can these days long continue, wherein charity is waxen so cold, and faith
so scant? In men there is not the mercy that has been. No man (almost) will
speak in a good cause without a fee, and without a gift in the hand there is
no hearing for it. Sin ranckleth in the bosom, and ratleth in the bones of
the inueterate adulterer. The aged drunkard pleads unto and prescribes for
his sin, wrong sentence is good judgment in some earthly courts. And, men
hold their peace of these things, but will God do so? will not he speak? will
he keep silence for ever? will he not by the writ of his last great sessions,
remove all these matters to his own court of audience shortly? Let us not
therefore too much presume, or think that God is like us because he holds
his tongue while we do such things: for, he will reprove us, and set them in
order before us. Ps. 50.21.

But must a judgment be? if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged. 1. Cor. 11.31. As if he should have said: if we would examine our
selves of our sins, confess them before God the Judge, give sentence against
them, or (as a judge upon the bench) condemn them, and our selves for them, we
should not come into condemnation. Or, if we would judge our selves, God would
not judge us: and if we would condemn our selves God would deliver us. For
we shall not receive a double judgment, nor double sentence from him that
judges righteously. When David judged himself, God forgave him. 2. Sa. 12.13.
When Job confessed against himself, God accepted him. Job. 42.6.8. and when
the lost son came unto himself, the father presently received him. Luke
15.17.18.19 20. So shall it be with us in the day of Christ, if we will
(accordingly) humble our selves in our day. With earthly Judges, the more is
confessed by a malefactor, the worse it may be for him: but, so is it not with
Christ the Judge. For, the more we aggrauate our faults, the more will he
lessen them; the more we lay upon them, the more will he take from them; the
more we mislike them, the less will he judge them. Let us learn then to
avoid the common fashion and error of the world, in lessening, hiding,
excusing, and justifying of our faults, because we would not be shamed nor
condemned here. For here we must be ashamed, if hereafter we would not take
shame: and here we must be condemned, if hereafter we would not be condemned
of the Lord. And better now suffer a little, that is, in this life, then (after
it) suffer with sinners, in torments and woe endless. So much for the
certainty of the judgment, it follows to show with how great a train and
solemnity it shall be performed.

With thousands of Saints, etc.] Or with his holy thousands. These thousands of
Christ are the royal host of his Angels, and the glorious company of his
Saints, all which shall attend their Lord unto judgment. The meaning is, that
Christ shall be brought with great glory and attendance to the throne of his
last Sessions. The doctrine is: Daniel the Prophet, has a singular place for
this purpose, where speaking of God the Father, and Christ his Son, and of
their state and magnificence which was, that they sat in thrones, shining
bright like the flame of a furnace, and therefore called thrones of fire, the
wheels of which were as burning fire; Dan. 7.9. He says that the ancient of
days, meaning Christ, who is the same and his years shall not fail, Heb.
1.12. sat on his throne, where thousand thousands ministered unto him; and ten
thousand thousands stood before him, or attended upon him. ver. 10. al which is
spoken, to show, with what a Court of attendance, and train of glory, Christ
shall (as it were) be brought to the hall and judgment place at the last
great day. And further, to make manifest so solemn a Session, it is added,
that the books shall be opened: meaning chiefly by these books, as Saint.
John does. Apoc. 20.12. the book of Life, which is the book of the law
written, and the book of conscience in every man's heart. The book of the law
shows what we should have done, and the book of conscience what we have
done. And against these there is no exception. For the book of the law, is a
book of commandments, that are all holy and righteous, Psalm. 19.9. And the
book of conscience a book of evidence that cannot lie. He that is judged by
it, is judged by a book that was ever in his own keeping, and is written with
his own hand: and how can that be falsified? For God will judge no man by
another man's conscience, but by his own. So manifest and glorious shall Christ's
coming be. Saint Paul speaking of this second coming of Christ, shows that
it shall be manifest. For, he says, it shall be with a shout. 1. These. 4.16.
Meaning by it, aloud and vehement cry, such as Mariners nake, who doing some
business in the ship, make a very strong and common shout. And this is further
showed by that which follows of the trumpet the shrillest and lowedest of all
musical instruments. The Evangelists speaking of the same coming of Christ,
unto judgment, say: it shall be glorious. There words are: The Son of Man
shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him. Mat. 25.31. Mar.
8.38. Mat. 16 27. Or, the Son of Man shall come in a cloud with power and
great glory. Luke 21.27. Their meaning is; that, as at the setting forth of
his Gospel, all the host of heaven did assist him: so coming to revenge and
visit for the contempt of that same Gospel, all his Saints, Angels, and
servants shall attend upon him. As (therefore) earthly Judges are brought with
great pomp and terror to the hall or place of sitting, the Sheriff, the
Justices, and many other gentlemen attending them to the court, and the
halbards going before: So (here) the son of God, the great Judge, is said to
come with his holy thousands: whose Sheriff is, powers, principalities,
thrones, and dominions, whose followers are the Patriarchs, and Prophets, with
the twelve Apostles, and with Disciples innumerable, whose guard are the
Angels, and not a few bil-men, whose troops are the blessed Martyrs, the
forty and four thousand who have his fathers name written in their forheads.
Apoc. 14.1. Whose throne is of fire, and seat of burning Jasper, whose
garments are (not of scarlet) but of vengeance, whose head is like wool, and
feet like unto sine brass, and voice as the sound of many waters. Apoc.
1.13.14, 15. Thus shall his coming be manifest, and thus will his person be
glorious, who shall come to judge the world. The reasons. There must be a
difference between Christ's first coming in the flesh, and second coming to
judgment. Now, his first coming was base, therefore his second coming must
be glorious. His first was obscure, his second therefore must be manifest. In
the first, he came into the world, in the second he comes against it. His first
was to receive judgment, his second is to give judgment. His first, in
mercy, his second with rebuke. Then, he came as a servant, poor and without
show, but now he comes as the mighty God with power and great glory. Tit.
2.13. And, if Judges of assise do not ascend to their seats of judgment, but
(as we have said) with great state and solemnity: shall we think that the Lord
of the Angels, and judge of man will go meanly attended) to his tribunal in the
clouds? 2. Christ's second coming is to co^demn^ the world, and to cast fear in
the face of every sinner. It is requisite (therefore) it should be with power,
and with signs of power. 3. Christ shall have, at his coming, all that may
set forth the state and roialtie of such a King. Now, a part this glory is in
the attendants about his person. For in the multitude of the people is the
honor of the King, says Solomon, Pro. 14.28. Therefore, shall his day be
manifest, and his coming glorious.

A confutation of their madness who think with their multitudes (as Giants here)
to put Christ out of countenance, that they boast so much of their thousands,
whom they have numbered against religion) shall know one day, and may know
within few days, that there is no health but under his wings whom they have
defied. For, what says the Lord to such Assyrian Spoilers? gather on heaps
and ye shall be broken: gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, so
says the Lord, and he says it twice, because it is ratified, and God will do
it. Esa 8.9. They were many against a few, and heaps of men, to there here and
there a man, yet did they stumble, and fall, and were broken, and snared, and
taken, verse 15. look Nahum. 2.1. 2. 13. and Joel 3.9.11. There was a
conspiracy of Kings against Christ, and David prophesied of a world of
kingdoms that should be against him: and yet what could they do against him?
put him to death? and he rose from death, tread him down, by his own
sufferance and will, for a little while? and he is King for ever; Judge him
here? and he will be their judge at his terrible coming. Ps. 2.2.3.4.

But, fled and stood a far off. Exodus 20.19. And if the sight was so
terrible, that Moses himself said, I fear and quake. Heb. 12.21. (And yet
Christ came then but to give the law as Mediator, not to visit for it as
Judge:) how shall his despisers stand before his great glory and second
coming, when he shall burn with wrath, stirring up himself like a man of
War, till the houses of pride, and children of disobedience be destroyed for
ever? Or, if the brethren of Joseph could not tell what to say unto him,
because of one trespass against him. Genesis 45.3. What shall these bastard
brethren say to this glorious Joseph, our brother, their Judge, for innumerable
contempts and trespasses wherewith they have pierced him, being not over one
kingdom only, and under an higher, as Joseph over Egypt, and under Pharao, but
over all the kingdoms of the world? And if they who came to take Christ (being
a well provided company) when he himself was not countenanced with worldly
means to resist, and was only followed by a few unarmed men, fell to the
earth, after he but spoke unto them, Ioh. 18.6. how shall they fall back, or
(rather) altogether flat upon their faces with horrible fear, who shall come
qu^uering before him, not attended (as then) with eleven Apostles (only) but
with thousands of his Saints: nor meanly furnished, but gloriously arrayed;
not speaking gently, whom seek ye? But threatening sharply, and saving
roundly; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels? Mat. 25.41. If men should pitch against us, we would
fear with the servant who said, Alas Master, what shall we do? 2. King.
6.15. We would more fear if many Kings should join to make an host against
us. Yet the power of men might be forced, yea, the power of Princes: but if an
Angel should come against us, as sometimes against Balaam, with a drawn
sword, Number. 22.23. Who can compel an Angel to return to heaven? What then,
when mighty troops of Angels shall threaten the world at Christ's coming? Who
shall daunt so strong a power, the strong power of the Angels, when they shall
keep their march in the air, and profess to rebuke the ungodly and sinners
that shall be turned into hell, with all that forget God? The Sun, Moon, and
Stars (that never sinned) cannot endure this wonderful, and astonishing
majesty of the Son of God; and therefore shall, by a kind of blushing
darkness, presently loose their light and glory: and shall the race of men,
that have been such sinners, and stand not in any borrowed corruption (as
those heavenly lights do) but in their proper transgression and filthiness,
appear without shame, and without the confusion of their faces before Christ
the judge of all flesh at that day? nay, if the sea and waters, not infected by
their own, but by man's sin, shall (then) roar and cry out because of those
things which shall come on the world, Luke 21.25.26. How shall the wicked roar
out for the disquietnesse of their hearts, and how shall the ungodly and sinners
fear and be troubled, who have stained themselves and cast into the world
those defilings that cannot be washed but with a flood of fire?

A comfort to the righteous. For, David was made King, all David's children sat
near the throne, though not in the throne. His sons were the kings sons,
and the posterity he had, the Kings children. Thus David's honor honored
those that come of him. And such honor have all the Saints. Such? Nay greater.
For they all are Kings, and all sit on thrones, who come with Christ. 1. Cor.
6.2. More is spoken of this in the next doctrine.

But the Saints are a part of Christ's company and attendance, that is, he will
bring them with him when he comes to give judgment against the world of the
ungodly. we learn, that the faithull (though despised here) shall have the
honor from Christ, at his coming, to be companions with him in the last
Sessions. This is the prerogative of the Saints, and their proper glory. They
shall meet Christ in the clouds, and reign with him for ever in heavenly
places. When the wicked shall stand upon the earth, as upon a burning floor,
the fire flaming high about their cares, they shall be received into
fellowship, with Christ, and then shall the judgment begin. The Prophet aimed
at this, Psa. 50.4 5
who speaking of this great day of the Lords coming, shows whom the Lord
would call unto it, either to stand before him as witnesses, or to be joined
with him as companions. The witnesses are heaven and earth. They, whom Christ
will have in company with him, are the Saints. And therefore he says, Gather
my Saints together unto me. Psalm. 50.5. Math. 24.31. As if he had said: Let
heaven and earth come to judgment, but let my elect come to the bench. And
David speaking of the Saints glorified, does not set them in the outward courts
of Gods house, but in the presence, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence, says he,
that is, in place where thou art. This is resembled in the Lambs standing on
mount Sion, and in those hundred fourtic and four thousand that were with him,
having his fathers name written in their forheads. Apoc. 14.1. For by the Lamb
is meant Christ, and by the hundred forty and four thousand, the company of
the Saints who shall be with Christ. So, in the Virgens that went to meet the
Bridegroom: Math. 2^.1. But more specially in those, who being ready, when the
Bridegroom went in, went in with him to the wedding, ver. 10. But the Apostle
S. Paul speaks plainly, and not in a figure, where, speaking of the great
honor that the Saints shall have in the sight of the damned, he says: They
shall be caught up in the clouds and meet Christ in the air. 1. These 4 17.
And adds, So they shall ever be with the Lord. The meaning is, and it is as
if he had said: they shall never be strangers but companions. Christ himself
has said it, who speaking to his Disciples and, in them, to the rest of the
thousands of his Saints, that have followed him in the regeneration, promises
that they shall sit on seats, or rather on glorious thrones. Math. 19.28. Luc.
22.30. Now he is faithful who has promised, and will surely do it. Therefore
shall the righteous abide with Christ for ever. The reasons. The Saints are
Christ's servants. Now where the Master is there must the servants be that,
wait upon him. Ioh. 12.26. nay, they are Christ's friends. Ioh. 15.5. and where
should a friend be, but in the presence of his friend? or they are Christ's
court. Therefore, where he is, there must they be: for where the King is, there
the court is. And they be more then of his court: for, they are of his court
and counsel too. Ioh. 15.15. And so Christ's presence is not only where they
are, as the Kings is at court, but they be his counsell-table, or court of
power, wherein he sits gloriously, as the King in his throne. Secondly, and
to reason from the less to the greater. If a good Master will prefer his
good followers, when himself is preferred: Christ, being so highly exalted in
glory, will much more honor those thousands that have been of his company
and attendance here. And so, they who have had fellowship with Christ in his
afflictions, shall have fellowship with him in his glory, and they who have
suffered with him, shall reign with him. 2. Tim. 2.12. Thirdly, Luc. 12.32.
this is the hope of the faithful, and shall the hope and patient abiding of
the faithful deceive them?

This teaches the righteous to bear the injuries of the world quietly, and
willingly. For, the day will come when their persecutors shall be trodden down
to hell and second death, and they (presently) receive the crown of their
sufferings, who have suffered for Christ. Here, he that refraineth from evil
makes himself a prey, Esa. 59.15. and it is safer to do wrong, then to
complain of an injury we; but let me not too much discourage Gods children,
for, that which is thus, and so here, shall be contrary hereafter, when the
Lord shall requite the fury of his adversaries with a recompense, verse 18.
then they who here despised the righteous man's life, will say, that they, whom
they thought to be fools, and their end without honor, are now counted among
the children of God, and their portion among the saints. Wisd. 5.4.5. what
though the companions of the devil set themselves, as in battle array,
against those whom it pleases Christ, in a gracious fellowship thus to call
his, and the companions of his coming: after a while they shall be gathered to
Christ, and be free from all wrongs of men; and at Christ's coming see the just
judgment and vengeance of all those, who cruelly hurt them, themselves sitting
on the bench, and giving a kind of judgment against them, with Christ, and the
thousands that are with him.

But shall the Saints be in company with Christ at his coming, Prou. 1.14. 2.
Cor. 6.14. Or shall they sit on the throne of iniquity, who must sit on thrones
with Christ? And make a league with the world, who must judge it and the
Angels? 1. Cor. 6.2.3. That is, shall they now justify the world with their
talk and conversation, who must hereafter condemn it, and the hels of the
devils with the sentence of their mouth, and sincerity of their ways? That
holy Author of the 119. Psalm, had an eye to this blessed hope of being one of
Christ's attendants hereafter; and therefore, would not be for all companies, but
professed himself a companion only to such as feared God and kept his laws.
Psalm. 119.62. He would not hazard his frail pot-shard upon the rock of evil
company for any thing. And wherefore did David hate the assembly of the evil,
and not company with the wicked, Psalm. 26.5. but because, having fellowship
with God, he feared to have any fellowship with Gods enemies, and was persuaded
that as God will not take a wicked man by the hand, Job 8.20. so none of Gods
company should; Also, he was loath to make them his companions on earth, of whom
he could have no hope that they should be his companions in heaven. Let them
consider this, who cast in their lots with a wicked generation for their ends
in the flesh, and mingle heaven and earth together in a soci^tie, whereof we
may say, the head is gold, but the legs are iron, and the seete stand upon
clay. Dan. 2.33. I speak to the faithful, whom I would not have to go out of
the world, to avoid the wicked that are in it, but entreat by the tender
mercies of God, to be as careful as they can, to avoid them and their
assembly; and if they must use them for necessity, not to use them as
companions, neither to draw with them in any yoke of affection, but rather to
draw back when the wicked are in place.

A comfort to the godly, no disparagement to them, but glory, nor loss, but
gain,) Yet they are esteemed of the good, and admired of the evil, though not
followed of them. Or, do the wicked hate them? They shall loose nothing by
such hatred, for God and good men will love them. Will not the unrighteous have
any fellowship with them? It is the better for them. For they are in less
danger of corruption, and more possibility of grace. And where men that be
evil avoid them, Christ and his thousands will stick unto them. Those
worthies of whom we read in the eleventh to the Hebrews, were vilely and
cruelly dealt with in the world. But what says the text? The world was not
worthy of them Heb. 11.36.37.38. The wicked dr^ue them out of their companies
by sharp persecution, into deserts, and mountains, and holes of the earth:
But they were worthy, and had far better company, having a kind of
fellowship with Christ, and all the Saints that were gone before them. ver. 40.
So for the faithful that now live, if the ungodly make no more of them, then
of the filth of the world, and the of-scouring of all things, 1. Cor. 4.13. It
is because they are good to live among them, and too precious to be cast before
Swine, that so tread them under foot, and rent them. Mat. 7.6. And where they
say; Away with such fellows from the earth, Act. 22.22. Christ will in his
time, take them from the earth by a blessed and sweet death to have fellowship
with him and his thousands. Wherefore, let us comfort one another with these
sayings. 1. These. 4.18.

A comfort against death, the head of his own Church, that he may be honored
in us, and in the thousands of his Saints? Again, if we be hated in a place,
we will long to go out of it, to a place, where we know or hope to be
otherwise, and better regarded. Here the true Christian is hated for the name
of Christ, that he loves, and few places shall he come into where the good
course he follows, and the profession he is of, is not spoken against: What
comfort (then) can we have to remain in the Meshech of those assemblies, where
such haters of God be? Psalm. 120.5. And what great comfort must it needs be to
him to remove to that place and glory, where all love the Lord Jesus with all
their hearts; which place is heaven, and glory in heaven, and not in these
tents of Kedar? Therefore, that we may comfortably look for this day of the
Lord, or day of our removing to him, and to the company of all his thousands;
Let us love the appearing of Christ here: love to go out with the Saints to
meet him in Christian assemblies; love his truth and brethren with all our
hearts, and decline the ways of the wicked, that we may escape their
judgment. So much for the judgment it self, the ends of the Judge his
coming, follow.

To give indgement upon all men, etc.] Verse 15.
The ends of Christ's coming are to judge generally, all men; particularly, all
ungodly men. The general is of good and bad; the particular, here mentioned,
is of bad only. The good shall receive a sentence, but it shall be of
absolution; the bad shall have their judgment, but it shall be of rebuke. For
the first, which is the judgment that concerns all men; it administreth this
doctrine; Paul speaks where he says; we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ. He says, we, that is, the righteous: and all, that
is, both godly and sinners, must appeare^ and not by their Attorney but in
their own persons. No man's absence shall be excused by security, or bail,
neither will any caution be received for an after-comming. For, the Apostle
does not say, we must appear hereafter, but, we must appear, that is,
presently appear, and without delay, before Christ the judge. Saint Matthew
says that all nations shall be gathered before him. Mat. 25.32. His meaning
is, that in every nation, every man, Ioh. 5.28.29.
woman, and little child, high, low, poor, and rich, shall personally be cited
to judgment by the voice of the Son of God in the air. But shall they be
cited, and shall they not come? The Evangelist says, they shall be gathered:
that is, they shall not choose but come. And the Evangelist John, the third
witness of this truth unto us, saw this in a vision, and wrote it in a book.
His words are: And I saw the dead both great and small, stand before God. Apoc.
20.12. Not some dead, but all the dead, little and great. And they were judged:
Not some men, but every man according to his works. ver. 13. But shall the
dead only stand before Christ, and not they who shall be found alive at his
coming? Yes, even they shall stand before Him, and the elect (then alive)
shall come up unto him. 1. These. 4.16. The elect shall be with him in the
Mount, the wicked and sinners shall stand at the foot of the hill. The
reasons. First, every thought and work must be brought into judgment.
Eccles. 12.14, and 11.9. and if every secret thing and work, then the persons
out of whose hearts those thoughts came, and in whose hands those works were,
must be judged. Secondly, among the sons of Adam, some are gold, and they
must be purged, and some dross, and they must be burnt up with the fire of the
Lords coming. Here, goats and sheep feed together as in one common pasture,
and here tares and wheat grow up together as in one common field. But when they
come to the fold, the Porter of heaven (not Peter but Christ) will open the
door of life to his sheep, and open hell for damned goats and reprobates:
and when they come to the harvest, the Master of the field will command his
Reapers, the Angels, to gather the wheat of his election into his garner; but
for the chafe of his wrath, he will scatter it with the wind of his judgment,
and burn it up with the unquenchable fire of hell. Math. 3.12. and 13.30. It
is necessary therefore, for the trial of every man's work and person, that
there should be a general judgment, and a general appearing at it. Thirdly,
it is more for the glory of God and the solemnity of the day, that all without
exception, shall be cited to it, and be present at it. It is more to the glory
of God: for, then, the glory of his justice shall more appear in the
reprobation of sinners, and the glory of his grace be more and more gloriously
manifest in the salvation of his people. And for that days magnificence, what
can be imagined to make it more solemn, stately, and glorious, then to have
all countries, tongues, and kindreds of the earth to come together to it? for,
what a great day will that be, and how full of majesty, beauty, and honor;
when the whole world shall appear together at once, that is, at one session
and judgment? If a King should marry his eldest son and bid many Kings, and
some Emperors to the marriage, would not that be a great marriage? but at the
day of Christ's marriage, wherein he shall be (eternally) espoused to his
Church, all the world shall be present: all Kings and Emperors that ever were
shall be at it: some as guests to honor it, some as enemies to be driven from
it. Math. 22.11.13. John say, that he who believes in the Son, shall not
come into judgment? Ioh. 3.18. For answer, I say, that, righteous only shall
stand in the judgment. Ps. 1.3. and with boldness, before Christ the Judge:
Luc. 21.36. who (therefore) shall receive sentence with them, not, as the
wicked, against them, and here the sentence of come ye blessed, not the woeful
sentence of go ye cursed into everlasting fire. Math. 25.34.41. and where it
is said, that he who believes shall not come into judgment, the meaning is,
and so our books have it, into judgment of condemnation.

Will Christ give judgment upon all men, is a point or article of faith to
salvation, wherein we profess to believe, by the scriptures, that when the
soul goes out of the body to rest or pain, the body it self is laid in
some grave till the day come, wherein the Lord Jesus will raise it, by his
voice in an Archangell, either to eternal happiness, or to eternal misery.
I speak of the souls going out of the body. For, some have thought that the
souls of men, which die not, are kept in still within the body that dies, as
in a sleep or swoune till the last day. But, we read to the contrary in the
word of God: as of souls under the altar, not still in the body; and of crying
souls, not of souls asleep or souls in a trance. Apoc, 6.9. So Lazarus
soul was carried to heaven. Therefore not least in the body, but taken out of
the body. Luc. 16.22. Other groser opinions of the souls estate after death,
I leave to the Mowles and to the Backs from which they came, Esa. 2.20. My
purpose being to speak of the bodies estate as it shall be at the last day;
not of the souls as it is at the day of our death. And (here) for the
resurrection of bodies, which we believe with all the true Churches of Christ,
Satan has raised some in all ages to cavil against it, or flatly to deny it.
For, all have not (altogether) denied it, who were enemies to it, as Himineus
and Philetus, who granted there was a resurrection, but said it was past. 2.
Tim. 2.17.18. And, the Sadduces did not generally resist it, but had their
false glosses, and diverse interpretations of it. Indeed the Stoikes and
Epicures, among the Philosophers were peremptory ad^ersaries to it. Act.
17.18, and Libertines among Christians do in their lives deny it. But the
truth of it shines brighter in scripture and reason, then that it can be
darkened by any cloud (how black soever) of humane opposition. Job says, that
after the worms have done with his body, yet even in that body he shall see
God. Job. 19.26. Ezechiel foresheweth the bringing again of the people out of
captivity under an excellent figure of the rising and restoring of our flesh
at the last day. Ezech. 37.5.6. as if he should have said; He that can restore
flesh and breath to rotten bones, can restore the Israelites to their country,
Esaias speaks plain of this matter, saying, Thy dead men shall live, together
with my dead bodies shall they rise. Esa. 26.19. where the Prophet testifies,
without any figure, his hope in the resurrection, both of his own body and
the bodies of all believers. His drift is, to prove that same thing, whereof we
spoke before out of Ezechiel; namely, the restoring of Israel after their long
captivity in Babylon: where he shows, that, as herbs, which in winter seem
dead, are fresh again in the spring; so the people, who seemed to die (as
winter herbs) in their captivity, shall in the spring of their return rise, as
it were, from death to life: And yet he plainly shows, that the bodies of
the faithful (though they seem utterly to porish, when they are in the earth)
shall rise at the last day, through that seed which they have in Christ. Daniel
speaks yet more plainly, and says: Many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth shall awake. Dan. 12.2. He says many, as if he should say: an
infinite number shall awake, an infinite number of the just, and an infinite
number of the wicked. Or, by many, he understands all; as the Apostle in a
like case does, Romans 5.15.19. Where, speaking of many dead by the sin of
Adam, he shows in the 18. verse, that by those many, he means all. The
Jews gather from the text in Daniel, that there shall be no resurrection of
the wicked, which also they do from the first Psalm. But they gather that the
holy Ghost never scattered. And they may as well say, that all the godly shall
not rise, because it is said many, not all, as that the wicked shall not be
raised. But to proceed, wherefore did David lay up his flesh in such hope, but
because he had greater faith in the resurrection? Psalm. 16.9.10. Martha never
staggered at the resurrection, but confessed it, as a doctrine of the faith of
those times. For when Christ had said, thy brother shall rise again, she
readily answered, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the
last day. Ioh. 11.23.24. As if he had said, I doubt nothing of that. Saint
Paul in the whole 15. chapter of his former Epistle to the Corinthians, makes
the resurrection the subject of all his disputes there. And, this was his hope
that he had toward God, that the resurrection of the dead, should be both of
the just, and unjust. Act. 24. The Epistle to the Hebrews speaking of the
manifold martyrdomes of the Saints, shows that they quietly endured al those
sharp storms in their faces, because their hope was to receive a better
resurrection, that is, better then any deliverance here. Heb. 11.35. Also, how
could Christ's argument hold, that God is the God of the living, being the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; if Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, should not live, as
now in their souls which are before God, so hereafter in their bodies, which
are in Gods keeping? Mat. 22.32. Neither does the Lord say, I am the God of
Abraham's soul, but the God of Abraham, that is, of Abraham's whole man. Thus
the point of the resurrection is plain by Scripture; It follows briefly to
show what evidence it has in reason, that we may take heaven and earth to
witness against the oppugners of it. Deuteronomy. 30.19. It is sufficient to weigh
these matters in the weights of the sanctuary, and not needful to try them
at the bulk of humane reason, yet, to give them over measure, that will not
receive this truth; Let it first be considered, that as the soul of the
righteous, did not please God without the body, nor the souls of the wicked
sin against him, but in their bodies: so it is requisite, that as the soul
of the one is glorified, and the souls of the other are condemned to hell,
that (I say) their bodies also should, in Gods time, be brought to pleasures
or torment. Secondly, without the body, the soul is imperfect. And being
imperfect, how can it enter into an entire estate of happiness, till the body
be raised, that the body may be joined to it? Thirdly, if the body should
not be raised; the fullness of grace should not be showed to the Saints, nor
the fullness of wrath to sinners. Fourthly, if there were no resurrection, God
should promise, that which he minded not to give; who promises a reward to the
just, but it is at the resurrection. Luke 14.14. Fifthly, the reuolutions of so
many springs, summers, haruests, and hard winters, as it were so many deaths
and resurrections; the dying of the day in the night, the grave of that day,
and the vprising again of it in the morning, from that den of darkness, are,
and do become so many lively testimonies to the world, of the general great
resurrection of all bodies, at the last day. Sixthly, do we not see, in the
spring, how that from a dead and dry tree leaves proceed and sprout forth, by a
kind of resurrection? And do we not see the same tree to bear further
fruit, and to be adorned with a new rind, as it were, fresh and beautiful
skin? do we not fee in a small seed a tall and great tree? is that, which is
sown quickened except it die? 1. Cor. 15.36. Do not our Meddowes, pastures,
and pleasant gardens which in the winter appear dead, without all beauty,
return, with the return of the Sun, to their former full life and glory?
This winter is our death: and this spring our rising from death to life.
Seventhly, the swallows, worms, and flies which lie dead all winter, do with
the return of the Sun, and coming of Summer, receive a new life. Now, shall
the force of this earthly Sun, work so in birds and worms; and shall the
Sun of righteousness be less able to give life then the sun of the
heavens. And if it was an easy thing with God at first, to make man of
nothing: is it a less easy thing with him to make him again, though he be as
nothing, seeing he is not merely nothing, but nothing out of that, which was
before? Before we were borne, where was our form and matter? Yet we feee to
what bigness we are come, and what form we have, and what being. Where was
the seed of Leui, when (to speak as the Scriptures do) he was in the loins
of Abraham his great grandfather? Heb. 7.20. Many alterations, corruptions,
and changes came between, yet God purposed that Leui should be so borne, that
is of the feed of Abraham, and not all the corruptions that came between,
could alter his purpose. Lastly, all the resurrections that we read of in the
Scriptures of the old and new testament, as of the Shunamites son. 2. Kin.
4.33. Of the body that was cast into the Prophets grave, 2. King 13.21. of
Lazarus, Ioh. 11.43. of Iairus daughter, Mat. 9.25. yea, of the bright Sun
himself, and of many Saints with him, Mat. 27.52.53. are as so many pledges to
us of the resurrection that shall be of all dead bodies at Christ's coming.

But must all bodies be raised? O then, let us so prepare for death by a good
life, that the day of our resurrection may be a day of refreshing to us from
the Lord. Act. 3.19. When the wicked (as seed that rotteth in the earth which
God does not bless) shall arise without comfort, let us endeavor to lie down
in that favor of God, wherein who so falls a sleep, shall out of the same be
sure to awake comfortably and ioifully, having no more woe nor sorrow. And as
Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep, 1. Cor. 15.20. there
resurrection being yet in the blade and green ear, and their bodies at rest
in their graves, as it were beds of peace, in which they sleep quietly till he
shall raise them, who raises the Sun daily from his den: So, let us so live
in Christ by our good consciences, that when the night shall come, that night,
or hour in the night, whereof our Savior spoke, when he said; the night
comes when no man can work, Ioh. 9.4. we may go down peaceably to our
sepulchers, as into our beds, with confidence to stand before God in the
resurrection of the just. The day will come (let us think of it earnestly)
when we must meet the Lord face to face. It is good therefore to meet him
here in his word, and in our honest conversation, seeking the things above,
Col. 3.1. that when we shall go forth to meet him with the Virgins, that had
oil in their lamps, and store of oil, that is grace in their hearts, we may
not be ashamed. Math. 25.1.10. If we will attain to the resurrection of the
just; we must begin it here in the New birth of a Christian, and new life of
one that is so borne. For as in the first birth, man is brought forth,
consisting of soul and body: so in this second of our spiritual resurrection,
we must have a new soul and body, as it were new heaven and earth created in
us. Of flesh we must be made spirit; and of fleshly, divine; so we may
comfortably look for the last resurrection, or our parts in it: a day that
sweeteneth more then sugar, the crosses and miseries of our hard life here. The
comfortable day of the Saints: and Christ's glorious and welcome day, after
which he will reign in the mids of the people for ever.

Again, shall the judgment be of all men good and bad? then it concerns us
all, if we mean to receive from Christ the Judge, a comfortable sentence in
that day, to look well to our estate and matters here, that we bring a good
cause, and the witness of a good conscience to that judgment seat. He that
has a matter to be heard before some earthly Judge, and upon some certain
day, will, at the time and about the day appointed, be in some good readiness.
That is: He will bring his sufficient counsel to the bar, be sure that his
matter be good, and eu^dence without exception, have his witnesses to speak
for him, and the truth of the cause to speak for it self. And, shall we
negligently deal in so weighty an action, as that which must come to hearing
before so great a Judge of quick and dead? The day is set: and we know not how
suddenly it will come, and in how short time. Besides, the matter to be heard,
concerns not lands or goods, but life or death eternal. Christ is our only
Counselor, or Advocate in that court, our good deeds are our good evidence.
The witnesses are the word that must judge us, and our own consciences. And,
shall we now despise the Son of God, and count his covenant a profane thing?
shall we crucify, by our sins, Christ our Advocate, and think to have him
on our side and part, or dream that he will be for us whom we have crucified?
should we not rather kiss the Son with the kiss of our reconcilement to
Christ, who must speak for us, and be for us, if ever we be saved? our good
deeds are our best evidence: and shall we follow after unrighteousness, do
bad deeds with greediness, and show no good evidence why we should not be
damned? our witnesses are the word and our own consciences: and shall we make
a mock of the word, and not regard the witness of our conscience, whether it
be with us or against us? if we despise the Gospel, it cannot speak for us,
and if we go against our conscience, it will surely be against us. And should
not man fear to bring a witness (specially in such a court) that will
fearfully speak against him? Let us (therefore) endeavor, by making much of
the word, by preferring it to our chief joy, by hearing it diligently, by
being molded in it, and fashioned like unto it, to get one witness for us,
that is more worth, then all the pleasures and profits of sin, that wretched
men so admire. And, for the ways of our heart, and actions of our life, let us
so approve them to God, who will give an upright sentence upon them, and upon
us for them, and do them in such an integrity before God, and innocence
before men, when we either deal with God, or have dealing with our Neighbor,
that we may have two witnesses clearly for us in that great day of hearing.

Lastly, here reproved, who take from God his seat, and judge their brother,
that is, judge him to condemnation. For, this Christ has forbidden who is
Judge. Math. 7 1. And the Apostle Saint Paul would not have us thus to judge our
brother, giving this for a reason: for, we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ. Romans 14.10. as if he should have said: by judging in
this manne^ we would seem to step before God, and to prevent his sentence,
exposing our brother, with great wrong, to a double judgment, one, which we
pronounce, another, which Christ will give at the last day. So our brother
shall be twice judged, once by us who are usurpers, and again by Christ who is
Judge indeed, or, by such manner judgment, we argue Gods righteous judgment
of insufficiency, and judgment seat of corruption, and so wrong the Lord, and
not only our brother when we so judge him. But though rash judgment be
forbidden, yet all judgment is not. For, the Judge may censure a fault, that
deserves death, with death, and may condemn a malefactor to the gallows,
whom he may not condemn to hell. The Minister may censure faults by the doom
of the word of God, and by ecclesiastical correction. Nay, the private man may
judge a wicked person by his life, so far as he may know him by it, and judge
him by the word, though he may not judge him to hell, nor judge him before the
time. 1. Cor. 4.5. we may judge the tree by the fruit, because by the fruit we
may know it. Math. 12.33, and so, as far as we know we may speak, so we
speak charitably and wisely of our brother, we may not judge of the tree by
the sap: neither may we judge our brothers heart, but must leave that to his
judgment seat who knows it, and the secretest walks of it. Neither is rash
judgment only here forbidden, but much more all lying judgment, as to say, a
man does evil when he does well, or, when he does evil, to say he does worse
then he does. When a thing is doubtful to take it in the worst part, and when
it is plain to obscure it. This meteth (also) with a kind of people who blow
abroad (uncharitably) the faults which they should cover, and have their
tongues always upon their neighbors sores, setting their small faults upon
tenters, and great upon the stage of the wide world. But the time that such
spend in censuring of others, they should bestow in amending of themselves,
remembering that they have a Judge, and that, that Judge is the Lord, who is
full of eyes, and lacks not power to thrust into hell all such usurping
Judges, who speak cruelly and without respect, either of their own frailty
or their brothers amendment. But more of this in the place thereof, hereafter.
Here (also) they are reproved, who give a favorable sentence, not so much upon
evil doers, as upon their evil deeds, calling their evil good. Esa. 5.20.
For, these do not only prevent, but flatly cross Christ's righteous
judgment. Of these says Solomon: He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord. And let
them consider this, who will be sure to speak for, or to speak well of a
wicked person, or excuse him in his boldness with a lying tongue. Men may
commend such as charitable, but God will condemn them as unrighteous: they may
be welcome to men, but they are an abomination to God. You will say:
Christians must judge charitably. Charitably, I grant, but not falsely.
Charity must neither be too quicksighted, nor blind. And here wise judgment
is not forbidden, but rash judgment. So much for the general end of Christ's
second coming, the particular follows.

And to rebuke all the ungodly among them, etc.] The particular end of Christ's
coming concerns the ungodly among men: and that is to rebuke them to
damnation, and to set their doings in his angry countenance. Where the Apostle
sets down two things; as the form of judgment in the word rebuke or
convince, and ^ow far it exceeds in the letter, he speaks of the persons
who, and the matters where of they shall be judged. The form is by a judgment
of rebuke or conviction, wherein the Lord will proceed against all ungodly
persons severely and terribly by his word and their own consciences. For God
rebukes two ways, either in mercy when he corrects his children. Ha^. 3.2.
or in justice without mercy, when he destroys his enemies. Psalm. 6.1. Of the
latter it is meant, where it is said, that the Lord will rebuke all the ungodly
among men, as if it had been said; he will rebuke them to a perpetual
destruction, or pour out his fury upon them. The doctrine here taught is: The
day of Christ's coming against his enemies will be intolerable and full of
wrath. So the word shows whereby the Apostle does express their igtollerable
judgment to come. For, he says, the Lord, will rebuke. Meaning, that in his
judgment of rebuke, he will reprove them by the book of theirown wicked
hearts, which shall be so touched (as it were opened) every leaf of it, and
work in it, that all shall come forth, Apoc 20.12. and they shall be able to
deny nothing, that shall be objected against them: and being thus laid open in
their own consciences, he will presently execute his fierce anger upon them by
punishing them with hell fire. Esaias the Prophet says, speaking of the Lords
coming to judgment against ungodly men, that he will stretch out his hand as
one that swimmeth; his meaning is, His judgment shall so extend to them all,
that no one shall escape it. Esaias 25.11. Yea, as an ouerflowing river, so shall
it be, and shall go over all their banks, and with such force break into
their souls that they shall be able no more to avoid this destruction of
fire, then the old world could that of the flood. Esaias 8.7.8. Now, will not
this be an intolerable judgment, that thus shall single out every ungodly
sinner, as it were by the Pole, to perishment? It shall not be avoided, and it
cannot be abidden: so terrible to all the Lords enemies, shall the Lords
coming be. But this is set down more fully by Saint Matthew, where showing how
Christ, in his last judgment, shall separate his own people from strangers, as
a Shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats; he says, he will call to
salvation the righteous, whom (therefore) he will set on the right hand of his
favor; but for the wicked, whom (therefore) he will set, as on his left hand,
before the face of his rebuke in all their sins, he will, in the chiding
voice of that his last judgment, send them from his own comfortable presence,
to have company with the Devil and his Angels of darkness in the lowest hels.
The words are: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Math. 25.41. One writing upon these
words, does thus amplify, As if the damned should say: Lord let us be in thy
presence, though unworthy to sit down upon seats in thy kingdom. No, says
the Lord, but depart from me, that is, out of my sight and presence for ever.
Yet, say the damned, if thou put us out of thy sight, bless us before we go.
Genesis 27.38. No, says the Lord, but depart ye cursed. And must we go with a
curse, say the damned? yet send us into some place of ease and comfort. No,
says the Lord, but go into a lake of fire. Yet let this fire have an end
might the damned say, No says the Lord, but go into everlasting fire. If we
must depart into everlasting fire, might the damned say, yet, let us have some
good company there. No, says the Lord, but go into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, having the Prince of Devils for your
King, and the rest of the Devils for your companions. And thus, after this
second Noah, has blessed the seed of the righteous, as is said before in this
Chapter: verse. 34. he will curse all the Chams of the earth: Genesis 9.24. And
now, that the blessing is past, which, not Jacob alone, but the seed of Jacob
has gotten; though they would say with Esau, yet bless us, even us also,
before we go hence; they shall hear, not from Isaac, but from him that is
judge in the clouds, who having made an end of blessing, shall say: Jacob have
I blessed, and he shall be blessed, the godly are with me, and shall ever
remain with me, but for you the workers of iniquity, Depart from me, I know
you not. Genesis 27.30.33.38. Mat. 7.23. It is a plague of all plagues, and the
very bottom of the vial of Gods wrath, to be separated from Christ. For, as
in the presence of God is the fullness of all joy: Ps. 16.11. So to depart from
the Lord, is the perfection of all misery. Absalon could say; Let me see the
Kings face, and if there be any trespass in me, let him kill me. 2. Sa.
14.32. His meaning was, rather let me not live, then live in disgrace, an exile
from my fathers court and favor. And what will the wicked say, who must in
this rebuke of their everlasting banishment, from the face and salvation of
Christ, depart, never to return? And if the coming of the Sun to a place,
promise joy, and the again departing of it from the same place, cause sorrow
and darkness: what joy must needs be lacking, and sorrow abound, where the
Sun and God of salvation, shall never in the sunshine of his presence, be
seen any more? Where shall be no gleames of favor, but dark tempests of
justice, raining snares upon all the woeful inhabitants of the earth? And yet
this punishment is not all, though insufferable. For, the damned Cains of hell,
shall not only have this cursed mark set upon them, to go from the presence
of the Lord; Gen 4.16. but shall dwell for ever in the Tophet of damnation,
Esaias 30.33. where besides their not endurable pain of loss, they shall have
inflicted upon them pains of sense that are intolerable. For, spiritual
Tophet is a place, wherein is fire, and much burning. Our ordinary fire, the
hottest we make, and greatest we kindle, is but as painted fire, to this fire
indeed. Yet a man would not be in it, one quarter of an hour to gain the
world. How much then and itolerably shall the wicked suffer, who shall be
tormented in this fierce fire, not a quarter of an hour or year only, but
years upon years, yea millions of years, world without end? or, if a little
disease and that but in one part only, so troubled us lying upon a soft bed:
How shall we abide the rebuke of the Lord in all the parts of our body and
tender powers of our mind, and not upon our pallats of ease but beds of
glowing fire? The rage of the fiercest enemy may be qualified, or if it might
not, yet he shall perish, and his wrath with him. But in this large winepresse
of the Lords indignation, the worm dies not and Gods anger endures for ever
as himself is eternal. The covenant that God has made with the day and night
shall be broken. But his judgment of rebuke is inviolable. They, whom he
condemns shall be ever damned, and whom he sends to hell, shall never
return.

Some do (here)idly ask how fire can ever burn the flesh of the damned and
never consume it? To this Ianswere, material fire cannot, but this fire
appointed so to do by the powere and will of the Creator, shall. The bush that
Moses saw in the fire, burned and consumed not: Exodus 3.2. And it is said of
the Salamander, that she lives in the fire and is not burnt. So why may not
these bushes of the curse ordained to burning, and hellish Salamanders judged
to perpertuall fire be, day and night, tormented in a furnace of intolerable
heat, and yet their flesh never be diminished, nor their body consumed in
those flames? Some are curious to know what manner fire that shall be, Lord
will rebuke the world with fire, and sinners with hell fire, rather to quench
the matter of it in our so many increasings against God, by the means of sin
that dwells in us, and to take from it the wood-pile that fedeth it, then
curiously to dispute or search how fire can fasten upon a spiritual substance
and with what kind of burning. Thus have we showed that the Lords coming, at
the last day, shall be a putting of the wicked from God, and a putting of them
into hell, where they shall be tormented day and night for ever: and that
(therefore) it will be a day to all ungodly men of intolerable wrath from God,
and vexation from the effects of his coming. The reasons. All things which
(then) they shall see and feel shall be, if any thing may be terrible, most
terrible. They shall see and feel sin on their right hand, and Satan on
their left hell under their feet, and an angry Judge above their head, the
world full of destruction without, and a worm gnawing the heart within. Or, to
speak, as Anselme.
one, (sometimes) fearfully spoke. Above them, shall be their Judge offended
with them for their wickedness: beneath them, hell open and that burning
furnace wide gaping to receive them: on the right hand, their sins accusing
them: on the left hand fierce devils ready to execute this wrathful sentence
of the Lords rebuke upon them: within them, their conscience gnawing: without
them all damned souls bewailing: on every side, the world burning. Be not
these sights terrible? and will not these things work terribly? Secondly, the
wrath of a Lion is terrible. Am. 3.8. what then, when the Lord shall roar from
heaven, and give forth his voice, and that a glorious voice? who will not
(then) be afraid? or, if the wrath of a King, that is, if a Kings anger or
fire, just kindled, burn to death upon the offenders: for Solomon says, The
wrath of a King is as messengers of death. Prou. 16.14, how terrible to
eternal death, shall the Lords anger be, provoked by sinners? how insufferable
to all those, who have by rebellious wickedness offended him? If the King
pass sentence, who will deny execution? For, where the word of the King is
(says the Preacher) there is power. Eccles. 8.4. And yet the King may command
where the Subject will not see done: as when Saul would have put Jonathan to
death, and the people would not let him die. 1. Sam. 14.44.45. But if God once
pass sentence, who will stop it? nay, who will not be ready, both good and
bad Angels, to execute it? If Gods wrath be to be feared in man: how fearful
is that wrath, in the God of wrath? David says, if his wrath be kindled but a
little, blessed are they that trust in him: then, when it is all on fire, how
miserable are they, who having trusted in themselves and provoked him, can have
no hope from him, nor comfort from his coming? Thirdly, the signs that shall
keep company with, or be joined to the coming of the son of man to
judgment; as the darkning of the Sun and Moon, the roaring of the Sea and
waters, not by an ordinary but strange unquietness, the failing of men's
hearts, the general palsy or shaking disposition, that shall be in all the
heavenly powers, which shall be so violent, and with such perturbations of all
lights and elements; that the stars shall fall, that is, shall seem to fall
from heaven, and the sign of the Son of Man, which I take to be the burning
of the high heavens and this lower earth, which, at the instant of his coming
shall be set on fire; these and the like signs, (not of peace, but of war to
the world, and not of favor, but of great wrath to sinners) how can they but
pierce with fear all such as shall come before the Lord, in their sins
without repentance, at this day? If the winds keep us in some awe when they be
high and loud, and if we fear the sea when it is but a little moved: if
every sudden noise and crack at mignight fright us, and if the thunder make
us afraid; what shall their fear be, and how great the confusion of their
faces, who shall stand in no faith, and therefore with no boldness before the
Son of God, when all these matters of intolerable fear shall come together,
and meet upon the (then)fiery stage of this world, and be ready to execute, in
their fiercest wrath and greatest power, the law and will of their most
excellent Creator against all faithless reprobates? Fourthly, this will be a
day, not of mercy, but of rebuke to all Gods enemies, and therefore
intolerable to such. For, if the Lord do straightly mark what is done amiss,
who shall abide it? Psalm. 130.3.

An admonition, Him while we are in the way. Mat. 5.25. Our Savior does exhort
all the faithful to this wisdom by the example of a King, going to war, who
being wise, confidereth if he be able with ten thousand, to mere him that
comes against him with twenty thousand: or if he be not, will send an
embassage, and desire conditions of peace. Luc. 14.31.32. Have we our ten
thousands to encounter with Christ, who comes, that is, will come with
thousands of his Saints, to give judgment upon all men? Surely, as the men of
Samaria reasoned concerning John; two Kings could not stand before him, how
then shall we stand? 2. King. 10.4. so we may more truly and better say
concerning Christ: not two Kings, but not all the Kings of the earth, though
they banded themselves, and assembled in troops against him, could (yet) ever
prevail, or stand before the fierce wrath of his coming. Psalm. 2.2.4.9. and
shall we (poor worms,) when Christ will come to rebuke sinners, think to
abide or stand against the chiding voice of his judgment, so intolerable and
righteous? therefore yield we must, or be broken in pieces. Should we not
therefore, while this King is (I cannot say a great way off, for he may be
neeter then we are aware) but in his way yet toward us by his singular
patience, send forth an embassage of humble supplication and tears, and
present amendment of life, desiring peace and that he would not turn against
us, but to us in mercy, that we may be saved? Therefore while our feet are at
liberty, and before we be bound hand and foot, let us run the way of the
Lords commandments: and while we have tongues, and before we become
speechless, Mat. 22.12. let us use our tongues well, and not suffer our
mouths to sin: and while we have hands, and before our hands fall from our
arm, and arm rot from our shoulder, let us work with our hands, the thing
that is good, Ephesians. 4.28. and procure things that be honest in the sight of
all men: and while we have breath, and before God stop our breath, let breath
and all praise the Lord: and while we have ears, and before our ears, these
daughters of singing, be abased, Eccles. 12.4. let us lift up our ears to the
word, and not unto vanity. For, if (here) we stop our ears against the
trumpet of the Gospel, we shall hear to our grief, the trumpet of the last
judgment, which, whether we sleep in the air, or fire, or sea, or holes of
the earth, will awake us. Some, nay many, like some players at the game of
cards, who (though the night be far spent) will not give over till their
candle fail them, will not leave off to do wickedly, till the candle, that
Job speaks of, be put out. And some flatter themselves with an imagination
of a longer day then God has set unto them, or perhaps to the world, for the
last hour thereof. But let such know, that though the day of judgment were far
of, yet the day and hour of every man's particular judgment in death, cannot
be; it being a common and true saying: to day a man, to morrow none. And for
the day of the general death of this languishing world, he that wisely
considers the waines and declinings that have been found in it within these
few years, and (how like a woman with child, which has many panges and fits
before the throws of her great labor come) it is now in pain till it be
delivered, having much complained in those signs and alterations that are gone
before; I say, he that well observes, to the true purpose of his salvation,
these and such like throws, or rather down throws of things, in the womb of
this old and sickly world so near to the travel, and time of her appointed
end by fire, cannot but say that it cannot continue long, and that the Lord
will come shortly among us. When we see a man, in whose face wearing age has
many wrinckles, and deep surrowes, we say, This man can not live long: so when
we see the furrows of old age to appear and be manifest, in so many wastes
and consumptions, as this feeble world is entered into, why do we not see that
the death of it is near? More particularly and specially, as there is no
greater sign that a man is drawing toward death, then that he is always
catching at the sheets and blankets, and always snatching and pulling at
somewhat: so, seeing that every one catches what he can in this griple and
covetous age, and seeing that there is so insatiable a mind of having, in all
conditions and callings of people now, it is a sure sign to the heart of a
wiseman, that this world is sick unto death, and so, as it cannot hold out
long. And if there be no greater sign of death, then that the body is so
cold, that no heat will come unto it; surely the cold charity of the world,
men's no zeal to religion, our nullitie of faith, or poor growth in faith,
insomuch as Sermons are seldom heard, or with small amendment, can not but
testify that the world it self came to be of no long life. And if for should
it not much concern us without putting off, presently to turn unto God,
presently to repent and believe the Gospel, and presently to enter into, and
keep the way of truth and virtue, which are so seldom birds in our days?

A terror to all the enemies of Christ, men, and of such he will say, at his
second coming, bring them hither, and slay them before me. Luke 19.27. Then
shall Kings be bound in chains, and the Nobles (that would not be linked to
Christ) in linkes of iron, till the appointed vengeance come. And when that
time is come; the King will say: Executioners, do your offices. Bind these
Kings, and these great men: bind them hand and foot, that they may neither
defend themselves nor fly; and cast them into utter darkness, that if they
would fly, they may not know whether to fly in the dark. Mat. 22.13. They
have had their time, and this is mine. Men durst not rebuke them, but I will
rebuke them in judgment. And not them only, but all the ungodly of the earth.
This is my great day, wherein I will burn with the fire of rebuke, and
perpetual torment, with the intolerable fire of hell all mine enemies. Thus
Christ will rebuke all the ungodly among men, when he sends the damned to
their own place. At his coming, and when he shall put on these garments of
rebuke, he will sharply reprove the world, with a fire burning before him? At
mignight shall a cry be made by the voice of an Angel, and trumpet of God. Mat.
15 6.
Now, can thou hear a sudden and long cry of fire, fire, at midnight, and
not be afraid? Thou will be worse afraid, if the fire shall be in thine own
house: and worse then that, if it shall burn in the timber, and along the
floor of thy bed chamber. But the ungodly shall suddenly and woefully hear a
greater cry, and cry of greater fear. For, the fire of hell, and not the bare
cry of fire, shall be in their ears, and begin to kindle in their bodies, at
their first rising out of their graves. They shall see heaven and earth burning
before their eyes, and the chambers of their graves all on a fire. They shall
see the fire about them, and flames of euer-burning fire ready to enter into
them, to torment them day and night. So terrible shall this day of rebuke be to
sinners and ungodly men. And shall not the expectation of all this make the
unrighteous to melt with fear? If the downfall of two or three houses can
give such a crack: what a terrible crack and great burst will the heavens,
air, sea, and all the elements, with all the buildings and houses of this
large and great frame, make when they shall (all) run together like a scroule
in the fire? Therefore, if we would not have this cry, at midnight to condemn
us, let us now in this midday of the Gospel, hear, to obedience, the cry of
the word, that we may live. If we would have a comfortable rising, let us go
to our beds, that is graves, in the peace of faith and a good conscience. And
if we would not fear hereafter, let us fear now; and now be Saints, if we
mean to be as the Saints then, that is, at that great day of Christ's coming.
So much for the form of the last judgment, the persons to whom it extends,
follow.

All the ungodly among them, etc.] The persons, who shall be rebuked in
judgment, are the ungodly: yea, all the ungodly, none excepted. By this
property of ungodliness, and by these persons who are called ungodly, the
Apostle understands impenat^ wickedness, and the impenitent wicked against
God, and the people of God, who shall rise to damnation. Ungodliness is a
sin directly against God, and ungodly men are fighters aagainst him. Either
their thoughts are, that their is no God. Ps. 10.4. or, if they believe a God,
yet they deny his providence, and distinguish of his presence: they make an
idol of his mercy, and a sport of his justice. Or, if they confess that God is
Ruler, yet they will not confess his rule by his word. Job 21.14. nor worship
him as he has commanded, but as they (themselves) think good. They neither
pray for their necessities, nor give thanks for their receipts. Job. 21.15.
They love not the Lord, and they abhor his inheritance: they make much of his
enemies, and smite down his people, living as if there were no God, nor
judgment to come, Ps. 44.5. These are ungodly men, and against these this
judgment of rebuke is threatened. Moses, and proclaimed his name before him, he
speaks of his mercy, grace, and slownes to wrath, yet with a reservation and
prouiso of taking his justice unto him when he sees time: for, he adds, that
all this shall not make the wicked innocent, as if he had said, Indeed I am
slow to anger, but just in my anger, to all those, who shall abuse these graces
of my patience, mercy, and favor to sinners. Exodus 34, 6.7. When the haters
of God, and they who cast his words behind them powered out themselves to all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness, the Lord held his tongue, that is, seemed
not to dislike so great disorder, and excess of wickedness in ungodly men:
therefore they thought that he was like to them, and liked (...) sin as well
as they; that he took pleasure in wickedness, and would never punish those
that did wickedly. But God assures them that all is contrary, telling them
that he will reprove them as here, and draw forth his hand to punish them as in
a day of rebuke, and make them ashamed of all their sins, that he will bring
in order before them, and as they committed them before him, not sparing any
Psalm. 50.21. The sinner (says Solomon) does evil an hundred times: that is,
makes no end, and keeps no measure, in sinning, because God prolongeth his
days, or, is patient, not cutting him off so soon as he has done wickedly.
But though God bear never so long, presume never so much, it shall not be well
to him, or it shall be far otherwise with him at the last. For, as the shadow
that flies away, so shall he post to his grave and his soul fly to
destruction. Eccles. 8.12.13. The reasons. If God should ever justify the
sinner, it were either because he did want power to punish him, or instice to
punish sin. But neither is lacking to God, who for power is almighty, and
for zeal against sin, of pure eyes that cannot see evil. Habac. 1.13. That
is, cannot abide it. Secondly, if God should bear ever with sinners; men would
think that God delighted in them, or made some reckoning of them. The godly
would be discouraged from doing good, and the wicked encouraged to do evil.
Thirdly, so, God should condemn the generation of the righteous. For, he that
iustifyeth the wicked condemns the just. A man cannot take an evil man's
part, but he must by taking part with the evil, take part against the good.
Esaias 5.23. Fourthly, Gods law condemns the wicked; Now shall his law condemn
them: and will he clear them? Or shall his word send them to execution: and
will he save them from the hand of the Executioner? Fifthly, this were to bring
sin into credit. For, the Magistrate that will not punish sin, does countenance
sin. And shall we think that he who perfectly hates evil, a^ good men hate
it, but imperfectly, will grace either it or the doers of it? Lastly, the word
every way threatens finners: and therefore if God should for ever spare them,
the word should not be true.

Will not God justify sinners?

(...) to Christians, ungodliness, and to exercise themselves unto godliness,
and the duties thereof, that they may escape this sentence of the rebuke of
ungodly men. so much the grace of God, that (namely) which has appeared in our
salvation, teaches us. Tit. 2.11. Where the Apostles meaning is, that we
should forbear, not only palpable Atheism, of an ungodly life in
Christianity: and that we should au^ide not only the ungodliness of
despising God openly, but the dissembling ungodliness of serving him
negligently. Some will believe that what God has promised, in mercy to his
people shall be done, who will not believe that what the same God has
threatened in justice, to sinners, shall be performed. This is open
ungodliness. So, when we hear men say, it were no (...) i^ there were on more
going (...) seeing there is no more follo^^^: this (likewise) is a speech of
(...). For, did ever any grow (...) sitting by the fire, or more (...) eating
of good meat? So me will ^eare the word, who yet despise him that teaches it.
But how can this be less then a maine effect of ungodliness, seeing that he
who despises the teacher, despises God? Luc. 10.16. Some think if they
frequent the assembly with those foolish virgins, that went out to meet the
Bridegroom, Mat. 25.1, or if they be at Church, though they hear not at the
Church, and come to prayer, though careless how to pray, and receive the
Sacrament, though not Christ by faith in the Sacrament, that their coming
hither, and being here is sufficient. But he that rests in these forms,
going no further, is an ungodly man. Some have a form of godliness and deny
the power thereof, who wear Christ in their mouths, and have not tasted of him
in their hearts. Some have a polygamie of husbands, their old husband the world
is not dead, and they will be married to Christ, serving God and riches: or,
they are not divorced from the flesh, and they will marry with the Spirit,
seeming spiritual and serving sin. These and such like, are the ungodly men,
whom without repentance, God will judge. It must be our care (therefore) not to
walk in their ways, and to decline their paths. For, their ways are
contrary to wisdoms ways, of which it is said: Her ways are ways of
pleasure, and all her paths prosperity. Pro. 3.17. Indeed, there is a way that
seems right to a man, the issues whereof are the ways of death. Prou. 16.25.
And so, the broad and easy way to death and hell, seems to have much
pleasure in it in the conceit of worldlings. But so many as fear the Lord,
will refrain their foot from such ways. And, seeing they only shall stand in
judgment who take hold of the ways of life, walking with God, let us keep the
ways of judgment, and walk uprightly, that the Lord may be our shield for
ever. Prou. 2.7.8.

A reproof of the worlds error, serve not the Lord Jesus but their own
bellies. Rom 16.18. and are sure to be damned; being as Oxen that are made fat
in the best pasture, and therefore ready for the slaughterhouse every day. And
is there any happiness in this, or matter that we should envy? Ps. 37.1.2.
Say, there were no knots in their death. Ps. 73.4. and that the web of their
life should run in an even thread without any breakings, concerning these
outward things, even from their cradles to their graves, (though this be rather
in opinion so, then so indeed:) yet after this comes the judgment. Eccles.
11.9; and when they come down, who now are on horseback in their ruff,
against Christ and christians, their fall shall be great; not to conversion
with Saul. Act. 9.4.6. but into hell with all that forget God. God will rebuke
them, and (suddenly) they shall be cut off in judgment: their beauty shall
consume when they go from house to grave, Ps. 49.14. Is there any happiness
in this? or can a man be happy for this? And yet the life, that these wretched
men have here, is not altogether so without twitches of sorrow, as we think.
For, when we suppose them most happy in their goods, and most pleasant in
their days, perhaps even then, there is a most bitter remembrance of death
within. Even, in laughing (says Solomon speaking of the wicked) the heart is
sorrowful. Prou. 14.13. His meaning is, when you think them most merry and
past bitterness, there are gripes of fear in their pleasures, and sorrow of
heart in all their mirth. Feign would they cast out fear, sometime with one
pastime, sometme with another: but it will not go out; and though they would
cast it out as out of a Cannon, it will return to vex them. Thus there is no
peace to the wicked. Esa. 57.21. nor sound joy in the wicked, and what is it
(then) that we think to be so full of pleasure in a life so unpleasant,
tormented with the guilt of an evil conscience, that like an ulcer in the
body, will put those to great anguish that are pursued of it in the mids of
their feasting, and not cease to torment them day and night, though wrapped
vpwith never so great bravery? But, this is the very case of some of those
whose life we think to be so happy, and condition of life so without knot. So
much for the persons that shall be rebuked; the things, for which, follow.

Of all their wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed.] The matters
about which the sessions of the last day shall be holden, by Christ with all
wicked sinners, concern their deeds and speeches, according to which, or the
evidence of which, they shall be reproved of him at his coming. Their deeds
are to be said ungodly committed, that is, done against the law of God, in
the first and second table. For, every sin (though it be done directly
against man) yet has a kind of defect, and withdrawing from God. And for the
manner of committing them: it is not said that they were sins of infirmity
or accident, but sins done after an ungodly manner, or, to render it by the
aduerbe, as here, ungodly, or sins, not weakly, but wickedlie committed,
and not upon occasion but of purpose: that is, from an unrepentant heart, and
mind addicted to ungodliness. The Apostles meaning is, that they do not evil
unwillingly but gladly, nor against their mind, but purposely, nor sometimes of
weakness, but continually, or, that they are of the occupation of sin, and
follow it, as men do their trades; and for this, they shall be rebuked to
damnation. John is to be understood when he says: He that commits sin is
of the Devil. 1. Ioh. 3.8. For, his meaning is, he, who gives himself over
to sin, in whom Christ never destroyed sin, cannot be the child of God, but
of the Devil, nor child of salvation, but of death. ^inne destroyed not David,
for he repented of it: but sin destroyed Saul, for he would not leave it to
the day of his death. If Judas had repented for betraying of Christ, as Peter
did repent for denying of Christ, Judas had not perished more then did Peter.
Judas did cast to do evil, Peter was circumuented: therefore Peter obtained
mercy, Judas died in his sin. Sin therefore does not principally or so much
condemn a wicked person, as his impenitencie in sinning, a greediness to
commit sin. For, a man may have an infirmity, and not die of it; and
regenerate man may commit some sins, and not be damned for them. Else why
came Christ? Was it not to save sinners, that is, repentant sinners? 1. Tim.
1.15. I speak not this, as if sins of infirmity did deserve pardon. For, I
have said that every sin (both of infirmity and other) deserves death.
Yea, sins of infirmity in Gods children, deserve death, and are sins: but,
by grace, they loose their power and condemnation, Romans 8.1. and so are, as
they are accounted, not sins unto death, but sins that shall not be
condemned, and his sins who shall not die. The reasons; All are sinners in
Adam, and all have sin in them, that came from Adam: and therefore if sin
(simply) should condemn a man, no man should be saved. Secondly, a man may
commit sin, as the Apostle did, who said: the evil that I would not do,
that I do. Romans 7.19. But sin so committed is covered in mercy, that is, is
accounted none: or is not imputed, that is, stands not upon the book, and so
goes for no debt, and is made, by remission, no sin. and if no sin, by
account, then none to condemnation. Further, we are that in account that we
are in affection: and he is no sinner, who strives to be none. Now, if no
sinner in account, then no sinner unto death. But it is so, with all Gods
children, who are in sin, as a Mal^factor in prison, that would gladly go out
and cannot, that is, though they do evil, they would and with all their
hearts, would do otherwise: and therefore in some, sin does not condemn,
which in others, sinning ungodly, that is, willingly, wilfully, and
ordinarily, is to condemnation. Thirdly, when Gods children fall out with their
sins, which they ever do, and do by true repentance, God comes in with
them: being in with them, they are no longer accounted enemies by him, but
friends, and so their sins cannot hurt them. For, who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods chosen? Romans 8.33. That is, who shall object any thing
against them that shall be able to condemn them, or harm them? But this
should not be, if the committing of sin simply, should bring death.

The use of this point teaches us to distinguish between sinners, and to put
difference, in sins committed by Gods elect and reprobates. For, the sins
of Gods children are sins of infirmity; so are not the sins of the wicked
that bring death; and sins of infirmity befall not graceless sinners. The
ordinary drunkard, though he call his sin of drunkenness his infirmity, yet
is it his inexcusable sin. And large covetousness is not an infirmity, but
sin of idolatry in those that commit it. Reigning anger is a great iniquity:
so is the custom of swearing. Buyers and sellers, who trade with lying, as
they do with wares, are obdurate sinners, not sinners of infirmity. And they
who so offend, let them repent quickly, or they shall bear their condemnation,
whosoever they be. Gods children may fall into some of these sins, or all;
yet, though they fall into them by infirmity, they rise up from them by
repentance; but the wicked fall into them, and lie in them, and love them.
Again, the sin of wantonness is covered by sinners with a cloak of natural
infirmity, and the wicked lend a sigge leaf of excuse to prankes of vanity
in striplings and young men. But the godly say with David, Lord remember not the
days of my youth. Psalm. 25. and the sins of my youth, they call not
infirmities, but rebellions. If young men dance, and colt, and riot, and pour
out themselves to all excess, not only on common days, but on the Lords day;
cockering parents, and carnal masters will justify all the profuse
wickedness and say, Youth must have a time. But godly parents, will sacrifice
care for their children, with Job, in such a case: Job. 1.5. and religious
masters say for themselves and their servants, with Joshua in a like matter: I,
and my house will serve the Lord. Ios. 24.15. And if any such wickedness be
committed by their children, or any in their house, they will not bear it with
the ungodly, but be against it with David, Psalm. 101.3.4.5.8. and protest
against the doers of it with Nehemiah. Neh. 13.21. So for mispending of time:
The wicked justify that vnthristinesse, the godly bewail their loss of
precious time. The wicked say, how shall we pass the time? They cast to do
evil: the godly say, let us redeem the time, they are sorry for the loss,
and confess it. And thus great difference is to be put between the falls of
Gods children, and the break necks of the wicked, who fall into death.

A comfort to repentant sinners. Ier. 18 8. Though they have been great
sinners, as Saul and Manasses were: Yet if they be repentant sinners, neither
they nor their sins can change the new testament, that God will be merciful
to their sins, and blot out all their transgressions. Though their sins
were many: the matter is not how many their sins are, but how penitent they
be that are sinners; and the more they are, the greater is his mercy who has
forgiven them. But is this for the work of repentance? No, but because the
repentant soul does by faith apprehend Christ in his promises, and believe
that upon his true conversion or coming home, God will receive him, and the
father welcome home his straying son. Luk 15.20.22.23. God will be merciful
to your unrighteousness, and forgive you your sins. Ezech. 18.21.22.23.32.
Luc. 17.4. Though your conscience be full of wounds, the Lord who is your
Surgeon, has plaster enough of his tender mercy and long compassions to
heal them. Though the debts you owe be great sums, Gods mercy is not
stinted to any number, and he that is infinite in his pardons, will as soon,
and does as graciously pardon many as few sins; yea, when the sum of them
is grown to a great reckoning, and maine total. And though, like a wretched
subject, you have raised against Christ many commotions in his own kingdom,
yet the King of the Kings of Israel, is a merciful King; and when you come to
him with true submission, as Benhadads servants did to the King of Israel, with
signs of submission. 1. King. 20.31.32. he will be as ready to grant your
pardon, as you to ask it.

Of all their ungodly deeds, etc.] Secondly, where the ungodly shall be called
to their answer for all that they have done, we learn that all the deeds of
the wicked shall be rebuked to damnation. So says the Apostle S. Paul, where
he shows, that in the day of wrath, the wicked shall be rewarded according to
their deeds: meaning by their deeds, their evil deeds. Romans 2.5.6.8. And the
same Apostle says: we shall receive, according to that we have done; the
godly for the good they have done in Christ, the wicked (out of Christ) for the
evil they have done in their own body. 2. Cor. 5.10. And S. Matthew the
Evangelist says as much, where, speaking of the coming of the Son of Man,
he says: when the Son of Man comes in his glory, he shall give to enerie
man according to his deeds. His meaning is, the godly shall bear unto
judgment the good deeds of Christ, imputed to them, and the wicked bring into
judgment the bad deeds of sin, properly theirs. Math. 16.27. The like we
read in the book of the Revelation, or rather the same, where it is said, that
all the dead shall be judged according to their works. The good, for Christ's
righteousness, and by it, shall live: the wicked shall be damned for their
own unrighteousness. 20.11.12. But some may say: if evil deeds deserve
damnation, why should not good deeds merit life? I answer. good, because so
mixed with infirmities, cannot merit heaven. And now, that bad deeds shall be
rebuked in judgment, may further appear by the reasons which follow. As
(first:) The deeds of the wicked more harm the Church, then words do, or
thoughts can: but words and thoughts shall be judged, therefore deeds much
more: else why does Christ say, that God will avenge his elect that cry day and
night unto him? Luc. 18.7. Secondly, these things says Amen; now, if Amen say
it, the same Amen, who is faithful, will do it. Apoc. 3.14. Amen has said by
his Servants and in the Scriptures, that he will bring every work unto
judgment. Eccles. 12.14. And therefore every ungodly work, and deed of every
ungodly man shall be ludged. Thirdly, for this cause (as has been said) the
Lord will stretch out his hand, in the rebuke of the ungodly, as one that
swimmeth spreads his arms abroad to enclose all before him. The meaning is:
God will enclose so in the fadome of his second coming every work of wicked
man, that no one shall escape the severity of his throne. Esa. 25.11. Fourthly,
if any wicked work should not be judged, it were either because God could not,
and then were he not almighty; or would not judge it, and then should he loose
his righteousness. But none can stand before his great power. Ier 49.19. And
he that is Judge of the world will judge it with righteousness. Psalm. 98.9.

An instruction to do good deeds, by diverse testimonies and effects of grace.
Luc. 23.40.41.42. Therefore, though good works cannot save us, yet bad works
and the want of good, may damn us. They be evidences of our salvation, though
not causes. As (therefore) he who holds a piece of land, holds it by his
evidence, his evidence was not that that procured it, but his money: so the good
evidence of our salvation, is in our sanctified lives, the cause of it in
Christ's merits, no other coin, either of gold or silver, could purchase it at
the hands of Gods justice; in our redemption. 1. Pet. 1.18. wherefore, as S.
James says: If thou have faith, show it by thy works. Iam. 2.18. so with the
Apostle S. James I say: If thou have this hope, let me see it in that evidence
of thy good conversation in Christ.

A terror to all the persecutors of Gods Church and people, in such manner and
so cruelly, smite their fellows with imprisonment and death. Math. 24.49. And,
the beast and false Prophet shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
there to be tormented day and night for evermore. Apoc. 20.10. Men may not
judge the Antichrist of the West though he do never so badly, yet God will
judge him. And such portion shall they have from the Lord; every one that
smites down his people, and vexes his heritage. So much for the first of
those things for which the wicked shall be rebuked, the second follows.

And of all their cruel speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against
him.] The last of those things, whereof the ungodly shall be judged, is their
cruel speakings, that is words proceeding from a cruel mind in all ungodly
and railing tongues of evil men. For, men shall receive according to that
which is done in the body, or any part of the body, whether hands or tongue.
Cor. 5.10. The doctrine from hence is: The wicked shall not only answer for
their evil deeds, but for their bad tongues. So says our Savior Christ. By
thy words, to wit, if they be gracious, thou shall be justified: and by thy
words, if they be wicked, thou shall be condemned. Math. 12.37. Solomon did
confess as much, when he said, that death and life are in the power of the
tongue. Prou. 18.21. as if he had said, as a man orders his tongue well or
ill, so shall he receive his sentence from the throne that judges right,
either unto death or life. And he (further says; He that keeps his mouth,
his meaning is, is considerate or wise in the words of his mouth, speaking but
when he ought, and what he should, keeps his life, that is, provides well
for his salvation hereafter: as contrarily, he that is careless of his tongue,
or cruel in talk, shall come to destruction. Prou. 13.3. The Prophet David
says: he that desires life, and loves good days, let him keep his tongue
from evil. Psalm. 34.12.13. Then, they who keep not there tongue, shall neither
see life, nor the good days of life, but inherit the evil that they have paid
for with their bad tongues. And Saint James says, that a fiery tongue shall
have a fiery doom. Iam. 3.6. For as it has done, so God will do unto it.
Judge. 1.7. And, it is just, that, that which has set on fire the course of
nature, should (it self) be set on fire, by the curse of God. The reasons. If
(as we heard) sentence must be given for every thing that is done in the
body, then for words which are uttered by the tongue, a part of the body. 2.
Cor. 5.10. Secondly, the mouth is the sin-hole of the unclean heart, for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Mat. 12.34. And what is due
to the one, is payable to the other. If the one deserve judgment, both deserve
it, and if one be punishable, both are. Thirdly, cruel tongues are compared to
sharp arrows, and coals of Juniper, to show, that as arrows sent out of a
bow, by the hand of a strong man, fly with great force and violence, and as
Iuniper-coles are not only very hot, but do long continue so. So cruel words
forced out of an evil heart, and wicked speeches fired by the malice of a
spiteful soul, do not only pierce violently through the name of the
innocent; but leave a long and incurable wound in it after the blow given. And
do not such tongues deserve to be rebuked in judgment? Psalm. 120.4. Yea
surely; And therefore among the rabble of reprobates, spoken off. 1. Cor. 6.10.
railing persons, and railing tongues are in the number.

But shall cruel speeches and speakers be judged to condemnation? Romans 12.17.
Some give reproach for reproach, as if they would fight against an injury, not
with the weapons of Christ, who being reviled, reviled not again, 1. Pet.
2.23. But with the Devils weapons of impatiencie and revenge. The Prophet
says, his enemies laid a snare for him. Psalm. 119.110. Did he (therefore) lay
another for them? No, he would not shoot with Satan in his own bow,
recompencing sin with sin, but stuck to the word, committing all to him who
says; Vengeance is mine and I will repay: Heb. 10.30. Romans 12.19. This is
written for our learning: and therefore seeing that the reuiling tongue shall be
brought into judgment, let the Lord judge it, let not us judge it before the
time. And as our Savior says: resist not evil. Mat. 5.39; So let us be so
far from fighting with the wicked at their own weapons, auenging our selves,
that we be ready rather to suffer two wrongs then to revenge one. ver.
39.40.41. David's example is notable in this case: who, when Shemei that Cur-dog
snarles fiercely at him, being then King, would suffer nothing to be done unto
him for it, but with remembrance of his own sin and wicked son, suffered
him to go on, leaving him to a higher Judge. 2. Sam. 16.5.6.7.8.9.1.11.12.

An instruction to look carefully to the good ordering of our tongues, for
speeches, as well as for deeds. Saint James says, be slow to speak, and slow
to wrath. Iam. 1.19. As if he should have said: If thou be of an hasty
mind, keep thy tongue long in thy mouth, the scabbard thereof; and draw not
that sword hastily, so shall thou neither provoke so much, nor be provoked so
soon. Solomon the Preacher gives like good counsel, bidding a Christian not
to be rash with his mouth, Eccles. 5.1. His meaning is, the Tongue is an edge
tool that will cut where it should not, if we handle it rashly, and nimble,
and light tongues cannot but do much harm: and therefore we must keep the
tongue in the sheath, if we would not be cruel speakers, and such as must come
to our answer for blood. Set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of
my lips, was David's prayer, and must be our practice. Psalm. 141.3. And why did
the Prophet pray the Lord (so earnestly) to set his watch at the gate of his
lips, but because he knew well that without Gods watch over his words, they
would rather pursue mischief, then follow peace. And should we not fear more
then he to let our tongues go at such liberty without a keeper and watch man,
being nothing so able to guide them as he was? This would be considered of
those who turn their tongues loose, and give them leave to utter whatsoever
the lusts or malice of their heart can invent. For, lewd words do not only
work on themselves, but on those that hear them; on themselves to
destruction, and on their hearers to infection: and malicious tongues do not
only destroy the soul that uses them, but wound the innocent name of those
against whom they are bent and used. So, they are to give a double account for
their wicked speeches: one for hurting themselves, another for harming their
brethren. So much for the last of those things that are to be judged; which is
further amplified: and that by two properties, as first, that those speakings
are cruel, and secondly that they are spoken against Christ.

Cruel speakings, etc.] The speakings of the wicked are said to be cruel
speakings, because, by them, they cruelly raged against the righteous, and,
after a sort, drew blood from them in the point of their credit, and (sometime)
in the case of their life, bitterly accusing or tauntinglie mocking them. And
now where these things are styled, with the name of cruelty, The doctrine is;
they were tried by mockings, was reckone one. Hebr. 11.36. And thus was Isaac
persecuted by scoffing Ismael. Moses says no more but that Sarah saw the son
of the Egyptian, mocking her son. Genesis 21.9. yet, S Paul speaking to that
point, says, He persecuted him. Gal. 4.29. Saint Paul's meaning is, that
scoffs and girds at men for good ways, are sore afflictions and the point of
cruelty at their heart. It was not the least part of Christ's suffering, that
the instruments of his death and many limbs of the Devil so despitefully
wagged their heads at him in great disdain: and that they spate upon him, and
spoke unto him so disgracefully and so cruelly, saying: Thou that destroiest
the temple and buildest it in three days, save thy self, etc. Math. 27.40. A
great portion of the cup of his bitter Passion consisted in this, that he was
mocked for his confidence in God. For, they said: He trusts in God, let him
deliver him now, if he will have him. Psalm. 22.8. Math. 27.43. The reasons.
First, it is a degree of murder thus to speak. Math. 5.22. For, to speak
cruelly, is to speak wrathfully, with despitefull tongues and goomes in blood.
Secondly, such speeches proceed from a contempt of the grace of God in those
who so suffer. And it greeueth them more, and they set it more to heart that
God is contemned, then if themseles were to suffer reproach and contempt, yea
loss of their goods, and that, which is dearer to them, their life. Hebr.
10.33.34 Act. 20.23.24 Lastly, that which sauoureth of cruelty must needs be an
affliction. But cruel speakings are such, for they are cast upon the righteous
with terrible indignities, and therefore cruel speakings are afflictions.

First, Ismaelites, and therefore bound over to condemnation for their cruel
speakings against Christ, and the Church of Christ. Like judgment is to be
given of all filthy speeches of unclean Sodomites, which gall the simplicity
and very souls of the righteous.

Secondly, The Disciple is not above his Master. Math. 10.24. Thus men dealt
with Christ: and they must expect accordingly, to suffer, that are in Christ It
is our Masters reproach, and we must bear it. Hebr. 13.1^. or (properly) our
own reproach, and good reason we should bear it. So much for the first
property of the wi^ked, the second amplified property, follows.

Which wicked sinners have spoken against him.] That which was spoken against
the godly is (here) said to be spoken against Christ: For he takes the
injuries of his Saints, to be injuries done unto himself: they that deal
despitefully with them, deal contemptuously with him. The point taught is:
righteousness is esteemed as spoken, and done unto Christ, for whose sake and
cause they so suffer. The people had cast off Samuel whom God had chosen.
Therefore the Lord counted himself despised, because they had despised him
whom he had chosen. 1. Sam. 8.7. Saul persecuted the church, and Christ says,
I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: to wit, not in my person, but in the church
my members. Act. 9.4.5. Also, concerning his Disciples Christ says, and
concerning all the godly in them: He that despises you, despises me. Luc.
10.16. The reasons; That which is done against the body, concerns the head,
but Christ is the head of his church, and the church is his body. Ephesians.
1.22.23. And therefore what is done against the Church, is done against Christ.
Secondly, It is not we that are hated, but the cause of Christ in us when we
suffer for righteousness. And will not he revenge his own abuse, and desend
his own glory? He that spurneth against his truth, spurneth against him. And
shall not the Lord turn to confusion all his despisers.

A terror to those who reproach a good man for his goodness, Pharao, Saul,
Senacherib, Herod and others, found the truth of this in their fearful
destruction, because (like desperate wretches) they fought against God, in his
Saints.

A comfort to those who defend a good cause. of God be on our side, who can
be against us. Romans 8.31. If we have such a cause as Hezekiah had, we may say
with like confidence as Hezekiah did^ there be (...) with us, then are with
them. 2. Chron. 32.7. 2. King. 6.16. David's cause, was the Lords: and he found
that God would be near to avouch his own truth in the mids of his enemies.
Therefore was he delivered from the battle that was against him; for many
were with him. Psalm. 55.18. To conclude therefore, let us provide our selves of
a good cause: and we shall be sure of a strong helper: Let us reverence the
godly, and honor the Lord: and we shall stand invincible in all oppositions,
or as mount Sion that cannot be removed, but remains for ever. Psalm. 125, 1.
Our death shall be comfortable, and our judgment without rebuke: we shall
benefit Christ's church, and have praise of God; to whom, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, three persons, and one immortal and only wise God, be rendered all
glory, power and thanksgiving now and ever. Amen.

All glory to God.
FINIS.
POINTS of instuction for the ignorant: With An examination before our coming
to the LORDS TABLE: And A short direction for spending of time well.

LONDON, Printed by William Hall, for Francis Burton, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Church-yeard, at the sign of the Green Dragon, 1613.

TO THE Christian Reader, the saving knowledge of that truth which is according
to godliness. Tit. 1.1.
(*)
CHristian Reader: this short Catechism, thus gathered and set down for the
help of the ignorant, cannot be called new, but renewed for their sakes. For,
I may say in thi^ case as Solomon in his Ecclesiastes, said in a like case:
What is that that has been? that that shall be. Eccles. 1.9.
And what is that that has been done? that that shall be done: and there is
no new thing under the Sun. The portion of meat which is here offered to
the tasle of the simple, is no other then that which he has already tasted of,
if he have tasted any thing of the things of God: and it is but the substance
of other Catechismes set before him in another kind of service, that is, with
some difference of Cookery and dressing. which, (considering our too great
distaste with one kind of meat, though never so wholesome, if we be
continually fed withit without diversity) may not be without some good use,
at least for some short time. For, the affections of men stand no less
diversely affected toward the variety of Gods gifts, in delivering one and the
same matter, then does the stomach toward the dressing of one and the same
kind of meat in a diverse manner, by some alteration of form and manner of
doing it. And yet it is no part of my meaning to hold up the market of nouelty
by any schey-seruice as tends rather to tikle the ear then to satisfy the
sounder judgment: or to say any thing for those who make books like to the
apparel which they wear, and fashions that they are weary of, when a newer
comes. Only, having taught these Principles (most of them) to a few privately;
and finding it more easy to print them then to write them, for the surer
keeping of them in their memories, who had learned them, and the good of some
abroad that desired them; I was not unwilling thus to give them content by the
benefit of the Press and of Printing. Neither have I done this far any want:
for there is store of Catechismes abroad: to which this worm of mine, is no
way comparable: and God has dealt mercifully with our age for the means of
knowledge; but we famish spiritually at the full measure of these means,
either by not using them at all, or not as we should. This mite of
instructions I could have made much larger but that I considered in my Cruse of
store the vessels that I had to fill, King. 4.4.6.
which could not well receive more, and so left pouring, as I perceived their
filling. Accept therefore (Reader) what is here offered to thy gentleness,
and take it in as good part as it is meant unto thee. And so, I command thee
and thy grouth in godliness to the grace and assistance of Al-mighty God: and
rest,

Thine in all Christian ROBERT HORN.

POINTS of instuction for the ignorant.
WHat is true happiness?

To know God, Ioh. 17.3. Ier. 9.24. Luk 15.17.
and to know my self.

Can you know God?

Not so plainly and fully here as we shall hereafter, by face; Exodus 33.20.
1. Cor. 13.12
but as he has revealed himself unto us.

How is that?

By his works without us and within us: Romans 1.20 and 1.19.
and by some description of his nature, and effects in his word.

How does the word describe him?

Generally thus: ^xo. 3.14 Ioh. 4.24 ^xo 34 6. Psa 90. (...) 1. Tim. 1 17. Isa.
5.5. Psalm. 103 8 ^m. 4.13. 1 Pet. ^.19. Psalm. 99, 1, 2, ^ Heb. 1, 3 Act. 17 25
26 1 Job. 5.7. Mat. (...) 16.17. 2. Cor. 13 13.
He is what he is. And, more particular, thus: a Spirit, every way infinite,
goodness it self, Creator, Preserver, and Ruler of all things; distinguished
into three persons; Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

So much for the knowledge of God; What say you of the knowledge of your self?

It may be considered before the fall, or since.

What are you by creation in Adam before the fall?

A reasonable Creature, Mat. 10.28. Ge. 1.27 Col 3, 10 Ephesians. 4.24.
consisting of soul and body: made after the image of God, in knowledge,
righteousness and true holiness.

What are you since by Adams fall.

A sinner, Romans 3, 9, 10 Job 14.4 Romans 6, 23 and 5.18.19. Gal. 3.10.
and by sin subject to all kind of misery and punishments: as to the death of
my body, and the death of my soul, which is endless damnation.

What are your sins?

A guiltiness in Adams first offense: that is, Romans 5.12.18. and 7.18. Ier.
17.9. Genesis 6.5. Matthew. 15.19. Romans 7.5.
a deprivation of all good thereby, and a disposition of my whole heart to
every thing that is against the Law of God, with innumerable corrupt fruits
thereof, in thought, word, and deed.

What do you consider in Man, thus falling.

His recovery to salvation, and duty for it.

What say you of his recovery?

It may be considered in the worker thereof, or the mean of apprehending it.

What say you of the worker?

The worker or substance of it is Christ Jesus the Son of God, 1. John 2.1.2.
Ioh. 1.14. John 3.16. Philip 2.7.8. Galat. 4.4.2. Cor. 5.21. John 1.12.
who in Man's nature (which he took in the womb) suffered the death of the
Cross, and fulfilled the Law for all that receive him.

What is the mean whereby Christ is apprehended?

Faith; Galat. 2.20. Acts 6.31.
which is a special persuasion of Gods favor in his word, Ioh. 1.12. Luke
2.29. Ephesians. 3.17. 1. Cor. 1.30. Ioh 20.28. 2. Tim. 1.12.
wrought in my heart by the holy Ghost, whereby I do truly, and in
particular, believe that Christ is made unto me, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

When does this faith begin to breed and take place in your heart?

When, by Gods grace, I begin to be touched in conscience for my sins, Psalm.
51.17. Isa. 55.15. Math. 5.6. Phil. 3.7.8. Math. 15.25.27. Mark. 9.24.
to hunger and thirst after Christ and his merits, above al things in the
world, and against all doubtings, do begin to believe.

By what means is this wrought?

It is begun (ordinarily) by the preaching of the word, Romans 10.14.17. Acts
8.28 34.35.37. John 16.23.24. Pron. 29.18. Romans 4.11.
and it is confirmed by the same means, as also by the reading of the word,
and the reverent use of prayer, and Sacraments.

What is Prayer?

A speech to God through Christ, John 16.23. James 1.6. Phil. 4.6.
with faith, whereby I ask graces wanting, and give thanks for benefits
received.

What is a Sacrament?

A visible seal of the Gospel fully assuring the faithful of Christ by two
effectual instruments of grace. Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.11. 1. Cor. 11.25.


Then there be two Sacraments?

Yea.

Which are they?

Baptism, 1. Cor. 10.1.2. and 12.13.
and the Lords Supper.

What is Baptism?

A seal of our entrance into the name, that is, Tit. 3.5. Matt^. 28 19. Ephesians.
5.26.
Church and covenant of Christ, by washing with water.

What does washing with water signify in Baptism?

That the blood of Christ washes away sin, Coloss. 2.11, 12.13. Apoc. 1.5.
1. John 1.7.
as water does bodily filthiness.

So much for Baptism, what is the Lords Supper?

A seal of our continuance and nourishment in Christ, 1. Cor. 10.16. and
11.24.26. Ioh. 8.55.
signified by Bread and Wine.

So much for Man's recovery to salvation; what is his duty for it? Psa. 50.23.
and 17^ 12.13. P^m. 1.21


True thankfulness.

Wherein stands that?

In new obedience: which is, Ephesians. 4.23.24. 1. Pet. 1, 15, 18 Luke 1, 74.75
Romans 6.1.2.3.4 Galat. 1, 6 Luke 1.6 Acts. 24.16 Tit. 2.11.12 1. Cor. 7.17.
that man carry in his heart a constant purpose not to serve sin any more,
and withal endeavor in his whole life to please God, in all his
commandments; doing his duty in his calling to God and man.

ECCLES. 12.13. Let us hear the end of all: fear God and keep his
Commandments: for this is the whole duty of Man.

An examination before our coming to the Lords table.
WHat do you call the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

Our growing up with Christ by faith, Ephesians. 4.15.16 1. Cor. 10.16. Math. 26.27.
resembled in visible signs and effectual seals of bread and wine.

In coming to this Sacrament, what is to be considered by every well prepared
communicant?

The doctrine thereof, and our ends of coming to it.

What say you of the Doctrine?

It is seen in the nature of the signs which are made Sacraments, or in their
uses.

What say you of the nature of the signs?

Their nature is to be seals of the body and blood of Christ, Matthew. 26.26.28.
that is, of the fruits of the same offered to us by faith.

Where, have you the seal of Christ's body?

In the bread. Math. 26.2^.


Where, of his blood?

In the Wine. Math. 26.27.


So much for the nature of the signs, what say you of their uses.

They be such as concern the Bread and Wine.

What is that concerns the bread?

It is that which is feene in the breaking and giving, or in the receiving and
eating of it.

What does the breaking of bread signify?

The wounding and breaking of the flesh of Christ for us. Isai 53.5 1. Cor.
11.24.


What does the giving of it signify?

The giving of Christ, the true bread, John 6.51. 1. Cor. 11.24.
for our spiritual nourishment.

What does the receiving of the bread signify?

The receiving of Christ with the hand of faith in our hearts, John 1.12.
Ephesians. 3.17.
as we receive the bread with our bodily hands.

Who are reproved here?

The Papists who say and believe that the substance of the bread is turned into
the natural body of Christ, Bellarm. tem. 2. text. cont. genesis de sacr. Euch.
lib. 3. cap. 18. etc.
and that the people, carnally, receive and eat their Maker.

What say you against this gross opinion?

That a true natural body such as Christ's is, Matthew. 28.6. and 26.11. Heb.
10.13. Acts 3.21. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
cannot be in two places at one and the same time, to wit, in heaven, and
bodily in the Sacrament.

So much for receiving; what does the ea^ting of the bread signify?

That as bread does nourish our temporal and corporal life; John 6.54.
so this is a Sacrament of our eternal nourishment in the life to come, and of
our spiritual, in this life of grace which we have here.

So much for the uses of the bread; what be they of the Wine?

They be seen in the pouring out and giving, or in the receiving and drinking
of it.

What does the pouring out of the Wine signify?

The pouring of the blood out of his holy body for our sins. Matthew. 26.28. 1.
Cor. 11.25.


What does the giving of the Wine signify?

Our full nourishment in Christ offered, not in his body only, John 6.^5.
Psalm. 104.15.
but in his saving blood.

What does this teach?

That the Papists did, and still do, 1. Cor. 11.25. Bellarm^. Tom 2. tert.
comtr. genesis lib. 4 cap. 22. de Eutharqst etc.
with injurious sacrilege, detract from our assurance and Gods goodness, one
great help of our faith by taking from the common people the use of the Cup.

So Much for giving; what does the receiving of the Wine signify?

That possession is taken of whole Christ, 1. Cor. 10.16. John 6.56. 1. Cor.
10.3.4.
while, after the receiving of the bread, we, by faith, open our hearts, as
vessels, to receive the trickling drops of his blood that nothing be lost.

What does the drinking of the wine signify.

The applying of the comforts of Christ's passion to our drooping souls, Galat.
6.14. Phil. 3.8.9
as Wine reioiceth the heart of Man.

So much of the doctrine of the Sacrament, what say you of our ends of coming
to it?

They be before, or in our coming.

What is that which is before our coming?

Our end before our coming is to satisfy the earnest desire that we have,
Acts 8.6. ^^h. 7.37.38.
or should have, of receiving the promises of God under seal.

What be the ends in our coming?

Such as testify our gifts, or receipts.

What be our gifts?

Such as we give to Christ, the head, or to the Church his members.

What give you to Christ, the head?

A heart well examined concerning our estate before we come, 1. Cor. 1^.28.
Luke 15.21. Math. 8.8.
and seriously meditating on Gods goodness in Christ, and our own great
unworthiness, when we are come.

What else?

An humble oblatio^ of our selves, Romans 12.1.
souls and bodies, to him with thanksgiving at our departure.

Wherein stands the hearts examination?

In the examining of our knowledge, faith, love, repentance, 1. Cor. 11.29. 2.
Cor. 13.5. Matthew. 22.12. Ephesians. 4.28. Romans 1 21. Heb. 13.18.
thankfulness, and works of our particular callings.

So much for that you give to Christ the head, what give you to the Church his
members?

A fellow-stone in the spiritual building, 1. Cor. 10.17. and 12.13.14. Ephesians.
2.21.22. Ephesians. 4, 12, 16
that is a member to help to make perfect the body of Christ

What does this teach?

That they that are negligent or profane comers to the Lords table, do
detract from the perfection of Christ's body, and sever themselves from the
society of his Church.

So much for our gifts, what do we receive at the Lords table?

That which we receive there, concerns our selves alone, or our selves with
others.

What is that that concerns our selves alone?

The strengthening of our faith and memory by the reverent and right use of that
holy action. 1. Cor. 11.24. and 10.16.17.


How is our faith strengthened and memory helped by it?

By seeing that in the Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.26. Galat. 3.1. and 1. John 1.1.
which we do but hear of in the word, namely the particular offering and
receiving of Christ, in his body and saving blood by all believing communicants.

So Much for that which concerns our selves alone, what is that that
concerns our selves with others.

It concerns our growing up with Christ, and our communion with our brethren.

How do we receive our growing up with Christ?

We receive it with Christ by spiritual eating and drinking, 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
and by a more full partaking with him and his graces, through faith increased,
and that use of his ordinance blessed unto us.

How do we receive our communion with our brethren?

By testifying our mutual agreement, 1. Cor. 10.17.
inasmuch as we eat (all) of one bread, and drink(all) of one cup.

How else?

By feeding all of the same food bodily and spiritually, 1. Cor. 10.4. and
12.13. Ephesians. 4.15.
and by drawing all life from the same fountain; as the life of grace which
here we receive, and the life of glory, which, in heaven we shall be partakers
of. Amen.

So much for our examination before the Sacrament.

Prou. 23.1. When thou sit to eat with a Ruler consider diligently what is
before thee.
A short direction for spending of time well.
HOw do you divide the days of man's life?

Into the days of labor, and days of holiness.

What say you of the days of labor?

These concern the works of our calling, or works of help unto them.

What be the works of our calling?

The works of that trade of life in which God has placed us. 1. Cor. 7.10.
Ephesians. 4.1.


What must a man do in these?

By offering them to God, Coloss. 3.17. Genesis 24.12.13.14.13. Ephesians 4 28. Romans
12.7. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Genes. 5.22.
He must walk in them neither slackly nor deceitfully, but with Christian
diligence and good conscience; following his own business with quietness, and
walking with God.

Then, every one must have some special calling and trade of life to live in?

Yea verily, Genesis 3, 19. Matthew. 20.6. 2. Th. 3.10, 11, 12 Romans 12, 4
or he is no sound member of the Christian common wealth, but a rotten member
in the body of the same, that deserves a cutting off.

So much for the works of our callings, what say you of the works of help
unto them?

They concern duties to be done before the work, or that day after.

What must we do in the morning before our work?

Praise God for his mercy the night past, Psalm. 59.16. and 88.13. Genesis 24, 12.
and pray unto him for his further mercy and blessing the day present.

How shall we praise God?

By giving him thanks, Ephesians. 5.20. Coloss. 1.10.
and by showing our thankfulness.

How is our thankefulnes showed?

Inwardly, or outwardly.

How inwardly?

By pleasing God in our understanding, thoughts, desire, Prou. 23, 26 Col. 1,
10,
affections, and will.

How outwardly?

By pleasing him in our words and deeds.

How in our words?

When they be gracious always. Col. 4, 6. Ephesians. 4.29.


What things hurt this grace of speech?

Lying, Ephesians 4.25. Jam. 5.12. Ephesians. 4.31. and 5.4. Coloss. 3.8. Prou. 26.21.
swearing, brawling, filthy speaking, foolish talking, jesting that is not
comely, and wrath that causes strife.

How in our deeds?

These are in the duties of our general callings, Romans 12.4.
as we are Christians: or our particular trades of life; wherein some are
Magistrates, some Masters and servants, some Merchants, Artificers, Husbandmen,
and the like.

What are our duties as we be Christians?

These concern God, Acts 24.16.
or man.

What are they that concern God?

They are in the four commandments of the first Table, Tit. 2.12.
called godliness.

What are they that concern Man?

They concern our selves, Tit. 2.12.
or our neighbor.

What is that that concerns our selves?

Sobriety, which is inward; Romans 12.13.
and and teaches us not to presume above that which is meet: and outward, in
our apparel, diet, outward members and senses.

What must our apparel be?

Such as becomes those that profess the fear of God. 1. Tim. 2.10.


What call you sobriety in diet?

That grace of temperance that consists in the moderate use of meats,
drinks, sleep, Luke 21.34. Romans 13, 13 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
and such outward things.

What sobriety is that which you call sobriety of sense, and the outward
members?

Sobriety of sense is a watchfulnes in it; 1. Tim. 4 16, Ioh. 31.1. 1. Cor.
6.15.
and sobriety of the members, a chastity in them.

So much for the general duty that concerns our selves, called sobriety;
what is that that concerns our neighbor?

It is contained in the six last commandments, Romans 13.^.9. Matthew. 19.18.19
Tit. 2.12.
being commandments of the second Table, called righteousness.

So much for our general duties, as we be Christians; what say you of our
particular duties, or duties of our trade of life?

These reach unto all callings in the Church and common wealth; but to our
purpose in a family, they concern the husband or wife, Parents or their
children, the Master and his servants.

What is the Husbands duty?

To dwell with his wife, 1. Pet. 3.7. Ephesians. 5.28.29
as a Man of knowledge, by instructing her, and by observing (for her better
encouragement) the good parts that are in her, and to love her as his own
flesh.

What is the Wives duty?

To help her husband in the duties of the family: Genesis 2, 18. 1 Pet. 3.2.
Ephesians. 5.22.24
also, to fear, and to be subject to him.

What be the Parents duties?

They concern the father and mother jointly, or by themselves.

What be their joint duties to their children?

In their tender years they must instruct them plainly, Prou. 22, 6 Ephesians. 6
4. Prou. 23, 13
and season them with good things, young, giving them due correction; Genes.
4.2 1. Cor. 7.36.37 2. Cor. 12.14. 1. Cor. 7.39.
and at more years fit them for some honest calling; and when time serves,
laying up something for them, give them in Marriage only in the Lord.

So much for the Parents joint duties, what is the Fathers more special duty?

To provide for his children; 1. Tim. 5.2.
and specially to have a special eye to the sons of his house, as the mother
must to her daughters.

What is the mothers special duty?

To nurse up her children, Genesis 21.7 1. Tim. 5.10.
if God have given her ability thereunto.

What be the childrens duties?

They be such as they owe to their Parents, or one to another.

What duties do they owe to their Parents?

They owe them reverence in their hearts, obedience, Leuit. 19.3 Ephesians. 6, 1 1.
Tim. 5, 4 Genesis 47, 12
in their deeds; and, when their parents shall be in years and need, it is
their duty (if they have wherewith) to nourish them.

What duties do they owe one to another?

To love as brethren and not to fall out. Psalm. 133.1. Genesis 45.24.


What duties do Masters owe?

They concerue Religion; Genes. 18.19. Coloss 4.1. 1. Tim. 5.8. Prou. 31, 15
and so they must help them to God by their instruction, and the care of their
souls: or they respect their life here; and so, paying them their wages
justly, they must make honest provision for them.

What duties do servants owe?

In singleness of heart, Ephesians. 6, 6 Tit. 2, 9, 14 1. Pet. 2.18.
and all good faithfulness, they must do their masters work, be true unto
him, and seek to please him though he be froward.

So much for our thankefulnes to God, expressed in our words and deeds, and for
our duties the morning before our work in prayer and praises; what duties do
we owe that day after?

They be duties, such as are between, or after our work at night.

What must we do between our work?

It concerns our refreshings, or recreation.

What must we do at our refreshings?

Pray before meat for Gods blessing, 1. Tim. 4, 4, 5
give thanks, after, Coloss. 3.17. 1. Cor. 10.31. Math. 16.30. Act. 10.10. Luke
21.34. Exodus 32.6.
for Gods blessings, using the same for strength or honest delight, and, no way
for excess, or drunkenness.

What must we observe in our recreation?

That our company be good, Ephesians. 5.7.11. Phil. 4, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Ephesians. 5.16
and sports of good report, remembering that time must be redeemed.

When be our sports of good report?

When they be lawful for the nature of them, Romans 14.16. 1. Cor. 6.12. Coloss.
3, 2 1 Thessalonians. 5, 16, 17.
and necessary for the use, not hindering better duties.

So much for the duties as are between our work, what must we do after it?

Examine our selves, Ier. 8.6. Psalm. 4.4.8.
as upon an account, what we have done the day past; and prepare our sleep,
that it may be comfortable.

How shall we by such preparation make our sleep comfortable?

By committing our selves to God, souls and bodies, 1 Pet. 4.19 Psalm 4, 8, and
55, 16.17. and 121.4, 5, 7. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 3^
praying him to inspire the soul with good thoughts, and to watch the body
till the morning, that no hurtful thing break in upon it.

But some go to bed without prayer?

Such sleep in Satan's lap, and have him for their keeper: who (therefore)
makes a thorow-fare in the thoughts of their heart, sowing the tares of many
unclean concupiscenses and lusts therein, Math. 13.25.26
which sown in the night, grow in the day

What reason can you give to prove the necessity of prayer, before we go to
rest?

That night (for ought we know) may be our long night, and that sleep our last
sleep. Which (if it be, and the Lord has sealed no warrant to any that it
shall not be) must needs bring small hope to our vnpraying soul, that it shall
be glorified, and as little comfort to our body, (laid down in so brutish
forgetfulness) that it shall go to God at our next rising.

What do you conclude of this.

That those Masters are cruel to their servants, who sufter them to go to
their beds, Psalm. 19.5.
as wild beasts to their dens, without prayer, and do not better arm them
against the fear of the night.

So Much for the days of labor, what say you of the days of holiness?

On Gods Sabaths, Mark. 1, 35 Exodus 20.8.
we must (first) pray God to bless the duties of them, and so keep them holy.

How must we keep them holy?

By doing as little worldly work as may be, Isa. 58.13. Ier. 48.10.
and by doing Gods work religiously, and with all our might.

In doing of God work, what is to be considered?

That we do the works that sanctify the Sabath, and avoid the unfruitful
works that defile it.

What works are required to the sanctifying of the Sabath?

To prevent or defer, Exodus 16, 23. Psalm. 92.1, 2, and 32, 5, Job 1.5. Jam.
1.5. Ephesians. 6.19. Eccles. 4.17. Psalm. 84, 1, 2 Acts. 10.33, and 13, 15. and 20,
7 and 16.14. Deuteronomy. 11.18.
and by rising early to dispatch all businesses that would profane it; and,
by praying God, to bless his onwe ordinances, to come with a spiritual and
forward mind to publik prayer, preaching and Sacraments.

What other works are required?

It is required further, before we come to the assembly, that we pray, read,
or hear somewhat read at home that may edify; between the times of public
exercise, Luke 24 14. Deuteronomy. 6, 7
that we meditate on that which has been delivered; and after and between,
that we talk with others, and examine our selves about it.

What is (lastly) required?

That we take a view of God in his works and word; Psalm. 92.5 Romans 1 19, 20
Psalm. 19.1 Acts 17, 11. los. 1 8 Cant. 8.13. Ps. 14.4 Apoc. 1, 3, to Deuteronomy.
17.19. Psa. 92. in the title, Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 5 19.1. Cor. 16.2. Eccles. 7.15.
pray, and read, and sing Psalms privately; do works of mercy; and consider
Gods special works, of mercy, justice, goodness, and truth.

So much for the works to be done, what are the unfruitful works to be
avoided?

The spe^ding of the day in sleep, Psalm. 92 2. Ex 32 6.1. Cor. 11.21. Isa.
58.13. Exo. 20 10. Isa. 29.13.
play, drinking, worldly talk or business, foolish communication, and things
that separate from God by a carnal heart.

Glory be to God.

EPHE S. 5.15.16. Take beed therefore that ye walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise,

Redeeming the time, for the days are evil.


The sense and exposition of the ten Commandments in Engglish verse, published
long since by a godly Brother, and in some points (now) altered.
GOD (first) does charge me by his law
to have no Gods but one.
That is, to love, to fear, to pray,
and trust to him alone.
Next, that I do devise no sign
or image of the Lord;
Nor swear by creatures, rood, or Mass,
but serve him by his word.
The (third) that both I think and speak
of him with reverent fear;
And to his word, his works, and name
like awe and reverence bear.
The fourth the Sabath does command
religiously to spend,
In public place and privately
from morning to days end.
The fist, all Parents to obey,
who rule me in Gods steed,
And I (as Parent) rule and teach
my charge with careful heed.
The sixth forbids my heart, my hand,
and tongue to work despite
And biddes me save by all these parts
the life of every wight.
The seventh condemns both thought,
and words of wanton life,
Commanding cleanesse, and th^entire and deed,
chaste love of man and wife
The eight, to shun the stelth of heart,
of hand, and crafty deed;
To live contented with my state,
and help my brothers need.
The ninth all falsehood does forbid
in witness, talk, or thought,
To speak ill, or believe it till
the truth to light be brought.
The tenth condemns our stain of birth,
and first intent of sin,
Though neither action, nor consent,
(...) no^ liking pass therein.
A brief rehearsal of the ten Commandments for the use of the weakest.
THou shall have no Gods b^t one:
And truly worship him alone.
Gods name in vain thou shall not take
The seventh day holy thou shall make.
Honor thy Parents:
Murder flee:
A fornicator never be:
Thou shall not steal:
False speech eschew:
And covet nor another due.
LVKE 10.28. This do, and thou shall live.



