THE SCOVRGE OF DRVNKENNES.

By William Hornby Gent.

depiction of andunsavory man-beast with scourge and pipe

LONDON, Printed by G. ELD, for Thomas Bay^ie, and are to be sold at his Shop,
in the Middle-Row in Holborne, near unto Staple-Inne. 1618.

TO HIS LOVING Kinsman, and approved Friend, Mr. HENRY CHOLMELY Esquire:
WILLIAM HORNBY wishes all health and happiness.
I Have presumed to Dedicate this Book
Unto your self (Kind Sir,) vouchsafe to look
Into the same: and with indicious eyes
View here the difference twixt the fool and wise.
I count them fools, which night by night do sit
In Tauernes for to foolifie their wit;
Suffering strong wine to domineire and brave,
And so make Reason a poor captive slave:
Who with Hell-smoaking vapors do delight
To turn night into day, day into night:
In which they Time, Wealth, Wit, and all do wast,
Because to beggary they soon would have.
I deem them wise which can this sin eschew,
And bless themselves from such a damned crew
Of hate full hell hounds, in all sins grown ripe,
Which daily dance before the Devils Pipe:
There Is not a vice, but they are expert in all,
And ready into Hels wide mouth to fall.
At Bacchus Altars they their sins deplore:
And Venus for their Goddess do adore.
All virtuous thoughts they from their hearts expel,
And never think of Judgment, Heaven, or Hell.
Then blessed are they (I say) which sober live,
And not an ear to their inticements give:
Which keep decorum ever in their ways,
Both to Gods glory, and their endless praise:
By this they shall preserve their wealth and name
From prejudice, from scandal and from shame:
By this they shall be honored and renowned,
Where special virtues in them so abound,
It Is ever best a golden mean to keep,
And not to cl^mbe too high, nor wade too deep,
Lest climbing high, the greater be their fall,
And by deep wading they be drowned withal.
To keep us then from falling either way,
Upon this staff let our affections stay
Of blessed Golden Mean, there let vsrest;
So live, so dye; and dying so, be blessed.
Thus hoping you will kindly this receive,
The rest unto your generous thoughts I leave.
Your Kinsman to be commanded, WILLIAM HORNBY.

TO ALL THE IMPIOVS, and relentlesse-harted RVFFIANS and ROYSTERS under Bacchus
Regiment: Cornu-apes wishes remorse of Conscience, and more increase of Grace.
YOu Roaring-boyes, which use to drink and swear
As if you straight would cause the Devil appear
Amongst you, for your execrable crimes,
To fetch you unto hell before your times:
View here the farewell of my youths-greene folly,
Which breeds my joy, but your sad melancholy.
It Is joy to me, because I now do leave them:
But grief to you, that I no more receive them.
Thus it is my only comfort, but your sadness,
That still I ^ill not follow you in badnesse:
For they which be composed of all evil,
Care not how many go unto the Devil;
That as on earth they all alike do fare,
Even so in hell like torments they may share.
Once I was vain, yet now I do abhor it:
But I may blame such wicked tempters for it.
Now by the light of Grace my faults I see,
How vain, how vilde, and how corrupt they be.
I feel within my breast continual iarres,
My Flesh and Spirit are at mortal wars,
By reason of my sins so extreme vilde,
As hard it is to have them reconcilde.
But now Repentance comes, and she makes peace,
And so the Combitants their wars do cease.
She bids me boldly write against that sin,
And horrid wickedness, I long lived in.
She bids me spit in Drunkenness foul face,
Deny, defy, and do it all disgrace:
With sharp inuectiues bitterly to rate it,
Revile, detest, and utterly to hate it.
Thus I of Bacchus service am ashamed,
Let me a Coward therefore be proclaimed
At drinking healths: to drink so out of health
They are vilde members in a Commonwealth.
Let Drunkards publish this for their own grace
In every Town and Corporation place,
That where I see pots stand in battle-ray,
They make me Coward-like to run away:
With this loud clamor I am well content,
'Twill be my praise, but their disparagement.
Then they which filthy be, so still remain,
Who touches pitch, must needs his finger^ stain.
I will proceed even as I have begun,
Virtue shall be the race I mean to run.
And so base Drunkards all, I you defy,
Thus I will live, and thus I hope to dye.
Yours if you will turn to Grace, else not; CORNV-APES.

COme Drunkenness, untruss,
and naked strip thee:
For without mercy
I will soundly whip thee.
I have prepared a Scourge
I hope will smart,
Because I do abhor thee
with my heart.
Then will I pinch, nip, sear,
and brand thy skin,
To make thee (if thou can)
to feel thy sin.
So serve thee in thy kind,
and let thee pass,
For the most vildest Rogue
that ever was.
I Will use thee like a Dog, a Jew, a Slave.
Expect no mercy from my hands to have.
THE SCOVRGE Of DRVNKENNES.
CORNV-APES his Farewell to Folly, or his Metamorphosis, wherein he does show
his unfeigned hatred to evil Company such as be Drunkards, Swearers, and such
like; which God does hate: And also, where he does briefly display the effects
of Drunkenness, with his Detestation of frequenting Alehouses: profitable to
all, and hurtful to none.

BItter sweet pleasing
vanities adue,
Ye subtle Sirens
sing unto your selves,
For from your songs,
much prejudice ensue,
I list no longer
for to trust such Elues,
Sing, play, pipe, dance, your Gransires Galliard round,
Swagger and swear, dice, drab, and drink profound.
The Crowing Cock which sharply checked Peter,
The Scriech-Owles hideous notes give more content,
The croaking night-Rau'n yields tunes much sweeter
Then the vain music your vild breaths have spent:
These are and have been ominous to some,
But yours presage a dismal end to come.
To damp and quench the heat of all your sport,
Let me but tell you the true end of all,
You that to brothell houses do resort,
And unto Dicing and to Drinking fall.
I will be plain the very truth to tell,
Such be the highwayes and the gates to hell.
Your eager sports ^o easelesse grief do tend, Sweet meat must have sower
sance.

Your mirth in mourning, and your bliss in bane,
Your weal in woe, your wealth in wrack shall end,
Your sweet in sower, your pleasure all in pain:
This is the song my doleful Muse begins,
Which does declare the stipend of foul sins.
Then suck Tobacco, and swell up your jaws,
And make your nostrills like to Chimneyes smoke,
Still be rebellious to your makers laws,
If that you will his anger so provoke:
For be you sure though he be slow to ire,
His wrath will come, as a consuming fire.
Be as you are, if you will not amend,
As I have been, I will no more be so,
As I have been, I was not my own friend,
But to my self a very deadly foe:
Then as I was, I do my self deny,
And all the follies of my youth defy.
In bearing of my name, I bear my shame,
My name is spotted with my sins offense,
But true repentance yet will clear the same,
And make for it (I hope) a recompense,
Then farewell all the follyes of my youth,
Which have been Traitors for too work my ruth.
Most vain delights have hurt me all they can,
In doing to me vild and great disgrace,
I now will mortify a sinful man,
Repentance does thrust folly out of place:
Folly therefore for ever fare thee well,
For true Repentance in my heart does dwell.
Bacchus thou God of all ebriety,
Which do obtuce and blunt the edge of wit,
Thou enemy unto sobriety,
Which make some rage as in a frantic fit,
Who so frequents thy Court shall not be wise,
To thee therefore no more I Will sacrifice.
Thou which do cause the liquid juice of Grape, The diversity and contrariety
of pretty drunken tricks and qualities. That is dance like Alexanders great
horse.

For to possess men's several heads with rage,
Some for to dance the Anticke like an ape,
And some to sing as twere a Bird in Cage:
Some Maudlin-drunke do straight distill down tears,
And some like great Bucephalus, carreares,
Some, fall to swear, blaspheme, to cogge and lie,
And some will rattle pots against the wall,
Some in Pot valor will his manhood try,
And some to other pretty feats will fall:
Some then will run through fire and water deep,
And some be silent and fall fast asleep.
Some, armed in Ale, will stoutly prate of Wars,
And some will in an Alehouse draw his dagger,
Some will ore look the Moon and all the stars,
And some will in a beastly humor swagger,
And some will offer to no Creature wrong,
Because the Crampe is in his legs and tongue.
Some, like an Ape, will featly mumpe and mow,
When Drink has much deformd his formal face,
And some will reele when as he cannot go,
And some will run and ride the wild-goose chase:
And some will shout and hallow like madmen,
And some will roar like Lions in a Den.
Some valiant Hercules will imitate, Drink makes Cowards valiant.

To fetch the triple-headed Dog from Hell,
And some of great atchiuements then will prate,
As if their deeds should Hercules excel:
And some will fight up to the knees in blood,
For his friends sake if it will do him good.
Some like an Adjective do props require,
For to support their ill distemperd bodies,
And some like Swine do wallow in the mire:
And some go gazing here and there like noddies,
Some has the ach so grievous in his head,
That he wants help to carry him to bed.
Some disobedient rake-hell void of grace,
When Drink has got the maistery of his wit,
Will call his father fool before his face,
And cheek by iole by him will boldly sit.
And some in drink will give a desperate stab,
And some not stick to call his mother Drab.
Some has his face most curiously bedeckt, Most admirable rich faces.

With Carbuncles and buttry buttons fine,
And some will have his face most strangely sleckt
Like Cream and strawberies or Claret wine:
And some will have his nose most rich bespred,
With Pearls and Crinkoms mixed with crimson red.
Some to maintain his huge red bottle nose,
Least that the fire should be extinct and dye,
Ere he want cash to drink heel paune his clothes,
So make his back, out of his belly cry,
And bitterly the same to ban and curse,
That by his paunch his back should fare the worse.
Some ere he want his quenchlesse thirst to slake,
Will Conicatch, and cheat, so live by's wit;
And some nere greatly care a purse to take,
If opportunity their purpose fit:
Thus may we see, this sin Ebriety
Does link together much impiety.
All these are Bacchus prentises free made
Of that foul trade of filthy Drunkenness,
His Livery is on their fronts displaid,
And true devotion they to him express,
At's Altars they Tobacco sacrifice,
And honor him in all due quaffing wise.
He trains them up and frames them, makes them fit,
For death, destruction, and eternal woe,
Their finnes will sink them to the infernal pit,
Where Drunkards all without Repentance go:
Besides all earthly blessings quite forsake them,
And shame and Beggary do overtake them.
Who ever knew but that some fearful end,
At unawares these Malt-wormes did surprise,
In which God does his Justice right extend,
As he is all-vpright, all-iust, all-wise,
His menaces they never fear at all,
Until his judgments on their heads do fall.
But first, being loath for ever they should dye,
He warnes them fair, (as warned folks may live)
And with delays he likewise them does try,
Deferring still due punishment to give:
But when he sees they will not turn to grace,
His Judgment straight does mercy quite displace.
Then grim-facd Death comes with his Mace in's fist,
And at Gods suit does sudden them arrest, There is not resisting against
Death

When it is in vain to rescue, or resist,
His conquering hand does ever get the best:
He is Gods Sargeant, and no kind of bail
Can any whit in all the world prevail.
Not all the costly rich Arabian gold,
Can ransom them from Deaths strong Prison place,
Nor all the treasure that our eyes behold,
No bonds, no bail, can help them in this case:
No strength of men, no policies, no laws
Can once redeem them out of deaths strong claws.
Thus on these lawless livers he makes seasure,
Not by one way, but by a sundry kind,
Which is at Gods appointment, will and pleasure,
By his decree their lives are so resigned,
As by examples often do appear,
Which is enough to strike our hearts with fear.
One in the midst of quaffing ends his days,
Even by a sudden stab which he receives,
Such Accidents do happen many ways:
Another in a ditch lies drunk, and leaves
His liuelesse Corpse there, grievous to be found,
To witness he was drunk ere he was drowned.
Another does receive a woeful check,
His brains round whirling with distempering drink,
Down from his horse does fall and break his neck,
All these are heavy Judgments we may think,
Another surfeiting in great excess,
Dies sudden in the midst of Drunkenness.
Another having spent his only means,
In a most drunken loose lascivious vain,
Upon base Panders, filthy Whores and Queanes,
Which wealth might well him else in age sustain:
Having thus vainly spent a good estate,
By a sad swing his days do end their date. He departs out of this World in
a halter.

Oh are not these fair warnings to take heed!
And yet alas men cannot warned be,
For still they do in drunkenness exceed,
We are so blind our faults we cannot see:
Drunkards, each where do swarm as thick, at least,
As flies on some dead putrified beast.
Sodom did not in greater sin abound,
Then does this wicked world we now enjoy,
Whereas ten righteous men could not be found,
For which the Lord with fire did it destroy:
That in so much we now may plainly see,
Sodom was burned, her sins escaped be.
For he which will not take his Lap down free, The Drunkards term their
Drink Lap, a good currish comparison fit enough for such dogs as they be.

Lap, so they term it, such as dogs do use,
And dogs with such indeed do best agree,
Because Gods Creatures they so vild abuse:
He Is a base fellow that will this deny,
When as most baseness in themselves does lie.
And he that will not drink off his whole scowre,
Is a Bench-whistler, and a peasant slave,
Oh they will rail upon him every hour,
And tell him he is not worthy for to have
A boon companion or good fellows name,
If that he rightly cannot show the same.
But he which bravely will carouse and quaffe,
And drink downe-drunke even to the depth of Hell,
And spend his money, as it were but chafe,
Oh that's the man that bears away the bell,
He shall be praisd, for taking of his due,
And called a Captain of the Drunken crew.
But if to pledge a slash he does refuse;
They Will take the pot, and throw the drink in's face,
And with broad scoffs, most grossly him abuse,
Thus will they urge him to his great disgrace:
So upon this, they must go try their tools,
Then out they go to fight like drunken fools,
When as they cannot go, nor stand alone.
Then most of all their hearts with fury swell,
They Will make great brags to have their valor shown,
That they will fight even with the Devil of Hell:
Whilst that their reputation quite does sink,
Base is the quarrel that begins in drink.
But of all other he is truly wise,
That from these ill-good-fellowes can refrain,
Though scoffingly they say he is precise,
Yet Drunkards tongues his credit cannot stain:
For blessed are they which have an evil report,
By them which are right of the Devils consort.
It Is great impeachment to a generous mind,
A base and paltry Alehouse to frequent,
It best befits a Tinker in his kind,
Then any man of virtues eminent,
Go to an Alehouse to quaffe and carouse,
It Is Cousin German to a Baudy-house.
It is the receptacle of all vices, An Alehouse rightly decyphered.

Where Tinkers and their Tibs do often repair,
Where thieves and Iugglers with their slight devises,
Their false got booties, at a night do share,
Where Rogues and Runagates do still resort,
And every Knave which is of evil report.
It is a Cage of all base Villainy,
Where Swearers, Dicers, Cutpurses and Cheators,
Bull-wards and Beare-wards with like company,
Of Fiddlers, Farriers, Conycatching creatures,
Bauds, Pedlers, Panders, and such Bride-well stuff,
As Mistress Meritrix with t'flaunting Ruff.
It is a harbor for iniquity,
It is the very sink of horrid sin,
It is a Den of all impiety,
And well is he that does not fall therein:
It is a place of pleasure bitter-sweet,
Where Knaves and Whores do often together meet.
There every saucy Jack will have his Gyll,
And every knave will with his mate be bold,
Naught evermore with naught frequenteth still,
Birds of a feather will together hold:
Where stinking carrion does corrupted lie,
There greedy Kytes do all together fly.
Thus where an Alehouse is decyphered right,
Me think a Gentleman should scorn to stain,
His virtues, which might else give splendour bright,
So basely in an Alehouse to remain:
Go to an Alehouse, why then go to Hell;
For there all sin and villainy does dwell.
There every vpstart, base-condition'd slave,
If that he have but money in his bag,
A Gentleman unto his teeth will brave,
And in his pots most malapertly brag:
Confront him too with terms most gross and vild:
Who touches pitch of force shall be defilde.
Oh is it not pity Gentlemen should drowned
Their wealth, their wits, and virtues, all in drink,
When such good qualities in them are found,
They should (alas) so much in the wetting shrink?
For though they be well read, and highly borne,
Yet they are but held in base contempt and scorn.
How much, Oh how much, do they dim I say
Their Orient virtues which might else appear,
As bright as Cynthia in her glorious ray,
When gentle winds the night from Clouds do clear:
Ay me, that Virtue should lie so obscure,
And Prisoner-like such penance great endure.
Then Gentlemen let me you this persuade,
From what you be do not degenerate,
God a degree you above others made,
That chiefly Virtue you might imitate:
For Gentlemen from Swains should differ far,
As does the Moon from the least twinkling star.
As for the vulgar let them still be vicious,
Let them be drunk and altogether vain,
Let them be wicked Swearers and malicious,
If no persuasions can their wills restrain:
A rusticke humor fits a rusticke mind,
Only be you from such gross ills refinde.
Once did I see, I would I had not so,
A thing not strange, yet strange I would it were,
A Vicar was so drunk he could not go,
With drinking of Tobacco, Ale, and Beer:
Needs must the People then go far astray,
When as the guide does reele out of the way.
Another time I saw as bad a sight,
A Justice that did rule a corporation,
Would to the people bid at noone goodnight,
By reason of strong liquors operation:
Ill can he keep a Town in good subjection,
When as he cannot rule his own affection.
And is not this a lamentable case,
They which should be as Lanthornes shining bright,
To guide each one to run a virtuous race,
Do more eclipse their ways then make them light,
Irreverent Sirs, your places fit you ill,
Because you cherish Vice and Virtue kill.
I knew a Vicar was as free a man, Behold a swaggering Vicar.

As ever to this day Tobacco nosed:
He would not stick to drink off his whole Can,
If in an humor he was so disposed:
For a full cup he would be no man's debtor,
There Is not a Roaring-boy could pledge him better.
A Constable which lack't both wit and law,
(As of them such Lack-iudgements there be many)
Would drink himself as witless as a Daw,
So break the peace and braule and fight with any,
Infringe his oath, and often be changing knockes,
Judge then if he deserve not best the Stocks.
Act^nke Attorney likewise I have known,
Which would carouse as deep as any other,
Until by drink he would be overthrown:
For to good fellowship he was sworn brother:
But may not he even for an Idiot pass,
Will trust his Case with such a drunken Ass.
Thus they which should ciuillity embrace,
Observe good order, and preserve the peace,
Do altogether err in such a case,
Which does their endless infamy increase:
For when such faults by these, men understand,
Who Will put a sword into a mad man's hand.
Thus they which should be perfect presidents
Of glorious virtue and a godly life,
Do even become accursed instruments,
To foster drunkenness now grown too rise.
The Clergy do^ instruct, admonish, preach,
Yet seldom follow that which they do teach.
But though their hearts be vain, profane and vilde,
And for Gods word too bad and base a place
To dwell in; yet most sure it is vndefilde,
Nor can it dimne the luster of it is grace:
It Is far unfit indeed, becaue so pure,
In such foul filthy vessels to endure.
So ne'rethelesse their doctrine may be sound,
Though they two masters, God and Bacchus serve:
But this in sacred Writ is certain found,
Who serves two Masters needs from one must swerue:
Then where in such foul hearts such vices breeds,
Respect their doctrine, but reject their deeds.
But by the way, before I further go,
Though I affirm the Clergy to be naught,
In gen rall yet I do not tax them so,
Oh God forbid I should have such a thought,
No, there be some most sacred and divine,
Whose light aright like glorious stars do shine.
These cherish virtues, vices do suppress,
These are unfeigned haters of foul sin:
These sharply do reprove vile drunkenness,
And other wickedness that men live in,
Yea these be they which only do endeavor,
To cure sick souls that they may live for ever.
God grant their doctrine I may right embrace,
And imitate the lives which they do lead:
Then shall I gain an euer-blessed place,
Which is deuoid of sorrow, grief and dread:
God grant (I say) I such may imitate,
Until my latest days do end their date.
I only this and nothing more desire,
For the Worlds follyes I have known too long,
And do repent, recant, and quite retire
From those vain ways in which I have gone wrong?
A better task I now will undergo,
With hearty sorrow for my erring so.
And as I did begin, I here conclude,
To vain delights, I now do bid farewell,
And to the rascal drunken multitude,
Whose portions for them are reserved in Hell,
For these God has ordained endless terrors,
If that they soon do not repent their errors.
Virtue is she which above all I love,
Virtue that leads unto eternal bliss,
Virtue my faith and loyalty shall prove,
For her I do adore, embrace and kiss:
She is my comfort and my only pleasure,
My Love my Dove, inestimable treasure.
She is my solace, and my sweet delight,
She is my joy even in my great extremes,
With her I will converse both day and night,
She Will banish all vain thoughs, and idle dreams
Quite from my heart, for virtue is most pure,
And can no filthy wickedness endure.
Thus with this resolution I do end,
No more to be by folly so misled,
The remnant of my days I Will better spend,
To Virtue only I am truly wed,
She is my Spouse I Will have no other wife,
Till death does come and take away my life.
A MEDITATION OF the FLESH and SPIRIT.
OH what strong oppositions do arise,
Within my frail, weak and unstable breast!
My Flesh and Spirit are mortal enemies,
Excluding peace, procuring my unrest:
I like, dislike, I hate and yet I love
Those sins which to me do salse Traitors prove.
Which do betray my Soul to endless woe,
With all deceitful pleasures vilde and vain,
I feign would leave this sin yet on I go,
Surcease a while and then return again,
My Spirit's willing often for to leave it,
But then my Flesh again bids her receive it.
My Spirit freely longs after grace,
And does by grace in Heaven desire to dwell,
Yet stubborn Flesh would intercept the place,
Of my Souls rest, to cast it down to Hell,
Thus they within me strive like those two twins,
Jacob and Esau: yet cannot be friends.
Rebellious Flesh does sore it self oppose,
Against my Spirit fraught with fearfulness,
And enters arms with sins insulting foes,
Weak nature down by violence to press:
Fear of Gods wrath does make me cease from sin,
Then that forgot, a new I do begin.
Three mighty Giants do my soul assail,
(Great ods, my poor weak spirit to resist)
The World, the Flesh, the Devil, all these prevail
And by their force do conquer as they list:
To kill and rob me of each virtuous thought,
Plots of false pleasure they have howerly wrought.
When as good motions enter in my breast,
And I bethink me of the state of Man,
How far through sin I am from being blessed,
And that my life is short and but a span,
The Devil he then does to false doctrine fall,
And says, Sin on; thy sins are Venial.
The World, it is fraught with execrable sin,
And does stir up my Appetite to lust,
Unto alluring baits it does me win,
Seducing unto vanities unjust:
And careless says, let Melancholy fly,
Eat, drink and sleep, to morrow thoushalt dye.
The Flesh to pleasures does it self betake,
And steals good motions from my heart away,
So Grace and Goodness it does quite forsake,
Vain Pride and Luxury, for to obey,
Accounting sin no sin, and deeming hell,
To be a tale, which some old wiue, do tell.
It says, that Pride is but a decent thing,
And Avarice, is good frugality,
It says that Swearing does from valor spring,
Which does declare man's Magnanimity:
It says to quaffe is fellowship, right good
To maintain friendship, and to nourish blood.
It tells me bounty argues a brave mind,
And Venus sport is but a youthful trick,
Whilst penury comes posting fast behind,
And with wants spurs does touch me to the quick:
Thus still the flesh does make my sins seem small,
By false opinion for to work my fall.
Fond flesh, why do thou thus thy self abuse?
(Which art the only Mansion of thy Soul,)
All gracious proffers daily to refuse,
By rash repulse, and rigorous control;
Yield sinful Flesh, yield for thy after good,
And live in peace, in love, in brotherhood.
Resist not still, for fear of future smart,
Delays breed danger, as experience prove,
One time the Spirit from the Flesh shall part,
How loath will thou be then it should remove:
And such a dear companion to forsake,
When as Death comes away thy soul to take.
For Soul and Body cannot ever hold
Together, but must needs a parting make,
The One to the Earth to be enclosed in mold,
Tho'other to rest or unrest does betake,
Until the last and dreadful day of doom,
When quick and dead shall unto judgment come.
Each Soul her body then shall repossesse,
And they that have done well shall Heaven inherit,
But they which still Gods sacred Laws transgress,
They shall have Hell, just stipend for their merit.
For God does all men's secret sins behold,
Which are in's Book of great accounts inrold.
Then how shall I (poor worms meat, wretched Man)
Be able for to stand before his sight,
Who me like Chafe will winnow with his Fan,
From the pure Wheat his chosen and delight:
Is no hope left me from despair to keep?
Yes sure; for Christ is Shepherd of his Sheep.
Oh, there is a Jewel for my Souls content,
Since it is so, I never will distrust:
My Savior puts Despair to banishment,
He died for me, a sinner and unjust:
And by his Death and Passion, I believe,
That unto mercy he will me receive.
Although my sins, were even as Scarlet, red;
And with vain thoughts my heart was filled full;
Though in corruption I was borne and bred;
By Christ I yet am made as white as wool:
So dearly he has all the world esteemed,
That by his death the (faithful) he redeemed.
Christ is the only Shepherd of renown,
Who love's his sheep so truly and so dear,
That for their sakes his life he did lay down,
That they by him might Crowns of Glory wear
In that celestial place, prepared for those
Which true Repentance from their hearts disclose.
(Sweet Jesus) I have often gone astray,
And erred both in thought, in word, and deed:
O, lead me now into the perfect way!
Though great my sins, thy mercies great exceed.
With mercy (Lord) me straying sheep behold,
And bring me back again into thy Fold.
Grant (gracious Father) I thy Laws may keep,
And that thy Statutes I may right obey:
That when the Goats are seuer'd from the Sheep,
At thy right hand I may with comfort stay,
Where I shall hear that blessed voice Venite,
So never fear that cursed sentence Ite.
In Justice (Lord) do not behold my sin,
To take thereof a strict and strait account:
Nor in just judgment do not once begin
To punish me, because my sins surmount
All other sinners, whatsoere they be;
In Mercy, not in Justice look on me.
Lord keep me ever from presumptuous sin,
So guide, direct, and order all my ways,
That I regenerate may a new begin
To serve thee right, and give thee perfect praise:
For who can magnify thee in the pit?
Or give thee praise which do in darkness sit?
O Lord, to thee I sue, I beg, entreat,
Not for my merits, but thy mercies sake,
To grant me mercy from thy mercy seat:
For my deseruings me accursed make;
Which if thou should no better me regard,
Death and Hellfire would be my just reward.
With Sin and Shame I am inuiron'd round;
Sin at my right hand, Shame stands at my left,
And vice and folly in me so abound,
That of thy graces I am quite bereft:
I sin, still shame at sin; I leese and win:
Thus daily walk I circuler in sin.
I leese heavens blessed and all-glorious place,
In running headlong into sin and error:
I win Prince Plutoes Court of black disgrace,
All fraught with dread, with torment and with terror:
This is my just desert, my due, my meede,
If thou (O Lord) in Justice should proceed.
Since then I am so wicked and so vain,
So vilde, so wretched in thy gracious fight:
My impure heart, which filthy sin does stain,
Make pure (O Lord,) and so reform aright
The inward man; that being dead to sin,
I may to righteousness anew begin.
And so to live; and living so, to dye;
That dying so, I so may live again;
And so to live, to all eternity
Amongst thy glorious Saints in heaven to reign.
A sinners death thou (Lord) do not desire,
If he repent, and from his sins retire.
Repentance then shall be the only course
To bring me into favor with my God:
From Folly quite I will my self deuorce,
To which I have been wed twelve years and odd:
Twelve years and odd, I have been vainly led,
More often then there be hayres upon my head.
I will begin my nunquam sera now,
And spend the remnant of my days in grace:
I have confirmed it with a solemn vow,
A life more godly ever to embrace:
For God has said; from's word he will not flee,
Who true repents, shall truly pardoned be.
To this, by word, be firm himself has tide,
Which stronger is then covenant, bond or bill;
Yea, better far then all the world beside:
For he all-faithfull is, and ever will:
Then sink Despair into the depth of hell,
I Will trust in God, with whom I hope to dwell.
A PRAYER AGAINST TEMPTATION.
I Now have vowed
from vanity to flee,
To dedicate
my life and love to thee,
O (gracious God) grant
I my vow may keep,
Till Death close up mine eyes
with his dead sleep:
For unless thou
be an assistant to it,
I, of my self,
unable am to do it.
My nature is
so sinful, weak, and frail,
That when that Satan does
my thoughts assail,
He often of me
the Victory does win,
So bears me headlong
into grievous sin,
With Satan's boystrous
and contagious blast
Of great temptations
here and there I Am cast,
Upon the Rocks
of Fear, Distress, and Woe,
Hope and Despair
do often to warring go:
Sometimes I say
that I will cease from sin,
And yet through weakness
I again begin.
Sometimes, this sin I do,
and then abhor it:
And sometimes that,
then straight crave pardon for it.
I sin, and for my sins
do beg remission:
As if to sin still
I would have commission.
Thus Satan does
against my soul conspire,
In making of me
to my sins retire;
Thy gracious aid
I therefore do deplore,
(Good God) that I
may ever thee adore,
With fervent zeal
and with an upright heart,
Laying foul vice
and vanity apart:
Infuse into my mind
thy holy grace,
Make it for thee
a sacred mansion place.
With holy weapons arm
my breast within,
That I of Satan may
the conquest win.
With Faith in thee,
with Hope and Confidence.
Let all these weapons
(Lord) be my defense:
For what am I
without thy gracious aid,
But even a filthy,
loathsome sinner made?
What strength have I
the Devil to withstand,
If thou be wanting
with thy powerful hand?
For that same great
old enemy to man,
Goes still about
to murder whom he can:
Defend me (Lord)
from his devouring jaws,
And make me truly
to observe thy Laws.
And as thy self
mine only maker art;
So frame my mind,
and so direct my heart,
That always still
may harbor in my breast
Unfeigned hate
of that I now detest.
FINIS.

