To my very loving and dear beloved felowlabourers in the word of God, and
brethren in Christ, William Ienyns Deane of the Cathedral church in
Gloucestre, Ihon Williams, doctor of the law, and Chauncelour and to the rest
of all the church appointed there to serve the lyuinge God, with all other,
Archedeacons Officiales, Deanes, Persons, ^y^ars and Curates, within this the
Kings Majesty's diocese of Gloucestre, grace, and mercy from y^ lord ever
living in the blood of Jesus Christ, our only Sauyoure.
IF the dangers and perils of Sayncte Paul's time, derebe loved* mynistred
and gave occasion unto him, for too ^eare of the lost of such people as then
were converted unto y^ knowledge and understanding of gods holy word, least
by negligence or corrupt doctrine of the bisshops and pastors, they might be
seduced and brought into error, doutles the dangers of this our time, that
be not only to be feared, least such as know the truth, be by error seduced
and brought from y^ truth, or ^ls by continuance in ungodly life, continue in
the truth in vain* but also that the most part of people be yet ignorant and
not converted unto y^ truth, should minyster and give occasyon unto us a great
deal more to be vigilant and circum spect, not only to keep those in truth,
to whom god has reave led it: but also to win and con^ert with all prayer,
diligence, preaching, and other instruction, such as yet be ignoraunte and out
of the way, unto the truth and knowledge of gods word. And so much y^ rather
because we se by experience, and also feel it in our selves, that the just god
is offended and angrye with our sins, and will not be contentyd with these
troubles, miseryes and crosses that alredye he lays upon us, but does
doutles prepare and make ready many more and more greuouse. Our office
therefore is to be dilygent and circumspecte for the people of God, and now the
hand of god being stretched furthe, to admonysh the flock committed unto our
charges in time, least they die, and their blood required at our hands.
Certain I am y^ our sins be ye only cause, where fore this most just god is
offended, and certain we be that the only way and means to please and quiet
him again, is to leave and wasshe away our sins. What the sins of ye
people be where with all god is thus offended, you that have y^ ouersyght of
them, know: or ye ought to know. I mean not too descend particularly to
any sin, least paraduenture I might seem too be temerous and over hardye,
too judge more then I perfitly know, or else in naming such sins, as many
good simple people have notte heard of, might rather learn to augment the evil
they know, then too learn the good, they know not. It is the duty of every
good pastoure and curate, dilygently to search and know what virtue is most
mete to be commended, and what vice most to be reprehended in y^ church yt he
serves. I will leave therefore the unknown evils unto me, to the shepeherd of
every parish, requiryng him to mark the sins of the people after-and by the
estimation of gods word, and thereby too pondre the condytyon of his people,
lest that he cause the^ and do the same him self, swalowe a Camel, and be
choked with a flee: leap over a block, and stomble at a straw. Before all
things, se that the people know their commandments, and the works thereof,
appertayning unto god in the first table, that they honor no wrong nor false
god, nor yet the true god, a wrong way: but as he has commanded him self,
in the old Testamente, and the new. And alsoo that they avoid all such
sins, faults, and dysobedyence, as be contrary to the commandments of
God, in the second table. And for a help unto you, and also to the people in
this behalf, I have set forth here the. xiii. Chapyter of S. Paul to the
Romans, which entreats of all the second table, and duty of a chrystian
manne, how he should use him self with, and toward al sorts of people.
Most heartily praiing you, and also in gods name, and the kings majesty's name
command you, that as many as serves any cure wtin this diocese, y^ can not
for lack of learning or exercise, teache nor preach him self too the people
the like doctrine, that they do every Saterdaye and Sonnedaye, read unto
the people this. xiij. Chapyter, as I have here set it forth, that the people
may learn to know, love, and fear the better the kings Majesty, and other
such magistrates as be by him appointed over the people. And all such as God
has yeuen grace of preaching unto, in their sermons, shall oftentimes
inculcate and persuade this argument and rule of obedience unto the people.
And the cause why, I have written in this Chapter, more then an other, and
think it very expedyent to be now taught unto the people, is the great and
dangerous offenses and sins of the rycher sort of people, and alsoo of the
poor, both ^n this shiere, and other the kin^es Maiestyes, in this realm. And
certain I am, that both of them shall dye eternallye, if they amend not.
Wherefore to deliver my soul, I give such as be commended by god and y^ kings
Majesty unto my charge warning of the judgment and dampnatio^ to come before.
The rich man so incrochith, gathers together, and obteyneth so much into
his own hands, that he alone possesses y^ earth lives therebye, and his
poor neighbor ready too dye for lack, so that he is brought into Cantalus
pain, meat and drink catel and corn enough of every side of him, yet shall
rather dye for lack then y^ insatiable and never contented, couetouse persons
will price their goods s^ ^s poor men, their wives and their Children may be
hab^ to by reasonable peniworthes o^ Gods aboundaunte plentye and riches that
he brings out of the earth. These men except they repent, can not be saved,
nor be partakers of the merits of Christ's passion. For God would the rich to
give unto y^ poor, But our men that care neither for god nor the kings
laws, will neither give nor sell what so ever necessite do require. If they
would not care for gods word, yet should they have respect to Nature and to
there countreye, though the poor man be not a rich man, yet is he a
Christian, and thy country man, of whom nature and countreyshyp requires the
to have compassion. The poor manne partlye provoked by necessetye and need,
and partelye of vnchrystyan hatred and dysdayne he has at his neighbors
wealth and prosperitye conspyryth, works, provoke and desires by all
means to oppress and rob his richer neighbor and will by force, strength
treason, sedytion, commotyon, assemblaunce, and gatheryng together of such as
he is him self against gods laws, gods ordinances, Magistrates, and
superioure powers, take away and usurp every man's goods, he cares not how.
Not reme^bryng the judgment and terrible dampnation of god, for his so doing,
and that it is his bounden duty too suffer and bear such neades and
necessities, as god lays upon us for our sins. And that upon pain of hell
fire, no manne should revenge his own wrongs, but commend him self to god,
who can and will hear the prayers of the poor in their troubles and neades.
And that they should offer their supplycatyons to the Kings Majesty, and to
such other as be appointed for the redress of such oppressyon and wrongs:
and not too take weapons, armoure and force against GOD and his ordynaunces.
In case the Kings Majesty and the rest appointed too see poor men's causes
redressyd, will not hearken too their clamoure, doutles the Ire and vengeance
of god will punysshe them, and so much the rather if the people quietly and
obediently commend their causes unto him, y^ which if they do not, they perish
eternally. For there is no traytoure nor sedityous man can be saved but
obediente and quiet men shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, and such as
suffer wrong, and not such as do wrong, or intend to revenge by strength,
they^ own wrongs. Therefore to kep^ the people of this diocese from the
displeasure of god and their king, and my self from everlasting dampnatio^, I
require yo^ most dilygently to teach them this Chapter every weke, o^ part
of it, the Saturday at E(...)song: the other, the Sunday (...) the morning
prayer, and y^ thir^ part, the sunday at Euensong Thus fare ye al well, and god
ye^ us grace all, well too dyscharg our offices commended unto v^ Yours with
all my heart, brother and felowpreacher.

Ihon Gloucestr^

Annotations in ye.xiij. Chapter to y^ Romans. The Prologe.
THE office and duetye of a christian man, is contained in two parts. The
first, that he use himself aryght and reverently with God. The second, that
he use him comely and honestly with man. In the Epistle to ye Romans from ye
beginning Saint Paul has fullye and sufficyently declared the vnty and office
of man, toward god: toward the end, he declares how we may honestly do our
duetyes toward men. ^othe these offices must dilygentlye be known and
exercised. And because a Ciuyle and outward life, seem it never so honest, is
mere and very hypocrisy, and can not please god, except the mind and soul
inwardly be well affected toward him, I think it conuenyent brieuely to
declare wherein Saint Paul in this Epistle does put the religyon of the heart
of man, toward GOD: and then we hall the better descend unto such dutys and
offices, as appertains to al manner of persons as well publyque as pryuate.

First, Saint Paul perceyueth that in grace and promises of God can no^ be
known of man until such time a(...) he be brought to acknowledge and
dyspleasure of his sins. The physician an(...) physic be unprofitable unto
such a(...) know not that they be sick, as Christ^ said, I came not to call
the just, but synn^^s Mathe. 9.
to repentance. Therefore we must know the wound of our souls, and the
syckenes of sin, before we can get any profyt by the grace of God. We must
confess that all men and women, except Christ, are borne the chylderne of ire
an^ of gods dyspleasure, and that we bea^ about in us sin, that always
repu^neth the spiryt, whereby we are acertayned that we be always subject unto
sy as Saint Paul says, he concluded ^ Roma. 11.
men vndersinne, because he might ha(...) mercy upon al. Seeing we be al sinners
Roma. 6.
the reward of sin, is death, Saint Paul's conclusyon where he says, we ar^
Ephesian. 2
borne all the chylderne of Gods dysplesure, is true. Now then may we be
de^^uered from this great Ire and dysple^sure? 1, Joan. 4, Roma, 5.
By the mercy of god the father rewards us, that first loved us, we loved
him, whiles we were yet his enemies. But what is that, where with all we may be
annexed and reconciled unto god by his mercy, when there is no good thing in
us, but all fylthy and sinful? It is Jesus Christ, y^ son of god, most
^erebeloued, in whom the father is con^ented, and by whom he is reconciled un
to all sinners that repent and believe his Math. 3. 17. Ephe. 1. 2. Col. 1. 2.
Roma. 8. Philip, 2.
^romyses, for the merits and shedynge of Christ's blud, his derebeloued
son. After that, we se and perceive so great a mercy and pity of our
heavenly father. y^ would not fanoure nor spare his only son, to die for
our redemption, but gave him to the most cruel and vile death of ^e cross for
us, how should not we trust (...) so merciful a father in all our troubles and
aduersityes, whether they be of ^^die or soul? Why should we not call Math.
1^.
only upon so merciful a god? If we do (...)us amend our lives, believe his
promy^^^, and study a better life, we shall not one^^ Luce* ^^
ve saved by his mercy, but also glad to ^^^ue him, and walk before him in
inno ^^^cie and pureness of life: and also obedi^^tly and quyetly in the world,
give re^^rence and love to all persons accordingly to whom honor, honor: to
whom love, love: to who^ justice, justice: to who^ mercy, mercy. Unto this
christian quyetnes, reverence, love and fear, does all the scripture exhort
us, and chiefly this present xiii. chapter to the Romans. For the
understanding whereof the better, I note at the beginning a certain dyuersitie
and difference of persons. There be, and ever has been some public persons,
and some pryuate persons. Publyke persons, be those that bear any office,
rule, regiment or Dominion, in a common wealth, as a king with all his
justices, Maires, Sheriffs, Baylynes, Constables, and other, Private persons,
be such as be subjects, and under these officers. These two persons must be
diuersely used, and the duty that is due unto y^ one is not due unto the other
in ciuell respects. And seeing we must live with both these persons and states
appointed to be in the world by almighty God, Saint Paul in this chapter is
very diligent to teach and instruct us how we should live accordingly in
truth and honestye toward them both.

The division of the chapter
Parts. 1 Why the superyoure powers should be obeyed. 2 How we be debtors of
love to the publyke person and Magistrate, and to the pryuate person that is a
subject, indyfferentlye. 3 Conteyneth an exhortatyon to innocence and
honesty of life, that the truth being once known and received, every man
should abstayn and keep him self from filthynes and unclean life.


The first part, concerning the obedyence of ye Magystrates.
The text.
LEt every soul submit him self unto ye authority of the higher powers.

SAint Paul pronounces generallye, that every soul, that is too say, every
man should be obedyent unto the higher power. In a kingdom, and monarchy, where
one is appointed to rule all the subjects of y^ same realm, are bound to obey
the one king appointed by god, of what condition, state or degree, so ever they
be, as the king him self, is bound to be obedient unto the law, and unto God,
where as the laws be not contrary to ye law of god and y^ law of nature. And
here is no exception to be made. No man in a kingdom is or ought to be
priuileged or exempt from y^ obedience of the king, which is the higher power.
And the ecclesiastical laws that do exempt and priuelege any spiritual (as
they be called) or temporal person from this general rule Every man be
obediente to the higher power, is damnable and heretical: manifestly
condemned by the word of God. For Christ and his apostles paid tribute, Mat.
17. 22. Roma. 13.
and other duties unto ye higher powers of the earth.

And the powers that here Saint Paul speaks of, be not only kings and
Emperors but all such as be appointed to any public office and common
regymente, either for a king, where as is a kyngedome, or in the place of a
king, where as y^ state of the commune wealth is no monarchye, but a rule and
dominion, commended to many To all these Saint Paul commands obedience,
honor, reverence, and love too be borne. And this is specialli to be noted in
Saint Paul, yt he says simple and plainly, we should obey the hyhher powers
to confute, argue, and reprehende those that cloak and excuse their
inobedyence, either for ye age of the rulers, or else for condytyons and manners
of the rulers. And that ^ige discharges no man for inobedience, the word of
god declares, how that he was present ^. Paral. 21.
to help young kings, and to defend them in their under age, as it is to be
seen by king Josias. Also God punyssheth young kings as often as they walk
not after his word, as it is to be seen by Iehoiacim that was crowned in ye
eight year of his age, and with in three months and ten days, for the sins
^. Paral 36.
he committed before god, he was taken prisoner by Nabucadnozor Even so was
Manasses being of. xii. years of aige. Neither does the manners and condition of
ye magistrates excuse our inobedience, though they be naught. For Paul byddeth
us look upon the power and authority of ye higher powers: and not upon their
manners. And S. Peter ^. Peter, ^.
commands the servants to obey their masters though they be evil. So
Joseph obeyed Pharao, and Christ our savior Pilate, Saint Paul, the Emperors
of Rome, Caligula and Nero. And when S. Paul co^maundith us to be obedyent, he
means not only we should speak reuerentlye and honorably of ye higher power,
or make curtesye unto him, but to obey the laws set forth by the powers,
except they command things against gods laws: then must we obey more god then
me^, and yet not to Acts, 5.
strive and fight with the magistrates: but suffer patiently death rather then
to offend God: or else our obedience is nothing but hypocrisy and
dissimulation Who would accept his own childs making of curtesy, when all his
factes be contrary to his commandment? What Master would be content, or
think his servant did his duty in putting of his cappe, and in his doing
co^temneth all his masters laws and commandments? The laws of a
magistrate be of two condytyons and sorts: either they concern God, or man.
If they concern or appertain to god, either they be according to the word of
god, or contrary to ye word of god. If they be according to ye word of god, of
necessity and bondage, upon pain of dampnatyon, they must be obeyed. If they
be repugnaunt to the word of god, they should not be obeyed. Yet rather should
a man suffer death, then to defend him self by force and violente resystinge
of the superyour powers, as Christ, his Apostles and the prophets did.

If the laws concern and appertain unto man, and unto things Civil, they
must simple without exceptyon, be obeyed, except they repugne, and be contrary
to the law of nature. As Pharaos laws and commandment Exodus 1.
was to the midwyffes ye should have killed all ye men children that the women
of Israelites brought furthe. Seeing Saint Paul commands us to give
obedyence unto the higher powers, how much be these men worthy hell fire,
that resyste them both with hand heart, and tongue. In the book of Exodus the
people is commanded Exodus 22.
not too speak yuell of the higher powers, read the place and learn to detest
and abhorr^ those renneagats that in ever tavern and tappe house, spewoute
their blasphemous and traiterous talks, against the magistrates, when they
should rather look upon their own faults, and study to amend the^ And also
pray God to do the same in the magistrates, that (...) might please him of
his great mercy, to amend and redress all thyuges that be amysse.

After that Saint Paul has generally commaundid all me too be obedyente to
the high powers, he shewyth the cause wherefore they should be obeyed.

The text.
For there is no power says he) but of god. The powers that be, are ordained
of God. Whosoever therefore resysteth power, resistyth the ordinances of GOD.

Because that naturally there (...) in every man a certain de^^^r of
liberty, and to live without subjection, and all manner of laws, except
souche as please him self. Saint Paul is not content generally too exhort
and command all men too obedience of the higher powers but yeuyth many
great and weighty causes, wherefore men should be obedyente and in subiectyon
unto them.

The first is because the office of a magistrate, is ye ordinaunce^ of god: and
seeing all the ordinances and powers of God, are to be obeyed, necessarely it
follows that with out all tergiuersation, hipocrisye, and collusyon, yt the
Magistrate must be obeyed except we will say in some respects god is not to be
obeyed. Of this reason of Saint Paul, we must note, first the dignity and
honor of a public person, that his office and place is the ordinance and
appointment of god And therefore the Magystrates Exodus 22. Psalm. 82.
be called gods in ye holy scripture. For no man can come too the offcie of a
magistrate, but by the permission and sufferaunce of God. Many times some
persons come unto the place of a ruler, by false and preposterous, ^eanes, as
those do that for a ^riuate lucre, or private hatred (...) other, put up
themselves, and pull down those that god has appointed. But such ungodly
^ummyng to honor, god suffers and appoints for the sins of the people,
such evil and disce^blyng hipocrites to reign But let the king and Magistrate
be as wicked as can be devised and thought, yet is his office and place the
ordinance and appointment of god, and therefore to be obeyed. And as it is the
subjects duty to obey them, so is it their duty too watch and be
circumspecte, that they trouble nor unquiet any thing in their offices
contrary to the word of God, whose officers they be. In case they do,
although the Subjects may not, nor upon pain of eternal dampnatyon ought
not by force nor violence to resyst the offycer in his high power, yet he
should, and is bond to thyncke him self, that God can and will as well revenge
the abuse of his office in him, as punysshe the subject for the dysobedyence
of his ordinances toward the higher power.

If it be true that Saint Paul says, the higher power to be the ordinau^nce
of god, it is very damnable iniquity, that for any private affection or other
iniust oppressyons for any man to depose the magistrates from their places and
honor appointed by god, or else privily or openly, craftily, or violentli to
go about to change or alter, y^ state and ordinance of God: and there wythall
God is soore offended ^s it does appear by the grudynge and murmuring of the
Sau^^cl, 8.
People against Moses, in the deserte, the which thoughts and conspiryces of
the people, against their Magistrate and gouernoure, the Lord punysshed with
death, and killed Nu^e, 14.
them all before they came too the land of Canaan. For even as Kings and
Magystrates be appointed and ordained of God* even so be they alsoo defended
by him, as it appeared by David, Iosaphat and other. And the sedition and
treason redounded always too the destruction of ye people at length, as it is
to be seen in Absolo^ Architophel, Catilme Brutus, 2. Samuel* 17. 18.
Cassius, and other that destroyed not only the selves, but also people by
such treason and disobedience against y^ ordinance* and appointment of god:
as ye may see here by the text of Sayncte Paul that folowyth which is his
second cause why the higher powers should be obeyed. And as he said first,
they should be obeyed, because their place and autoritye is the ordinance of
god: so now in his second cause he shows, what great danger and peril it
is, too resyste and dysobaye Gods ordyaunces.

The text.
And they that resyst shall receive to the^ selfs damnation.

As though he had said, lest ye should think it a light thing, and but a
trisfelyng matter to wythstand and dysobeye the magistrates, understand ye y^
in your so doing ye withstand and fight against god, and therefore ye provoke
judgment and vengeance against your selfs, and be culpable and gylty of gods
everlasting dyspleasure, if ye repent not, and give over your obstinate and
disobedyent rebelly on. Here Saint Paul has set forth the end and success
of sedytion, treason, conspyracie, and rebellyon, too say, destructyon both of
body and soul. Whoo is hable to contend and fight with God, and overcome
him? Is not he only almightye, and only strength?

Absolon with a thousand traitors against one true subject prevailed not
against his father Dauyd, but dyed the death of a traytoure. Even so did those
whom before I named. And as S. Paul speaks he^e, so speaks Christ to Peter.
He y^ strikes Math. 26.
with the swerd shall perish by the sword, if gods word be true (as it can not
be false) all such as do by thought, word, or deed intend to trouble, unquiet
change, altar, move or resyste the ordinance of god, which is the
Magystrates and higher powers, must needs of necessite perysshe, as well in
this world as in the world to come, except they repent, and cease from
doing of yuell. Now goyth Saint Paul fourth with the terte.

The text.
For rulers be not to be feared of such as do well, but of such as do cuyll.

By these words Saint Paul declares two things. First he warns the
Magystrate of his office, least when he shall perceive it to be y^ ordinance
of god, and that no man should more resist and contrary it, the^ to resyste
and contrary God, should ware arrogante and proud and begin to favor and
flatter him self to mouche under the title and pretense of Gods power. But God
forbid says Saint Paul, that the magystrate should think any such
thing, he should remember rather that he is appointed to his place to
defend, help, and preserve souche as be good, and punysshe souche as be
naught and evil. This commandment did GOD command to the higher powers
in the commune wealth of the Israelites, and that they should not lift up
their hertes above their brothers, but to use indyfferencie and justice, with
all indifferently, without exceptyon Exodus 18 Nume. 27. Deu. 1. 16. and, 17. ^,
Par. 39. Psalm. 72. 82. 108.
of persons: as ye may read in the holy scripture.

The second part of Saint Paul's words commendith ye magistrates for their
vtilitye and co^moditye in y^ common wealth, because that by their autoritye
yuel doers among the people are punyshed and corrected: that honest and true
men may live in rest and quietness. And for this commodytie and necessary use
we be bound to obey them. For through their diligence, labor and pains under
God, we eat, hear the word of god, labor, bring up youth, householdes be
in quietness, the goods there of, with Cities, towns, and villages of the
realm. These commodities be great, and worthy of thanks, specially to god,
and then to the higher power.

Saint Paul follows his purpose with these words.

The text.
Will thou be With out fear of ye higher power? do well then, and so shall
thou be praised of them.

Where as before he said ye high power was a fear to evil doers in these words
he shows, how me^ may be without fear of the magistrates, to say, if men do
well, for well doing pleases gods order, and gods order being pleased,
fears not, nor punyssheth ye weldoer. And where as Saint Paul speaks of
fear to the higher power we must understand, that fear is of two sorts. One
is if love and good will anexed and knyt with reverence and love, and this fear
is only in godly and virtuous men that delight too be ordered and ruled after
the order and appointment of God.

The other fear is annexed with spyte, hatred, envy, and dysdayne, that
wyssheth there were no order, law, nor Magistrates, and those that be to
destroy them, or to bring them out of credyte and estymatyon among the
people. This fear is wicked and dampnable, and a testymonye of an yuel and
cursed conscience, and forbidden here in this Place by Saint Paul. Saint
Paul contynueth in the co^mendatyon of the magistrates saying.

The text.
For he is the mynyster of God, for thy wealth.

Here Saint Paul adds an other commendatyon of the higher power, the which
consysteth in two members, wherefore he should be obeyed. The first is,
because he is the Mynyster of God. The second, because he was instytuted and
appointed by God, for the wealth and commodyte of the subject In this, that
Saint Paul calls him the mynister of God, he puts the subject in mind
again, that whoo so ever contempne or dysobeye the higher power, contempnyth
and dysobeyeth GOD. And so says Luc. 10.
Christ, who so contempnyth such as I appointe and send, contemnyth me. And
the same said God unto Moses. They have not cast of the, but me. Also the
magistrate there is warned too take heed, he do nothing but as the minister
of god, too rule and govern after his word. For this god requires of him
Deuteronomy. 17. 1. Cor. 4.
that he be a faithful mynister. And when so ever he begin to wax laughty,
haulty, arrogant and proud* let him remember Saint Paul's words, that he is
but a minister.

And where as Saint Paul says, the Magystrate is ordained for the wealth
of the people* he must take heed of the end where unto he is appointed, and be
in deed as god would him to be, a wealth and saluatyon of ye people, to defend
just causes and to condemn such as be unjust, to remove false and
supersticious religion, and to plant true and godly religion, to maintain
such as profyt the church and ^^ocke of Christ, and to remove such as hinder
and deceive the^. Saint Paul now prosecuteth ^ys matter, and shows whoo
should fear the higher powers with these words.

The text.
If thou do evil, then fear for he bearith not aswerd for naught: but he is
the minister of god, to take punishment of them that do evil.

Even as Saint Paul says here, that the cause of fear too an evil man, is
that the Magistrate bears a swearde: Even so does he declare that it is not
enough for the Magystrate to bear a swerd, but to use and execute the sweard,
as the sins of the people require, too punysshe and kill them, if the law so
find them gyltye: and for fear of the use of y^ swearde which is not in
vain, they should keep evil doers in obedyence and fear, and so much the
more, because he is the mynyster of God, and his punyshmente is the very hand
and will of god, when he punissheth yuell doers. And it is not he y^ kylleth,
but god, whose place he occupies, being a magistrate and higher power. For god
co^maundyth Exodus 23. 22. Liuiti. 19. 20. Deuteronomy. 19.
him to punysh, and not to favor such yuel and naughtye persons.

It is very diuillishnes to accuse the magistrates of yuel doings, when they
punysh or put too death yuell doers, seeing in their this doing, they be none
other, but gods Ministers. And where as the scripture forbyddeth punishment and
reuengyng, it means that no private man should revenge his own cause, nor
fight at his pleasure, but rather suffer wrongs, if the law will not redres
it. And if y^ judge and magistrate in a cause of the law, for lucre, fear,
love, friendship, or any other respect, kill any man that is not worthy by the
law to die, the judge and Magystrate is a very murderer. And so he is, if he
save any man that the law condemnyth. For he is as S. Paul says, a mynyster
of God, whoo never saves one, and conde^nith y^ other in like causes. S. Paul
when he has sufficiently declared y^ dignity and of the higher power,
gathers by two necessary causes more, y^ the Magistrate is to be obeyed with
these words.

The text.
Wherefore ye must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only, but also
because of conscience.

The one cause wherefore we must obey, is the fear of pain and punishment, the
which the Magistrate must minister by ye commandment of God, unto all such
as disobey and contemn the ordinance of God.

The other is conscience, for although the magistrate do not se nor know, how
thou do disobey and break the order of god or else if thou could by power
and strength, overcome the magistrates, yet thy conscience is bound to obey,
and that for many causes. First, because the magistrate is the ordinance of
god then because dysobedyence and breaking of gods laws, troubles the
public and commune peace, and yeueth other stomach and encouraging to dysobey.
Al these euyls folowith dysobedyence, the which of conscience, we are bound to
exchew and avoid.

There be some so indurate and past grace, that think them selves not bound to
obey this order and higher power, appointed and commanded of God: but doubtless
those shall perysh with their capitaines, as Architophel did with his Absolon.

If y^ higher power command any thing contrary unto gods word, they should
not be obeyed. Notwythstandynge, there should be such modesty and so bernes
vsyd, as should be wtoute al violence, force and rebellion. As Peter and Ihon
vsyd, saying. God is more to be obeyed then man. And so in saying of truththey
continued in y^ truth, without moving of sedityon and suffered death for y^ truth,
as Fabiane and Cipriane, holy martirs, and records of god, suffered in Africa
under Decius the Emperor of Rome. How we are bound in conscience to obey
the^, S. Paul declares farther saying.

The text.
And even for this cause pay ye tribute, for they are gods ministers
appointed to ye same purpose

If we were not bound in conscience to obey them, we should not need to pai
tribute unto the^, but seeing we ought to pay trybute taxes and subsidies we
know they do defend us against all force, violence, and wrongs of our
enemies, Therefore tribute is a note and knowledge of our obedience, which we
must pay wyllyngly and gladlye of duty as Christ says, give unto God, y^
which is gods, and to ye Emporour that which is the Emperors.

Saint Paul shows the cause why tribute ought to be paid unto the higher
powers because, says he, they be ordained of God, to preserve and defend the
common wealth, in peace, and quietness: to punyshe the yuel and to defend the
good. And without the magistrates help this can not be done, as ye may
read, In the book of the judges, how the people fell in to all myschiefe,
when they wanted a lawful Magistrate and superior power, and every man did as
it seemed best in his own eyes. And in the Prophet Esai Cap 3.
the lord threateneth ye wicked Jerusalem, because there was none in it,
worthy to bear rule Even as subjects be bound to obey this higher power, so
must the higher power always take heed that virtue and good me^ be commended,
and evil men with sin and disobedience, punisshed. The second part of the
Chapter
Now follows the second part of the Chapter.

The text.
Give to every man therefore his duty, tribute, to who^ tribute belongs.
Custom, to who^ custom is due: fear, to whom fear belongs: honor, too whom
honor pertains.

When Saint Paul has sufficiently told us our duties to ye higher power, he
descends from that particularitye, and one sort of persons, to a generality
how we should do our duties to all manner of persons. First generally he
says, we should give every man his due. Then numbreth he certain kinds and
particulers of duties. Tribute we owe to kings and Magistrates, that must we
faithfully pay, or else the wythhoulders commytte theft, and therefore Christ
paid tribute. Custom is the revenues or proffytes that comes by land, or
trade of merchaundyse, and in this point, faith must be kept to all men,
according to the laws appointed by ye higher power. Fear is due unto GOD,
the King, to parents, and to all other of whom we be help in body or soul,
and so is honor due likewise. Therefore says the law, fear GOD, honor the
King, honor father and mother. etc. Arise to a hoare head 1, Peter. 2. Exodi.
20
Saint Paul breakith his disputation of duties, and will tarry no longer in
y^ enumeration and numbrynge of the parts and particulars of duties, but
referryth altogether to charity in this wise.

The text.
Owe nothing to any man but to love one the other.

As though he had said what needs it to write mouche of duties, contractes,
of byinge, lendynges, and such other like things? Let charytye be the rule of
all these things, unto the which, if the subject submyt himself, he will
use his higher power none otherwise than he would be vsyd himself if he were
an higher power: the higher power, the subject none otherwise then though he
were a subject himself, whatsoever thing agrees with charity is good.
Whatsooeuer agreyth not with charytye, is yuel. But many men cannot tell what
chariteis. And therefore it is no merueyl though al their doings be against
charity. Charytye is a feruente desire and earnest study to do well unto all
men, yea, even with the hurt of him that doyth it, if necessytye so
requires, as Saint Paul teaches. Phil. ^.


And Sayncte Ihon says, 1. Joan. 3.
Christ gave his life for us, and we ought to give ours, for our brothers. The
effects, properties, and conditions of this charity, Saint Paul shewith,
and says, Charity suffers, will not do yuel for yuel, lokyth not her own
proffyte, charytie will not conspire nor work traiterouslye, but pray for the^
that persecute her. etc. Thus Saint Paul declares that we be debtours to keep
peace and quietness among our neighbors, and to do all men good as long as we
live. Faith makyth us free before god in Christ Jesus. Charity makes us
servants to our neighbors for the love of Christ. Saint Paul prouith by
examples, that charity should be the rule of all our doings with these words
that follow.

The text.
For he yt louyth an other fulfylleth the law. For these commandments thou
shall not commit aduoutry, thou shall not kill thou shall not steal, thou shall
not bear false wytnes, thou shall not desire and so fourth (if there be any
other commandment) they are al comprehended in this saying, love thy
neighbor as thy self.

A wonderful commendation of charytye, yt who so obseruyth her, fulfylleth the
whole law, meaning the law that appertaynyth for the duty and offices to be
done between man, and man. And not that any man can satisfy the law before
God, saving only Christ, no, nor al parts toward man: for no man louyth his
neighbor, so fer^^^^ly, as the law of God requires. Yet S. Paul says we
fulfill the law when we give ourselves earnestly and holly* as much as lies in
us to work the law. And then our lack and imperfection shall be perfeted and
accounted full and sufficient for Christ's sake: he adds yet an other
Comendation of charity

The text.
Love hurtyth not his neighbor.

That is to say: he that has a Christian love cannot hurt his neighbor. By
this rule men may know whether they have charity, or not: for in case we
deminish the goods of our neighbors whether they be of his body or his
soul, or else of his possessions, honor, place, or dignity. Or if we
increase not these goods toward al men if we may, there is no charytye
inv^. Or else, if we dymyinsshe not their yuelles and troubles, as we may,
either if we do the yuels in any sort by ourselves, or by other, we have no
charity in us. By this rule we may now know, whether we love our brothers,
or not: and duly examyning ourselfes we shall se how far we be from
charity, and that it is an easy thing to speak and talk of charity, and a
very hard matter, to practice and lead our lives according to charytye. For
if we had as much charity as we profess to have, we should satysfye all the
law, as Saint Paul says.

The text.
Therefore is love the fulfyllynge of the law.

Meaning by the law, the second table of y^. x. commandments, in the which
is conteynyd the duty and office of every manne, to all manner of persons, of
what condityon so ever they be. As for the law of the first table, which
conteynyth the relygyon of GOD, fear, faith, love, prayer, obedyence,
pacyence, right use of Sacraments, with souche other as apperteynyth only
unto god, and be the fountain and orygynall of all good works. For here his
argument and state is to tell what men should do to men, and in the first
table is declared what manne should do to god, fully and sufficiently these
two former parts, sufficientlye declared by Saint Paul he folowyth with the
third part of the chapyter, which conteinith an exhortation unto Innocence
and honesty of life.

The third part of the Chapter.
The text.
BEcause we know ye season how yt it is time we should awake now out of sleep.

Hitherto Saint Paul has taught how christian men should behave themselfes,
not only to wards the publycke person; the King and magistrate, who^ they be
bound to honor and obey: but also towades private persons, that bear no
office whom they be bounse to love. And that the same obedience, to ye higher
power and love toward al men, may the better preserve and continue, he adds
now an exhortation to honest living, and godly conversation which he takes
metaphorically, or by similitude of the time: Saying, it is mete we should live
honestli now for it is time, meaning by ye time the season and time, wherein the
grace of god in Christ Jesus, is preached and opened to ye world the which
should not give us occasion of wickedness and sin: but rather wake us out of
our sleep and to rear us out of sin.

Here mark what the apostle calls sleep, and what too rise and wake out of
sleep. Sleep is a stupoure and deadenesse of the mind that restyth, and is a
sleep in yuell and myschyefe, and cares not for the law, nor will of God, but
will follow religyon of will, fantasies, hidolatrye, superstityon, ignorance
and all ungodly conversation, with out all fear, feelynge, or remorse of
gods displeasure. In this sleep restyth al Idolaters, obstinate, dronckin,
Covetous, envious, seditious, traiterous, adulterous, sclau^derous, proud, and
negligente persons, y^ feel not nor repent not, though they be sonk down eue^
to ye bottom and very dregs of these yuels. From this sleep ye gospel of
Christ prouokith, excitatith and stirrith, if obstinacy have not indurid and
made hard our hearts. And would have us to correct and amend our self and
idolatrical iud geme^t in religion from our wills honesty and obedience, and
to a new life, that we might be new creatures in the lord, and to be ready to
al service and obedience, both of god and his word, that we might have a true
old and patriarchall, prophetical, and apostolical faith, like fear, like
love, like obedyence of the magistrates, and like charity, toward all men.
For all they that walk not in these virtues sleep yet in their sins, and
nener felt yet the light of the gospel, whoose meruaylouse nature and
condytion: Saint Paul shows in the words that follow.

The text.
For now is our salvation, nerer the^ when we believed

As though he had sa^ed of congruence and decentnes, it is mete that we should
now live honestly and godly in all love and obedyence, for our salvation is now
nerer unto us by the preaching of the gospel, which sauyth us by Christ, the^
it was before time by preaching of the law or philosophy, when we thought to
be saved by the ceremonies and works of them. Of this text of Saint Paul, we
se what is the nature and condition of all men that then they must trust and
hope whiles they be in a false religion, so did the Jews seek to Roma, 10.
be saved, and required justice of the law. So did the Pharisees and exalte
them selfs above Christ and his Apostles. Therefore, S. Paul says here, then
when we believed, to say by the works of ye law and the doctrine of men, we
should be saved. But this faith was an error and lie for we know our salvation
to be by the preaching of the gospel.

The second, we learn of these words is, y^ only y^ gospel shows and
opens unto us our salvation, and does not deceive us, and Luke. 14. Roma. 1.
therefore it is called y^ power of god, to al y^ believe. Let us therefore
embrace and receive this only gospel obediently and thankfully, which y^ lord
willed his apostles to teache unto al y^ world, and wylled y^ their successors
should do y^ same, as they do never almost, y^ more pity. S Paul tarieth, and
goes forth with his metaphore and figure, saying.

The text.
The night is passed, and the day is come nygh.

The night is called y^ time of false doctrine and ignorancye, in which men
live naughtely un punysshed, whereas the true light, Christ and his word is
not preached, there the greatest virtue is accounted vice, and vice accounted
for virtue, and sins rebuked, are excused and extenuatyd. So is all true
judgment taken from the world, for in the m^hte no man can judge colors. In
papystry ye se matrymonye judged to be ^ncest, the use of gods creatures
flesh and such like, to be heresye. Again, manifest Ido latry taken for the
honourynge of God: Monkerye for perfyte life: Whore dome, for mockery, and ^ot
worthy a half penye pardon. etc. The day that Saint Paul speaks here of,
is the time wherein the Gospel of Christ opened to ye world, the which
brings not only true doctrine, but also life ever lasting. For Christ is
the light of the world. If then Christ the very son and bryghtenes of God,
has illumynated us, we must, says Saint Paul, dilligent lie walk in him, and
live an honest and virtuous life, as he exhorts earnestly in the words that
follow.

The text.
Let us therefore cast away the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the
armoure of light, as men walkyng honestlye in the day light: not in eating and
drynckynge, neither in chamberynge and wan tonnes, neither instryffe and
enuyenge.(...)


