THE SOVLES PREPARATION FOR CHRIST.

OR, A TREATISE OF CONTRITION.

Wherein is discovered How God breaks the heart and wounds the Soul, in the
conversion of a Sinner to Himself.

PSALM. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: A broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT DAVVLMAN, at the sign of the Brazen-serpent in
Paul's Churchyard* 1632.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
A
ALl-sufficiencie in God a means to enlighten our dead hope. 214. Application
of particular sins a way to make us see them 64. How the word affects, when
applied. 65. then hitting soonest. 65. sinking deepest. 67. for this it is,
ministers are so hated. 68.
B
Bondage, the spirit of bondage how it helps to the sight of sin 124. Broken
heart is made by meditation of the word preached. and.
C
Carnal men can give no comfort to wounded consciences 220. and 240. Christ,
three grounds why the soul flies not to Christ* 118. Labor to see the
necessity of Christ 122. sight of sin a means to drive us to Christ. 117.
Common depravation of our nature no plea for us to slight sin. 40. Confession
of sin needful for the cure thereof. 57. It must be open and free. 219. a
large confession may come from a wicked man. 221. when hypocritical. 225. the
difference between true and false confession. 227. popish confession what.
230. To hide our sin a fearful and dangerous sin. 235. To what persons,
and how they should be qualified that we must confess unto. 239. Motives. 241.
Companions, when evil, a great hindrance to the working of grace and bow. 95.
Conscience a help to meditation. 123. Consideration of Gods goodness a means
to break our hearts. 101. Contrition what, 2. a contrice heart acceptable 163,
164. this contrition is wrought in all, though not in the same manner and
measure. 170. Conviction of the soul for sin ^ow. 23. why God convinces. 31.
means of conviction. 36. other means to work sound conviction. 200.
D
Death of sin must be in us. 256. Delight in sin damnable. 190, 191, 192.
F
Freeness of Gods promises revives our hope. 215.
G
God is All-sufficient. 6. merciful. 6.210. Gods goodness considered, a
means to break the heart. 101. so also his justice. 103. Gods abundant mercy
a means to revive our hope. 217
H
Heart which fears discovery is evil. 79. It is broken by meditation on the
word preached. 81. so also by consideration of Gods goodness 101. so also of
his justice. 103. what is meant by heart here. 130. when our hearts are like
stones 181. an ignorant heart is a naughty heart. 33. Hatred of sin what. 246.
differences between sorrow for him and hatred of sin. 241. wherein this
hatred consists. 250. Help must be conveied to a wounded soul. 190. Hearing
the word how we may with profit. 76. Hell torments how in some sort to judge of
them. 55. Hiding sin a fearful sin. 80. Hope supports the hearts of the
sorrowful. 205. an antidote against despair. 208. It incourageth our
endeavors. 209. the souls anchor, 112 how it is maintained and fed. 214.
I
Ignorant heart is a naughty heart. 33. Justice of God a means to break the
heart. 10*
K
Kindness of God a means to break the heart. 101. Knowledge of our sin a
means of conviction for it. 377.
L
Law a means to convince us of sin. 38.
M
Meditation of Gods word preached a means to break our hearts 81. what it is
and how to be done 83. it brings the word more powerful to the heart and there
fastens it 88. the lamentable neglect of this duty lamented, c^nsured 93. the
comfort that arises from this duty 98. the ground, the manner, power thereof
100. how to be followed 109. when damped in us, how revived. 122. Mercy: with
what cautions a profane person may seek it. 5. abundant mercy in God, a
means to revive our hope 217. God is merciful 210. Ministers must first
humble before lift up 61. they are much based for special application 6^.
plain preaching is the best way 71. they should be skillful, merciful,
faithful men. 240.
N
Nature, no plea to help us to lessen our sins. 41. Nature of God is tender
and merciful. 210.
O
Opposites to the word, deeply plagued. 127.
P
Pity belongs to wounded and troubled consciences. 183. etc. Popish divices
cannot help a wounded conscience 191. Pricking or piercing the heart, wherein
it consists. 129. Promise of God being free life's up the head and revives hope
215.
R
Repentance not in our own power. 52. Reprehension (...) sharp, a means to
move us to see our sins 64.
S
Shifts a sinner uses to beat back the power of the word 40 Sin must be
truly seen before the heart is broken 11. what this sight of sin is 12. the
properties thereof 14 the evil of sin is far greater then the evil of
punishment: reason thereof 15. It is a departing from God. 19. why men cannot
see the vileness of their sin 20. how to see them convictingly 36 grounds
why we slight our sins 40. particular sins closely applied, a means to see
them 64. sight of sin a means to drive us to Christ 117. sin wounds the
soul why. 158. when we make sin our God 174. all are not alike wounded for
sin. 178. A truly sorrowful soul has a restless distaste of sin. 245.
Sinners in an high degree may be reconciled. 4* All sinners are fighters
against God 18. open and scandalous sinners commonly have a greater measure of
sorrow 179. Soul how prepared for Christ 247. when it is said truly to be
broken 255. Sorrow if godly, it is a deep sorrow 134. how wrought 135. how
procured 142. how the soul should behave it self under this sorrow 150. It is
restless till it have obtained mercy 155. It drives unto God 157. this makes
us highly to prize Christ 164. whether sorrow for sin is a work of saving
grace 165. how sorrow of preparation is known and how sorrow of sanctification
167. whether this sorrow is wrought alike in all 170. not in the same manner
177. when sorrow is made a mask to cover sin 193. It must not be slight but
solid 198. the fruits thereof 203. Spirit of bondage how it helps to see sin
1^4.
T
Thoughts that are sinful how produced 44. how and in what respects sin in
thought is more vile 44.
W
Word must be submitted unto 39^ and never shifted off 40. the threats must not
be shifed off 48. when closely applied it much affects 64, 65. the word preached
must be meditated on, 81. the opposers of the word in great danger 127.
Worthiness in our selves none to move Christ to pity us. 119. Wrath of God is
an insupportable burden. 56.
Places of Scripture enlightened.
Cap. ver. page Deuteronomy. 1.14.51 32.6.102 Joshua 7.24.211 1 Ki. 20.21.64 2 Cr.
36.16.127 Judge. 1.12.101 Job 5. last. 85 6.12.^6 7.20.30 13.27.25 14.17.22
19.23.184 22.13.48 36.6.126 9.12 10. ib. 40.3.39 Ps. 39.24.255 38.2.2 Ps.
58.8.77 74.4.2 79.26.187 83.2.18. 103.3.6 119.36.13 59.83 Pro. 8.19.24 Esaias
5.19.49 7.18.5 17.11.29 Ier. 4.3.162 15.42 8.6.12 31.29.12 Lam. 3.19.82 20. ib.
Eze. 16.16.223 30.31.244 Ezekiel. 36.31.11 Dan. 12.4.83 Hos. 2.2.65 15.211 3.3.175
Zac. 11.10.13 Mal. 3.45.22 Mat. 7. last 62 12.37^ 43 21.45.66 27.4.240 46.57
Luke 3.11.64 12. ib. 19.10.58 23.40.222 29.42.36 Ioh. 6.44.171 Acts 3.17.38
Acts 4.22.69 5.3.235 16.30.180 To. 7.7.38 8.15.138 2. Co. 3.2.62 Ephesians. 3.19.215
20. ib. 1. Th 5.8.213 2. Ti. 1.17.138 3.14.84 4.1.72 Tit. 1.13.72 Heb. 6.19.212
2. Pet. 2.8.82 Re. 22.17.173
CHristian Reader, thou have here some sermons brought to light, which by
reason of the Authors absence, are presented to thy view, both with some lesser
escapes, and in more homely terms, then his judicious eye would have suffered.
The principal faults I have here corrected: those which are smaller may in the
reading be easily discerned.

Page 30. for many read may. p. 51. f. the r. they: p. 63. f. sorces forces. p.
78. f. careless carelessenesse p. 89 f. slave salve. and line 32. insert is*
p. 94. ^. cup. p. 98. f. wherefore whereof. p. 173. f. brad bad. p. 142. and so
in other places for happily perhaps. p. 149. f. it him. p. 67. f. fece fence.
p. 275. f. pulked plucked* p. 56. blot out, not, p. 119. blot out this and that
p. 143. blot otu, the. p. 149. blot out and so forth. p. 153. blot out for it
is so in the second place. p. 155. blot out which p. 160. blot out how I
dispute. p. 141. blot out in the second place p. 112. l. 11. blot out those
evils and.

THE SOVLES PREPARATION FOR CHRIST.
ACTS 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and
said to Peter and the other Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do to
be saved?


IN this great work of preparation for Christ, Observe two things. First, the
dispensation of the work of Grace on Gods part, he pulls a sinner from sin
to himself; and Secondly, the frame and temper of spirit that God works in
the hearts of those, that he does draw: and that makes its self known in two
particulars; partly in Contrition, partly in humiliation; For our better
proceeding in the prosecution of these two maine points, I shall handle them
severally, and at large. And first we will sift out what this Contrition and
humiliation is, that we may not deceive our selves, and think we have them,
when it is nothing so.

What contrition is.
This Contrition (as I conceive) is nothing else, but namely when a sinner by
the sight of sin, and vileness of it, and the punishment due to the same, is
made sensible of sin, and is made to hate it, and has his heart separated
from the same; and the sight of sin makes it self known in three particulars:
Prophet says: Psalm. 74.4.
Thou hold my eyes waking, I am so troubled that I cannot speak, the Lord
holds sin to a carnal sinful wretch, so that his sin walks, and
sleeps, and goes with him; nay the soul of a poor sinner would beat back
the blow, and would not have the word to touch him, he labors to shift off the
arrows of the Almighty, which the Lord shoots into the soul; but the Lord
will not suffer him so to do; Thy arrows stick fast in me* and thy hand
presses me sore. Psalm. 38.2.
Psalm. 38.2. As if the Prophet had said, I would feign have beat back thine
arrows, but they stick fast in me; and I would have shaken off the burden,
that lay upon me, but thine hand presses me sore, so then at last, when the
sinner sees, he cannot shake off the arrows, then he is content to be
separate from his corruptions.

This is in general in the text, wherein you shall plainly see these three
particulars fully expressed.

Peter's words, and it was not by the bare hearing of his words only, but when
Peter came somewhat roundly home to them, and said; This is Christ Jesus whom
ye have crucified, then follows the former work, namely, the acknowledgement
of their sins, and the first cause that made them see their sin, was a
particular application of their sins, he came punctually and particularly to
them, and said, you are they that have crucified the Lord Christ, this touched
them and made them see their sins.

hearing, that is, daily pondering and considering of the evils, that were
committed by them and showed to them.

they were pricked, they did not prick themselves, but the Lord followed that
truth that was delivered, and by his Almighty hand did make that word
prosperous to their souls; and though they would not pierce themselves, yet
the Lord pierced them.

The second part of it is in these words, They were pricked in their hearts,
not in their hands or eyes, but in their hearts.

The third part is the separation from sin in these words, Men and brethren,
what shall we do? Whatsoever you would have us to do, we will do it, and
whatsoever sin is forbidden, we are content to be rid of it; nay, nothing
was too hard, or too much for them.

Give me leave to take a doctrine by the way from the words; they when they
heard this, who were these ( they?) see this in the 36. verse, them that had
crucified the Lord of life.

What will some say, is it possible that ever they should be so pierced from
their sins? it was said of Judas that betrayed Christ, it had been good for
that man that he had not been borne, What shall we think of those that
murder Christ. If Judas was damned for betraying of Christ? then much more
they for killing of him. Is it possible the Lord should do good unto them,
yes, even they came to be pricked in their hearts.

Doctrine
From these words this doctrine arises; It is possible for the most stubborn
sinners upon earth to get a broken heart. They that stoned the Prophets and
killed them that were sent unto them, and slighted all the means of grace,
they that refused Christ, and would not hear him; they are now brought upon
their knees, and are resolved now, if any course might be taken to get Christ
and mercy. Titus. 12.13. one of their own Prophets said, the Cretians are
always liars, evil beasts, and slow bellies: a man would think it a vain
thing to meddle with them, they are such desperate wretches, but the text says,
Reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, so that a Cretian
which is a filthy beast, by a sound reproose, may come to be a glorious Saint:
and whereas the Jews had laden the Lord with their sins; therefore it was
just with God to ease himself of his burden, and so send them and their sins
down to hell together. Thus a man would think; but the Lord did not so, as we
may see in Esaias, I am he, Esaias 45.23.2^.
that blotteth out all thy transgressions, for my own name sake, I will
remember your sins no more, and as the Apostle says, Romans 29.30.
the Gentiles were full of all unrighteousness, worse then they almost could
be for all kind of degrees of sin, and yet many of them became full of all
holiness; Such were some of you (says the Apostle) and in another place we
may see that a Scarlet sinner may become a Saint in nature; Esaias 7. 18.
we know this scarlet is such a deep die, that all the art under heaven cannot
alter it: Yet the Lord can make of a Scarlet sinner, a milk white Saint. I do
not say it will ever be, and it does always come to pass, but it is possible.

The reason is taken from the Lords Almighty goodness and power, Reason,
the Lord is able to supply all wants, and amend that which is amiss, nay, he
is able to do more then that thou stand in need of. When the Lord made
heaven and earth he did not spend all his strength, that he was able ^o help no
more. No, no; he is All-sufficient still, he is not only able to continue that
good, which the creature has, but to make a glorious supply of whatsoever is
wanting, Psalm. 103.3.
as David says, He pardons all thy iniquities, and forgiveth all thy sins:
not some, but all, otherwise he were not All-sufficient, unless he had a salve
for every sore, and a medicine for every malady; if our sins were more then
God could pardon, or if our weaknesses were more able to overthrow us, then
his strength to uphold us, he were not All-sufficient: Indeed there are some
things which the scripture says, God cannot do, but it is not because of the
want of power in God, but because there is a weakness in the creature; As God
cannot deny himself, but the more and greater our sins and wickedness are,
the more will the strength and glory of his power appear in pardoning of them,
and where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more in the pardoning of the
same: Christ is All-sufficient in power to procure mercy for all thy sins,
and the Spirit is all-sufficiently able to apply the satisfaction of Christ to
thy soul, and therefore be thy condition never so fearful, (the sin
against the holy Ghost only excepted) there is power and mercy in the Lord to
pardon thee, and it is possible for thee to find mercy.

Use.
The first use is for reproof, and it checks the desperate discouragement that
harbors in the hearts of many poor sinners, that if they find no power in
themselves, no succor in the means; they do question in this case, and
presently conclude an impossibility to receive mercy, and they think there is
no hope, of pardon, as heretofore they have had no care in sinning; because
they cannot see how it may be, they suppose it cannot be: This brings a great
indignity to the Lord Jesus Christ, and a great discouragement to themselves:
why? the Lord has hardness, and difficulties at command. 2 King^ 2^
When the seige about Jerusalem was mavelous sore, and every man did despair
of any comfort or succor, the Prophet said, before to morrow this time shall a
measure of fine flower be sold for a shekle, and then a Lord on whose hand the
King leaned, said, If the Lord should make windows in heaven, how can this
thing be? and the Prophet said unto him, thou shall see it, but not eat of it,
so it is with many that beg often, and the Lord answers not, so that the
soul is marvellously starved, and the flood of iniquity comes in amain upon
the soul, and all his sins come to his view, and the heart begins to
reason in this manner; If the depths of Gods mercies should be opened, can all
these sins be pardoned? and can this damned soul of mine be saved? Surely this
cannot be. It is just with God we should seek mercy, given to others as bad
as we, and yet we not taste of it, because we distrust the Lord. Cains sin
was so much the greater, because he said it could not be forgiven: so it is a
horrible sin to say, the Lord is not so merciful, as the Devil is
malicious, and that the world, and a sinful heart, (...) able to damn me then
God is to save me; if (...) so, God were no God, and Christ no (...), and the
Spirit no comforter, this is a (...) sin, our selves, and the devil above God
and the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh therefore check all those discouragements of
soul which too much prevail with us.

Use 2.
Secondly, it is a ground of great encouragement to provoke the hearts of all
wicked men under heaven, to look out of that condition wherein they are, for
some mercy; because the most wicked of the world may be wrought upon, and the
most profane heart may be pierced; Who therefore would not have his heart
quickened up, to seek out for recovery from that estate wherein he is. All you
poor creatures, if there be any here present, as I doubt not but there are; Oh
you poor and ungodly sinful creatures, my soul pitties you, you that have
had your hands imbrewed in the blood of Christ, and whose sins are written
with a pen of Iron, and are seen in every corner of the street, you that are
thus in the gall of bitterness, and yet in the kingdom of darkness, though
your case for the present be very desperate, yet here is a little twigge in the
midst of the maine sea, whereupon you may lay hold. And this may make you
look up, the Lord may show mercy unto you, as proud, as stubborn, and
rebellious as you, have had mercy; If you have the hearts of men look for
mercy; though your estate be fearful for the present, yet it may be good: God
has not set the scale of condemnation upon your sins, he has not yet sent
you to hell. Consider this whatsoever thou art, thou yet live upon the earth,
and enjoyest the means, and it is possible yet to have all thy sins
pardoned; oh lay about thee, go home, and say, Good Lord, were they pierced in
their hearts that pierced the Lord Jesus; and were their souls wounded? In
conclusion then, why may not my profane sinful heart be humbled and pierced?
It may be so, if the Lord say, Amen; it will be thus, that disease is not past
remedy that has been cured in others, therefore let this stay thy heart, as
bad as thou have been humbled, and brought home, and therefore why not thou?

But the soul will say, Can all these abominations be removed? and is it
possible all these rebellions of my heart should be pardoned, and all this
loosenes and security should be cast behind the back of the Lord? I say it
cannot be.

It is possible: only labor thou that it may be, and that thou may not be
puffed up with presumption, consider these three Cautions in thy seeking.

3 Cautions.
First, consider in thy seeking, a little mercy will not serve the turn; thou
that have been an old weather-beaten sinner, and have wallowed in thy
filthiness, when thou go to God for grace, consider it is not a little
grace, or a small work, that will do the deed: it is not a few spoonfulls or
buckets-full, that will cleanse a fouleskinne; so if thou have had a filthy,
prophan heart which has been a through-fare to all wickedness, and thou have
thus given thy self liberty thereunto, and have continued therein; there must
be a well of mercy to purge such a miserable wretch as thou art.

Psalm. 51.
When David had committed those two sins of adultery and murder, and had
continued in them long, he was forced to beg for much mercy, and to say, purge
me, wash me, cleanse me. O Lord these stains are marvelous deep, therefore
purge me with hisope; nay he had never done with it, because his sins were
more then ordinary; So, it will cost a great deal of work before a loose
profane drunkard can be made clean.

oh, before it be brought into his right place again; So it is with a man
whose heart is full of filthiness, it will cost him much pains and difficulty
and heart-smart, before the Lord will bring the soul to a right set again.
Manasses humbled himself mightily before the Lord, because he had bin a mighty
proud rebellious man, the Lord made his humiliation as miraculous as his sins
had been, and so David when he had given his sins ease in bedding with them,
the Lord brake all his bones and did awaken him with a witness.



The maine point in hand is this, It is for the first part of contrition for
the sight of sin; This hearing is not barely the sound of a man's words, but
the sense and meaning of the words, by which the mind is enlightened, and he
begins seriously to ponder the nature of his sins, that were so laid open
unto him: thus hearing they came to be pierced.

The first doctrine is this: Doctrine.
There must be a true sight of sin before the soul can be broken; for the
text says, They did first hear and then apprehend the evil that was done by
them; and thus they were brought to a saving remorse for their sins: Ezekiel.
36.31.
Ezekiel: 36.31. the text says, Then shall you remember your own evil ways and
your doings, that were not good, and shall loath your selves for your
abominations. First, they shall remember their works, and then loath
themselves; it is the course that Ephraim takes in Jeremiah, Ierem. 31.29^
After that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; and after I was turned, I
repented, I was ashamed and confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth. And it is Gods Course which he takes with his, Job. ^^
as in Job. When the Lord had once gotten his people into fetters, he showed
them their Wickedness, and makes their ears open to discipline. And in
another place the Prophet showed the ground and reason why the people repented
not, Iere^ (...)
they understood not the ground and reason of their sin, For no man says,
What have I done? As a horse rusheth into the battle and fears nothing, so
a wicked man continues in a sinful course, never considering what he has
done; the drunkard does not say, How have I abused Gods creatures? and the
despiser of Gods ordinances does not say, How have I rejected the Lord Jesus
Christ? And therefore no wonder though he be not affected with that he does.

Now for the better clearing of this doctrine, I will handle these three
things: First, I will show what this true sight of sin is: Secondly, I will
show the reason why there must be a true sight of sin, before the soul can
be broken for it: thirdly, I will make use of the point.

First, it is not every sight of sin will serve the turn, nor every
apprehension of a man's vileness; What the true sight of sin is.
but it must have these two properties in it, First, he must see sin
clearly; Secondly, convictingly. First, he that will see sin clearly, must
see it truly and fully, and be able to fadome the compass of his corruptions
and to dive into the depth of the wretchedness of his vile heart, The property
of i^.
otherwise it will befall a man's sin as it does the wound of a man's body,
when a man looks into the wound overly, and does not search it to the bottom,
it begins to fester and rancle, and so in the end he is slain by it; so it is
with most sinners, we carry all away with this, We are sinners; and such
ordinary confessions; but we never see the depth of the wound of sin, and so
are slain by our sins: it is not a general, slight, and confused sight of
sin that will serve the turn: it is not enough to say, It is my infirmity,
and I cannot amend it: and we are all sinners, and so forth. No, this is the
ground why we mistake our evils, and reform not our ways, because we have a
slight and an overly sight of sin: a man must prove his ways as the
goldsmith does his gold in the fire, a man must search narrowly, and have much
light to see what the vileness of his own heart is, and to see what his
sins are, that do procure the wrath of God against him, as the prophet David
says: Psalm. 119.36. opened.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy testimonies: the phrase in
the original is thus much; I turned my sins upside down; he looked all over
his ways. And as Zachary says: Zach. 11, 10.
When the people shall look unto him whom they have pierced, and consider the
nature of their sins, then shall they mourn: Note, that this clear sight of
sin may appear in two particulars.

I will not hold that man guiltles that blasphemes my name, of what place or
condition so ever he be: Look now on the nature of thy sins nakedly.



Now I will make it good by three reasons that sin is a greater evil then
those torments and plagues which the damned in hell do endure. What a horrible
thing sin is.


The first reason is this, That which deprives a man of the greatest good must
needs be the greatest evil, 1. Reason.
nature says so much, that which deprives a man of all that comfort and
happiness wherein the soul finds most content, that must needs be the
greatest evil of all, but sin only deprives a man of the greatest good: for
the good of the soul is, to have an heart united unto God and to have
fellowship with him, to have him and salvation through him, to be one with the
Lord: this is the chiefest good of the soul: All things here below are made
for the good of the body, and the body is made for the good of the soul, and
the soul is made for God; and these things here below are only so far good
to us, as they are means to make us enjoy a nearer communion with God; and
contrarily, riches, and honors, and profits, and pleasures, are as so many
curses to us, if by them our hearts be withdrawn from God: The reason why God
is estranged from us, it is not because we are poor, or pursued, or
imprisoned, or the like; but it is sin that breaks the union between God and
us, as the prophet Esaias says, Your sins have separated between you and your
God: Esaias 59.^.
Now that which separates from God which is the chiefest good, it is our
sins; it is not punishment, that takes away the mercy of God from us; but a
proud rebellious heart, and the contempt of Gods ordinances; Therefore sin is
far worse then all the plagues that the damned do or can suffer.

Reason 2.
Secondly, because there is nothing so contrary and opposite against the Lord as
sin and corruption, and this is the reason why God is the inflicter of all
the punishments of the damned in hell: it is through the Justice of God that
they are damned, because God is of such a pure nature that sin cannot be in
him, nor practiced by him.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, because it is sin that does procure all plagues and punishments to
the damned, and therefore being the cause why they suffer, it must needs be
greater then all punishments: for all punishments are made miserable by reason
of sin, therefore sin is a greater evil then all the miseries of the damned.
If a man were in prison and had the peace of a good Conscience, his prison
would be a palace unto him, and though a man were in shame and disgrace, and
yet have the favor of God, there were no misery in him, so it is with sin;
if no man suffer but for sin, then sin is a greater evil then all other
punishments, as being the fountain from whence they flow.

Now let us look upon sin through these things, and when our corrupt heart
provokes us, and the world allure us, and the devil tempts us to take any
contentment in a sinful way; suppose we saw hell fire burning before us, and
the pit of hell gaping to swallow us, and sin enticing of us, and let us say
thus to our souls. It is better for a man to be cast into the torments of hell
amongst the damned, then to be overcome with any sin, and so to rebel against
the Lord. Now therefore if those plagues and punishments make the soul shake
in the consideration of them; Oh then bless thy self so much the more from
sin which is the cause all plagues whatsoever; Were a man in hell and wanted
his sins, the Lord would love him in hell, and deliver him from all those
plagues: But if any man were free from all punishments, and in honor, and
wealth, if he were a sinful and wretched creature, the Lord would hate him in
the height of all his prosperity, and throw him down to hell for ever.

Psalm. 83.2.
they are called haters of God, Psam. 83. That is when they see grace in
another man, in such a man, and in such a woman, and hate them for it; little
do they think that they hate the God of heaven and his holy nature; and if it
were possible, they would have no God in heaven, to take notice of their sins,
and call the^ to account for them, as the wise man Gamaliel said to the
Pharesies and elders, refrain your selves from these men, and let them alone,
for if this Counsel or work be of men, it will come to nothing, but if it be
of God, you cannot destroy it, lest you be found fighters against God; you make
nothing of opposing the Gospel, and preaching thereof, I tell you that there
is never a creature that lives in any such sinful course, but he is a fighter
against God, and he resists the Lord as really as one man does another; And as
Stephen says, You stifnecked and uncircumcised in heart, you have resisted
against the holy Ghost: You must not think that you resist men only, no
(poor creatures) you resist the Spirit, and so aim at the Almighty in
opposing of the means of grace; What a fearful condition is this, I pray you
in cold blood consider this, and say thus, Good Lord! What a sinful wretch am
I? that a poor damned wretch of the earth should stand in defia^ce against the
God of hosts, and that I should submit my self to the devil, and oppose the
Lord of hosts.

And as you resist the Lord, so you do also pass the sentence of condemnation
upon your selves, and seal up that doom which one day shall be executed upon
the wicked in hell at that great day of account; that look what God shall do
the^, the same thou do now by sinning; this is the doom, or (as I may say)
the neck verse of the wicked and the last blow; as now thou do depart from
God by sinning, so then thou shall depart from God for ever. A wicked man
forsakes God, and pluckes his heart from under the wisdom of God that should
inform him in the way of life; and the soul says, God shall not bless me,
God shall not be God unto me; but I will live as I list, and I will run down
post have to hell, and when our hearts begin to rise against God and his
ordinances, and your souls begin to go against the Lord, I tell you what I
would think with my self; suppose I heard the voice of the Archangell crying;
Arise ye dead and come to Judgment; and the last trumpet sounding, and the
Lord Jesus coming in the heavens with his glorious Angels and did see the
Goats standing ^^ the left hand, and the Saints on the right hand, and with
that I did hear the terrible sound, Depart ye cursed: would you be content to
hear that sentence pass against your souls? Oh what lamentation and woe your
poor souls would make in those days, and therefore consider it well, and say
that I do that in sinning which the Lord will do in the day of Judgment;
shall I depart from the Lord and withdraw my self from mercy, and say Christ
shall not rule over me and save me? shall I do that against my self which the
Lord shall do in that day? God forbid. There are two things hardly known;
what God is, and what our sins are, or else we hardly apply the knowledge of
them to our selves?



Why men see not the vileness of sin.
though it be so vile, it is mainely upon these two grounds.

Judas saw the money, but he did not see the malice of his own heart, nor the
want of love to his Master, and this made him take up that course which he did,
but when he threw away his thirty pence, the Lord made him see the vileness
of his sin; it came clearly to his sight, and therefore he cried out: I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood. As bribes blind the eyes of the wise and
pervert judgment, so sin bribes the eyes of the soul, and therefore the
Tradseman sees much profit come by cozening and false measures, and so gives
way to himself therein, but he sees not the sin; so the oppressor sees the
morgages, and pawnes that come in, but he cannot see his sin, till he be laid
on his death bed, and then the Lord shows him all the wrong that he has done.

all things continue a like, (says the wicked man) as if he had said, you
talk of the wrath of God that shall be revealed from heaven against all
ungodlines, and where is the promise of his coming? do you not see that such
a man is an oppressor, and a profane person? yet grows rich and thrives in
the world; and because God spares a wicked man still for the present, therefore
he thinks all are but words, he shall be free from the punishment to come (as
the Prophet says in the name of the Lord) These things have thou done and I
kept silence, Psalm. 50.2.
when thou wast upon thy Ale-bench, and there thou did speak against
holiness and purity, and because I did bear yet, and say nothing, therefore
thou speak wickedly that I was even such a one as thy self; The wicked man
takes Gods patience to be a kind of allowance to him in his sin, (as the
wise man says) because sentence against an evil work is not speedily
executed, Eccles. 8.11.
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are wholly set in them to do
mischief, and as the Prophet says, they call the proud happy, Mat. 3.45.
ye that work wickedness are set to do evil, and they that tempt God are
delivered. As who should say, you say that the wrath of God is incensed against
swearers, and drunkards, and the like; but we see them prosper, and because
they do prosper thus, their hearts are set to work wickedness, but howsoever,
it is true the Lord does sometime bear with wicked men; the longer God stays,
the greater account they shall make, and the heavier judgments they shall
receive from God; See what Job says, thou sealest up my transgressions in a
bag, Job. 14.17.
and thou sowest up mine iniquities; Wicked men do treasure up vengeance
against the day of the Lord, the profane person treasures up wrath, and in the
eighteenth verse he says: The mountains falling come to nothing: as if he had
said, good Lord, who can bear all those sins, that I have committed? Are
they all sealed up, and shall all the judgments due unto them fall upon me
heavier then the mountains? Good Lord, what rock or mountain can bear the
weight of my sins thus sealed up and settled, and laid close to my heart. And
so God seals up an hundred thousand oaths in one bag, and an ocean of pride
and mischiefs done to Gods people and Church are barrelled up, in another: and
the Lord shall one day lay all these upon thy neck; Who is able to bear all
these sins?

Now it falls out with a sinner as it is with a banckrout debtor, one man
throws him into prison, and when he is there, every one comes against him, and
so he shall never come out, but die and rotte in the prison, so though the Lord
will not execute judgment on thee speedily, yet in the end the Lord will be
paid for all thy sins; and when thou art in hell, then mercy, and justice, and
patience will cry all to heaven for justice and vengeance; then happily a
drunkard is cast into prison for his drunkenness, and for his blasphemy, and
then all his filthiness comes in as so many bills of indictment against him:
Oh therefore labor to see sin alive: we play with sin as if it were dead:
when children see the picture of a dead lion upon a wall, they labor to pull
him in pieces, but if there were a live lion in the place, it would make the
strongest to run. So thou paintest thy sin, and say it is thy infirmity,
and God forgive your swearing, and the like; and thus you dally with your
sins: but brethren, labor to see sin alive, and to see sin roaring upon
you, see the pawe of sin and the condemnation that shall be thrown upon the
soul by it, and this will awake the soul in the apprehension of it.

Secondly, How to see our sins convictingly.
we must see sin convictingly, that it may be so to us as it is in it self;
that look what sin is in it self, we may so conceive of it in our souls
being guilty of it, and this discovers it self in these two particulars.

First, when we have a particular apprehension in our own person, that look
what we confess to be in sin in general, we confess the same in our own
souls; and that our sins are as bad as the sins of any: this is the cursed
distemper of our hearts, howsoever we hold it to be truth in general, yet when
we come to our own sins, the case is altered, and we never come to the right
seeing of them as they concern our own particular. As the adulterer can
easily confess the danger and filthynesse of that sin in others, but he
thinks not his sin to be so vile; as the Wise man says, He that enters into
the house of an harlot, Pro. 2.19.
does he ever return again, does he ever take hold of the path of life? The
Lord is pleased to set such a heavy stamp on this sinful distemperature. These
are truths, and a man in his cold blood will easily confess it in the general,
that he never returns again. Take the words as they are in the letter of
them, and howsoever they have some other interpretations, yet in the letter it
is thus read, he is ever hardly recovered. Howsoever it may be, yet with much
difficulty. David had let his soul loose in that, and he did hardly recover
himself again, scarce one of a thousand yet ever took hold of the way of
life. And the drunkard will confess the danger of his sin in general, when
he sees his drunken mates lie grovelling in the dust, he will be ashamed of it,
and say, Now no adulterer or drunkard shall ever come into the kingdom of
heaven; but here is the wound of it, when he comes to his own particular
drunkenness and uncleanness, that he must look into them, then the sight of
a man's knowledge has not so much power as to judge himself rightly; or to
make a particular application to himself; but he thinks his adultery and
drunkenness is not like to another man's, or else his knowledge is but weak,
or else he sees as a man in the twylight, when the sun is down and the
heavens begin to withdraw their light, though a man can see to read abroad, yet
he cannot see to read in the house, or in the chamber; So it is with a weak
knowledge and with a feeble understanding in a wicked man, he is notable to see
the vile nature of sin in himself, when he comes to read his own closet
sins, and his bosom abominations, then he has not so much light as to
perceive them so fully in himself as he thought to do; therefore the rule is
this; Arest thy soul in a special manner of those sins whereof thou stand
guilty; that phrase in Job is to good purpose, Job 13.27.
thou look narrowly to my paths thou set a print upon the heels of my
feet, so God followed Job to the hard heels, and did narrowly observe his
ways; so deal thou with thy own soul, and set a print upon the heel of thy
heart, arest thy heart in particular for thy sins, and I would have you
perceive your own particular sins and follow them to your hearts, and make
huy and cry after your sins, and dragge your hearts before the Lord, and say,
Is murder, pride, drunkenness, and uncleanness, such horrible sins, and
does God thus fearfully plague them? Lord, it was my heart that was proud and
vain, it was my tongue that did speak filthily and blasphemously, my hand
has wrought wickedness, my eye was wanton, and my heart was unclean and
filthy, Lord here they are, it is my affections that are disorderly, and it is
I that do delight too much in the world; Thus bring thy heart before the Lord;
you shall observe the same in David, so long, as Nathan spoke of sin in
general, he conceived of it truly, and confessed the vileness of it, and the
heart of this good King did rage against the man, saying, It is the Son of
death: but as soon as the prophet had said, Thou art the man, though he never
saw his sin kindly before, yet now his heart yielded, and he began to see
himself and his sin in the natural colors of it. So the Apostle John
says; He that hates his brother is a manslayer, and you know no manslayer
has eternal life abiding in him.

Then play thou the part of Nathan, and say, I am the man; it is this wretched
heart of mine that has hated the Saints of God, and therefore if I be a
murderer, will not my sin keep me from the kingdom of heaven as well as
another man's? Yes that it will, if pride and stubbornnes be such vile sins in
others, then they are so in me, and as there must be a sight of our personal
particular sins; so,

Secondly, the soul must be set down with the audience of truth, and the
conscience of a sinner should be so convicted as to yield and give way to that
which is known, as not seeking any shift or way to oppose that truth which is
revealed, his particular apprehension of sin is like the indictment of a sinner
before God, and his conviction is that which brings the soul to such a pass,
that the heart will not, nay it dares not, nay (which is more) it cannot escape
from the truth revealed: As when a man is only arested and no more, he may
escape, therefore it is not enough particularly to arest the soul, and bring
it under command that it cannot shift from the truth revealed: When the Lord
comes to make rackes in the hearts of such as he means to do good unto, the
text says, he will reprove the world of sin, that is, he will convince the
world of wickedness, he will set the soul in such a stand, that it shall have
nothing to say for it self, he cannot shift it off; for there is in every man's
heart naturally such corrupt carnal pleading, that it labors to defeat, and
put by the work of the word, that it may not come home to the heart. As a man
in battle array labors to put by the blow that it may not hit his body, so
it is with a corrupt heart when the word comes home to the soul, as it does
sometimes into the heart of a drunkard, or an adulterer, or a murderer, and
the word of God seems to stabbe the heart, they put by the word of God by
carnal shifts, and so break the power of it that it cannot have its full blow
upon the soul, and so the word takes no place to any purpose in them.

Now this kind of knowledge takes away all shifts, that the soul has nothing
to say for it self, and pluckes away all defense, that the edge of the word
cannot be blunted, but that it will fall flat on the heart, this is that I
would put to your consideration punctually; When there is that wisdom and
knowledge revealed to the soul so powerfully, that it prevails with the
heart, and it gives way thereto, so that all the replies and pleas of the soul
be taken away, and the soul falls under the stroke of the word, not
quarrelling, but yielding it self, that the word may work upon it, and
withal there is a restless amasement put into the heart of the creature, and
a kind of dazeling the eye, so that the soul is not content now before it see
the worst of his sin that is revealed, and then it lies under the power of
that truth which is made known, these two make it plain; The minister says,
God hates such and such a sinner; and the Lord hates me too, says the soul,
for I am guilty of that sin. Many times when a sinner comes into the
congregation, and attends unto the ordinary means of salvation, if now the
Lord be pleased to work mightily, at last the mind is enlightened, and the
Minister meets with his corruptions, as though he were in his bosom, and he
answers all his cavills, and takes away all his objections; With that the
soul begins to be amassed to think that God should meet with him in this
manner, and says, If this be so, as it is for ought I know, and if all be true
that the Minister says, then the Lord be merciful unto my soul, I am the
most miserable sinner that ever was borne.

Give me leave to open a passage or two this way; Suppose there be an ignorant
creature, that knows nothing, and he thinks God will pardon him because he
is so, and he need not consider of this or that which the minister calls upon
him for: see what God says to such, Esaias 17.11.
in Esaias. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made him will
not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor: You
think to carry all away with ignorance, but the God of heaven will show you no
pity, and he that made you will not save you; When a poor soul begins to
consider of this, he that made us, will save us, Will he not? no, he will not;
Not one of you, not your wife, nor children, nor thy servant; this drives the
soul into amazement, when the Lord works this truth in him, and he frequents
the ordinances more diligently, and says, if it be so, my case is fearful;
In conclusion he finds every minister says so, and all writings confirm it,
and he sees it is so indeed; and it is the will and way of God: Then the soul
is cast, and says, I see this is just my estate and condition and therefore
woe to me that ever I was borne. This is right conviction, and though his
carnal neighbors come to him, and begin to cheer him up, and say, The Lord
is more merciful then men are, ministers must say something, etc. If the heart
be truly convicted, it returns this answer, and says; I have thought as you
do, but now I see there is no such matter, these are but figtree-leaves, and
will not cover my nakedness; It is true, Christ came to save sinners, and he
came to humble sinners too, he came to bind up the heart, and he came to break
the heart too. This is a great part of the spirit of bondage spoken of Romans
8.15. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again. When God
has revealed a man's bondage to him: So that sees he himself bound hand and
foot, for (mark it) so long as a man keeps in these carnal shifts, he is not
in bondage; But when he is once in bondage and fetterd; he says, If ever any
had a proud heart, I am he, If ever any were profane, I am he; And if ever God
hated such wretches, he hates me. Now there is no escape, there is no plea at
all, he will not go away and say, there is no such matter, Ministers many say
what they will. No, no, the soul that is truly convicted of sin yields it
self, Job. 7.20.
and says I have sinned; Oh what shall I do unto thee thou preserver of men?
says Job, as if he had said, Lord, I have no plea at all to make, nor no
argument to allege, for myself, I only yield up the bucklers, I cannot say
so bad of my self as I am, I have sinned Lord, what shall I do unto thee Oh
thou preserver of men? thus it is with a heart truly convicted and thoroughly
informed of the vileness of sin, he does not withdraw himself and play
least in sight, but he says, this is my condition just; the Lord met with my
heart this day; God resists the proud and profane in heart, and he resists me
too; I have heard much, and would not be informed, therefore it is just with
God to harden my heart for ever; the Lord has come often with many loving
persuasions to allure me, and draw me to him: If the devil had had the means
that I have had, he would have been moved and more bettered by the^ then I have
been, and have done more then I have done, I have hated and despised all, and
to this day I have not been brought upon my knees; shall not Christ rule over
me, and yet save me? No it cannot be, except I can bring my neck under the
yoke of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is not possible I should be ^aved by him, I
excuse not my self Lord; nay, I confess I know more then all the men in the
world can speak by me, and I yeed to all this and more; what shall I say, I
have sinned? O thou preserver of men.

The reason why, Reason.
and how it comes to pass, that God deals thus with poor sinners, is taken
from the office which the Lord has placed between the heart and the man, the
ground lies thus.

There are two things in the soul; Why God convinces men of their sins.
First, you conceive and understand a thing. Secondly, you will, and choose it.

repent not: As it was with Job, when his Oxen and Cattle were taken, it never
troubled him, because he never knew it, but when he heard of it by the
messengers, he said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb.

There must be a messenger before he can be grieved for the evil; So it is
with the soul of a sinful creature, the Devil has made a prey and a spoil
of him; thou came into the world in Adam, wise, holy, and gracious; but he
has made thee unholy and ignorant, and thou considerest not this till God by
his Ministers opens thy eyes, and makes thee see plainly, that the Image of
sin and Satan is upon thee, and that God is now become thy enemy, and that
now thou go on in the way to destruction, and art become the heir apparent
of hell; And when these evill-tydings come to the understanding, that leaves
them upon the heart and will of a man, and so lets it work effectually upon it
as God does bless the same; as Paul says, I know that through ignorance they
did it, Acts. 3.17.
if they had known the Lord of life they would never have crucified him.

This is the cause why we commit sin, because we see it not, and therefore we
sorrow not for it; As it is with some hot Clymates in the world, though there
be never so much heat in the sun, yet if there be no entrance for the heat
into the house, it will not scorch nor heat any, so the understanding is like
the door or entrance into the house, and sin is of a fiery and scorching
nature, if there be no passage, and if the mind know not, and if the will
affect not sin, it will never scorch his conscience; though a man carry sin
enough in his bosom to sink his soul for ever, yet we suffer it not to
work upon us, and we attend not to it, because the brazen wall keeps it off:
(as the proverb is) that the eye never sees, the heart never rues. Because we
see not our evils, and discern not our sins so clearly as we should,
therefore it is impossible we should be touched for them as we ought to be.

The first use is for instruction; Use 1.
from the former truth delivered we may learn that an ignorant heart is a
naughty heart, and a miserable wretched heart, whether it be out of ignorance
that cannot, or out of wilfulness that men will not apprehend their
conditions, both are marvelous sinful and miserable; I desire to deal plainly
in this point, because I know there are many that do flatter themselves in
their conditions, and think all is well with them; I will say nothing of the
cause, but I appeal to the hearts of all that hear me this day, and your
selves shall be judges in these particulars; Imagine you did see a poor sinner
come before you, and lay open his condition and bewail it with bitterness,
saying, that for his own part he never did find his heart touched for his
sins, nor sorrow for his corruptions did ever enter into his soul, but he
has lived senseless and careless; and for this wounding of spirit he counted
it a wonder; for this humblenes of heart it was ever a ridle unto him: let any
one pass sentence upon this man now and tell me seriously what do you think
of such a person: I hear (me thinks) every man reason thus, (and every man's
heart shakes at it) and says, Good Lord, what a senseless poor ignorant
creature is this? If no humbling for sin, no pardoning for sin, and no
share in Christ, no salvation? What, is this a good heart that is not in the
way to receive any good? If a man be never broken for sin, God will never
bind him up, and if never humbled, and burdened for his sin, God will never
ease him of it.

Therefore woe to that soul that is thus miserable and accursed. I beseech you
pass this sentence against your selves, Oh brethren, the hearts of men are
past this brokennesse of spirit, nay, they are enemies to it, they never had
their judgments cleared and convicted of their sins, and therefore their
hearts were never broken, and this brokennesse is so far from their heart as
it never came into the head; we think not of the foul nature of sin: Do
thou think this to be a good heart that was never humbled and prepared for
Christ? alas, it is so far from being truly wrought upon, that it was never
in any way to partake of mercy from God; therefore thy condition is mavelous
miserable; thy misery is as great as thy sin, if not greater, because when a
sinful creature is wounded and gauled for his sin, there is some hope he may
be cured and helped, but an ignorant soul is not capable of it, he is in hell
and sees it not; he is under the power of Satan and thinks himself at
liberty, nay for the present, he is incapable of any good from the means
appointed to that end.

It is with an ignorant soul as it befell the drunkard that was asleep on the
top of the mast who fears no harm, because he sees it not. So it is with a
sinful heart, he is resolved to go on still in his sin, because he sees
not the danger; take a man that has his heart stabbed with a stilletto and the
wound is so narrow that it cannot be searched, there is no means to come to
it; Just so it is with a blind ignorant heart, there is much means whereby
good might be done to it, but an ignorant heart bars all out, so that nothing
can do good to the soul. All counsels, admonitions, reproves cannot
prevail, all mercies allure not, because they find no sweetness in them; a
Minister is as able to teach the stool whereon he sits as to do them good. Me
thinks it is with a world of men that live in the bosom of the Church, as it
is with such as have suffered shipwreck, they are cast upon the waves, and
their friends are standing upon the shore, and see them, and mourn for them,
there they see one sinking, and another floating upon the waves even laboring
for his life; and they sigh and mourn, but cannot help him; Just so it is
with ignorant people that are swallowed up with the floods of iniquity, here
is one man going, and there another in the broad way to destruction, and we
pity them, and pray for them, that God would open their eyes, and give them
the sight of their sins: but alas, they are not able to conceive of any
thing. We cannot come at them, and thus they sink in their sins.

Our Savior looking over Jerusalem said, Luke 29.42.
Oh that thou had known at least in this thy day the things that belong unto
thy peace, but now they are hidden from thine eyes. As if he had said, oh now
they are sinking, they will not be reformed nor reclaimed, now they are going
the way of all flesh, and to hell too, the way of peace is hidden from their
eyes, they refuse the means that may do them good; I might here condemn the
Papists that say ignorance is the mother of devotion, whereas it is the breeder
of all wickedness, and the broad way to hell and everlasting destruction.

The use is this; as you desire the comfort of your souls, V^e
and to be prepared for mercy and to partake of that rich grace that is in
Christ; as you desire to have the rich promises of the Gospel put over to you,
as ever you would have the Lord Jesus Christ a guest to your souls, you are to
be entreated to give your souls no content til you have your eyes so ope^ed to
see your sins that you may be convicted of them.

Questi^^
Now it may be some will say, it is good that you say, but what means must we
use to come to this sight of sin? Means how to see sin convictingly.


Secondly, I will take away all the lets that may hinder a man from it;

Thirdly, I will use some motives to stir us up to use the means, and set
upon the service, though it be somewhat harsh and tedious to our Corruptions.
The means are three.

Laodicea thought none like her self, as it is the fashion of many in this age
so to do; and therefore the Lord said, thou thoughtst thy self rich and full,
and that thou did want nothing; It is an argument of a proud sinful heart
that he is always well conceited of himself and of his own wit, grace, and
sufficiency, but mark what the Lord says to this Church, I counsel thee, to
buy of me eye salve: She thought all her compters to be good gold, and all her
appearances to be good Religion, but the Lord bids her buy of him eye salve; As
if he had said, you see not your sins, and therefore go to God, and beseech
him that dwells in endless light, to let in some light into your souls.

When the poor blind man Bartimeus sat begging by the way, Mark 10.15.
saying, O thou son of David have mercy upon me, and pressed earnestly on our
Savior, in so much that when his disciples rebuked him, he cried so much the
more, O thou son of David have mercy on me, and when Christ said, what
would thou have me to do for thee, he answered, Lord, that I may receive my
sight. If he did so earnestly seek for his bodily eyes, much more should we
for the eyes of our souls, that we may see our sins; A blind mind brings a
wicked heart with it, and lays a man open to all sins; and therefore we
ought to be more pinched for the want of this sight, honor, riches, or the
like?

Means
Paul thought himself once alive without the Law, and who but he in the world?
he was able to carry all before him, he thought his penny good silver, but when
the Law came (says the text) then sin revived; Romans 7.
when God had opened my eyes to see my sin and the corruptions of my heart,
then I saw my self a dead man, yet Paul was a Pharisie, and brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel, and one that did keep the Law of God in a strict manner.
Whence we learn, that a man may be an ignorant man, be his parts never so great
for humane learning; Romans 7.7.
and the ^ame Apostle says, I had not known lust, except the law of God had
said, thou shall not lust, by which is meant the tenth commandment, which
forbids the secret distemper of the heart, though there is no delight and
consent to it; who but Paul? and yet he knew it not, and therefore no wonder
though many otherwise well learned are ignorant in Gods Law, therefore look
your selves in this glass of the word; all you that say how ever you are not
able to talk so freely as others, yet you have as good a heart to God as the
best, I tell you if you could but see the filthiness of your hearts, you would
be out of love with your selves for ever.

An ignorant heart cannot but be a naughty heart.

Thirdly, Mean. 3.
bind your hearts to the peace and good behavior, and be willingly content to
take every truth that is revealed, without quarrelling; and I would have a man
to bind his heart, hand, and foot, that they may not dare to have any brabling
against the revealed will of God; that so what ever truth is delivered, though
never so cross and contrary to our corrupt nature, the soul may be willing to
be under the blow of it, and let the strength of the word come full upon the
heart; And this will make us feelingly to understand our conditions: as in Job,
when God had taken down his proud heart, see how he submits himself, Job.
40.3.
Behold, I am vile, what shall I say? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, I have
sinned; but I will go n^ further; as though he had reasoned thus with himself,
I have (I confess) pleaded too much for my self, I have made more shift for
my self the^ was needful, I have gainsaid thy word, but now no more. Now if
any man seem to quarrel and take up arms against the truth of God, let that
man know he was never truly humbled for his sins: It is a sinful rebellious
spirit that carries it self thus against God and his word; the shifts whereby
the soul labors to beat back the power of the word may be reduced to these
three heads.

First, the soul has a slight apprehension of sin, 1. Shift. How the ^oule
labou^s to beat back the power of the word.
and thinks that it is not so heinous, and so dangerous, as those hot
spirited ministers bear men in hand; this is usually the common conceit of all
men naturally, and even of us all, more or less, to make a slight account of
sin, and that for these four respects.

Why men make slight account of sin.
we slight it; what says one; Good now, what then, are not all sinners, as
well as we? though we have many faylings, yet we have many fellows.

If we were drunkards, or whoremongers, then it were somewhat? Thou say true
indeed, thou have many fellows in thy sins, and thou shall have share with
many fellows in the punishment to come; there is room enough in hell for thee
and all thy fellows, hell has opened her mouth wide; nay the more companions
thou have had in thy sins, the more shall be thy plagues.



with a penknife or with a spear; or for a man to be murdered in the streets
or in his bed? so, though thy sins be not hydious blasphemies and the like,
yet if they be petty oaths, they are enough to sink thy soul; It is not your
great swearer, but no swearer shall come into the Kingdom of heaven. the text
says not, no great liers shall enter into heaven, but no liers shall enter
into heaven; What difference is there between a man that goes to hell for open
rebellion; and a man that goes to hell for civil profession; and what
difference is there between an open adulterer and a secret adulterer?





John. 3.3.
as the Apostle Saint John says, He that has this hope purges himself, as
he is pure, he striveth with his whole endeavor to be pure, and always he
has a respect to all Gods commandments; And as the author to the Hebrews
says, pursue faith and holiness, Heb. 12.14.
without which no man can be saved.

If thou do say, if it were an honor to pray in my family, and if Gentlemen
and Knights did it, I would do it. I tell thee if holiness does seem to fly
away by disgrace and persecution, the^ you must pursue it; Nay, do thou say
it is thy nature to sin? Then I say the greater is thy wickedness, if it be
thy nature so to do: We hate not a man because he drinks poison, but we hate
a ^oad because it is of a poysonus nature, therefore rather mourn the more for
thy sins, because it is thy cursed nature so to do, And say, Lord, did only
temptations, or the world, allure me to this, there were some hope that thou
would have mercy upon me, but O Lord I have a cursed nature, and though
there were no Devils, nor world, no temptations outwardly, yet this cursed
nature of mine would sin against thee.

They that have received Christ, have a new nature: and therefore if I have a
carnal corrupt nature, then my condition is most fearful; And say, did
temptations and the world allure me, then there were some hope of mercy, but it
is my nature to sin, and therefore my estate and condition is most miserable
and wretched; Oh wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from this body of death?

press men to the inward work of the soul, not only to keep men from the
halter, but to tell them, they must pull down their proud hearts, and be
humbled for their sins, and the like, then they reply, thoughts fly away
suddenly, and thoughts are free. To which I answer, these words are such wind
as will blow down thy soul into the bottomless pit of hell. It is not I that
say so, but our Savior himself, By thy words thou shall be justisfied; Mat.
12.37.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned: though you make nothing of your
swearing, and idle thoughts, and revilings of Gods people; yet the God of
heaven will require them at your hands, and you shall either receive
acquittance from Christ of them, or else vengeance for ever for them: Iud. 15.
For the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints in flaming fire to punish
not only murderers and adulterers and the like, but all ungodly ones; the
Lord will call thee to an account for all thy abominations, nay, for all thy
speeches against the people of God, upon thy ale-bench when thou did toss
the^ too and fro, Psalm. 50.
and the Lord will set thy sins in order before thee; nay, he will call thee
to an account for them, for all thy thoughts, though they are sudden and
quickly passed over, as the Prophet Jeremiah says, O Jerusalem, wash thy
heart from wickedness, Ierem. 4.15.
how long shall thy vain thoughts remain in thee? Whatsoever men think of
thoughts, yet they are the very life and sinews of sin, and they are brought
forth by meditation of a man's corruptions in this kind.

How sinful thoughts are produced.
A man may sin more in thought then in any other kind whatsoever; both in
regard of the vileness of sin, and his unavoydablenesse thereof. A thief
cannot rob all the town, but a covetous man may wish all in the town were
hanged, that he might have their goods; and so an adulterer cannot commit sin
with every woman in the town, but he may lust after both the godly and
profane, and he may commit adultery both with the chaste and unchaste too in his
thoughts; A man may sin infinitely in this kind, and never have done: for no
company nor place can hinder an adulterer from sinning and lusting, nor the
malicious man from envying in his heart, nor the covetous man from desiring the
goods of other men. Though thou dare not cut the throat of a minister, yet
thou can malice all the ministers in the country.

he so? has he any argument to allege? No, not a word, but he that is proud
will be proud, and he that is a swearer will swear, and will not make
conscience of any thing; this comes from a proud and a sturdy heart. When
Jeremiah would have convinced the people of their sins and of the punishments
threatened to them, they said, Ier. 4^ ^
Thou speak falsely, there is no such matter: So it is with many a carnal
heart now a days; if the minister of God will not please their fantasies,
then all the business is, they knew all this before: when as indeed they knew
nothing at all. Deuteronomy. 28.28.29
Therefore says God, Take heed there be not in any of you a root of
bitterness; if the soul hears the law and blesses himself in his
wickedness, and says, I shall have peace though I walk after the
imaginations of my own heart; the Lord will not spare that man: but the
Jealousy of the Lord shall smoke against him; this root of bitterness is
nothing else but sin, and a resolution to continue in it; For the Lord Jesus
sake consider this; there are too many of these in the Congregation; will thou
not believe Gods word, I tell thee thou deniest almost that there is a God, and
thou renouncest the Lord Jesus Christ and salvation by him; thou say in
effect, there is no God, and that there is not any means of grace revealed;
What devilish blasphemy is this? Let me speak to the terror of all such
hearts, hell never entertained any such thoughts, the devils in hell for ought I
know, have not any such professed resolutions, the devils believe and tremble;
the devils believe that the Scriptures are the word of God, and they know
there is infinite mercy in God; but they shall never taste of it, and they know,
all the plagues threatened shall come upon them, and they snake and tremble at
the remembrance of it. What, do the devils consent to the word of God, and
conceive of it, and know that it is the truth of God and shall be made good
upon them? Then good Lord of what a strange temper art thou, that wilt not
believe it, and that wilt not consent that it is true? the devil is not worse
then thou art in this case; I must confess that the consideration of these
passages sometime makes the soul of a poor minister shake within him, and
were it in my power as it is not, the first work that I would do, should be
to humble and break the hearts of all such vile wretches, but all that I can
or will do, is this, that which the holy man Moses spoke and he spoke it with
a mavelous caution; you that never came to the height of this horrible
contempt, take heed that there be not any man among you, that says, It shall
go well with me whatsoever the minister says. It is as much as your souls
are worth, and to such as are guilty of this sin I will give the same counsel
that Peter gave to Simon Magus, who had a base esteem of the gifts of the
Spirit, Acts. ^.22.
O (says Peter) pray, that if it be possible, the thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven thee. It is a fearful thing, it is a mavelous opposing of grace;
And for you, whose eyes God has opened, go home and consider of the miserable
estate of all such as lie in this sin; go to prayer, and send up requests in
the behalf of all such poor creatures; and say, Is it so Lord, that there are
many such who have the name of Christians, that will not be reformed nor
humbled? good Lord! that many, that have the name of Christians, will not come
in; thy word will not prevail nor take place in their hearts? Good Lord break
their hearts in pieces, break in upon them, and let thy word overcome them in
mercy and compassion; and bring them to the true knowledge of sin here, and
happiness hereafter. And thus much of the first Cavil.

Secondly, 2. Shift.
the soul says, I confess I see more now then ever I conceived of before; I
did not conceive that sin was so heinous and so dangerous as it is: Now I see
it is mavelous great and dangerous; yet this is my hope, that whatsoever
falls, it will not light upon me; and therefore what need I care, I hope to
prevent it, and then all will be well. When the word comes fair and full upon
the conscience of a man and would pierce his heart, and meets him in every
place as the angel did Balaam, he will have some fetch or other to put by the
word, and he says; I hope for all this, How the soul puts by the threatenings
of the word.
the danger shall not fall upon me. Now the way that the soul uses to put by
the word, and to prevent the danger threatened, appears in these three
particulars.

The first is this, how ever sin is never so vile in it self, and he is
guilty thereof; yet he thinks the God of heaven does not attend to his sins,
or else he is not so just or righteous that he will punish him for them.
Indeed, if he were some notorious wretch, as a murderer, or an adulterer or a
thief, or such like, then he had cause to fear, but God will not bring him to
an account for every small sin, That this is the sleight of the soul, I will
show you; and then show you how to avoid it.

It is ordinary with every carnal heart more or less, Job. 22 13.
to reason as Eliphaz with Job; How does God know? can he judge through the
dark? thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not, he walks in
the circuits of heaven. It is the guise of wicked men to say so; Nay, it is
that which the hearts of Gods people are driven to a stand withal, when they
consider the passages of wicked men, now God sees them and does not punish
them, they say, How does God know? and, Is there knowledge in the Almighty?
When the Prophet saw the way of the wicked to prosper, their eyes to start out
with fatness, he says, Does God see this, and not punish it? as if he had
said, Did God care for all that is done here below, could he brook such
strange oppositions of his word and his gospel and his members? I doubt not,
but that there is many an adulterous heart, that thinks a dark night shall
cover all his abominations; and the malicious man that contrives evil against
Gods children he thinks that God considers not his course; or else that God
will not trouble himself to execute Judgment upon him for all his sins. As
the Prophet says, The Lord will not do Good nor Evil; he is marvelous quiet,
he will not trouble himself neither for the good that does befall, nor for the
evil that is deserved by us; Nay, this is the bane of our ministry, when
people hear of many Judgments denounced against sin and sinners. (I tell
you what they think of all this) they think they are words of course. If the
adulterer or drunkard did consider that no such person should inherit the
kingdom of heaven, durst they go on? surely no. But they think they are but
the words of some hot spirited minister, to awe, and scare men and keep them
in compass, and they will not be persuaded, but God is more merciful then so,
that he should punish for every small sin, they think this is more then
reasonable; Let him make speed (says the wicked) that we may see it, Esaias.
5.19.
and let the Counsel of the most High draw nigh, that we may know it. As if
they had said, You ministers tell us much of Gods wrath against Jerusalem,
Zeph. 1.12.
let us see those enemies, and let the word of the Lord come to pass now, all
these words are but wind, etc. These are the carnal cavills of graceless
persons. To which I answer; It is desperate ignorance and marvelous Atheism of
heart, whereby the devil labors to keep men in sin; the Lord knows thy
thoughts long before, if thou would hide thy self from the Lord in the
dark, the day and the night are all one with him; nay, the Lord will search
Jerusalem with candles, the word in the original signifies to tracke her, Nay,
he will not leave searching till he find thee out; Prove. 5.21.
for the ways of man are before the Lord, and he ponders all his doings, 1.
John 3.20.
and if our hearts condemn us, God knows all things, and is greater then our
hearts. Does thy Conscience check thee for vain thoughts, and cursed devices?
then God knows much more by thee then thou know by thy self. God did see
Achan stealing the wedge of Gold, and David in his adultery; and he sees all
the malice of thy heart against his Saints; and all thy uprising of heart
against Gods word; Nay, the Lord sees all the prankes of the adulterer in the
darkest night; and God is just to bring all things to judgment; and thee also
to an account for them; In vain it is for wicked men to dig deep, to hide
their counsel from the Lord: These things have thou done (said God) and I kept
silence, Psalm. ^^
and therefore thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self, but I will
reprove thee, and set all thy sins in order before thee.

You must not think God is so gentle, No, he will set all your sins in order
before you, if not here for your humiliation, yet hereafter for your
everlasting confusion; the drunkard shall then see all his pot companions, and
the adulterer his mates, and the unjust person all his tricks, nay, God will
not bate thee one thought of thy heart; Romans 2.14. Jude. ^^.
be where you will, God will find you out with his judgments, and say, Lo,
here is thy pride, and here is thy murder, and here are all thy abominations,
this is the wretch that could carry fire in the one hand and water in the
other; these are thy sins, and this shall be thy punishment.

he knows all, God is not, nay, cannot be mocked, and therefore delude not
your own souls, every repentance will not serve the turn; thou may have
remorse of heart, and repent, and cry to God for thy sins, and this
tormenting of thy heart will be but a forerunner of thy everlasting damnation
hereafter: the Lord may deal with thee as Moses said of the people of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 1.14.
You returned and wept before the Lord, but he would not hearken to your voice.
So the time may come that all weeping and wailing will not serve the turn. You
see Judas wept and brought back the thirty pieces of silver, Mat. 27.3.
he had marvelous horror of Conscience, he took shame to himself, and made
restitution; and yet a damned creature for ever.

Thou that think it such an ^as^e matter, ask thy own heart this question:
Can thou be content to lay open all thy cursed sinful courses, and all the
wrong that thou have done; Consider what a hard matter it is to bring thy heart
to it; to confess all thy close adulteries; and when thou have done all this,
thou may be as far from salvation as Judas was, who went and hanged
himself; therefore it is not every sorrow will serve the turn, and bring
comfort to thy soul; but it must be repentance of the right stamp; And
again, do thou think thou have repentance at command, this is that which
cuts the throat of men's souls, and deprives them of all the benefit of the
means of grace; thou art not sure though thou shall live, thou have power of
thy self to repent savingly; and shall any man be so senseless, as to hang
his happiness on that which cannot help him? If thou did consider thy own
weakness, thou would not say that repentance is in thine own power.
Remember what the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.25.26.
Proving if peradventure at any time God would give repentance, that they may
acknowledge the truth, and come to amendment of life out of the snares of the
Devil. It is only but peradventure, it is a rare work, and few have it.

save sinners, and why may he not save me? It may be all this while? And
therefore for a full answer, consider these two things to shake off this
carnal security, whereby men resolve to pin their salvation Gods mercy, though
they purpose to oppose his mercy. First, know this, that there is a time when
God will not show mercy? Behold; says God, Revel. 1.21* 22.
I gave her a time of repentance, but she repented not, therefore I will cast
her upon the bed of sickness: and as our Savior says to Jerusalem, Oh that
thou had known in this thy day, Luke. 29.43.
the things belonging to thy peace; but now they are hid from thy eyes. God had
sealed up h^s mercy, and the day of salvation was past, and when the day is
over, though Noah, Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel. 14.14.
should pray for a people they should save neither son nor daughter; And if
thy father did pray for thee that art a child; if mercy be past, the Lord will
not spare that man says the text; as if the Lord had said, I have abundance of
mercy but thou shall never taste of it, nay, for ought I know, the Lord may set
a seal of condemnation upon thee, and so give thee over to all evil, to all
sin, to all curses; and blot out thy name from under heaven; Are you yet
persuaded that this is Gods word? if you were but persuaded of the sorrow some
have had, it would make you look about you; The Wise man says, that wisdom
professes to pour out abundance of mercy, Prove. 2.38.
saying, Oh you simple ones, how long will you contemn and despise purity and
holiness?

Now mark, when a people has had this mercy, and wisdom offered to them,
and yet they will despise it; then shall the cry, and call, but I will not
answer, (says God) they shall seek me early, but shall not find me. The
period of Gods patience is come to an end, and there is no expectation of
mercy; call, and call, you may, but God will not hear you; you whose
consciences fly in your faces, and tell you, that you have despised mercy, and
you would none of Gods Counsels, and you hate the knowledge of his ways, Do
you think to get it now by crying, when the date of mercy is out? No, no, you
would have none of Gods mercy before, and now he will none of you; Do you
think it fit, that grace, and mercy, and the spirit, should still stand and
wait upon you, and strive, and always be despised? Is it not mavelous just
that that word which you have despised, should never work more; and that
mercy, you have refused should never be offered to you any more? It is just,
and you shall find it so in the end, and take heed the terms of mercy be not
out.

have borne something, and they will also bear this as well as they can.

a wounded spirit who can bear? When God lays the flashes of hell fire upon
thy soul, thou can not endure it; what soever a man can inflict upon a poor
wretch may be borne, but when the Almighty comes in battle array against a
poor soul, how can he undergo it? witness the Saints that have felt it, as
also witness the wicked themselves that have had some beginnings of hell in
their consciences. When the Lord has let in a little horror of heart into the
soul of a poor sinful creature, how is he tra^sported with an insupportable
burden? When it is day, he wishes it were night, and when it is night, he
wishes it were day. All the friends in the world cannot comfort him, nay many
have sought to hang themselves, to do any thing rather then to suffer a little
vengeance of the Almighty: And one man is roaring and yelling, as if he were
now in hell already, and admits of no comfort* If the drops be so heavy, what
will the whole sea of Gods vengeance be? If he cannot bear the one, how can he
bear the other?

compare it with all the strength of the creatures, and so if all the creatures
be not able to bear the wrath of the Almighty, (as Job says, Is my strength
the strength of stones, Job. 6.1^.
or is my flesh as brass that must bear thy wrath? As if he had said, It must
be a stone, or brass, that must bear thy wrath. Though thou were as strong as
brass or stones, thou could not bear it, when the mountains tremble at the
wrath of the Lord) shall a poor worm or bubble, and a shadow endure it?

Conceive thus much, if all the diseases in the world did sease on one man, and
if all the torments that all the tyrants in the world could devise, were cast
upon him; and if all the creatures in heaven and earth did conspire the
destruction of this man; and if all the devils in hell did labor to inflict
punishments upon him; you would think this man to be in a miserable condition.
And yet all this is but a beam of Gods indigna^tion. If the beams of Gods
wrath be not hot, what is the full sun of his wrath, when it shall sease upon
the soul of a sinful creature in full measure?

he cries out with his eyes full of tears, and his heart full of sorrow, and
the heavens full of lamentations, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh thou poor creature, if thou
have the heart of a man, gird up the loins of thy mind, and see what thou
can do? Do thou think to bear that which the Lord Jesus Christ could
not bear with so much sorrow? Yet he did endure it without any sin or
weakness; he had three sippes of the Cup, and every one of them did sink
his soul; and art thou, a poor sinful wretch, able to bear the wrath of God
for ever? Now (beloved) seeing all objections are answered, and the things made
plain, labor to do that which you may have comfort in; Submit your selves to
the good word of the Lord, and not only be willing and content to be thus
enlightened, but labor for it, that thou may prevent the Judgments deserved
by the same.

Now that I may the better prevail with you, Motive 1.
consider these three motives, first, it is the only old way to heaven, for God
never revealed any other but this way in the old law: the only way for the
leaper to be cleansed was to come out into the congregation and to cry, I am
unclean, I am unclean. This leaper was every sinner; this means of curing
was the sight of his sin; and as he did, so must every sinner confess his
sin, take shame to himself, and say, It is my proud heart, and this my loose
life, etc. This true sight of sin is the only door to life and salvation,
who would not go that way which is the right and the ready way, if ever you
receive mercy at the hands of the Lord, it must be by this way, or not at all.
I pray you take heed, and do not find a shorter cut to heaven; the further you
go the contrary way, the further you must return back again; this has
cozened many a man more then he does imagine.

As a traveller when he is loath to go through some filthy lane, he will
break through the fence and go through the meadow, that he may save the foul
way, at last when he has gone up and down and cannot get out again, he is
forced with much loss of time to go back again, and go through the lane.
So it is with many sinful wretches in the world, and this has cost them
dear. They will not go this way, by sorrow for sin to see the filthiness
thereof, and their cursed abominations, but they will have a new way to receive
mercy and comfort from God, yet at last they are driven to a stand, and then
they will hear the minister of God, and when he says, Christ came to seek and
to save that which was lost, Luke 19.10.
that is, those poor sinners that saw themselves lost; and consider the
plagues of their heart; And when Christ works savingly, he opens the eye and
awakens the conscience, and a man must confess before he can find mercy, then
the soul says, I never saw this work upon my soul, I was never lost. No?
where broke you over then? you would needs to heaven a new way; you are like
the thorny ground that would receive the word with joy; Nay, I Will assure you,
you must come back again, and see all those abominations which have been
committed in secret by you and discover them, or else there is no means to
come unto life; Lament. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways (says the Church.) you must not think that
Christ will pardon all, and you do nothing, No, first see your sins, and
then you shall receive mercy and pardon for them.

Secondly, the work by this means will be much more easy then at another
time. Motive 2.
If thou once get thy conscience convicted and thine eyes opened, the work
will go on clearly and easi^y; Many of Gods people will strike in with you,
and many good Christians will pity you, and pray for you, and you shall have
many helps this way, and therefore is it not better now to have your conscience
awakened when you may have help, then afterward when there is no remedy? When
any of Gods people fast or pray, they will remember you; what says one? Do
you know such a man? yes very well: what is he? oh he was the most shameless
drunkard that ever the sun did see, or the earth bear. Was he so? oh but now
God has opened his eyes, and awakened his conscience, he was never so frolike
before, but now he is as much wounded, now his heart is broken, and his
conscience flies in his face; It were good to remember him, though he has
been a wretch and a professed opposer of Gods people, yet let us remember him;
Yes that I will, I know his burden is great, I have found it; and I hope so
long as I have a knee to kneel and a tongue to speak I shall remember him. And
then they pray for him and say, Good Lord, who can bear a wounded soul? Good
Lord thou have humbled him and made him see himself vile and miserable, let
him see thy mercy in Christ. What a comfort is this to have a whole country
pray for him in this manner.





Moti^e 3.
Thirdly, set upon this work, the issue will be very successful: oh what a
comfort will it be to a poor soul in the time of death, when he shall come to
render up his soul into the hands of God, that all his sins are wiped out:
And then to hear those glad tidings from heaven; Be of good comfort poor
soul, thou have seen thy sins, therefore I will not see them; thou have
remembered them and mourned for them, therefore I will never plague thee for
them. Who would not see his sins that Christ may cover them in that day of
accounts? there was never s^nner broken hearted but God did bind him up: and
there was never any truly wounded for sin but God did ever heal and comfort
him; and therefore labor to look your face in the glass of Gods Law, and so
see your own spots; I confess this is tedious to your sins, and the plagues
due to them; but look thou on them that, God may not; If an adversary offer
means of agreement, we use to say, suffer it not to come to the public
trial, for the case is naught; I say it will be so with every wicked man's
case, the Lord has a controversy with every wicked man, and it must be tried
in the public day of judgment, or else you must make a private agreement
between God and your own souls; If there be any drunkard, or adulterer, or
unjust person, that is guilty of any sin, you had better take up the matter
in private: Do not fear to look upon your sins, but bring the^ all out
before the Lord, and see the ugly face of them, and entreat the Lord to seal
up unto you the pardon of them, that you may never be called to an account for
them; I tell you, it is the most comfortable course in the world.

The last use for instruction to all my fellow brethren: Use.
let me speak a word to them and to my self too; let us all take that course
in dealing with the people, and Gods ordinances, which God himself takes up;
As the steward disposes of every thing at his masters will, and the Apothecary
orders drugges as the Physician appoints, so let it be with us to, we are but
stewards and Apothecaries; let us take that course, and use those means that
God has appointed for his peoples good; God says, you must see your sins,
and be humbled for them: and therefore let us labor to make men see them, (as
the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 3.2.
I hope we were made manifest to your Consciences; Did not your Consciences say
so, that you could not gainsay it?) we must take up that course the Scripture
has revealed, and which the faithful servants of God have ever used, and
which God has ever blessed: nay, it is our wisdom so to do. Mat. 7. (...).
Matthew the seventh and the last, Christ taught the people with authority, not
as the Scribes: there is a kind of commanding power which the word ought to
have upon men's Consciences, if a man be a sinner it will reprove him, and
command reproves to sease upon him, and if he be in distress of Conscience,
it will command comfort to take place in his heart.

Give me leave to speak my thoughts, and it is my judgment too: What does it
profit a man to scrape up a little Greek and Latin together, and to leave the
sense of the Scripture undiscovered, and the Conscience no whit touched, nor
the heart stirred? He that knows any thing this way, though he were but an
ordinary schoole-boy, that had but any skill in the tongues, if he could not
do it, he should be scourged by my consen^. But let it be in case of
Conscience a poor soul comes to anguish of spirit, the only way to ^et this
man on foot again, is to answer all his objections and questions; and resolve
all his doubts, and to make the way good and the case clear; Alas this course
is not known amongst us: And in the way of examination, if a man come to
examine a sinner, he takes away all his cavils, and all his carnal shifts,
that he has to hinder the word, and forces the soul to say, It is Gods word,
though he will not entertain it. Let a man try this course and he shall find
a mavelous difficulty, this is the reason why our ministry thrives not, and
the hearts of men are not wrought upon; Why men's hearts are not wrought upon in
the ministry.
because we labor not the right way, to show men their sins, and to convince
their conscience, that they may not flinch out from the ordinances of God; Nay,
I take it to be the special cause why after all the precious promises that God
makes known, no man receives good by them; We offer salves to them that know
not whether they have any sores or no; And we offer Physic to those that we
know not whether they have any disease or no, we speak of grace and Christ,
but people think they have no need of the^; suffer me to speak my mind herein
freely. That ministry which does not ordinarily humble the soul and break
the heart, does not convert and draw to Christ, but that ministry that does
not inlighten the mind and convince the soul of sin, that never humbles
ordinarily, and therefore never does draw home to Christ,

Now we come to show the causes why, and the means how sinners come to see
their sins. The Apostle speaks it to their faces, You are they that have
committed this sin, you have crucified the Lord of life, this is your sin.

Doctrine.
The Doctrine from hence is this: A special application of particular sins is
a chief means to bring people to a sight of their sins and to a true sorrow
for them. The Apostle does not generally propound their sins, but he comes home
to their hearts, and it is not only done in this place; but it has been the
practice of all Gods faithful ministers heretofore, As John Baptist, he goes
not cunningly to work, secretly to intimate some truths; but he deals roundly
with them, and says, O generation of vipers; who fore. warned you to fly from
the wrath to come? Luke 3.11.12.
And he shows them their sins in particular. And when the publicans came to
be baptized, he says, Receive no more then is appointed for you, and he says
to the soldiers, Do violence to no man, and be content with your wages; he
was the minister of humiliation and preparation: and therefore he deals thus
plainly with them.

When Ahab had slain Naboth, the Prophet Elias came to him and says, In the
place where dogs lickt the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood: 1 King
^0 ^1.
Ahab said, Have thou found me out o my emenie? And he said, I have found thee
out, because thou have sold thy self to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord; and the text says, When he heard this, he put on sacke-cloth and went
softly: This was the power of a particular reproof, though he were a miserable
wicked man. Thus did Paul deal with Peter, when he halted before the Jews, he
did plainly reprove him to his face, and that not secretly, but because he had
sinned openly, therefore he reproves him openly; so also our Savior Christ
shakes up the Scribes and Pharisees. Mat. 23.13.14.
And this is the rule in general, as the Apostle says, Reprove the^ sharply,
Titus 1.20. Object.
that they may be sound in the faith.

Oh! but some will say. If I do thus plainly deal with them, I shall
discourage them altogether.

Hosea 2.2.
see what the Lord says, Plead with your mother: the word in the original is,
Call her into the Court, call her by her name, and say, that she is not my
wife, and I am not her husband. And the Lord says by Ezechiel, Ezekiel. ^6.1.
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations: he does not say, cause
the country to know her abominations, or the country to know the sins of the
court, but make Jerusalem know her own abominations.

The reasons are these: First, because the word thus applied hits sooner then
otherwise it would. Reason 1.
A master commands a servant to do such a thing, and because he names him not;
one thinks it is not he, and another it is not he, only because he is not
named: So when a minister says, in many things we sin all, he hits no man,
and so none are affected with it; But now particular application brings every
man's part and portion, and not only sets the dish before him, but cuts him meat,
and carves for him, and we do in this cause as the nurse does with the child;
she not only sets the meat before it, but she minceth it, and puts it into the
child's mouth: the steward does no^ only say, There is meat enough in the
market, but he buys it, and brings it home, and sees it prepared, and gives
direction what is for every one. The words of a faithful minister are like
arrows, which if they be shot a cock height they fall down again and do
nothing: but when a man levels at a mark, then, if ever, he will hit it. So,
many ministers can tell a grave fair tale, and speak of sins in general,
and these common reproves, these intimations of sin, are like arrows shot a
cock height, they touch no man* but when a minister makes application of sin
in particular, and says, O all you drunkards and adulterers, this is your
portion, and let this be as venom in your hearts to purge out your lusts. When
our Savior Christ lapped up the Pharisees all in one speech, Mat. 21.45.
it is said, that they heard the parable and knew that he meant them.

Overly discourses that they are sinners and great sinners in other countries,
and you should do well to look to your ways and the like: These are like the
confused noise that was in the ship when Jonah was asleep in it, which never
troubled him, at last the Master comes and says, Arise, Jonah. 1.6.
O Sleeper, and call upon thy God; And as a father observes, they came about
him, and every man had a blow at him, and then he did awake. So because of
general reproves of sin, and terms a far off, men come here, and sit and
sleep, and are not touched nor troubled at (...). But when particular
application comes (...) to the heart, and a minister says; this is thy
drunkenness, and thy adultery and profaneness, and this will break thy
neck one day, what assurance have thou got of Gods mercy? and what can thou
say for heaven? Then men begin to look about them. There was never any
convicting Ministry nor any man that did in plainnes apply the word home, but
their people would be reformed by it, or else their consciences would be
troubled and desperately provoked to oppose God and his ordinances, that they
may be plagued by it. The word of God is like a sword, the explanation of the
text is like the drawing out of this sword, and the flourishing of it: and so
long it never hits: But when a man strikes a full blow at a man, it either
wounds or puts him to his fe^ce: so the application of the word is like the
striking with the sword, it will work one way or other, if a man can fence the
blow, so it is: I confess it is beyond our power to awaken the heart, but
ordinarily this way does good.

Secondly, Reason 2.
as the word of God particularly applied hits soonest, so it sinckes deepest;
the words of the wise are compared to nails fastened by the masters of
assemblies; the doctrine delivered is like the nails pointed; but when it is
clear, and then particularly applied, it is like the setting on the nails
fast upon the hearts and consciences of men; And this I take to be the reason
why many that have come many times to oppose the ministers of the Gospel; yet
God has broken in upon them, and humbled their hearts and made them see their
miserable condition.

Gather up all then, if a plain and particular application of the word hits
the heart soonest and sincks deepest into the heart, then it is a special
means to work a sight of sin, and affect the heart with sorrow for it; But
the former part is true: Therefore the latter cannot be denied.

Use 1.
The first use is for instruction, Here we find the reason why plain teaching
finds such opposition, why it is so cavilled at by all ministers and others;
because thereby the eye of the soul comes to be opened, and all a man's
abominations are discovered, and his conscience is pinched by the same; Our
Savior says, He that does evil, hates the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved, as a thief hates the light and the lantorn-bearer, because they show
his villainy; so they that are guilty of many sinful courses, and base
practices, hate the minister that brings the word with any power to their
souls. A malefactor at the Assizes can be content to see an hundred men in the
town and is never troubled with them; but if he sees one man that comes to
give in evidence against him, and knows his practices; Oh how his heart rises
with desperate indignation against that man. Oh says he, this is he that
seeks my life, he will make my neck crack; so it is with this soul saving
ministry, it is that which brings in a bill of indictment against a man. Now a
man can be content to come, and hear though it be never so many sermons; but
if a minister comes in for a witness against him, and begins to arraigne him,
and to indite him, for his pride, and malice, and covetousness, and to
convince him of them, and to lay him flat before the Lord, and his conscience,
Oh then he is not able to bear it. What is the reason of this? He can hear
others quietly, and say, oh they are sweet men, they deal kindly and
comfortably. Why? The mass bites not; (as the proverb is) such a kind of
ministry works not at all, and this is the reason why they are not troubled,
but go away so well contented. I have sometime admired at this: why a company
of Gentlemen, yeomen, and poor women, that are scarcely able to know their A.
B. C. Yet they have a minister to speak Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and to use
the Fathers, when it is certain, they know nothing at all. The reason is,
because all this stings not, they may sit and sleep in their sins, and go to
hell hoodwinckt, never awakened, and that is the reason they will welcome such
to their houses, and say, oh he is an excellent man, I would give any thing I
might live under his ministry. It is just Ahabs old humor, he could suit
seasonably with four hundred false Prophets, and if there had been five
thousand more, they should all have been accepted of him, but when Iehosaphat
said, Is there never another Prophet of the Lord; Oh yes (says Ahab) there is
one Micaiah, but I hate him, he never spoke good to me that is, he never
soothes me up. So it was the temper of the people mentioned in the Acts, when
the Apostle saw they were a rebellious people, Acts 4.22.
he deals plainly with them: but they cried, Away with such a fellow, he is
not worthy to live. What? said they, then it seems we shall be cast off from
the Lord and be his people no more, they were not able to bear that: people in
this case deal with Gods faithful ministers as the widow of Sarepta did,
when the Prophet had told her that the meal in the barrel and the oil in the
cruse should not decrease; Kings 14.
all this while he was welcome: but when her child was dead, Oh what have I to
do with thee thou man of God? thinking indeed that the Prophet had killed her
son; So all the while we set the doors open wide that all the drunkards and
adulterers in the country may go to heaven, you like us well enough, and we
are as welcome as may be, and we are mavelous good preachers, and you think
us fit for the pulpit, but if we come once to lay sin to your charge, and to
threaten condemnation for it, and to say, If God be in heaven you shall never
come there, if you continue in your sins, oh then they are up in arms, and
say as the widow did* Are you come to slay our souls, and awaken our
consciences? beloved, this argues a spirit that never found the power of the
word; But it is our duties and we must do it, and howsoever it is not accepted
of the wicked, yet it shall find entertainment with God, and he shall give us
our reward at that great day.

Use 2.
Secondly, it is a word of reproof, suffer me to deal plainly in this kind,
if particular application be so powerful, and so profitable, let me speak a
word of my self, and to my fellow-brethren. It falls heavy on us that are not
willing to practice the same, but rather oppose it in others that desire to do
it, this plain and particular application, is accounted a matter of silliness,
and want of wisdom, and rashness, and a thing which befits not a pulpit, but
a man's words must be sweet, and toothsome, and he must have a tender hand over
men whosoever they be, be they never so profane. Nay, I dare say, if the
Devil himself were here, he (...) not be troubled, ministers must lay
bolsters under men's heads, and sow pillowes under their elbowes, that they may
sit easily, and not trouble drunkards, and adulterers, but let them be still in
their sins, and so let them go down to hell, this is that which the Devil
loves and takes much content in. And it is certain, if he could prevail, no
other course should be taken up: if a great man be present, or a patron that we
look for a living from, (if my ears had not heard it, I could not have
believed it) it is strange to think how they daube this over. If their sins
be so gross that all the Congregation would cry shame, if he did not reproof
them, what will they say? reprove you we will not, we dare not, but beseech you
and desire you as every man has his infirmity, a word to the wise is
sufficient, etc. I blame my self so far as my base fear possesses me, but
brethren, what will become of preaching in conclusion, if this may take no
place in the hearts of people; and yet notwithstanding all this, there is one
thing to be considered, if there be but any upright hearted minister, or
sincere Christian that is more exact then ordinary, what will the carnal
ministers do, though they have no reason in the text, no ground in the word,
to warrant them? though they cannot condemn a poor Christian upon good
grounds, yet they will invent new ways, and wrest the Text to dishonor Gods
name, and then in all bitterness they can vent themselves against faithful
Christians, and conscionable ministers: and hence the hands of the wicked are
strengthened, and the hearts of Gods people are much daunted; and the Gospel
of Jesus Christ prevails not in the heart of such as it is preached unto.

Let us see what it is that God requires of us; mark the severe charge and
command that the Apostle gives his scholar Timothy, 2. Tim. ^^
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the
quick and the dead, preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season,
reprove, rebuke, (as if he had said) the stubborn hearts of men need this
specially, reproving, and therefore doing this, is the maine thing that God
requires, and the maine end for which the word serves. Sharp reproves makes
sound Christians. He that heales overly, Titus. 13.13.
hurts more then he heales, are there not many to be humbled? and are there not
many lusts reigning in the hearts of men and women? Let us therefore throw away
this shamfull hiding, and make our ministry known to the souls of those to
whom we speak.



used and practiced it; and the holy Apostles which were inspired in an
extraordinary measure of the spirit, did imitate Christ, and his Prophets: and
God commanded Esaias to lift up his voice, as a trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

That is, tell the drunkard and adulterer of their sins? Did Christ and his
Apostles rail? Are these men only wise? Oh fearful; that the souls of men
should be so desperately transported against the truth of God, you that have
had any such thoughts against the power of God, in the ministry of the word,
repent, and pray, that if it be possible the words of your mouths, and
thoughts of your hearts may be forgiven. Acts. 8.22.
The Apostles, and Christ himself used this kind of teaching: Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, seven times together, if Christ had now lived, you would
have said, he had railed: Oh fearful, I tell you this is the next sin
against the sin of the holy Ghost.



true, the Lord (blessed be his name) has made his word more evidently known
then formerly, and yet there is a great deal of knowledge wanting in the most
sort of men; nay, I can speak it by experience, that the meaner ordinary sort
of people, it is incredible and unconceiveable, what Ignorance is among them;
Nay, I will be bold to justify it, that he that thinks himself the wisest in
understanding, if we come home to him by way of examination, we shall make it
known, to him that he knows little or nothing of which he should and ought to
know: But Imagine men had the knowledge of the word, that is not the maine end
of preaching, to instruct men: but to work upon their hearts. When a man has
taught men what they should do, he is but come to the walls of the Castle; the
fort is in the heart, the greatest work of the ministry is to pull down the
wills of men, that know the truth of God and hold it in unrighteousness: Nay,
they that do know it, how dull are they in the performances of these duties
God calls for at their hands, so that we had not only need to mince their
meat for them, but even to put it into their mouths; nay, they sleep with
meat in their mouths; I appeal to you that are enlightened in the knowledge of
the truth, do you not find dullness of mind, and indisposednesse of spirit
in the performances of those duties God calls for at your hands? It was spoken
by a reverend Divine, that the freest horse needs sometimes a spur to prick
him forward, so I say, the best Christian needs a sharp reproof to prick him
forward in a Christian course.



Jesus Christ wanted matter, he presses their faults to the Scribes and
Pharisees seven times together, nay, in the sixth of John he presses on truth
nine times, his aim and end was, namely, that he was the bread of life; he
follows it and setleth it on them. Now in these men's judgments, Christ
wanted matter, he had not wherewith to spend the time, and therefore he spoke to
the hearts of men, and came home to their Consciences: but to say the truth,
the ground of their cavills that are cast against this kind of preaching is,
because this troubles the hearts of those to whom we speak, and brings
vexation to the souls. Do we want matter for our preaching? no, but this I
say, it is an easy matter for any man to observe truths out of a text, and to
lay forth a point; this is an easy thing for any one that has a judgment
enlightened in the Scripture, but for a minister of God in the work of
examination to drive the soul of a carnal man to a stand, that he cannot
escape; to make him go away and hang the wings, in so much that the soul
shall be humbled, or else go away and snarle at the truth, and reproof
delivered. Or for a man to uphold a soul in the time of trouble, to comfort
it, and take away all doubts, I say this is the hardest matter for a minister
to accomplish under the Sun, in the work of the ministry, I speak for
these two passages, that all the world may know what belongs to the work of
the ministry; and also that all the world may know if men take any distaste at
this kind of preaching, we care not, it is our duty.

Use 3.
The third use is, for exhortation, if this be our duty, it ought to stir up
the heart of all the people of God, to set an edge on their affections, that
they should desire this manner of teaching, and when God makes his truth thus
known to us, we should submit to the power thereof, You have most need of
this, and there is most profit in this; and therefore your hearts ought to be
more enlarged to the coveting and submiting thereto.

And therefore you that are hearers, suffer me to provoke you to it, How to
profit in hearing the word preached.
when the time comes that you are to approach to the house of God; pray unto
the Lord that he would direct you, and that the minister may come home to your
hearts, bring your hearts to the word, as the people did their sacrifices in
the old law; they brought them and laid them on the Altar, that the Priest
might kill them; and divide them. So bring your hearts under the power of Jesus
Christ, that they may be cut and divided, that you may be let blood in the
right vein, that your corruptions may be subdued, that they may have their
deaths wound given them; take up that resolution of the Prophet David, I will
hear what the Lord says to my soul. Psalm. 58.8.
I will not hear what the Levit says to the Courtier, or to the commons, but
I will see what the Lord says to me. Oh (say some) the minister speaks home
to such a one, he touched him to the quick: What is that to thee? Will
another man's salve cure thee? therefore labor that the Lord may come home to
thy particular, that the Lord may salve thee, and cut thee, and save thee, for
thy everlasting comfort.

You are wise for the things of this life, you will be content to part with any
thing that may procure your comfort; if a father were now on his death bed
making his will, every child would think, what does my father give me? For if
a man be bidden to a Feast, he is not content only to have the meat set before
him, but if the master of the feast will carve for him, he will take it kindly;
Every faithful minister is the father of the people, and they are his
children, they are the Stewards of the Lords house, and give to every one their
portion, terror to whom terror belongs, and comfort to whom comfort belongs.

Therefore when you come into the congregation, and see the minister giving and
parting to every one his doale; reproof here, and instruction there; look up
to heaven and labor to get some thing to thy own particular, and say as Esaias
did in another case, something for me, Lord something for me, instruct me,
reprove me, make known my sins, and discover my abominations, when the
dainties of salvation are distributing.

You that are at the lower end of the table, think with your selves; will the
dish never come to the lower end? Oh that the Lord would now guide the
minister, to lay his hand on the sore of this cursed infidelity of mind? Oh,
that the Lord would knock down that sin of mine this day; And if thy heart
be any whit enlightened and touched, thou will be much contended and comforted;
2 Samuel ^4.25,
as David said to Abigail when she came to dissuade him from going against
Nabal to destroy him, she said, Upon me my Lord be this iniquity: why? Blessed
be God (says David) that sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy
counsel, which has kept me this day from coming to shed blood and avenging
my self.

So if thou have a good heart, thou will not go away repyning and fretting at
the word, and say, the minister meant me, and crosses me; Take heed of this
tempter of heart, and if God be pleased to carve out to any man those
particular fruits that concern his good; go away and bless the Lord, and
say, blessed be his good word, and his poor servant that met this day with my
sins, I never observed that pride, I never observed that malice, I never
discovered that careless* what became of Christ I cared not; what became of
his ministers I respected not; what became of his name I regarded not; but the
Lord has showed me my sins; and blessed be God for that good work which
has been communicated to my soul by his servant.

And observe this, so far as the heart is fearful that the minister should
meet with his sins, A naughty heart discovered.
so far the heart is naught, Nay, if it be thus, if your consciences testify
against you that you are loath to have your sins dealt roundly withal; you
think the ministers should be mild, and not use such bitter reprehensions, and
sharp reproves: I beseech you think of it seriously, you deal with your
sins in this kind as David did with Absalon: 2. Sam. 18* 6.
when Ioab was to go out, he gives him charge to use him kindly and gently;
that is, do not kill him, but take him prisoner, that was his speech, deal
kindly for my sake with the young man Absalon.

Do thou deal so with thy sins? thou would have the minister deal
kindly with drunkenness and adultery and malice; do not kill drunkenness, but
only take him prisoner, keep him in, reform the outward face of drunkenness,
that we may not be drunken in the open streets, but in a corner, and so that
men may not swear at every turn, but when they come among gentlemen, that
they do it cunningly.

The case is clear, thy soul if it be of this temper, it never hated sin,
it never sorrowed for sin, it never found the word of God working upon it for
the subduing of sin.

Imagine there were a traitor or rebel come into the town, that sought to
take away the Kings life, nay, suppose he were thy enemy or the like, will any
one say that man hates an enemy, How to know whether we hate sin,
that cannot endure to have an enemy discovered, attached, and brought to
execution? No sure, but he loves him, he covers him, he hides him, and would
not have him known, he is a lover of a traitor, and a traitor himself? else
why do you harbor a traitor; you cover him that he cannot come to judgment,
and therefore you are a friend unto him: so it is in this case, Can thou say
that thou hate sin, thou hate malice, and covetousness, and looseness,
and profaneness, and in the mean time, thy soul says, I cannot endure that
the minister should discover these, I cannot endure that he should attach them,
and arrest my soul for my covetousness and adultery and the like? My heart
rises and I would cover it, and hide it, nay I can bear it out sometimes and
say, the traitor is not here, I am not the drunkard, I am not the adulterer you
talk of; but if the minister will pursue thy soul, then thou shuttest the
door against him: If it be thus with thee, I tell thee thou art a friend to
the traitor, thou never hatedst thy sin, thou were never yet brought to a
true sight or sorrow for it.

We will now proceed: When they heard this says the text, the word in the
original caryeth a continual act, when they had heard, there was not an end,
but the sting of the word did still stick in their hearts. When they walked on
the way, that sounded in their ears, I have crucified the Lord of life; and
when they lay down, that came into their minds, I have shed the blood of the
Lord; and when they arose, this was their first thought, I have consented
thereunto and imbrewed my hands therein, this stuck upon the spirits of the^,
and the sting of the truth would not away, but after they had heard it, it
remained still in their hearts.

The doctrine is this, Doctrine.
that serious meditation of our sins by the word of God is a special means
to break our hearts for our sins. After they had heard, (this notes a
continual action,) the truth of God still stuck in their stomachs, the
arrows of God would not out, the Apostle shot some secret shot into their
souls, which came home to their hearts and consciences, when they heard this:
that is, the musing and meditating and pondering of this, when they could hold
no longer, they could bear no more, but came to the Apostles and said, what
shall we do? Sometimes God brings a man into the Church to carpe at the
minister, and to see what he may have against him; now if the Lord sting the
conscience of that man, he will hear you all the week after, and say, me
thinks I see the man still, he aimed at me, he intended me, and me thinks, I
hear the word still sounding in mine ears; he is always meditating on the
word in this kind.

And a serious meditation of sin discovered by the word is a special means
to pierce the soul for the same, this is the power of meditation; when David
had considered the glory of wicked men, how their eyes started out with fatnes,
Psalm. 37.
and they had more then heart could wish, and who but they in the world? they
were not troubled, they were not molested; then he thought they were the only
men in the world; when he had considered and mused of this, it pierced his
soul, and he was vexed with it, this went to the very intrailes of him, and
therefore that place is marvelous pregnant. 2. Pet. 2.8.
It was the means whereby Lot was so touched with the abominations of Sodom,
that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. Many saw and heard
besides Lot, and yet were not vexed, but he vexed himself, that is, the
meditation of those evils and bringing them home to his soul, vexed him and
troubled him, and the word is a fine word, implying two things, first the
search and examination of a thing, Two things in the word.
Secondly, the racking and vexing a man upon the trial; So it was with Lot, he
observed all the evils, he weighed them, and pondered them; and then he racked
his soul, and vexed himself with the consideration of them; the same word
that is used here for vexing, is used in the matter of a storm, Mat. 14.^4.
the text says; The Ship was tossed with the waves: So meditation does toss
the soul with vexation. It was the practice of the Church, Lor^en^* ^. 19.20
remembering mine affliction, the wormwood and the Gall, my soul has them in
remembrance, and is humbled in me: In remembering I remembered, for so the
original has it, I remembered all my miseries and afflictions, and my sins
that were the cause thereof; that is, I still mused and meditated thereof. And
what follows? the heart was buckled and bowed thereby, and was broken in the
consideration thereof.

But you will say, Question
what do you mean by this musing and meditating? what is this meditation?



There are four things to be considered in it, What meditation is.
David's, Psalm. 119.59.
I thought upon my ways, and turned my feet into thy testimonies. The
original carries it, I looked upon my ways on both sides, it is taken from
curious works which are the same on both sides; they that work the^ must often
turn them on every side: so it was with the prophet David, I turned my ways
upside down, and looked every way on them. Dan. 12.4.
And so again, Many shall run too and fro and knowledge shall be increased.
Run too and fro, what is that? It is not the bodily removing of the man so
much as the busy stirring of the mind from one truth to another; it propounds
one, and gathers another, so that it sees the whole silvage of the truth. I use
to compare meditation to perambulation, when men go the bounds of the parish,
they go over every part of it, and see how far it goes; so meditation is the
perambulation of the soul; when the soul looks how far sin goes, and
considers the punishment of it, and the plagues that are threatened against it,
and the vileness in it.



A man that has been offered an injury by another, when he ears and walks,
still he thinks of his injury; his heart is settled on it: So your hearts ought
to be on the truth. The Apostle to Timothy says, 2. Tim. 3.14.
Continue in the things thou have learned; the word in the original is, Be in
them; that is, let a man's mind be molded into the truth.

Thirdly, it is a settled exercise for two ends; first, to make a further
inquiry of the truth: and secondly, to make the heart affected therewith* for
this is the nature of meditation, not to settle it self upon a thing known;
but it would either know more in those truths that are subjected to it, or
else labors to gather something from them; It is with the truth, as it is with
a man which goes into the house, and pulls the latch, when he was without, he
might see the outside of the house, but he could not see the rooms within,
unless he draws the latch, and comes in, and go about the house: meditation
pulls the latch of the truth, and sees, this is my sin, this is the cause,
here is the misery, this is the plague: and thus meditation searches into
every corner of the truth.

Job. 5. last
these things are so, know it for thy good; So when a man has viewed all and
considered all, then meditation brings all to the heart, and labors to affect
the heart therewith; this is that which brings sorrow and compunction for
sin, a settled exercise of the heart that meditates on sins, that makes
inquiry after them: and the grounds are two, Ground 1.
and very remarkable they are.

The first is this, meditation makes all a man's sins, and any truth belonging
thereunto more powerfully and plainly to be brought home unto the heart. It is
the action of the understanding when a man does gather all reasons, and musters
up force of arguments, and labors to press the soul, and lay them heavy upon
the heart, and bring it under the power of the truth. It is with meditation as
it is with usurers that will grate upon men, and grind the faces of the poor;
and suck the blood of the needy, they will exact upon men and take use upon
use, they will not be contented to take the principal, but they will have
consideration for all the time, until they have sucked the blood of a poor man
that is under such a muckworme; A poor man could be content to pay the
principal, but to exact use upon use, this killes him; So does meditation, it
exacts and slays the soul of a poor sinner, you have committed adultery in
a corner, but you shall not so carry it away. This you did against the
knowledge of God revealed, against many mercies received, against many
Judgments threatened, against checks of conscience, against many vows and
promises remembered: and Item for this, and Item for that; and thus meditation
oppresses the soul: But then the soul will say, happily it is but a trick of
youth, or it is my infirmity: No, no, says meditation, this has been your
course from time to time continually, that has been your haunt, it has been
a riveted corruption that has fastened upon your bones, and will go to your
graves with you, and it will bring you to hell. But then the soul says, I
will repent; No, no, says meditation, your heart is hardened in this sin,
you have a heart that cannot repent nor yield, the word of God works not, it
prevails not, the minister has flung hell fire in your face, and told you,
that no drunkard, nor adulterer shall go to heaven, and yet you go away no
more moved then the seat whereupon you sat, you have continued in sin, and are
hardened in sin. Thus mark how meditation exacts use upon use: But then the
soul replies, I will go to the word, and wait upon the means, and it may be
the word will provaile. No, says meditation, you have despised the word, and
God will take away his word from you, or you from his word, or his blessing
from both. What, is it a matter of infirmity? No, it is your continual course.
And you repent; No you cannot, you cannot, you are hardened. And you hope the
word will work upon you; No, no, it is cursed unto you. Thus meditation exacts
use upon use, until the blood of the soul be sucked up. Meditation breaks the
soul, and lays weight upon the soul, in this case. It is a passage
remarkable of Peter, the text says, when our Savior told Peter, that before
the cock crew twice, he should deny him thrice; in the last verse of the
chapter, the second time the cock crew, and Peter remembered the words of our
Savior, and when he thought thereupon, he went out and wept bitterly: the word
in the original is this, the holy man caught all together, and heaped all the
circumstances together, and reasoned thus; the cock crows, now I remember the
words of Christ: oh what a wretch am I, that should deny such a master that
called me; such a master as found me, such a master as was merciful unto me?
when I never saw my self, nor my sins, he plucked me out from my sins: It
is that master I have denied, he came to do me good, and to save me, and I
have denied him: Nay, even at a dead lift, if ever I should have defended him,
I should have defended him now, if ever stood for him, I should have stood for
him now, but to deny my master, and forswear him, that I should do it, an
Apostle beloved, an Apostle thus honored, that I should do it, when I
professed the contrary, what, such a master denied by me such an Apostle at
such a time, before such persons, and forced to it by such a silly maiden. All
these sinful circumstances, the manner of them, the nature of them, the
haynousnesse of them, the holy Apostle laid all these to his heart, and his
heart sunck under these circumstances thus gathered together, and he went out
and wept bitterly. Look as it is in war, were there many scores that came
against an army, they might be conquered, or many hundreds might be resisted;
but if many thousands should come against a small army, it would be in danger
to be overcome. Meditation leads as it were an army of arguments, an army of
curses, and miseries, and judgments, against the soul, how ever one misery or
plague will not down, but a man may brook it, and go away with it, yet
meditation brings an army of arguments, and tells the soul, God is against
thee wherever thou art, and what ever thou do. And then the heart begins to
cry out as Elisha's servant did, Master what shall I do? what, so many sins,
and so heinous, and so many judgments denounced, and shall fall upon me for
them. Lord, how shall I do? how shall I be delivered from these, and pardoned
for these: thus meditation brings home sin more powerfully to the heart.

The second argument is this: as meditation brings in all bills of account, so
secondly, meditation fastens sin upon the consciences of those to whom the
word of God is spoken, more strongly, in so much that the soul cannot make
escape from the truth of God delivered, and from the judgments of God
denounced against him: Sometimes when men hear the word and threatenings
denounced, then their hrarts are touched, and they go away resolved not to
commit sin as they have done: But when they are gone, it works not, but the
heart recoyles again, and goes to his own course again. The reason is,
because you meditate not on the word.

It is with the word as with a Slave, if a man have never so good a salve,
which will help a soar in four and twenty hours, if a man shall do
nothing but lay this salve to the wound, and take it off, it would never heal
the wound, and no wonder: Why? he will not let it lie on; the best salve under
heaven will not heal a sore, and eat out a corruption, unless it be bound
on, and let lie: So it is with the good word of God: many a soul hears the
word of God, and his heart is touched for his sin, and his conscience
begins to be awakened, but when he goes out of the Church, all is gone, his
affections die, and his heart dies, and his conscience is not touched: no
wonder, you will not hold the word to your souls, you hear sin, and not
hear it: you will see sin, and not apprehend it; and therefore it is, that the
word over-powers not your corruptions: Do you think the salve will work when
you keep it not on? The word of God is the salve, conviction of Conscience is
like the binding on of the salve, meditations like the binding of it to the
sore, remember the truth which touched thee first, and keep that on, let
nothing take it away from thy mind, hold that good word close to the soul;
and it will keep thy heart in the very same temper, after the delivery
thereof; as it was in the delivery. The Apostle James compares, a slight hearer
to a man that looks his face in a glass slightly, James 1 2.3.
that forgets himself what visage he had; but says, Who so looks unto the
law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a
doer of the word, this man shall be blessed in his deeds: the Law of liberty is
the Law of God; and this Law being a glass; You must not only hear, and be
gone, and slight and neglect it, but you must continue in looking, and then you
shall see the complexion of your sins, and the vileness of your corruptions:
when the drunkard hears the baseness of his sins, and the adulterer the
baseness of his abominations, they look themselves slightly in the glass of
the Law; But they must carry away the glass with them, and look themselves
still, and the adulterer must say, I am a profane creature, and my heart is
polluted, Conscience defiled, and this soul hardened, and I shall be damned; if
a man should thus look, and view his sins, and carry away the glass with
him continually, he would see his life so ugly, and his heart so base, that he
could not be able to bear it; If the pills be never so bitter, yet if a man
swallow them suddenly, there is no great distaste, but if a man chaw a pill, it
will make a man deadly sick, because it is against the nature of it, so our
sins are like these pills, they go down somewhat pleasantly; because we
swallow down our oaths and prophannes, and our malice, and contempt of God
and his ordinances; and we make it nothing to mock at the religion of God, and
the professors of it: you swallow down pills now, but God will make you chaw
those pills one day, and then they will be bitter; Though the swearer swallows
down his oaths now, yet at last the Lord will make him remember, that he will
not hold him guiltless, but araigne him at the day of judgment: and make him
cry guilty at the bar, and again will make you chaw over your malice: you
hated the Lords word, and the works of his Spirit: and this will condemn you.

Again, meditation does beset the heart of a man, that he cannot escape;
wheresoever he is, meditation brings those things to his mind, and the plagues
due thereunto; so that he cannot escape the dint thereof. It is the nature of
our own hearts that we are loath to read our own destiny, which will be our
bane and confusion: meditation calls over the thoughts of a man, tells him the
reasons are good, the arguments found, the Scripture plain, thy sins
evident: Conscience you know it, therefore heart you must do it, (says
meditation) take heed of drunkenness, says meditation, you heard what the
minister said; these sins are against God, and the wrath of God is gone out
against you for these sins, these will be your bane, and will bring you to
everlasting destruction. And when meditation does thus yawle at the heart, the
mind still musing, and the heart still pondering of sin, at last it is weary,
therefore unburdened therewith, the issue of the arguments is this, if
meditation brings in sin more powerful, more plainly to the soul; if it be
that, which binds and fastneth it, and setleth it upon the soul; then the
point is clear, that serious meditation of sin is a special means to bring
a soul to the sight and sorrow for sin.

The uses are three: the third is the maine: we will press on unto it. If it
be so, that meditation is thus powerful and profitable, both for contrition of
the heart, and to bring in consolation to the heart, then what shall we think
of those men that are unwilling to practice this duty? nay, what shall we
think of that untowardnesse of heart which is in us against the command of
this duty? It is a word of reproof against this practice, and it falls
marvelous heavy upon us all more or less in this kind: for we are marvelous
guilty in this kind, that we are tardy in this duty: a man had as good bring
a Bear to the stake, as a carnal heart to the consideration of his own
ways, much more loath is he to ponder seriously and meditate continually upon
his sins; no, men are so far from musing of their sins, that they
disdain this practice, and scoff at it: what say they, if all were of your
mind, what should become of us? shall we always be poring on our corruptions?
so we may hap to run mad, if we were of your opinion: thus we slight and put
it off, and trample on this duty, which is so profitable: the poor will not
meditate on his sins, he has no time: the rich they need it not: the wicked
dare not: and so no man will in this case. What, shall a man set his soul on a
continual rack? (say they) shall a man drive himself to a desperate stand,
and trouble himself unprofitably? cannot men keep themselves when they are
well? this is the course and frame of the world, and we may complain of this
careless and heedlesse age, as Jeremiah did of his time, Ier. 8.6. No man
repents him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? there is no
questioning, nor searching, no musing: no man says, What have I done? no man
says, these are my sins, these are my ways: no man looks over his course
and conversation, he does not apprehend his sin; and that is the reason we
hear of no humbling, of no repenting: but every man runs into sin as the
horse rusheth into the battle, hence it is, that there are so ma^y unclean
beasts in the Arc. In the old Law, if there were any beasts that chewed not
the cud, he was counted unclean, the chewing of the cud is serious meditation
of the mercies of God to comfort us, and of our sins, to humble us: there are
many ungodly persons in the bosom of the Church; that muse not of their
sinful ways, the Prophet Jeremiah says; Ier. 8.12.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abominatio^s? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush, he adds a reason in the eleventh verse.
They could not be ashamed: why? because they cry, peace, peace, let the
minister speak what he can, and denounce what judgment he will, they promise
themselves peace, and quietness, they consider not their ways, and therefore
their hearts are not distempered therewith, nor troubled at the consideration
thereof, nay, there are many that count it an excellency, a cunning skill, if
they can drive away and shake off the sight of sin, if they can put off the
meditation of any thing the word reveals, they make it a marvelous excellent
piece of skill, and what they do themselves they would have others do also:
but they that now will not see, nor consider, nor meditate of their sins, the
truth is, they shall see them as the Lord says by Esaias. 26.11. When thy hand
is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see and be ashamed: So I say,
you that will not see your sins, but say, What needs all this stir, let the
minister say what he will, shall we be mad men, to be troubled, and shall we
be fools, to be disquieted with the consideration of our sins? well, you
will not muse upon your sins now, but the time will come, that the Lord will
set all your sins in order before you, and you shall not be able to look off
them.

And hence it is, that when a man has lived wickedly all his days, and comes
to lie on his death bed, then all his sins come to his remembrance, and then
conscience flies in his face, and says, here is a cup for a drunkard and for
an adulterer: now he sees nothing but sin; and hell, and damnation, due to
him for his sin, and then he cries out he is damned. You might have seen
something before then, if you had seen them to be humbled for them, you should
never have seen them to be damned for them. If there be but any occasion of
baseness offered to the view of the drunkard, which way does he not use to
compass his carnal delights? and shall the drunkard and profane wretch be so
eager in lingering after sin, that he may commit it, and be damned for it,
and shall not a man so labor to see his iniquities, that he may be humbled for
them before God, and receive mercy from God in the pardon of the same? Shall
the reprobate hale judgments on their souls, and bend all their meditations
that way, and shall not they that desire to see God in glory, do the same?

The Second use is for instruction: from the former doctrine delivered, we may
collect, that loose, vain, joviall company is the greatest hindrance to
preparation for Christ, and the greatest obstacle to the work of grace that
can be possible: this is not forced, but follows clearly from the former
truth, in this manner: thus I reason.

That course which takes away the mind from musing, and the understanding from
meditating on his evil way, that course is the greatest hindrance why the
heart is not humbled, and fitted for the Lord, for meditation brings in
contrition, and that prepares the heart for Christ: but your joviall company
and ryoting persons, there is nothing under heaven that takes off the mind
more from musing, and the understanding from waighing a man's evil thoroughly,
therefore this must needs be a marvelous impediment, and hinderance to those
that endeavor to walk uprightly before God in any measure, Amos. 6.5. There
are rules of their revaldry set down, they thrust and put away the day of the
Lord far from them: that is the first law they make, the first statute they
enact, think not of sin now, and meditate not of judgment now, but come
(say they) cast care away, fling away and casheer those melancholy
imaginations: we have many failings, let us not therefore be pondering of them,
and make our selves so much the more miserable, this day shall be as yesterday,
and to morrow as to day, no sorrow nor judgment, no sin now considered. And
this is remarkable, and if a poor soul in that drunken distemper should be
smitten by the hand of God, and should suggest these words to his drunken
companions; We are all here merry and Jolly, and let out our hearts in delight,
but for all this, God will bring us to judgment, the eyes of God sees our now
drinking and bezeling, and the ear of God hears our blasphemies and
swearing; and for these we shall one day be plagued: why? this should spoil
all the sport and jollity, they could not be able to bear him, but they would
presently fling him out of doors: this is that which baneth many a soul,
therefore take notice of it, if any of you have had a sight of sin, mark if a
drunkard go aside and hang the winge a little, mark what men do, if they can
but once get him into their company, and make him shake off those dumps, and
run on in his former course, then this hinders him from meditating on his
sins, and from being prepared for Christ, and hence it is, that many a poor
soul that has had the fire kindled, the terror that the Lord has let into
his soul, would have humbled his proud stomach, and melted his stubborn
heart; but partly drunkenness on the one side, and merriness on another, took
away all the amazement whereby the soul might have been wrought upon, and he
have received everlasting salvation: Therefore think of it. It was the course
the Scripture observed in the lamenting Church Zach. 12.12. The house of David
apart, and their wives apart, the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart:
There is no casting up of account in a crowd; but if a man will cast up his
account, if he will see his sins, and consider his base practices, he must go
aside by himself, loose occasions and vain occasions withdraw the mind, and
pluck off the soul from seeing the evil, and affecting the heart with it.
Therefore the Apostle Peter a little beyond my text, when he saw the Jews were
affected with that he had delivered, and that their hearts were touched, when
they asked him what they should do, he says, save your selves from this
untoward generation, God has now touched your hearts, suffer not Satan by
these wicked Instruments of his, to steal the terror of God out of your
hearts; for your drunken companions are like nothing else, but those ravenous
fowls spoken of by Christ, that devoured the seed that fell by the way side,
the foul is the Devil, the seed is the word of God, now the Devil does not
pluck this out of the soul himself alone; but often by cursed companions:
the alehouse is the bush, that harbors those ravenous beasts, and drunken
companions are those: The Devil uses to pluck out this good seed out of the
heart: and therefore as you love your souls, suffer not your selves to be
drawn away by these cursed wretches, do not suffer them to steal the work of
Gods spirit away which he has wrought in your hearts: this I observe to check
that cursed practice of men, who when a man is troubled, send him to play at
cards, or dice, or the like, which is the greatest means to hinder the work
of God in their hearts.

Use.
Thirdly, seeing meditation brings marvelous comfort and profit to our souls,
then what remains? if I were silent, the word it self would speak, and the
profit of the duty would speak, and bring your hearts to address your souls
to this: you are therefore to be exhorted, since you see what it is that God
requires, that with speed, you set upon it, and that with care and conscience
you labor to persevere in the performance thereof, I beseech you think of it,
what is more usual in the world then this, that men should make slight and
little account of their sins? nay, to go boult upright under those execrable
abominations wherefore they stand guilty before God. Look as it was with
Sampson he went away with the gates of Gaza and made nothing of them: so there
are many, that carry the gates of hell upon their backs, as drunkenness and
adultery, and yet they fear not, nor are affrighted thereat, nay; Gods own
servants, that desire to look toward Zion. Is not this your complaint many
times? I cannot find sin heavy, I confess the word discovers it, and
reveals it, but I cannot be troubled for it, I cannot find my soul burdened
with it: sin is not heavy unto me, but I carry it away easily, and make no
bones of the matter, though proud, and lewd, and careless, and untoward, yet
my heart is not apprehensive of the weight of it: Let me speak unto you: Are
you not therefore here hindered in the way God requires of you, because you weigh
not and ponder not those evil ways you stand guilty of before God, but you
are better content to see them and slight the^, then to remember them and lay
them aside: I beseech you to take notice of it. Look as it is with men in the
world, if five hundred pound weight be laid on the ground, if a man never
pluck at it, he shall not feel the weight of it; your sins are not many
hundreds, but many thousand weights, the least vain thought you ever imagined,
the least idle word that ever you uttered, are weight enough to press your
souls down into everlasting perdition, and therefore so many sins, so
great, and so constantly committed against so much knowledge, against so many
comforts, and encouragements, against so many vows and protestations, are much
more heavy, and yet you see them nor: the reason is, you see the^ not, you
weigh not pride, you weigh not malice, you weigh not dead heartedness; if you
would weigh them seriously, and consider of them thoroughly, you would find
that they were heavier then the sand on the sea shore; but you will say, how
should we come to meditate on our sins, that we may be comforted? for this is
the only way: But what course shall we take? that we may be burdened? here
lies the skill.

Now for the opening of the point, I will discover three things: First the
ground on which our meditation must be raised: Secondly, the manner how to
follow it home to the heart. Thirdly, how to put life and power, to it that it
may prevail, and work that end in our souls which we would have it.

First, concerning the former, we must consider the grounds whereupon
meditation must be raised, and them I refer to these four heads. First,
labor to see the mercy, goodness, and patience of God, that have been abused
and despised by that unkind dealing of ours, and that marvelous carelessness,
those duties, God has required of us, the height of Gods goodness to us lays
out the height of all our iniquities committed: The greater the kindness and
mercy of God is, the greater are our sins, that esteem not of this mercy,
but abuse it, and despise it; This adds to our rebellions, this makes our
sins out of measure sinful, because God has been out of measure merciful.

There are many sins in one, when a man sins against many mercies, and
walks not worthy of them, Judge. 1.12.
we may observe, that this is the course that God takes to break the hearts of
the Israelites, when they had neglected his ways, and broken his
commandments: what was his message, when the Lord humbled the people and brake
them kindly? The Lord by the Angel thus speaks, I made you to go out of
Egypt and brought you to the land which I swear to your fathers, and I said, I
would never break my covenant with you, and ye shall make no league with the
inhabitants of the land, But ye have not obeyed my voice; why have you done
this work?

Now the Lord presses this his kindness upon them, and labors to melt their
hearts in the apprehension of his goodness to them, and their unthankefulnesse
to him; in the eight verse, the text says. When they heard this, the people
lift up their voice, and wept. The consideration of Gods kindness to them, and
their unkindnes to God.

He did all for them, and they did all against him, the Lord was gracious to
them, for their comfort, but they did not walk worthy of it: Why have you done
this says the Lord? Why was my mercy despised? Why was my goodness slighted?
Why was my patience and long suffering abused? When they heard this, they wept
in the consideration of their unnatural dealing: Nay, this is the thing
remarkable in Moses, he stabs the heart, and works effectually upon the
Israelites by this means? Do you thus requite the Lord O foolish people,
Deuteronomy. 32.6.
and unwise? Is not he thy father that has bought thee? Has not he made thee,
and established thee? and will you thus reward the Lord? Thus carelessly, and
thus proud, and disobedient? Why, Remember, says he, the days of old, and
then he reckons upon Gods gracious dealing with them.

I apply this in particular: there is never a soul here present, there is
never a man in the basest estate, and lowest condition, but has had experience
of Gods goodness, and mavelous loving kindness this way. Were you ever in
want, but God supplied you? were you ever in weakness, but God strengthened
you? in sickness, who cured you? in misery, who succored you? in poverty who
relieved you? has not God been a gracious God unto you? every poor soul can
say, never a poor sinner has had a more gracious God then my soul, all my
bones can say, Lord who is like unto thee? this heart has been heavy and thou
have cheared it, this soul has been heavy and thou have relieved it, many
troubles have befallen me and thou have given a gracious issue out of them all.

And shall I thus reward the Lord? shall I sin against his goodness and this
kindness? Then what shall I say, hear O heaven, and harken O earth, the Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, and Israel knows not Gods
kindness, nor acknowledges his goodness toward them, the consideration
hereof one would think should break the hardest heart under heaven: if men be
but ingenious men, if they have received any great kindness from a friend, they
were never in want but he relieved them, he took the^ into his house, and they
might freely go to his purse or any thing he had. If a man should deal thus
kindly with another, and this man should deny him an ordinary favor, he will
be ashamed to come into his presence, he will say his house was mine, and his
purse was mine, and to deal thus unkindly, nature would have taught me
otherwise: what are your hearts to God that has been gracious to us all, he
has created us, and does preserve and keep and afford many blessings unto us;
he gives us our houses that cover us: it is God that affords us all this, and
shall we sin against such mercy? therefore go to the beasts of the field,
and they will tell you, and to the birds of the air, and they will discover
unto you Gods mercy: go to your beds and tables; who gives these, and
continues these? does not the Lord? and yet sin against this God? O foolish
people and unwise, all love on Gods part, and all negligence on ours? God
exceeds in goodness toward us, and we do exceed in unkindnesse, and
unthankfulnes toward him; this is the first ground upon which meditation must
be raised.

you shall have Justice enough, and that without mercy; you must not think to
slight Gods mercy, and carry it away in that fashion. But God is a just God, as
he is a gracious God; he will be revenged of you; If there be any stubborn
heart shall say, God is merciful, and what then? therefore we may live as we
list, and be as careless as we please: Take heed, that just law that has been
condemned, and those righteous statutes that has been broken, and God has
been provoked by you, will be revenged of you; did ever any provoke the Lord
and prosper, and shall you begin? first think you where is Ny^rod and
Nebuchadnezer, and Pharaoh, and Herod, and those proud persons that set their
mouths against God and their hearts against heaven, they that provoked the
Lord, what is now become of them? they are now in the lowermost pit of hell.

God sent Pharaoh into the red sea, and for ought we know, his soul may now be
roaring in hell; this is certain, that whosoever resists him shall find him
a swift Judge to condemn him. The Apostle says, Hebr. 12. and last, our God
is a consuming fire. and in Deuteronomy. 22. and 32. If my fire be kindled, it shall
burn to the bottom of hell. That Justice of God will not be appeased without
satisfaction; that Justice is wise, and connot be deceived, that Justice is
powrefull, and cannot be resisted, and not only justice, but mercy and patience
will come in, and plead for vengeance against the sinner, and that will be the
forest plague of all. When you appear before God what will you expect? you will
call for mercy to save you, and for patience to bear with you. No, no, says
Mercy, Justice Lord; I have been despised. Justice says, Patience has been
abused. Justice, says Goodness, I have been wronged. And how will it be
then, when Mercy it self shall condemn that soul, and Patience shall be an
accuser of it, and Goodness shall call for vengeance against it.

your minds a little seriously, you will see them to be far otherwise: every
sin deserves death, The wages of sin is death, not he only that murders
his neighbor, and takes away his life, but the malicious man, and the proud
man deserves death. Nay, to come nearer the text, what if I prove you had a
hand in the shedding of the blood of Christ; dwell here a little and consider
it, and you shall see the point clear. If there be any soul here present that
hopes to have any part in Christ, as if I should go from man to man and ask,
have you a part in Christ? you will say, aye surely I hope so; mark what I say
the^, if thou hopest for any mercy from Christ, then Christ was thy surety and
bare thy sins, and those sins of thine were the witnesses against our
Savior, they were the soldiers that took him, the thorns that pierced him,
the spear that gored him, the Cross that took away his life: The truth is,
the soldiers, and Pilate, and the Scribes and Pharisees, could have done
nothing to our Savior but for thy sins: had it not been for thy sins, had
it not been for the sins of the elect, the soldiers could not have
apprehended him, the Pharisees could not have witnessed against him, there
could have been no Judge to condemn him; very well then, thy sins caused all
this, thy wicked thoughts and wicked actions caused our Savior to cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He sunk under the consideration of thy
sins, and thou go away and make a trick of youth of them, and a matter
of merryment, of loose talk, and wicked doings; well, you had a part in the
crucifying of Christ. When you are gone, think of this, and as you are going
home, think with your selves, It was my sins that had a part in the shedding
of the blood of Christ; and when you are at meat let that come into your mind,
I have had a hand in the crucifying of the Lord Jesus Christ; and when you go
to bed think of it, I am one of those that have embrewed their hands in the
blood of the Lord Jesus, that Savior that is now at the right hand of God,
that has done so much for his servants, that sweat drops of blood, those
sweates and drops were for thy sins, and is this a matter of merryment and a
trick of youth in the mean time? No, no, thy soul will find it otherwise
one day, unless the Lord remove those sins of thine, those sins will make
thee howl in hell fire one day, unless you be burdened with them here:
think of this, I am one of those that by vain thoughts and profane actions
have crucified the Lord of life; and if you can make those sins a matter of
merriment I wonder at it.

heaven and earth, and the attributes of God appearing before him: the Mercy of
God, the Goodness of God, the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the Patience
and longsuffering of God, and they come all to a sinner, a wicked hypocrite, or
a carnal professor, and say, Bounty has kept you, Patience has borne with
you, Longsufferance has endured you, Mercy has relieved you, the Goodness of
the Lord has been great unto you; All these comfortable attributes will bid
you adue, and say, farewell damned soul, you must go hence to hell, to have
fellowship with damned ghosts. Mercy shall never be enlarged toward you any
more, you shall never have Patience any more to bear with you, never Goodness
more to succor you, never compassion more to relieve you, never power more to
strengthen you. Nay, you that have heretofore withdrawn your selves from Gods
wisdom and gospel, you shall never have wisdom more to guide you, never
Gospel more to comfort you, never Mercy more to cheer you, you shall then go
into endless and easelesse torments, which can never be ended, where you shall
never be refreshed, never eased, never comforted; and then you shall remember
your sins. My covetousness and pride was the cause of this, I may thank my
sins for this. Think of these things (I beseech you,) seriously, and see, if
sin be good now, see, if you can take any sweetness in it: I end all with
that of Job, O that my grief were well weighed, and my calamity laid in the
balance: for now they would be heavier then the sand of the sea. So say I, oh
that our sins were weighed, and our iniquities weighed in the balance
together, such mercy have we despised, such Justice we have provoked, such a
Lord of life have we crucified, such torments have we deserved, endless,
easelesse, and remediless: if these were weighed, they would be heavyer then
the sand, and sincke our souls under the consideration of them.

But then you will say, happyly I can think of these things, and consider of
them. The mind happyly has conceived and fadomed these truths and brought in
these occasions, and yet for all this, the mind stirs not, the heart works
not, I say therefore, when your meditation is thus raised, you must have this
skill to follow home the blow, and make it work kindly on the heart; and that
is done by these three things. When your meditation is up, there is another
thing which is the following of it home to the soul, and that appears in
these three particulars.

The first is this, when we have conceived aright of sin, and the nature
thereof, and the punishment due thereunto, then do not rest in the bare
consideration of these things, but never leave the heart, be still musing of
these things, and bring these blessed truths home to the soul, and bind
these things on the will and affections; hold them and fasten them there, force
them upon the soul, that the heart may not make an escape: take notice of it,
it is a rule I would have you consider of, never leave meditating til you find
your heart so affected with the evil, as your mind and judgment conceived of
the evil before; namely, let the heart feel that evil it conceived, let the
soul feel that gall to be in sin which the mind apprehended to be in it: you
see these sins loathsome and abominable, make the heart feel them, and be
affected with them; the heart will fly off now, therefore it is the cunning of
a Christian to lay at the heart, and pursue it continually, and hold these
truths to the soul, and at last it may be under the dint of the blow, and the
power of God makes the soul feel and find, and be apprehensive of the gall,
and bitterness, and vileness of the evil, as before it conceived it so to be; It
is not enough for a man to exercise himself in the meditation of sin, but a
man must bring his soul in subjection under the power of that meditation, a
man must not only chew his meat, but he must swallow it also, if he mean to
have it nourish him: meditation is when the heart swalloweth down these
sins, that is, when he labors so to be affected with sin, and the nature
of it, as it does require. Meditation in this case is like the beleaguring of a
City, when a City is wisely and strongly beleagured, and beset round about,
they do two things: first, they batter it from without as much as they can;
and secondly; they cut off all provision and relief from coming in, and so
the city being partly battered from without, as much as they can, and being
hindered from all relief coming in, in conclusion when they see the enemy is
strong, and no provision can come to them, they are content to yield the City,
and render up themselves; and if they send a parley to him that does besiege it,
and say, they are ready to perish, why, he bids them deliver then, and they
shall be provided for, he bids them yield, and they shall be succored, and
before that day, there is no supply shall be brought into the City: So it is
with meditation, and here is the cunning of a Christian. Do as wise Soldiers
do, cut off all provision, that is, by serious meditation bring thy heart to
such a loathing of sin, that it may never love it more, besiege the heart
with daily meditation, that so you may cut off any ease and refreshing that the
heart may seem to have in any sinful course; if the soul be looking after
any sin, if the soul would go out a little to occasions, and take delight in
his corruptions, the drunkard in his company, and the wordly man in his wealth,
then batter that: When you are thus affected, beleaguer the way, that you may
find no comfort; no ease, and when the soul is looking after occasions, and
lingering after his abominations, then say to your hearts, you will have your
sins though you have your shame with them, you will have your corruptions,
though you have your confusion with them: when the soul would meddle with
these, let meditation knock off these. If you be still proud, and malicious,
and quarrelling, take heed; you cannot have these, but you must have hell and
all; you cannot have these, but you must have destruction and all: the mercy of
God will be not abused; and the justice of God will not be provoked, and God
will be revenged of you, and at last the heart by this means will be troubled:
Why, deliver up your sins then, and your souls, if your hearts find any sorrow
and anguish; why, then yield up your souls unto Christ, that you may find as
much comfort in a good way, as you have done misery in an evil way. Thus by
meditation make the heart see those evils; nay, thus by meditation make thy
heart see those evils, and the punishment that shall be executed for those
evils.

Secondly, when you have made the heart thus affected with sin, then take
heed that the heart does not fly off and shake off the yoke. Imagine
meditation brings all those sins, and miseries, and vileness, all are brought
home to the heart, and the soul is made sensible by this means: Hold the
heart there then, labor to keep the heart in the same temper, that it is
brought into, by the consideration of sin, for this is our nature, when the
struck is troublesome that lies upon us, and the sins are heinous that lie
upon us, and are committed by us, these sins, these sorrows, these
judgments, when the heart feels this, it is weary, and would secretly have
the wound healed quickly, and the sorrow removed, and the trouble calmed: Take
heed of this, and labor to maintain that heat of heart, which you find in
your selves by virtue of meditation, this is the pitch of the point: as there
must be subjection unto meditation, the heart must be so affected with sin,
as it conceived it to be, so there must be attention; that is, the soul must
hold it self to that frame and disposition so wrought as it should be. Look
as it is with a Gold smith that melts the metal that he is to make a vessel
of, if after the melting thereof, there follow a cooling, it had been as good
it had never been melted, it is as hard, happily harder, as unfit, happily
unfitter, then it was before to make vessel of; but after he has melted it,
he must keep it in that frame till he come to the moulding and fashoning of it:
So meditation is like fire, the heart is like a vessel, the heart is made for
God, and it may be made a vessel of grace here, and of glory hereafter: Now
meditation, it is that melts the soul, the dross must be taken away from the
soul, and sin must be loosened from the heart: Now meditation does this, it
melts the soul, and affects the soul with the weight of sin: now when you
have your heart in some measure melted, keep it there, do not let it grow
loose again, and careless again; for then you had as good never have been
melted: And that is the reason why many a poor sinner that has sometime been
in a good way, and the Lord has come kindly and wrought powerfully on the
heart, and yet at last it has grown cold and dumpish, and as hard as ever he
was again, and the work is to begin again. And take notice of it; look as
it is with the cure of the body, if a man have an old wound, and a deep one;
two things are observable; it is not enough to lance the wound, and draw out
the corruptions, but it must be tented also, for if the wound be deep, it must
not be healed presently, but it must be kept open with a tent, that it may be
healed soundly, and thoroughly: so it is here; meditation when it is set on,
does lance the soul, it launceth the heart of a man, and it will go down to
the bottom of the belly: When a man sees his sin, and weighs his sin it
will go down to the bottom sometime, and when your heart is thus affected, do
not heal it too soon, but hold the soul in that blessed frame and
disposition: For as meditation does lance the soul, so attention does tent
the soul; keep the soul therefore so troublesome and sorrowful that so you
may be healed soundly, thoroughly, and comfortably.

I use to find this by experience, a City that is be leaguerd and won, he
that has won it, sets a Garrison over it, that he may keep it for ever under:
So when the soul has been won by the stroke of meditation affecting the
heart with sin, then set a garrison over the soul, and keep it in awe, set a
garrison over the Conscience and keep all down, keep all under, that it may
submit it self, and that kindly under the stroke of the truth, for it were a
blessed frame, if we could always be so in that temper that we are in when we
are first humbled for our sins.

The third rule, which is marvelous useful is this: when the soul has been
affected with sin by meditation, and kept to sin by attention, then know
how you must stint your souls; know therefore that the soul must be so far
kept to the consideration of sin, that it may seek out for pardon for sin.
This is a point of marvelous use, and you must give the leave to be enlarged;
because there are many deceits this way, in the spirits of a man: for mark it,
this is the cunning of the Devil, if it be possible, he will keep a man that
he shall never see, muse, nor be troubled for sin; and therefore he does
pluck him off, and sends him to company on one side, and merriment on the
other side, that by this means, he may keep him from serious meditation of
the evil: But if it be so that God will make a man meditate of his sins, and
that the heart of a sinner is fully resolved to muse, and ponder, and consider
of his corruptions; If he will pore upon his sins, then he shall see nothing
else but sin: and thus the Devil has hindered many a poor soul from
coming unto Christ, and from receiving comfort of him; he shall now be always
poring upon his corruptions, and therefore here lies the skill of a Christian,
not to neglect meditation, and therefore here is the stint of meditation of our
sins, you shall thus discover it: So far see thy sins, so far be
affected with them, so far hold thy mind to them, that they may make thee
see an absolute necessity of a Christ, and that these sins may drive thee to
the Lord Jesus Christ for succor: here is the maine thing observable, and thus
far we may go, and must go, if ever God intend to do good to our souls:
and therefore when thou set thy soul, and bestowest thy self to muse and
meditate upon thy corruptions, and lay them to thy heart; when thou find thy
soul to be affected with them, and humbled under them, labor then to see an
absolute necessity of a Lord Jesus Christ, and so far see them, that they may
drive thee, and compel thee to seek unto Christ for mercy: and this is all
God looks for, all the Lord requires and cares for in this preparation or
preparative work: And therefore take notice of it, see thy sins so far as
they may make thee merely look for a Christ, and to fall upon the arms of
Gods mercy in and through Christ. For it is not sorrow for sin, nor
humiliation, nor faith it self, that can justify us in it self, but only
these must make way for us to a Christ, and through him we must receive
comfort: for these two be the special extremes, that the Devil seeks to
drive a man into: If a man presume of a man's own sufficiency, then he thinks
he is well, and he will not go to Christ, because he thinks, he does not
stand in need of Christ; and if he despair of his own ability, he will not
go to Christ neither, and here is the ground why a sinner despaires, it is not
by reason of any sin, excepting only the sin against the holy Ghost,
despair is not grounded there, for Cain despaired, yet Manasses committed
greater sins then Cain and despaired not; but the soul despaires out of
stoutnesse of heart, because it has not sufficiency in it self, it will not
look out for help and comfort from another: presumption says, I have
sufficiency in my self, and need not go unto Christ; and despair says, I
have not sufficiency, and therefore will not go to Christ: here is the
property of despair, to cast away hope, when a man has no hope that God will
help him, now all the while the soul looks for sufficiency from Christ,
there is hope; for though our sins be never so heinous; that's nothing, all
the question is, whether we can hope in Christ; For if all the sins that ever
were, are, or shall be committed, ran into one man, as all Rivers run into
one Sea, Christ could as easily pardon his sins, as ever he pardoned the
sins of any Saints in heaven: but here is the ground, when we look into our
selves, we can see there is no sufficiency to comfort us, and we will not go
to Christ, that we may be comforted, and so we come to be void of hope, and to
despair: a despairing heart, is a proud stubborn heart; because he cannot
have what he would of his own, therefore he will not go to another to receive
it, and so sinkes down in his sins. And therefore let this be the period and
stint of meditation, when the soul so far sees sin and the punishment
deserved by it, that the heart is resolved that none but Christ can take away
these sins and the punishments due to them, and is resolved to seek to
Christ, and be beholden to him for all; when it is thus with you, then away to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and let this meditation of a man's corruptions be as a
Bridge to carry him to Christ, that so he may have salvation which is promised
through him, and shall be bestowed upon all broken hearted sinners: and mark
what I say, that soul that will not seek out to Christ, and will not be
beholding to Christ for what he need^, that soul wants brokennesse of heart:
What ever he be that will not seek out to Christ, and go out of himself to
another, wants brokennes, and this stubbornness of his, that he will not go
to Christ, arises from some of these three grounds.

First, the soul will not go out, it is because the heart thinks and
presumes it has no need of Christ, and therefore will not go, but we will
not meddle with that: for that is proper to carnal men.

Secondly, if the soul will not seek out to Christ for help and comfort, it
is because the heart is not content in good earnest to be ruled by Christ, that
Christ should come and take possession of the soul, and do all; therefore if
the heart cling to corruption, it is content that Christ should ease it, but
not that Christ should sanctify it, and remove that corruption that has
prevailed over it; and therefore when a man is under the sight of sin, he
would feign have God show mercy unto him, and yet he will not pray, nor read,
nor use the means but dwells upon the meditation of his sins, and neglects
many ordinances of God, whereby it may receive comfort: this man would have a
Christ to quiet him, but not to rule him, and take possession of him, and this
is the reason why, in these cases the soul is never commonly kindly stricken,
these would feign have quiet and comfort; ^^d yet they will not be driven to
holy duties, nor be content that Christ should rule in them, they are content
to commit the sin, but they would have pardon for it.

The third ground is this, and the cunningest of all, and that is this;
provided the soul be content to be ruled by the Lord Jesus, and to submit unto
him, yet here is another deceit of the soul of a poor sinner, that would
join something with Christ, for the helping of him in that great work of
salvation, and this I take to be the complaint of sinners, and sometime broken
hearted ones too; they dare not go to expect mercy from the Lord Jesus. Why?
why? because they are unworthy, so abominable their lives, so wretched their
courses, that they dare not go to Christ, that he may show mercy to them. I
reason the point thus; is it because of your unworthiness that you dare not
go to Christ? so then, if you had worthiness, this would encourage you for to
go: Why then, you think Christ is not able alone to help you, but you would
have your worthiness help Christ to save you, and so you would join with the
Lord Jesus in this great price of Salvation and Redemption: If your sins were
but small, and you had some worthiness, that so Christ might do something,
and your worthiness do something, and so you might make up the price between
you, then you could be content to go to Christ, but otherwise you think you
may not go to Christ, without some worthiness of your own; Again, why then
(belike) you (...) be beholden to Christ for so much mercy, and so much grace,
and so much forgiveness: one of these two must needs be the ground of this
complaint, either we would have our own worthiness join something with Christ,
or else we are so vile that we will not be beholden to Christ for so much
mercy; but this unworthiness indeed is nothing else but pride, a man will not
be beholden to Christ for so much mercy, but he will share with Christ in the
matter of salvation, or else he will not be pertaker of the great work of
redemption.

Imagine a debtor were in prison, and a friend sends to him, what ever the debt
be, if he will but come to him, he will pay all; the man returns this answer.
If he had not such a great debt to pay, he would be content to come to him, but
the truth is, the debt is so great that he will not come to him, nor trouble
him: now one of these two must needs follow, either he thinks his friend is
not able, or willing to pay his debt, or else in truth he will not be beholden
to him for so much, but if the debt were a little one, then he would make a
shift to pay some, and his friend some, and so they would make up the debt
between them: So it is in this case, this is that which keeps the heart from
laying hold on the promise: they think they are unworthy to partake thereof,
which is nothing but pride of spirit: for either they would bring something,
and share with Christ in the work of redemption, or else they will not be
beholden to Christ for so much mercy.

There is another shift which keeps the heart from going to Christ; O faith
one, I never had my heart so broken and affected as such a one has; and
therefore they dare not go to Christ, because they have not so much
contrition, their hearts so much broken as others have, therefore they dare not
go: Ay, but be your souls content to go to Christ and yield to him; would
you keep any corruption? is there any sin which you would not have Christ
come and remove? The soul answers, that they would be content to resign all
to the Lord Jesus Christ, but they are not so humbled as others are: I say the
ground of this complaint is nothing else but selfe-confidence in broken
heartedness, for the soul is not content to have so much broken heartedness
as is sufficient to bring a man to Christ, but it would have so much as that it
might bring a man to Christ to help him in the work of redemption; they
think i^ is not enough to have the soul so humbled as to submit to the Lord
Jesus Christ, but they would have so much as they would join with Christ in
this great work: which is nothing else, but carnal confidence. Therefore the
conclusion is this: So far see thy sins, so far meditate upon thy sins,
and so far labor to have thy heart affected with thy sins, and so far
attend unto them, that three things may follow.

First, that you may see an absolute necessity of Christ, and that thou may
use all means to seek unto him, and never be quiet whilst thou find him;
Nay, while thou do use the means but only upon the Lord Jesus; pray, and
rest not in prayer, but in a Savior that is obtained by prayer, hear, but
rest not in hearing, but convay to thy self what is revealed in hearing,
receive the Sacraments, but rest not in them, but therein seek a Savior which
is there signed: this is the very stint and pitch of meditation: thus far see
and affect and draw your hearts to the consideration of your sins, that the
soul may be forced to go to Christ, and use all means to find him, pray for
a Christ, hear for a Christ, use all means, and see a need of a Christ, to
bless thee in all thy services, and see a need of a Christ to pardon thy
sins, and then you take a right course; And thus much for the second passage;
now we see how to follow meditation home, that the soul may be affected
therewith, and holden thereto.

Ay, but you will say, our thoughts are dull, and our meditation frail, and
our wants heavy, and little good we get by this meditation, we fall to sin
again; how shall we come to get the life of meditation, that it may be to us
as it ought to be?

I answer, the means to make meditation powerful are two, I confess after a
man has mused and pondered, it is possible that a corrupt heart may recoile
and fall back again, therefore there are two helps to put more life into
meditation.

First, labor to call in the help and assistance of conscience, that
meditation may be more fruitful and powerful; conscience is a great
commander, it is Gods vicegerent and chief officer, and God is the general
overseer of all the affairs of the world, but conscience has authority to
execute Judgment according to the sentence God has revealed, and has a
greater command with the heart, then bare meditation has; understanding and
reason are but the underlings of the will, and they are but servants and
subjects to the will, and these only suggest and advise unto the will what is
good, as a servant may suggest to his master what is good, and yet his master
may take what he list, and refuse what he please in this kind. But conscience
has a greater command, Romans 2.15. conscience is said to accuse or excuse a
man, and conscience comes with a law and a command as the Apostle says, 1.
John 3.20. If our hearts condemn us; conscience makes the heart to yield. I
comp^^e it thus: look as it is happily with a man that is in debt, if a man
have a writ out for him, he is not troubled greatly with that, he will not go
to prison because of that, nay, though he show it him, yet he will not go, but
if he brings the Sergean^ ^o arrest him, then he must go, and and then he must
be imprisoned whether he will or not: So it is here, meditation brings in the
writ, and shows a man his sins, lays open all his duties neglected, so
many hundred duties omitted, so many thousand sins committed, so many
prophanatio^s of Sabbaths, so many oaths, so many blasphemies; but the soul
says, What is this to me? I have sinned, and others have sinned, and I shall
do as well as others; but conscience is a Sergeant, and Sergeants do your
office; these are your sins; and as you will answer it at the day of
Judgment, take heed of those sins upon pain of everlasting ruin. When
conscience begins thus to arrest a man, then the heart comes and gives way to
the truth revealed, and conscience thus settles it upon the heart.

The Second means whereby meditation may get power upon the soul, is this, we
must cry and crave, and call for the spirit of humiliation and contrition, that
God by that blessed spirit of his which in Scripture is called the spirit of
bondage would set to his helping hand and assist conscience his officer, and
take the matter into his own hand, and because there are many rebellious
corruptions that oppose Gods truth, we must call to heaven for help, that God
would seize upon the heart, and break it: A perverse heart will linde the
Judgment, and say, I will have my sins, though I be damned for them, and
when conscience comes, and says, I will bear witness against you for your
pride, and covetousness, and profaneness. They resist conscience: Look as it
is if a Sergeant arrest a man, he may escape his hands, or kill the Sergeant,
but if the Sheriff or the King himself come, and take the prisoner in hand,
then he must go to prison whether he will or no; so it is here, though a
corrupt heart can stop conscience, stay conscience, yet there is a commanding
power of Gods spirit; the spirit of humiliation: And when God comes from heaven
to aid his officer, the heart must stoop, and be governed. Look as it is
with a child that is under government, his father perhaps bids the servant
correct him, now it is admirable to see how the child will taunt with the
servant, and struggle with him mightily, now when the father hears this, he
says, Give me the rod, and he tells the child, you would not be whipped, but I
will scourge you, and he will set it home, and plague him so much the more;
because he resisted the servant: So it is here, the Lord has revealed his will
and sent his ministers to discover your sins, and verrifie your hearts, it is
strange to see what resistance we find; one scorns to hear, and rebels
against the minister. Well, however the voice of the minister, or the word,
cannot make the blow fall heavy enough for the time, yet if the Lord take the
rod into his own hand, he will make the stoutest stomach stoop, and the
hardest heart come in: when the father takes the rod into his hand, and lets in
hell fire, he will set it home, take it off who will or can; the Apostle calls
it the spirit of bondage: and observe the place, Romans 8.15.
When the spirit of bondage comes then comes fear: The spirit of bondage
is said to be the spirit of fear, as who should say, the Lord shows a man
his bondage by the Almighty power of his Spirit, and will make the soul feel
it and stoop unto it. Job. 36.^.10
In Job the Lord does show unto men their works, and then he commands them to
return, he opens their ear to discipline (says the text) and commands
that they return from iniquity, he opens the eye, and makes a man see his
sins, and then he commands the heart to return whether it will or no. When
the Lord does show unto man his sins, and holds him to his sins, that he
cannot look off them, this is the work of the spirit of bondage: when
conscience has done his duty, and yet his mouth is stopped, then the Lord
himself comes; and however the word by the mouth of the ministry could not
prevail, yet God will set the sun-light of his spirit to your souls, and then
you shall see your sins, and stoop under them. When a man would cut off the
sense of sin, yet where ever he is, and what ever he does, the Lord presents
his sins to him, when he goes in the way, he reads his sins in the paths,
when he is at meat his sins are before him, when he goes to lie down, he
goes to read his sins on the teaster of his bed, this is thy covetousness,
and thy pride, and for these thou shall be plagued. Look upon these sins,
they are thine own, and thou have deserved punishments to be inflicted upon
thee for them: thus we see the grounds how meditation must be raised: We see
how we may bring meditation home to the heart, we see how also we may get the
life and power of meditation.

I thought to have propounded an example that you may see the practice of the
truth delivered: as imagine it were the sin of the opposing of the word, I
would break my soul withal; first, by meditation cast the compass of this
sin, look into the word, and see whatsoever the word has revealed of this
sin: The text says, by this means the anger of the Lord is marvelously
provoked, in so much that he will laugh at the destruction of such. Prove. 1.26
Nay, by this means Christ himself is despised, nay, our condemnation is
hereby sealed irrecoverably. 2. Chron. 36.16. the text says, They despised
Gods word, till the wrath of the Lord arose, and there was no remedy: Nay,
hereby we aggravate our comdemnation. For Christ says, Mat. 11.22. Woe be to
thee Bethsayda: Woe be to thee Chorazin, for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
in dust and ashes: But it shall be easier for Tire and Sidon in the day of
judgment, then for thee: Nay, the Author to the Hebrews says, 2.3. How shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation? The case of such a man is
desperate: how shall we escape? Thus you see the reach how far this sin
goes, gather up all then, and tell your hearts of this, when they rebel and
oppose the word of God; How dare I do this? what, provoke God so far as to
laugh at my destruction? what, despise Christ and his Spirit, nay, make my case
irrecoverable, and aggravate to my condemnation? but if the heart will not
stoop under this, then call for conscience; conscience to your charge, and
then conscience comes, and charge the soul on pain of everlasting
condemnation to hear and to be humbled; And if this will not do, entreat the
Lord to take the rod into his own hand, and bring these truths home unto the
soul, that it may never be quieted till it be humbled: this is the course I
would have you take, to bring the truth home to your souls. When the minister
has done his sermon, then your work begins, you must hear all the week
long: he that never meditates of his sins, is never like to be broken hearted
for his sins: take notice of this, The text says of these converts, They
were pricked in their hearts.

This clause of the verse discovers unto us that, which brings in this
shiverednesse and contrition of spirit which the Lord calls for at the hands of
his servants; Now give me leave to make way for my self, by opening of the
words, that having taken away all the veil from them, you may more clearly
see the truth delivered.

First, let me show you what this piercing or pricking of the heart is.

Secondly, what is meant by heart. You must know, that sound sorrow, or sorrow
soundly set on, is here meant by pricking, and this word pricking resembles
sorrow in three degrees: For the word in the original imports not only a bare
pricking, but a searching quite through; and we have no word in our English
tongue to answer the same word, but only a shiverednesse of soul all to
pieces. I say there are three things wherein pricking resembles sorrow. First,
the body cannot be pricked, but there must be some pain, some grief, some
trouble wrought by it, and accompanying of it. Secondly, it is the separation
of one part from another, as the natural Philosophers couceive, and as the
Physician gives us to understand, it is the sundering of two parts. Thirdly,
the parts being thus pricked, there is the letting of it out, and if any blood
or water be in that part thus pricked, so answerably in this sound sorrow in
heart, there are three things; I mean in that sorrow which is set home by the
Almighty: First, there is a great grief and vexation of soul: Secondly, by
reason of the burden that lies upon the heart, that cursed knot, and union,
and combination between sin and the soul comes in some measure to be
severed and parted; the soul being thus grieved with the sin, is content to
be severed from it: this is the thing we aim at. Thirdly, this knot of
corruption being loosened, and this closure being broken, and the souldring
between sin and the soul being removed, there is now a passage for the
letting out of all these corruptions, that the heart may be taken from under
the power of sin and be subject to the power and guidance of God: This is the
true nature of sorrow. And by the way, consider this, unless the Lord should
thus wound and vex the soul, the heart that prizeth corruption as a God (as
every natural man does) would never be severed from it; did the soul see
only the delight in sin, it would never part from it; and therefore God is
forced to make us feel this, that we may be severed from our sins, and be
subject to him in all obedience.

Secondly, what is meant by heart; not to tire you with any matter of
signification, this word implies two things specially, which concerns our
purpose, both may be implied and intended, but the first is mainely implied and
intented, it is not the natural part of a man which is in the midst of the
body, that is, a fleshly heart; but it is the will it self, and that ability
of ^oule, whereby the heart says, I will have this, and I will not have that.
As the understanding is settled in the head, and keeps his sentinel there, so
the will is seated in the heart, when it comes to taking or refusing, this is
the office of the will, and ^t discovers his act there; As our Savior says;
Mat. ^. 1^
Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. And (as the Apostle
says) a man confesses with his mouth and believes with his heart: So then
they were not only pricked as with a pin, but this sorrow seiseth upon the
soul, and pierces unto the very will, it was not outward overly sorrow, but
that which went to the very root, and entered into the very heart.

(...)
From these words thus opened, the Doctrine I might have handled from this point
is, that sins unpardoned are of a piercing, nature, they were not only
pricked, because they heard the words, but their sins peirced them: but I will
not meddle with this point, though otherwise is were very useful.

The use is, this might take off the Imagination of those that think there
(...) no delight, but in sinful courses, they are much deceived: There is no
gall but in sin, and there is no sorrow but from sin, and sin only
imputed made our Savior to buckle under it, Psalm 22. David's heart was
crushed with it, Psalm. 40. Nay, the Apostle says, Ro^. 8 1^
All the creatures groaned under it, the earth groans under sinners, and is
willing to vomit them up, it is a burden to the Sun to give light to the
adulterer to see his harlot, and it is a burden to the air to give breathing
to a blasphemer that belcheth out his oaths against the God of heaven, nay, it
is that which sinkes the damned into the bottomless pit, it is such as Judas
had rather hang himself then endure the horror of Conscience for it: let this
therefore dash the foolish conceit of them which think there is no pastime but
in sin; however men glory in sin, and take delight in sucking the pleasure
of sin, yet the end will be bitterness. Their sweet meat will have a sower
sauce, and those sins which are so sweet, will eat out all comfort from
their souls, from everlasting to everlasting. They were pricked in their
hearts.

So that the maine point which fits our aim is this sound sorrow, piercing of
the soul of those that are affected with it, they were not only pricked in
their eyes to weep for their sins, and to say they would do so no more: The
adulterer is not only pricked in his eye, that he would see his adulterous
queen, no he goes further and sinketh into the very soul, and pierces
through the very heart; It is with sorrow that has any substance in it, as it
was with the repentance of Ninivie, not only the ordinary and refuse sort of
people forsook their sins, but even the King himself came from his throne
and sat in dust and ashes, yea, the Nobles and other subjects, and the very
beasts of the field did ^ast: So it is comparatively with this sorrow, it is
not only for the tongue to talk of sins, and the eye to weep for his
sins; but even the Queen of the soul, which is the will it self, puts on
sacke-cloth, and the heart and all the affections, as so many subjects follow
after: It breaks out into the eye, and the frame of the heart shakes with it,
and the knees knock together, and the hands grow feeble; it is not; O Lord be
merciful unto us, and so be gone: But it must go to your hearts; and you may
weep out your eyes, and cry your sins at the market cross, but have you put
off the will and affection of sinning as well as the tongue of sinning? the
nature of this sorrow is marvelous strange, Psalm. 51.^8.
consider it. David says, Make me to bear of joy and gladness, that the
bones which thou have broken may rejoice: This sorrow that did seize upon
David, was not slight, but it breaks all the bones which are the maine pillars
and props of nature, the burden was so heavy and so great, that it made all
the burden that was in him to shake. Psalm. 14.20.
And in another Psalm. My moisture is turned into the drought of Summer: This
sorrow went so deep into his soul, that it did not only take away his outward
refreshing, but it took away all the moist humors, the inward juice, the very
oil of life. It is admirable which the Prophet Hosea says Hosea 13.8. I will
meet them as a bear bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the kall of their
hearts. You must not think to have a whip and away, but the Lord will break
the very kall of those proud hearts of yours, rather then he will suffer sin
to dwell in you where his throne should be: And hence it is, that this sorrow
sink many. Did you never see a soul in distress of Conscience, he is all
turned to dust and ashes; this sorrow goes to the quick, it is not a little
touch and away, but it breaks the heart inwardly.

For the opening of this point, let me discover these particulars: First, how
the Lord works this sorrow, and how it is brought into the soul. Secondly, I
will show you the behavior of the soul when it is thus peirced, and this will
show the soundness. Thirdly, I will show some reason why it must be so.
Fourthly, I will answer some questions. Fifthly, make some uses, and therein lay
down some ends how we may help forward this work when it is begun.

For the first, I know God deals sometimes openly, and sometimes more
secretly: But for the first, how this pricking comes into the soul, and how
the Lord stabbs the soul, and makes at a man to thrust him through. This
discovers it self in three particulars. First, the Lord commonly and usually
lets in a kind of amazement into the mind of a sinner, and a kind of
gastering: As it is with a sudden blow upon the head, if it comes with some
violence, it dazells a man, that he knows not where he is; Just so it is
generally with the soul, the Lord lets in some flashes of his truth, and darts
in some evidences of his truth into the heart of a man, the hammer of Gods Law
lays a sudden blow upon the heart, and this discovers the vile nature of
sin; as when a drunkard is drunk to day, and will be so to morrow, and the
minister preaches against that sin, and yet he will be drunk still, and the
blasphemer says, come lets swear the minister out of the pulpit, now it may
be the Lord lets in some sudden truth, that unmaskes the soul, and drives
him to sudden amaze, that now he sees his corruptions to be otherwise then ever
he did; commonly he does not yet see the evil of sin, but he is driven to a
stand and a pawse, and he does not know what to say of himself, nor what to
think of his sin, there is a kind of tumult in his thoughts, and a confused
cumber, he knows not what to make of himself, and he goes away in a kind of
confused distemper: Thus it was with Paul when he was running a long to
Damascus; and had gotten a lusty Steed to make have, suddenly there did shine
a light from heaven, and he heard a voice from heaven saying unto him, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? He marvelled at the matter, and yet he did not
know what the matter was, and therefore he says, Who art thou Lord? What
would thou have me do^?

As it was with Saul, so it is most commonly with us all, it may be a poor man
drops into the Church, and the Lord lets in a light, and the Lord does compass
him about with some threatenings of the Law, and shows him the nature of sin,
and the damnation that comes by it, and thereupon his thoughts begin to hurry
in one upon another, and he retyres home, and thinks thus with himself, surely
the preacher spoke strange things to day, if all be true that he spoke, then
certainly my condition is naught, surely there is more in sin then ever I
thought of; I did always think that such sins as were gross and punishable
by the Law of man, were abominable, and God was incensed against them, but
what? will every wicked thought sink the soul into hell unless God pardon
it? and is God so just, and so severe, and will he punish all sinners? and must
I answer for all my petty oaths? If I shall be condemned for my words, and
thoughts, it is a strange thing: well, I will inquire further of the matter, it
is marvelous hard if it be true. Many a man has been thus, and goes no
further for the present.

Well then, Secondly, he resolves to hear the minister again, and he falls to
reading and conferring with others, to try if it be so as the minister before
revealed unto him, and commonly he goes to hear the same minister again, and
by this means what with hearing and reading and conferring, he sees the thing
he doubted of is too certain, and that the thing be questioned before is
without all doubt: the Law is just, the word is plain, if God be true, this is
true, The wages of sin is death; Yea of every sinful thought: and, He that
believes not, is condemned already: so that now the sinner begins to
consider that the condemnation threatened sleeps not, and that God has him in
chase, and that punishment that God threatens shall be executed upon him sooner
or latter: thus the soul from a general amazement, comes to see that it is
so, and by this means he is surprised with a sudden fear of spirit in
expectation and suspicion of what is discovered, left God should lay it upon
him, in so much that the soul says, What if God should damn me, God may do
it: and what if God should execute his vengeance upon me, the soul fears
that the evil discovered will fall upon him, the nature of his fear is this,
he knows there is cause of fear, and he cannot bear the evil when it is
come. He says, I am a sinful wretch, and God may damn me for ought I know,
and what if God should damn me: this is the reason of those phrases of
Scripture, We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, Romans ^*
1^.
the spirit that shows our bondage, and thence comes this fear.

Hence it is that the Apostle says to Timothy, God has not given us the
spirit of fear: 1. Tim ^.^7.
That is, the spirit of bondage that works fear; and therefore the Lord says
by Moses, Thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day
and night, thou shall have no assurance of thy life. It is with a soul in this
fear, as it was with Belshazzar when he commanded the cups to be brought out
of the house of the Lord, that he, and his nobles, and his concubines might
quaffe in them, and brave against the God of Israel: then came a hand writing
against him on the wall, and when he saw it, his thoughts troubled him and his
face began to gather palenesse, and his knees knocked one against another, as
if he should say, surely there is some strange evil appointed for me, and with
that, his heart began to tremble and shake; Just so it is with this fear, he
that runs riot in the way of wickedness, and thinks to despise Gods Spirit,
and to hate the Lord Almighty, and to resist the work of his grace and says
within himself, Let us go and hear the minister, that we may cavil at him,
and persecute him.

Now it may be there comes this fear and handwriting against him; and who
knows but that it may be thus with thee, whosoever thou art: for this is a
note of the child of the devil, to hate Gods servants, and ministers. Now when
a wicked man hears this, he says, the word of God was profestly spoken
against him, and these are my sins, and these are the Judgments and plagues
threatened against them, and therefore why may not I be damned? and why may I
not be plagued? and thus his heart is full of fear, and he begins to reason
with himself; what, is this the nature of sin? and are these the Judgme^ts
of God denounced against sinful creatures? why then, what if God should lay
these Judgeme^ts upon my soul? and who knows but God will do so to me this
day; pluck me out of the land of the living? I am sure my sins are such, and
Gods Judgments are such threatened against them, and therefore why may not this
be? and when he goes to bed he reasons thus; what if I never rise more? and
when he goes from home, what if I never return more? and God may take me with
my meat in my mouth, and cast me down into hell fire for ever. The soul
being in this estate, and the heart being thus pestered and plagued with the
fear of Gods wrath that follows a man like a Jailor, he is hindered still
that he cannot sin so freely, but still the wrath of God pursues him, and
says, Do you not fear that God may take you away in the act of sinning, and
in the midst of your chambring and wantonness? The heart being thus pestered
with this fear, it is not able to endure it, he labors to drive away this
trouble and dread from his mind, and still he thinks God is against him, and
he hears some behind him saying, Thou must come to Judgment and be plagued:
Now the soul labors to drink away and play away this Sorrow. Another man
happily that was a prodigal before, rises now early and will be exceedingly
busied about his occasions all the day long, that these things may take up his
mind; and the reason is, there lies something at the heart and he cannot tell
which way to drive away his fear, but he labors all in vain: For this is to
make up walls with untempered mortar which will presently fall down; it is as
much as a man should labor to ease himself of sin by sinning, to give a man
cold drink in a hot burning fever.

Thirdly, in the third place the Lord pursues the soul, and when the heart
cannot be rid of this fear, the Lord begins to let fly against the soul of
a sinner, and discharges that evil upon him which was formerly feared, and
affliction enters into the heart. The nature of fear is to fear an evil to
come: now the Lord makes the soul to see that it is not only great drunkards
and adulterers that are threatened, but every sinful thought and idle word.

The soul would feign have driven away this fear, but the Lord will not let
him, but says, these curses shall kindle upon thee, and shall continue for
ever to thy perdition. And hence comes this sorrow, the Lord lets in some vein
of his vengeance, and some secret displeasure of his, and makes sin to stabbe
the soul, and then the curse lies upon him, and the Lord as it were kindles
the fire of his wrath upon him really, and makes him see this is that which he
feared. Now his conscience is all on a flame within him, and he says to
himself, Thou have sinned and offended a just God, and therefore thou must be
damned and to hell thou must go: This is the particular seizing of the curse
upon a sinful soul; for this is the nature of true sorrow, if evil be to
come we fear it, if evil be upon us we grieve and sorrow for it, herein is
the greatest work of all, and the Lord deals diversely as he sees fit;
specially these three ways.

First, if God have a purpose to civilize a man, he will lay his sorrow as a
fetter upon him; he only means to civilize him, and knock off his fingers
from base courses, as we have known some in our days; many desperate
persecutors of Gods people, God casts his sorrow into their hearts, and then
they say, they will persecute Gods people no more, happily they are naught still,
but God confines them first: God only rippes the skin a little, and lays
some small blow upon him: but if a man have been rude and a great ryoter, the
Lord begins to serve a writ upon him, and says, Thou art the man, to thee be
it spoken, thy sins are weighed, and thou art found too light, heaven and
salvation is departed from thee, thy sorrow is begun here, never to have end
hereafter, but thou must continue in endless torments: thou have continued in
sin, and therefore expect the fierce anger of the Lord to be upon thee for
ever; so that now the soul sees the flashes of hell and Gods wrath upon the
soul, and the terrors of hell lay hold upon the heart, and he confesses he
is so, and he has done so: And therefore he is a poor damned creature, and
then the soul labors to welter it, and it may be his conscience will be
deluded by some carnal minister that makes the way broader then it is, and
bids him go and drink, and play, and work away his sorrow: or else it may
be, he stops the mouth of conscience with some outward performances: it may be
his conscience says, Thou have committed these and these sins, and thou will
be damned for them; And then he entreats conscience to be quiet and hold his
peace, and he will pray in his family, and hear sermons, and take up some good
courses; and thus he takes up a quiet civil course, and stays here a while,
and at last comes to nothing: And thus God leaves him in the lurch, if he
means only to civilize him.

But Secondly, if God intends to do good to a man, he will not let him go
thus, and fall to a civil course: When a man begins to color over his old
sins, and God has broken his teeth, that he cannot worry as formerly: but
yet there is no power in him: If the Lord love that soul, he will much the
more clearly reveal his sins unto him: God will pluck away all his
chambering and wantonness, all his pride and peevishness, and pull off his
vizzard, and show him all his sins, and pursue him; therefore as before God
entered the blow, so now he follows it home. And hence it is that Job says,
The arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me, and the venom thereof drinks
up my spirits, and the terrors of the Almighty encampe themselves against me
every way. And as David says, Thou keep my eyes waking, and my sins are
ever before me. If God love a sinner, and mean to do good to him, he will not
let him look off his sin, the Lord will ferret him from his den, and from
his base courses and practices: He will be with you in all your stealing and
pilfering, and in all your cursed devises, if you belong to him he will not
give you over.

Job. 7.19
And in another place Job says, How long will thou not depart from me, nor let
me alone till I swallow down my spittle? You had better a great deal now have
your hearts humbled and broken, and see your sins, then to see them when
there is no remedy.

And in another place the holy man Job says, Thou will not suffer me to take
in my breath, Job. 9.18.
but fillest me with bitterness. Your eyes have beholden vanity, and therefore
now you shall see the Lords wrath against you for your sins; and you have
breathed out your venom against the Lord of heaven, therefore now he will fill
your souls with indignation, in so much that he shall breath in his wrath, as
you have breathed out your oaths against him: you have filled the Lords eyes
and ears with your abominations, and the Lord of heaven shall fill you
answerably with his wrath.

And in another place Job says, Thou will break a dry leaf tossed too and
fro: And yet the Lord brake him: Now the soul sees all the evil, and the
Lord pursues him and sets conscience aworke to the full. Consider that of the
Apostle, That all those might be damned which believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness: Even all of them. What, shall no great ones be
saved? No, nor you little ones neither; all that lay not hold upon Christ, but
have pleasure in unrighteousness, not only great ones, and such as are
abominably profane, but even all that had pleasure in wickedness. Now
conscience says, Do not thou know that thou art one of them that have had
pleasure in unrighteousness, therefore away thou must go, and thou shall be
damned: Now the soul shakes, and is driven beyond it self, and would utterly
faint, but that the Lord upholds it with one hand, as he beats it down with
the other; he thinks that every thing is against him, and the fire burns to
consume him, and he thinks the air will poison him, conscience flies in his
face, and he thinks hell mouth is open to receive him, and the wrath of God
hangs over his head, and if God should take away his life he should tumble
headlong down to hell.

Now the soul is beyond all shift, when it is day, he wishes it were night,
and when it is night he wishes it were day; the wrath of God follows him
wheresoever he goes, and the soul would feign be rid of this, but he cannot;
and yet all the while the soul is not heavy and sorrowful for sin, he is
burdened, and could be content to throw away the punishment and horror of
sin, but not the sweet of sin: as it is with a child that ta^es a live
coal in his hand, thinking to play with it, when he feels fire in it, he
throws it away, he does not throw it away, because it is black, but because it
burns him; So it is here: A sinful wretch will throw away his sin, because
of the wrath of God that is due to him for it, and the drunkard will be drunk
no more, but if he might have his queanes and his pots without any punishment
or trouble, he would have them with all his heart, he loves the black and
sweet of sin well enough, but he loves not the plague of sin.

Foolish people (says the Prophet) are plagued for their sin. If thou
roarest for disquiet of heart, and thy bones are broken; it is because of thy
sin; thy pride, and drunkenness, and uncleanness, brought this upon thee; If
thou will be eased of the plague, throw away thy corruptions, if you would have
the effect removed, then take away the cause.

There are two things in sin which make a man sorrowful; first sin it
self that does defile a man, and separate him from God: Secondly the
punishment of sin. Now the sinner looks either so far at sin as it causes
punishment, or as it separats from God.

Happily a sinner will come to this, he will be content to carry his heart, and
that furiously against sin, because it brings Judgments and plagues; But
thus far a hypocrite may go, a Judas, a Caine, a Saul: Caine would say his
sins were greater then could be forgiven: because he had killed his brother;
but he could never see his sin so vile; because it did separate him from God.

Thus you see how God enters the blow, and follows it home upon the soul,
but yet for all this, God may leave a man as he did Judas and Saul, and there
is an end of them.

Now in the third place, if the Lord purpose to do good to the soul, he will
not suffer him to be quiet here, but he opens the eye of the soul further;
and makes him sorrow, not because it is a great and shameful sin, but the
Lord says to the soul, even the least sin makes a separation between me
and thee; and the heart begins to reason thus, Lord is this true? is this the
smart of sin? and is this the vile nature of sin? O Lord! how odious are
these abominations that cause this evil, and though they had not caused this
evil, yet this is worse then the evil, that they make a separation between
God and my soul. Good Lord, why was I borne? and why came I into this world?
why did God continue me here, and all the means of grace for my good, and all
the comforts of this life, whereby my course might be maintained and made less
tedious? what if I did want this horror of heart, and had all the ease in the
world? and what if I might be free from all misery on earth? what were this, so
long as I had sin in my soul, that makes a separation between God and my
soul? I was made to be one with God, and to have communion with God, and to
obey his commandments, but I have departed from God by sin and departed from
his commandments.

A Godless and a graceless man is a miserable man though he were never
plagued at all; I was made to honor God, and I have done nothing else but
dishonor him: I was made to subject my self to the good will of God, but I
have withdrawn my self from his will; and this is my misery and my plague; If
I had been in hell, and had not had sin, I had been a happy man, and though
I had been in heaven and had had sin I had been a miserable man; because it
makes a separation between me and my God.

Nay, the sinner still thus pleads with himself, what is this to me that I am
rich and miserable, honorable and damned, to have quiet, and ease here, and a
benumbed conscience, and so in the end to be thrown among the devils for
dogs meat? If I had all the ease, wealth, honors, and friends in the world,
so long as I have this vile heart I could not be a happy man.

If you were never pierced for your sins your condition is woeful, you shall
have enough of it one day, you that are never troubled for your sins but go
on smoothly, know this, I charge you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
though you had all the ease and pleasures in the world, so long as you have
these proud, sturdy, unfaithful hearts, you are as miserable creatures as ever
breathed upon the face of the earth.

Thus the heart complains as sometimes the lamenting Church did, Woe to us
that we have sinned, not because we have deserved plagues, but because we have
sinned, woe to us, for the God of grace is gone from us, and the God of mercy
is gone from us, because we have sinned; and the God of blessedness is gone
from us because we have walked in cursed ways. Hold here and then your sorrow
goes right, if the soul can say, though I have no horror of heart, yet if I
have this sinful heart, I am a miserable man.

Then thy sorrow is right. Sometimes God deals thus punctually with a man;
first, he drives it to an amazement, Secondly, he works in him marvelous fear
of evil that is to come; Thirdly, he possesses the soul with the feeling of
the evil, and so forth, as in the former particulars, but yet is bound to no
time, and therefore we must not limit the holy One of Israel: it is true, the
Lord may press in upon the soul, and work all this on the sudden, but yet
experience has proved, and reason will confirm it, when God works never so
sudde^ly, he affects the soul, thus when a poor soul comes in the
congregation, he lays some truth upon him, that is new and terrible, so that
the soul dare not deny it, nor yet fully resist it, but is in a maze, and by
and by it may be the Lord opens his eyes and awakens his conscience, and makes
that more evide^t to the soul, and so immediately arrests the soul, and then
sorrow falls in a maine upon it; and the heart thinks God meant my courses, and
the minister spoke against him; and he must go down to hell suddenly; so that
sometimes the sinner cries out in the congregation, and though he contain
himself for a time, yet he buckles under the burden; all this may be done at
one sermon, in one doctrine, or in one part of an use; but usually this is Gods
manner of working. But now the question in the next place will be this, how does
the soul behave it self under this sorrow?

I answer, when the soul is sorrowful for sin, as it is sin, and as it is a
breach of the Law of God, it may appear by these two particulars. First, the
soul is most of all weary of sin, because of the vile nature of it. Secondly,
it is restless in importuning the Lord for mercy and pardon for it.

First, the heart is most of all weary of the burden of sin, as it is sin,
and thinks it the greatest burden in the world: as a man that has a great
burden on his back wrincheth this way and that way, and if he cannot remove
it, yet he will ease it; so the heart uses all means, and takes all courses,
that if it were possible, it may cast off and ease it self of the vileness of
sin and plague of sin. This wearisomnesse of the soul, which follows the
weight of sin, makes it self known in these three particulars.

First, his eye is ever upon it, his mouth is ever speaking of it, and he is
always complaining against it, and he is readily content to take shame to
himself for it. If a man have a sore place in his body, his eye, and his
finger will ever be upon it: so it is with the soul; As the people when they
apprehended the hideous wrath of God against them, they entreated Samuel to
pray for them, 1. Sam. 12.19.
for (say they) We have added to all our sins this specially, in asking of us
a King.

As it is with a man that has the stone in the reins, or some stitch in his
side, or where ever his pain or trouble is, there he complains most; and when
the Physitia^ comes to feel on his body he says, is it here? no ^^ith he: is
it here? and when he comes to the right place, he says, there it is, cut
there, and lance there: So it is with a man that is stung with the vile nature
of sin, when he comes to complain of sin, he does not altogether complain
of his horror, nor of death; but he says, O! that chambring and wantonness,
that pride and stubbornness and rebellion of heart: O! that ryoting, and
malice against the Saints of God: The soul sees this, and complains of it,
and takes shame to himself for it; as Paul deals with himself: which argues
a heart truly weary of corruption. I was a persecutor, and a blasphemer, and
the like; and I was received to mercy; he does not say, I was in horror or in
trouble, but I was a persecutor: he does not say, I was thus and thus plagued,
but I was an injurious person to Gods Church, there he was weary, and there he
would be eased, if it were possible. Let all vile wretches tremble at it, for
God has enough for all Pharoes and Nymrods.

Away therefore with all these Lapwing cries and complaints, it is the nature
of that bird to cry and flutter most when she is farthest from her neast,
because by this means she would cozen passengers, and have her young ones: So
it is with an hypocrite, he will complain a great way off of his sin, and
have some secret turning. It is admirable to see how hard it is for a man to
lay open his sins before God, it is a sign that he is never weary of sin,
that he is not willing truly to confess his sin, when he is lawfully called
to it, and when he pretends (...) it is true sometimes God will accept of a
confession made to him in secret, if it be in truth, but when God will have a
man unbowell himself, and all his abominations, and when a man comes and
desires comfort in this kind, then for a man to cover his sin, and to
complain a far off of some ordinary corruption, which every poor child of
God is troubled with, and that particular lust whereof he is guilty for shame
he is not willing to acknowledge; this argues that the heart is naught and
never sound this wearisomnesse of sin: I know that the best heart under
heaven will have many windings and turnings; but the Lord will never leave the
heart in this case, till he come to deal plainly; and say, these are my
sins, and this is my uncleannes, and this is my secret theft, and thus he
opens himself at large, to that man whom God has appointed for that end:
but some are content to confess and complain of their sins when God has
them upon the rack, and Judas did, but mark, his punishment is the greatest
cause of his complaint, and hell is his greatest fear, he (...) weary of sin
because of the plague and punishment due to it, but he never regards the
vileness of sin in this respect, because it makes a separation between God
and his soul. Secondly, as the soul complains of the vile nature of sin and
desires to have his face covered with shame, for it is so in the second place;
it will never meddle with nor give way to any thing that is sinful, so far
as it is revealed, so to be setting aside sudden passions, and violent
temptations, but when a man is come to himself again, his conscience is
awakened; this is sure, the soul will not dare to tamper with any thing that
is sinful: why? because it has bin wearied with the burden of it before. It is
the practice of the lamenting Church in Hosea; Hosea. 14.3.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride on horses, neither will we say to
the works of our hands: Ye are our Gods, for with thee the fatherles find
mercy. That is, we will meddle no more with any thing that is sinful, wh^reby
we have dishonoure^ God heretofore, for they had trusted in their horses, and
made Idols, and relied upon them, but now they cast them clean off.

The reason is, because when the soul sees sin as it is sin, and that it is
burden to the soul, and the heart is now weary of it, it will lay no more
weight upon it, because now the heart is weary enough already. The blasphemer
fears an oath, and the adulterer shakes to see his queen, and he trembles to
see the place where his abominations have been committed, and now his heart
loathes all these. If a man has been once at deaths door by drinking deadly
poison, he will never taste of it more; Nay, he will not endure the sight of
that cup, he will rather fare hardly, and rather starve then eat and drink
that which shall kill him, so (says the soul) it is sin that has made a
separation between me and my God, this pride, or this uncleanness had been
the death of me if God had not been merciful unto me, and therefore I will
rather sink and die then meddle with these sins any more.

And hence it is, that if any thing come under the color of corruption, the
soul that is truly weary of sin, says, Omitting of this duty is evil, and
therefore I will not omit it, the doing of this action is sinful, and
therefore I will not do it; because the sin is worse then the plague, he
will take the less evil of the two, as we use to do in other matters: if a
man hate his sin for the plague, then so soon as that is removed, he
returns to his sin again, the blow was but weak. This was the fault in
Judas his sorrow he did see and confess his sins, and bewail them, and did
more then many will do now a days, and took shame to himself, bu^ though he
confessed and complained of his sin, yet he would rather commit murder upon
himself, then under-goe the horror of sin; if he had been weary of sin
because of the loathsomenesse of it, he would not have laid violent hands upon
himself: These two passages are every where, where true saving grace is.

Now in the third place, if God should deprive a sinner of his judgment and
horror of conscience, yet if his heart be truly apprehensive of sin as it is
sin, he cannot lay aside his sorrow; so long as sin prevails and gets head
against him, and dogs him up and down, nothing will content him, but the
removal of his sin: That soul which was cured by any other mean save only
by Christ, was never truly wounded for sin: If ease cures him, then horror
was his vexation: If honor cure him, then shame was his burden: If riches
cure him, the^ poverty did most of all pinch him: but if the soul were truly
wounded for sin, then nothing can cure him but a Savior to pardon him, and
grace to purge him: for what is that to the soul, to have ease and liberty,
nay to be in heaven, if he have a naughty rebellious heart, nay if it were
possible for him to be in heaven with his sinful heart, it would tire him and
burden him there: Therefore those souls that are cured by any thing saving by
Christ, those souls were never truly wounded for sin as sin: It may be
horror and vexation lay heavy upon the^, but it was not the stroke of sin
that did trouble them.

Then gather up all, he that which out of the vileness which he sees in sin
is content to take shame to himself, and will not meddle with his sin,
neither carelessly nor willingly, and is not cured by any thing saving by
Christ, this man behaveth himself truly in the first place. Thus much of the
trial.

Secondly, again, the soul is restless in importuning the Lord for mercy,
and will not be quieted till it get some evidence of Gods favor, the soul
will take on nay, it will not be contented unles it can find some glimps of
acceptance through the goodness of God in Christ. This is plain, if a man be
burdened with a weight, or some heavy load that is laid upon him, if that he
be fallen under his burden, he lies there like to die, and if there be none
near to succor him, all his care is to cry out for help, and though he sees
no man yet he cries out, O help, help, for the Lords sake. Saul was without
sight three days, Acts. 9.17.
and no doubt he prayed to God all that while, as if he had resolved to give
him no rest till he had found mercy: this is the nature of true sorrow, it ever
drives a man to God, whereas reprobate sorrow drives a man from God: Nay, it
may be, though the heart thinks it shall never find mercy, yet the Lord
carries on the soul in an earnest desire, and using the means, and will not
off from God, and from his word and sacraments and ordinances, Nay, though he
sometime concludes that he shall never get mercy, nor get power against his
corruptions; and then one says, You had best leave off all; Nay, (says the
soul) I cannot be worse then I am, if I go to hell I will go this way. There
is a kind of sorrow in the heart which is heavenly and godly, but reprobate
sorrow even drives a man from God, and maks him say, if I am damned I am
damned, if I be a reprobate I am so. O ^hou wretch, is this all? If a poor
creature that is pressed under his burden cries for help, when almost nature
and strength does fail, he cries still for help, and that is all he can say,
and so he dies, and this is the last word that he speaks with a soft still
voice O help, help: So it is with the soul of a poor languishing sinner, when
the heart is burdened with the vileness of the nature of sin and the
separation from God by the same, he does not now cry ease and liberty and
riches Lord: No, he cries mercy mercy Lord on this vile heart of mine, and give
me power against these mighty lusts: and after many means using when he is
going the way of all flesh, his last word is mercy.

Me thinks I see this poor soul slyding away and saying, how many sins
have I committed, Oh mercy, mercy, Christ. And this is the last word he
speaks, and so he dies; and no question but mercy shall be given him. It is
not a Lord have mercy upon me, and God forgive me will serve the turn: No, it
is otherwise, if ever God set home this work, he will make you restless in
seeking mercy, and nothing shall content you but mercy to pardon your sins,
and grace to subdue them, and the soul thinks if mercy would but shine upon
him, and if his sins were taken away that they might never hinder him in a
Christian course, he were a happy man: this is the frame of the soul that is
truly weary of sin.

When the young man came to Christ, and played fair and a far off, and said
he could do any thing. Well (said Christ) if thou can do any thing, Mat.
19.22.
then go and sell all that thou have and give it to the poor: but he went
away sorrowful from Christ (says the text) he did not come to Christ
sorrowful, but went away sorrowful from Christ whereas if he had been
burdened with sin as sin, he would have come to Christ sorrowful, and
say, Now I see Lord the world is a heavy burden, O Lord help me against it,
give me mercy to pardon me, and grace to remove it: But our Savior heard no
more of the young man, and as it is in the text, this pricking of heart made
the Jews come to Peter saying^, Men and brethren, What shall we do? They did
not as a great many say now a days, if the minister were far enough off from
me, and I from him, I were happy, I cannot be quiet for him: these are
reprobate speeches: but the sinner that is truly humbled and burdened with
sin as sin, he comes home, and is resolved to wait for mercy till the Lord
shows mercy to him. Carnal sorrow sent Judas and Achitophel to the gallows,
but godly sorrow ever drives a man to God.

When Jonah was in the Whales belly he said, Lord, though I cannot come to thy
temple, I will look toward it: so a sorrowful soul that is truly burdened
with sin, will say, though I cannot come to heaven, yet I will look up to
heaven: and though I never find mercy, yet for mercy will I wait: thy mercy
only Lord shall content me.

The next thing is this, we think of all things our sin most pleasant, and
nothing so grievous as Gods commandments, and therefore will these sins
wherein we have taken so much content, will these so wound the soul; why
should sin so wound and pierce the soul? The reasons are these three.

The first is this, the soul must be pierced with sin, because it is the
greatest evil of the soul, and therefore if the heart do but truly apprehend
it, it cannot but it must be most of all burdened with it: If a man bear two
weights on his back, that is most grievous which is most heavy; if he feel
the burden, as the nature of it requires, it will most press the shoulders of
him that bears it; if the one be thirty and the other forty pound weight,
nature will be most burdened with the greatest weight: so there is no evil so
properly and directly evil to the soul, as the evil of sin: Punishment
deprives the soul of ease and quiet, but sin depives the soul of God, and the
maine end for which it was created, through which the soul must be happy, or
for the want of this it must be accursed. Now sin is as it were ten thousand
weight, when as sorrow and shame and punishment, they are but a hundred weight:
if it were possible for a man to have all the ease and quiet in the world, and
to be in heaven, yet if he had a foul heart and a sinful soul, he were a
miserable cursed creature, and if it were possible to be in hell, free from
sin, he were a happy man. There is nothing that can do properly good to the
soul but God, and nothing can properly do any hurt to the soul but sin,
which estra^geth the heart from God, which is the chiefest good. If a man had
all the pleasures and contents the world could afford, nothing will satisfy the
soul but God, and if the soul were in horror, and had the presence of God
with it, it would not but be comforted and quieted therewith, it is possible;
Nay, God does it also, he makes the soul of a man feel the burden of sin
because of the vileness of it, as well as of the plague and punishment of it.

When the Lord will fasten a man's sin to his conscience, he is able to force
the soul to apprehend the evil of sin as well as the torment and plague of
sin.

And the ground is this, take the soul as it is polluted with corruption and
all abominations, sin is very cross to the nature of the soul, it is a
creature and a created thing by God, and has his being from God, and the soul
as it is a creature, was made for God: and howsoever the power of sin
prevailed with it and made it fall short of God, yet the nature of the soul
still, considering it as it is a creature, it is made for God, and desires to
have fellowship and union with God: therefore mark how I despute: If sin be
the worst evil to the soul, as crossing the end of it, and depriving the
soul of his chiefest good, then the Lord is able to make the soul see sin
as the greatest evil to the soul; But sin crosses the end of the creature,
for the end of the creature is Godward, and to have union and fellowship with
God. Therefore the Lord is able to make the soul see the evil of sin as
well as the evil of punishment: Therefore it is no wonder that the heart be
most of all pierced with sin.

The second reason is, because by sound sorrow the soul is truly prepared and
fitted for the Lord Jesus Christ, and no other way then this: namely, when the
soul sees the burden of sin as sin: For when the soul comes to feel sin
in the proper colors of it, and to be affected with the loathsomeness that is
in that sin, which has formerly overruled it: Now the soul begins to
renounce the power of that sin, and to withdraw himself from under the
dominion of his corruptions, so that the union between sin and the soul is
now broken, and room is prepared and way is made for the Lord Jesus to come
into the soul; when sorrow has wearied the heart and loosened it from the
love of sin then the heart is fitted for Christ. As it is with a vessel that
has been for dishonor, if a man will turn the nature of it and make it a
vessel of honor, he must not only beat it a little, but he must melt it
thoroughly, and then it is fit to be a vessel of honor. So the soul of every
sinful man and woman is a vessel of dishonor, and sin has marvelously
polluted them. Now if you will have your hearts fitted for Christ, you must not
only have your hearts warmed a little by humiliation, but you must have them
melted all to pieces, and the heart must be content to part with all
abominations whatsoever, that so the Lord may take place in it, and rule over
it even for ever. First, cast out the strong man, and then the Lord Christ will
come in and take possession of the heart; sin and satan are the strong man,
and the Lord Christ binds this strong man and casts him out, when he shows
the vileness of sin, and tries the heart with the burden of it, and binds
the soul to good behavior; that now the heart is readily content that Christ
should come and do all in the soul.

Many have gone a great way in the strok of humiliatio^, and yet because it
never went through to the quick, they have gone back again, and become as
vile as ever they were; I have known men, that the Lord has laid a heavy
burden upon them; and awakened their consciences, and driven them to a
desperate extremity, and yet after much anguish and many resolutions and the
prizing of Christ, as they conceived, and after the renouncing of all, to take
Christ upon his own terms, as they imagined; and even these when they have
been eased and refreshed, and God has taken off the trouble, they have come
to be as cross to God and all goodness, and as full of hatred to Gods
children as ever, and worse too.

Now why did these fall away? Why were they never Justified and Sanctified? and
why did they never come to believe in the Lord Jesus? The reason is, because
their hearts were never pierced for their sin, they were never kindly
loosened from it; this is the meaning of that place in Ier. Plow up the fallow
grounds of your hearts, Ier. 4.3. opened.
and sow not among thorns, it is nothing else, but with sound saving sorrow to
have the heart pierced with the terrors of the Law seizing upon it, and the
vileness of sin wounding the conscience for it. The heart of a man is
compared to fallow ground that is unfruitful; you must not sow amongst thorns
and thistles, first plow it, and lay it bare and naked, and then cast in your
seed. If a man plow here a furrow, and there a furrow, and leave here and there
a bawke, he is never like to have a good croppe, there will grow so many
thistles and so much grass, that it will choke the seed: our hearts are this
ground, and our corruptions are these thorns and thistles: Now if a man be
content to find some sin hateful, because it is shameful, but will keep
here a lust and there a lust, he will never make any good husbandry of his
heart: though a faithful minister should sow all the grace of the promises in
his soul, he would never get any good by them, but the corruptions that
remain in the heart will hinder the saving work thereof.

Therefore plow up all, and by sound saving sorrow labor to have thy heart
burdened for sin, and estranged from it, and this is good husbandry indeed;
the want of this was the wound of the thorny ground as you may see in the
parable, those hearers had much of the world in them, Mat. 13.
much ease, and profit, and pleasure, and these choked the word and made it
utterly unfruitful, and so they never received comfort nor mercy afterward.
Psalm. 51.17.
This is that which the Prophet David says, A contrite and an humble heart O
God thou will not despise* If you would have your hearts such as God may ^ake
delight in, and accept; you must have them broken and contrite: David says The
Lords voice breaks the Cedars of Libanus. So the voice of the Lord like
lightning must thunder into the corrupt heart of sinful creatures. Psalm* 29.5.


A contrite heart is that which is powdered all to dust, Psalm. 90.
as the Prophet says, Thou bring us to dust, and then thou say, return
again ye sons of men. So the heart must be broken all in pieces, to powder,
and the union of sin must be broken, and it must be content to be weaned from
all sin; as you may make any thing of the hardest flint that is broken all to
dust, So it is with the heart that is thus fitted and fashioned; If there be
any corruption that the heart lingers after, it will hinder the work of
preparation: If a man cut off all from a branch, save one sliver; that will
make it grow still that it cannot be ingrafted into another stock; So though a
man's corrupt heart depart from many sins and scandalous abominations: yet if
he keep the love of any one sin, it will be his destruction: as many a man
after horror of heart has had a love after some base lust or other and is held
by it so fast, that he can never be ingrafted into the Lord Jesus. This one
lust may break his neck and send him down to hell. So then, if the soul
only can be fitted for Christ by ^ound sorrow, then this must needs pierce the
heart before Christ can come there, but the heart cannot be fitted for Christ
without this, and therefore of necessity, the heart must be truly wounded with
sorrow for sin.

Sorrow for sin makes us set a high price upon Christ.
either the grace of God offered in the gospel, or that good way which God
has commanded us to walk in. If the heart find the greatest evil to be in
horror and vexation, then ease and quietness from these will be the greatest
good; but now the soul sees grace to be truly precious; because it sees
sin to be truly vile: and this is the end why the Lord makes the soul see
the vileness of sin; that the heart may be brought to see the excellency in
Christ and prize him above all.

Now there are two questions to be answered. Quest. 1.
First, whether this sound sorrow be a work of saving grace, and such a work
as cannot be in a reprobate.

Question 2.
Secondly, whether God does work this in all men that are truly converted and
brought home to Christ, and whether he works this in all alike or no.

Answ.
For the first,whether is this a work of saving grace yea or no, and such as
cannot be in a reprobate: for answer to this,

First I will show the order that this work has to the other works.

Secondly, I will show the difference of this from sanctifying sorrow, and yet
it comes to be sanctifying sorrow.

For the order: first, the heart in this work is not yet conceived to be in
Christ, but only to be fitted and prepared for Christ.

If you stop here in your consideration, and despute not of any work to
come, it is only in the way to be ingrafted into Christ; but so, that
undoubtedly that soul which has this work upon it shall have faith powered
into it: for this is the meaning of that place, The Lord Jesus came to socke
and s^ve that which was lost. Luke 19.10.
Now to be lost is not because a man is sinful and miserable in himself; but
he is lost that sees the evil of sin, and the punishment that comes thereby,
and comes to be lost in his own apprehension, in r^gard of his own estate;
and he that is thus lost shall be sure to have Christ and salvation by him. It
was the end why Christ came, and therefore it shall be fulfilled.

But he that is truly sensible of his sin and the vileness of it, and abhors
himself for it, he is truly lost, he is not yet settled on Christ, for then he
were safe enough, but he is truly sensible of his lost estate, and therefore
shall have faith and Christ; though yet he partake not of them, yet he shall be
everlastingly saved and redeemed by Jesus Christ.



Answ.
I say it is an idle question, because it is impossible that he which is thus
prepared for Christ and grace, but he shall have them before he die* As the
Prophet says, Mal. 3.1.2.
Behold I will send my messenger before me to prepare my ways. When the heart
is fitted and prepared, the Lord Christ comes immediately into it: The temple is
the soul, and the way is the preparation for Christ; so as the soul is yet to
be conceived as in the way of preparation for Christ; not to have any formal
work of grace whereby he is able to do anything for himself.

The next thing is the difference of the sound saving sorrow from sanctifying
sorrow; and you must know there is a double sorrow. First, there is a sorrow in
preparation, Secondly, there is a sorrow in sanctification.

The sorrow of the soul in this preparative work of it, Twofold sorrow.
is thus to be conceived; when the word of God leaves an impression upon the
heart of a man, so that the heart of it self is as it were a patient, and
only bears the blow of the Spirit; the Spirit of the Lord and the
over-powring force of the same forces the soul to bear the word: and hence
come all those phrases of Scripture, as wounded, pierced, pricked, and the
like, only in the passive voice; Because the soul is a patient, and the Lord
by the almighty hand of his Spirit, breaks in upon the soul, so that this
sorrow in preparation is rather a sorrow wrought upon me, then any work
coming from any spiritual ability in my self. What preparative sorrow is.
This is sorrow in preparation when I am a patient, and wherein I receive the
work of the Spirit, and am forced and framed by the spirit to do that which I
do in this kind.

But then Secondly there is a sorrow in sanctification, and that is thus, that
sorrow that does flow from a spiritual principle of Grace, and from that power
which the heart has formerly received from Gods Spirit: What sorrow in
sanctification is.
For sanctification comes after justification, and after the soul has
received faith and grace, then the heart has a new power given unto it,
whereby it is able to set forth it self into any holy action, so that in this
a man is a free worker; whereas sorrow in preparation is a work wrought on me,
and I am a patient and do only endure it: but I have not any spiritual power
to do any thing of my self.

Now mark what I say, both these are saving for rows, but they differ
marvelously; many thinks at every saving work is a sanctifying work, which is
false; for every saving work is not a sanctifiing work, Romans 8.30.
as the Apostle says, Those whom he calls, them he also justifies, and whom
be justifies, he glorifies. Glorification implies sanctification here in part,
and glory for ever hereafter; there is a saving work and calling but yet not
sanctifying work; Every saving work is not a sanctifying.
for vocation is when God so far enlighten^ the mind, as to buckle the heart
and to turn it away from corruption to him, and then afterward God brings the
heart to be justified, and then sanctified; they are first called, and then
justified* and then glorified.

The difference of those (...) is thus to be conceived in this simili^ud^^, as
it is with the wheels of a clock, Simile.
th^^ (...) qui^e wrong; what must a man do to set this clock ^ight again?
he must (...) stop it (...) no longer wrong, and then turn it and set the
wheels right; now all this while the clock is a patient, and the work^man
does all.

Secondly, wherein is thu^ set right, then the work man puts the plunmets and
weights on it, and now the wheels can run of themselves by virtue of that
poise and weight they have gotten; so that these two are plain different
actions.

Just so it is with the (...) of the soul, the will and the affections which
are as the wheels of this great and cur^ous clock (for the soul goes
hel-ward and sin-ward, and the mind knows nothing, and the will and the
affections embrace nothing but hell and sin) now to bring these into any holy
order, the Lord must stop the soul, and that is done by the discovery of
sin and by this humiliation of heart; when the Lord lets a man see his sin
and says to him; If thou will have sin thou must have hell and all together;
and then the soul says, if it be so, I will meddle no more with sin, the
adulterer will be unclean no more; and the drunkard will be drunk no more.

Now when the soul is thus turned, it looks heavenward, and Godward, and
is content Christ should rule over it: All this while the soul is a mere
patient, this is a saving work and a work of Gods Spirit where ever it is
soundly wrought, and will in the end be faith and grace.

But now when the soul is se^ heavenward* and God justifies a poor sinne^,
and pluckes him to himself by faith, and adopts him to be his child; then the
Lord gives him of his Spirit, and this is as the weight of the soul; then by
the power of that spirit the soul is able to run right, and has a principle
of grace in it, and the poise of the spirit of grace which does possess the
soul, makes it able freely to mourn for sin, and to have the heart enlarged
in the service of God: this is mainely the sanctifying work.





First, this work of contrition of heart is wrought in every one in this work
of preparation, before he is, or can be planted into Christ: for the truth of
this and the substantial nature of it, Scripture is plain, and reason is
pregnant; Scriptures are many, I will only name three, as that in Luke, our
Lord Jesus Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. Luke 19.10.
We may observe two things, first, the qualification of that party whom Christ
will seek and save, The qualification of those whom Christ will save.
he must be a lost man in his own apprehension: secondly, see the certainty of
salvation of such a one, Christ came for this end; he came to seek up and save
that which was lost. Now Christ will not miss of his end; he came for the lost
sheep, then the lost sheep he will have; and though the lost sheep cannot
seek nor save themselves, yet Christ will save them.

Thus you see, all men must be thus disposed before they can be saved; and if
thus fitted and disposed, they shall be certainly saved; It is not enough for
a man to be in a miserable estate and damnable condition, but he must also see
it, and his heart must be truly affected with it, and find and feel the but
then of it; not so much for the punishment, but for the sin whereby his heart
is estranged from God, and also God from his soul.

Now that the sensiblenesse of his lost condition is there spoken of, and this
man that has it shall be saved, may appear, because the sensiblenesse of a
man's condition in regard of the punishment of sin is such, as a man may have,
and yet never have grace and salvation: Cain had the feeling of Gods wrath and
felt the punishment of it, and so did Judas also, and yet they were never
sought up nor saved.

The second place of Scripture, is out of John, No man comes to me except the
father draws him, John 6.44.
by coming you must conceive believing, (as in that famous place of John, John
6.35.
He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me, shall
never thirst;) Now this text implies two things, and they are profesly granted
by the intendment of the Apostle, for the people murmured why the Pharisees and
the great ones believed not and followed not Christ, to whom Christ answers;
Unless my father from heaven draw them they cannot come: so that these two
things are clear, first, a man must be drawn, secondly, if he be drawn he
shall surely come*

This drawing is thus much, when God opens the eye of a man and makes known
his sin, and sets down the heart in the acknowledgement of sin, so that he
feels the vileness and the burden of it, and is content to part with the
fame.

When the Lord shall lay all a man's abominations upon him, all his adulteries,
and all his thefts, and now he sees what it is to depart from a blessed and a
pure God; O then, he will be drunk, and unclean, and malicious no more,
because the heart is weary of it, and is content to part with it.

From hence I reason thus, true drawing is ever accompanied with true
believing; but this sense of sin in regard of the punishment of it, is not
always accompanied with true believing, but a man must see his sin further
in the vileness of it, and in the abomination of it; and then he shall
undoubtedly believe.

The stream of the whole Scripture runs this way, Mat. 11.28.
as that in Matthew, Come to me all y^^ that are weary and heavy laden and I
will ease you: and this is that which Esaias says, The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me: Esaias 61.12.
because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the meek, he has sent
me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable
day of the Lord, and to comfort them that mourn: Nay, the garment of gladness
is fitted only for the broken hearted, as in the third verse of that chapter,
To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes,
and the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise, for the spirit of
heaviness: Nay, the promises of largest extent in Scripture, do either
expressly belong unto such as a^^ broken in heart, or else they do imply so
much that a man must be so before ever God can or will accept of him.

As in the Revelations, Revel. 22.17.
Hoe, every one that will, let him come freely, and take of the water of the
well of life and live for ever. So then, some may say,

A man is said to choose a woman when he is content to part with all for her,
and to have her for her grace sake; so a man must part with sin and himself,
and whatsoever is dear to him, that he may have grace, now he will not part
with sin, unless he be weary and burdened with it; and therefore this
wearying implies the burthening of the heart with sin; thus much for the
proof of Scripture.

Now to add some ^easons that may compel our Judgments to yield to this
truth; and they are taken; First, from the qualification of man's heart
naturally, and secondly from what he must be, before he can receive Christ.

I will discover my thoughts in four conclusions, and thus I reason.
Conclusion 1
It is a confessed case (I conceive) that every man by nature does entertain
sin as his God, and seeks and loves that most of all; himself, and his
sin, is his God. In this case it is his chiefest good, and the heart will
not, nay, it cannot, be content to part with it; What is the cause that we
propound Christ, and grace, and salvation, to a company of poor simple
creatures, and yet the counsels, the promises, and commandments of God
prevail not with the heart of them, nor awe them, but still they will have
their sins, and the offer of Christ and grace lies in the dust; the adulterer
will have his queans, and the drunkard will have his cups, and they will not
suffer the word to pluck away their corruptions, but they will have them
though they be damned for them, what does this argue, but that sin is their
God. Nay, it is clear, not only in palpable reason, but the Scripture is
evident this way: It is the match Christ offers to the young man, Mat. 19.21.22
if he would sell all and follow him, he should have treasure in heaven: he was
covetous, and this was fair offer for a little trash, he should have
everlasting life, now the text says, he went away sorrowful, he would rather
have his covetousnes and his wealth, then heaven.

Conclusion 2
The second conclusion is this, there cannot be two Gods in one heart, two Kings
in one throne nor two Suns in one firmament; you cannot have Christ, and yet be
an underling to sin; will Christ be a Physician to heal you that you may
have your sins still? No, our Savior is plain to the contrary, Mat. 6.22.
you cannot serve God and Mammon; If the adulterer will have his queanes, then
he must forsake the Lord, and if he will not part with his lust, nor have his
heart circumcised, nor broken, then he must go down whole to hell; as the
Prophet said, Why halt you between two opinions, if God be God serve him. God
will bochiefe in the soul.

It is not possible to have heaven and hell together; it is impossible for a
man look up to heaven steadfastly with both his eyes down to the earth, both
at one time.

Thirdly, Conclusion 3.
you must of necessity cast off the yoke of corruption, and rebel against
that; you must have your first god; pride, and malice, and the like, to be
unthroned, before the Lord Christ will set up his scepter, and before he can be
welcome to your souls; you must have your hearts divorced from your first
husbands, from sin, and all those abominations which you have loved and
hugged as your life; if ever you would have Christ make a match with you, and
take possession of your souls; as the Lord says, Thou shall ^e as a widow
and fit for me, Hosea 3.3. opened.
and as the original has it, Thou shall be separate from all, and fit thy
self for me, and then I will mar^y thee to my self in righteousness.

Lastly, the soul will not (...) with his corruption and lust, Conclusion 4.
which are his god; unless he be wearied with them, and find the gall and
bitterness of their evil nature; I say, till then, it is impossible that ever
the soul should be separate from that sin wherein it has found such
contentment; therefore it is of necessity that they be parted; but before the
soul sees the venom of sin, it will not part with it, and so he cannot come
to receive the Lord Jesus Christ and hence it is, that the Lord in his infinite
wisdom is thus not only willing to do for a poor sinner, but to force him
to it, for there is such love and liking to sin; that if you pull away the
adulterers queanes, and the drunkards pots, you had as good kill them, and they
begin to say, It was well with the town before the minister came there; the
reason is, because he would have his sin.

Now the Lord is pleased to lay a heavy weight upon the ^oule, and to force the
burden of sin upon it, that whereas before, the heart did find much
sweetness in these base courses; the Lord makes them as bitter as gall, or
wormwood; And then the soul begins to reason thus with it self; and faith,
Is it such a thing to be drunk, and is it murder to envy my brother? and can
none such enter into the Kingdom of heaven? and when the soul sees God taken
away, and heave separated from him; he says, Is this the pleasing sin that I
have loved? and is this the nature of my pride to have God resist me? this lies
heavy upon the heart, and at last the soul is resolved to part with his sin
and never to love it more; Good Lord, do what thou will with me, only take my
soul and save me, and take away my lusts and corruptions: The heart is content
at length that Christ should do all; and now the match is made, the sight of
sin from the punishment of it will never separate the soul from sin, nor
break that union that is between them.

Judas had it in a great measure, and God plucked his sweet morsels from his
mouth, and made him confess his sins, and take shame to himself; and so God
does with many, and makes them say, I have been a drunkard and an adulterer,
and a desperate opposer of God and his ordinances: But though Judas loathed the
horror and punishment of sin, yet he had a murtherous disposition still, he
that had killed Christ went and murdered himself too.

Now from these former conclusions I reason thus, If a man's sins be his God,
and if there cannot be two Gods in one heart, and if those corruptions of the
heart must of necessity be cast out, and if the heart will not part with sin
till it be wearied with it, and that is done by godly sorro^^; then it is a
matter of necessity, that the heart must be pierced; and there must be a
separation between sin and the soul, before Christ will marry the soul and
rule in it; or else there shall be two Gods in one heart, which cannot be.

The second thing in this answer is this, some may say, oh I never found this
work in me. Now therefore you must know, how ever this work is wrought in all
for the substance of it, yet in a different manner in the most. For the fashion
that God uses in framing the heart is different; two men are pricked, the one
with a pin, the other with a spear: two men are cut, the one with a pen
knife, the other with a sword: So the Lord deals kindly and gently with one
soul, All are not alike wounded for sin.
and roughly with another, and handles it marvelous sharply, and breaks it all
to pieces. There is the melting of a thing and the breaking of it with hammers;
this I say the rather to check the imagination that harbors in the heart of
some men, otherwise holy and wise, (and yet mistaken in this point) they think
the Lord never works grace, but in this extraordinary manner.

It is true, God sometime must use this affrighting of spirit, and when proud
spirits come to grapple with the Lord, he will make their f^urdy hearts to
buckle: And it is true; there must be a clear sight of sin and the heart
must be wearied with the vileness of i^ and be content to part with sin:
This is wrought in all: but that it must be in all in this extraordinary
fearful manner as it is in some, the word says it is not, neither is God
bound to any manner, there is a difference among persons.

As for example, First, if the person be a scandalous liver, and an opposer of
God, and his grace, and sets himself against the Lord Jesus Christ; if he set
his mouth against heaven and profess himself an enemy to God and to his truth.

Secondly, if a man have harbored a filthy heart, and continued long in sin,
and has been a close adulterer, and continued long in it.

Thirdly, if a man have been confident in a civil course.

Lastly, if God purpose to do some great works by him.

In all these four cases he lays a heavy blow upon the heart, and commonly
the nature of these persons requires it.

First, when any one has been an opposer of God and his grace, if the Lord
should deal gently with him, other vile wretches would be ready to say, such a
man is gone to heaven, though he be thus and thus, yet the Lord dealt lovingly
with him: and therefore though I continue in these courses, I shall do well
enough; Nay, (delude not thy self, for) the Lord will bruise him, and rend the
kall of his heart, and make him seek to a faithful minister for direction, and
to a poor Christian for Counsel, whom before he despised; and the world shall
know what it is to oppose God, and to persecute his children; as he broke Paul's
heart, and made him say, I am he that have persecuted the Saints.

Commonly the Lord will not show mercy to such as these are, in hugger mugger,
but will make the world see their humiliation, as they have seen their rebellion
and opposition.

Thus the Lord deals with the secret thief and close adulterer; the Lord
pluckes away their corruptions, and makes them vomit up their sweet morsels,
and then they will say, these are my sins, and this heart of mine is hardened
by the continuance in them: And therefore it is that the Lord works in this
manner.

But if the soul be otherwise trained up among godly parents, and live under a
soule-saving ministry, that says, you cannot go to heaven by a civil
course, and you cannot have any dispensation for your profanation of the
Sabbath; I say, if a man live under such a ministry and keep good company,
the Lord may reform this man, and cut him off from his corruptions kindly, and
break his heart secretly in the apprehension of his sins, and yet the world
never see it.

In both these we have an example, in Lydia and the Iaylor, Lydia was a sinful
woman, and God opened her eyes and melted her heart kindly, Acts 16.
and brought her to a taste of his goodness here, and glory hereafter. But the
Iaylor was an outrageous, rebellious wretch, for when the Apostles were
committed to prison he laid them up in stocks and whipped them sore; O says
he, now I have gotten these precise ^ellowes into my hands, I will have my
penny-worths of them.

Now there was much work to bring this man home; when the Apostles were
singing Psalms there came an earthquake which made the Prison doors to fly
open and the prisoners fetters fall off, but yet the Iaylors heart would not
shake, at last the Lord did shake his heart too, and he came trembling and was
ready to lay violent hands upon himself, because he thought the prisoners had
been fled; but the Apostles cried to him, Acts 16.30.
Do thy self no harm: for we are all here; with that he fell down before
them and said, Men and brethren, what shall I do to be saved?

I conclude this; naturally all men are locked up under infidelity, now the
Lord ope^s their hearts severally, you know some locks are new and fresh, and
therefore an easy key may open them, but some locks are old and rusty, and
therefore must be broken open by force of hand; so it is with some men's hearts,
howsoever sin prevails over the hearts of civil men, and they are full of
pride, and the like; and yet their hearts are kept clear from rusting, by
restrayning grace; now the Lord will draw that man by the key of his spirit,
and kindly withdraw him from his sin. But if a man have been an old rusty
drunkard, or adulterer, no key can open his heart; alas, it is not a little
matter will do the deed, it is not now and then a gracious promise that will
break his heart: But the Lord must come down from heaven, and break open the
door by strong hand, by awaking his conscience, that all the country rings of
him.

You know all men's hearts are compared to stones; Man's heart is like a stone.
some stones are soft, you may crush them to pieces with your hands, and some
are flints which must have many blows before they will break, so it is with
the heart: while it has not been melted and softened by humility, the Lord
must break it open by maine force, and as it is with a tree, some branches are
young and smooth without knots; and some are old ones, and full of knots; now
if a man come every day and give a little cut at the tender branch, at last it
will off easily; but it is no cutting of an old tree with a penknife, but a
man must take an axe, and give many a sore cut, that all the people in the
town may hear it.

All men grow upon the root of sin, which is Adams rebellion: some are young,
and have not grown knotty in a rebellious course; every Sabbath day the Lord
gives a cut at him by his counsels, and by his threatenings, and by his
promises; at last it falls off kindly, and they are content to part with their
sins, and to rest upon Christ for mercy. Another man is an old sturdy vile
wretch an over-growne adulterer and drunkard, and his heart is blinded in
sin: I tell you, if ever the Lord cut off this man from his base course, he
must come with a mighty hand, and with his book of the Law: God is ever laying
at his soul, blow after blow, and so at last he begins to forsake his wicked
courses. What (says one) is such a man turned? he was as heavy a persecutor
as ever the Sun saw: his father was an enemy to all goodness, and he was as
bad; Like father like son: Has the Lord brought him home? Yes, now he sends
to the faithful Ministers, and to Gods people for comfort and direction.

The third and last part of the answer is this, That when God works gently
with Christians, they hardly perceive the work, though wise Christians may
approve that which is done; for this is certain, wheresoever Christ is, there
preparation was; if ever man be saved, Christ has made him see his lost estate.

Sometime the work is secret, and the soul apprehends it not because it is
so, and though he do, yet it is an unknown work to him, he knows not what
to make of it, he can find in his heart to hate those and those sinful
courses, yet he cannot see how this was wrought in him: Man's spirit is such
that he misjudgeth the work; but give me a Christian that God does please to
work upon in this extraordinary manner, and to break his heart soundly, and
to throw him down to some purpose, though it cost him dear: this man walks
with more ear and conscience, and has more comfort coming to himself, and
gives more glory to God, whereas the other does but little good in his place,
and has little comfort coming to him.

Therefore labor for soundnes in this work, and then for ever sound: but if
once deluded here, then for ever cozened, and everlastingly damned.

The first-Use is for instruction. Use 1.
It is so, that the soul of a man is thus pierced to the quick, and run
through by the wrath of the Almighty? Then let this teach the Saints and people
of God, How to carry our selves toward such as are wounded for their sins.
how to carry themselves toward such as God has thus dealt withal. Are they
pierced men? Oh, pity them: let our souls, and the bowels of commiseration
and compassion be let out toward them, and let us never cease to do good to
them to the very uttermost of our power and strength. And to the performance of
this, not only reason persuades us, but Religion binds us, and pity moves us.

See what the Lord says by Moses, If a man see his neighbors ox or ass fall
into distress by the way the Lord commanded to ease him and succor him, Deuteronomy.
22.1.2.3.
nay to lay all business aside, and not to hide himself from him.

Thus the Lord commands mercy to the unreasonable creature, that is thus
wearied with the weight that he carries; has the Lord care of oxen? As the
Apostle says in another case, It is for our sakes that the Lord requires this
duty: The meaning is this; shall not the heart of thy brother be eased, that is
tired thus with the wrath of the Almighty? shall not this poor fainting
creature be succored? are you men or are you beasts in this kind? If a hog
be but in distress, it is strange to see how folk come about it; are we
devils then that we can see poor creatures burdened with the unconceivable
wrath of the Lord, and not pity them? do you see these, and not mourn and
succor, and pray to heaven for them? See what Job says, and let him speak in
the behalf of all distressed souls, Job. 19.21.23.
O says he, that my sorrows were all weighed they would prove heavier then
the sand. Mark how he cries for succor, oh you my friends have pity upon me,
for the hand of God is heavy upon me, for the hand of God has touched me:
Imagine you saw him sitting upon the dunghill mourning, it is not the hand of a
man or an enemy but the heavy hand of God; and therefore all you my friends
that see my anguish and my sorrows have pity upon me.

Those palefaces and blubbered cheeks, and feeble hearts, and hands of theirs;
say thus much unto you, have you no regard of a man in misery? have you no
pity says the Lamenting Church? so does every grieved and humbled soul,
their sighs and sorrows in secret say thus much; oh all you that walk in the
streets, have you no remorse of a poor desolate forlorn creature? Had I been
only wounded, or had my nature grown weak, some Physician might have eased
me, had I been poor, some friends might have enriched me, had I been
disgraced, the King might have advanced me to honors, but was there ever
sorrow like to my sorrow of soul? It is the God of mercy that shows himself
displeased with me, it is the God of all grace and comfort, that has filled my
heart with the venom of his wrath; if there be any pity or compassion in you
lend help, and succor such poor distressed souls; if a woman be in travel
and her strength fails her; oh what bitter cries she puts forth, with that
all her neighbors come to help her, and when they have done all they can,
they pray to heaven for that they cannot do themselves.

And as it is with a man that is swounding away, they run for strong cordial
water, and for this man, and that friend, to succor him, and they cry all,
help, help, for the Lords sake, he is clean gone; this is all well, it is a
work of mercy and pity.

But men, brethren and fathers you know not the heart breaking sorrows that are
in the souls of these poor creatures, he lies as it were in childbed, and is
in the very pangs of conversion, and his heart is even now at a ha, even now to
be converted, and loosned from sin, and to have Christ brought into his
soul; O that God would send some amongst you that you might see some
experience of it: Oh faith the poor soul, will these and these sins never
be pardoned? and will this proud heart never be humbled? thus the soul ^ighes,
mournes, and says, Lord, I see this, and feel the burden of it; and yet I
have not a heart to be humbled for it, nor to be freed from it; Oh whence will
it once be? did you but know this it would make your hearts to bleed to hear
him, it is not the swounding away of a man in a qualme; No, No, the sword of
the Almighty has pierced through his heart, and he is breathing out his
sorrow, as though he were going down to hell, and he says; if there by any
mercy, any love, any fellowship of the spirit; have mercy upon me a poor
creature that am under the burden of the Almighty; O pray and pity these
wounds and vexations of spirit, which no man finds nor feels but he that has
been thus wounded.

It is the sign of a soul wholly denoted to destruction, that has a desperate
disdain against poor wounded creatures, O says one, I hope you have hearing
enough have you not? it may be you will tumble down into a well or hang your
self, will you not? Oh fearful, is it possible there should harbor such a
spirit in any man? there is not a greater brand of a man denoted to destruction
then this; I do not say only he is stark naught for the present, but it is a
fearful brand of a man denoted to eternal destruction; if the devil
himself were upon earth I cannot conceive what he could do worse.

When the woman was about to be delivered, the Red Dragon was there ready to
destroy the child, Revel. 12.4.
and see what the Prophet David says of such, Lord power out thy wrath upon
the heathen that know not thee, Psalm. 79.24.25.26.
and the Kingdoms that have not known thy name; let thy wrathful displeasure
take hold of them that add iniquity unto iniquity, and let them not come into
thy righteousness, let them be blotted out of thy book. What Is the reason of
this? why did David make this imprecation, and say; Lord se^ open the gates of
hell, that thy wrath may fall upon the souls of such as these are, the text
says, they persecute him whom thou have smitten: the Lord smites a poor
sinner, and thou art ready to persecute him too; the Lord has wounded him, and
will thou stabbe him to the heart; Good Lord! add iniquity to iniquity! The
sin is marvelous, and the curse unconceivable.

When Amaleck met Israel and took them at advantage, because they were weak
and weary, Remember (says the text) what he did to thee in the way, how he
feared not God, and the Lord says, I remember what Amaleck did to the people
of Israel: Deuteronomy. 25.17.
go therefore and blot out his name from under heaven, and kill all both young
and old. This is a true type of such as are enemies to the poor Saints of God,
that are thus desolate and wounded in their consciences; their being in the
wilderness was a type of the Saints conversion; and their coming to Canaan, was
a type of the Saints ariving at the heavenly City Jerusalem.

Now can thou jeere at the Saints, that are thus wounded? and can thou
wound them further? and pierce him to the heart, and discourage him? The Lord
will remember thee in the day of thy death, and as thou have showed no mercy,
so shall thou receive no mercy in that day. I have known many such opposers of
God and his Grace, that have been forced to lay violent hands upon themselves,
and when the Lord has gotten some of them upon their sick bed they lie roaring
there; and the Lord lays his full wrath upon them; If there be any such in
this congregation, I pray God let them see some sudden vein of his vengeance,
that if it be possible they may find and feel the weight of this trouble of
conscience; that they themselves also may find mercy from the Lord.

The second part of the Use is this; as we must pity those thus wounded; so
hereby we see the best way to send help to such as are wounded in their hearts,
the wo^nd is in the heart, therefore let the salve be applied to the heart. It
is in vain to tell a poor wounded soul of Hawks or Hounds, or the like: he
is not wounded in his body, but in his heart: the physic must be applied to
the part diseased. If the head be sick or sore, you must not apply a salve to
the arm; and if the breast be ill, you must not apply a salve to the foot: so
it is a vain thing to offer riches or pleasures, or profits, to a man that is
wounded in his conscience for sin; the wound is not there: if the wound were in
disquietnesse, then pleasure will cure it; if the wound were in poverty, then
riches would cure him; if the wound were in baseness and contempt, then honors
would cure him. No, thy heart is wounded, and the conscience is terrified in
the apprehension of Gods wrath; And therefore apply the spiritual Balm of
Gilead, even the blood of Christ: the case is clear that all the Crosses and
Crucifixes, and Agnus dei in the world, and all the popish pardons can do no
good to a wounded Conscience. There is never a popish shaveling under heaven
can cure a wounded soul, he cannot apply that spiritual salve that should
comfort him: he may delude him, and lead him into the commission of sin, but
he cannot minister any true comfort unto him: thus they cure a poor Christian
by searing of his conscience, and make him sin so much the more, and never be
troubled for sin, as if a man should kill a sick person, and say now he
feels no hurt, so it often falls out that a man feels no sin, but yet he is
not cured, because his sin is not removed, and his heart unpacified in the
blood of Christ.

Secondly, Use 2.
is it so, that the wound of a sinner is in his heart? then we have here a
matter of complaint that we may justly take up against the secure generation
wherein we live, there is but little saving sorrow, and therefore but little
saving grace, if there be no preparation for Christ there can be no true
evidence of grace, nor of Gods love in Christ; if there be no preparation for a
building, there can be no building set up. The Lord be merciful to a world of
men that live in the bosom of the Church, if we had a fountain of tears with
Jeremy to bewail this age in this respect, it were worth the while, and if the
Lord should send some Ezekiel and say to him, go to such a country, or such a
shire, and see if there be any that do mourn for their sins, and comfort
such: Alas, what would become of a world of persons?

This is a bill of indictment against three sorts of people; it arraignes and
condemns such, as never yet shared in this work of preparation, and of saving
sorrow, and therefore were never in Christ: these swarm in our streets: And
first it falls marvelous heavy upon such as take contentment in their base
courses, those loose Epicures and boon gallants of our time, that go
staggering in our streets, they are so far from grieving for their sins,
that it is their greatest vexation that they cannot commit sin, and have
elbow room to sin freely; O what a grief it is to them to have a minister
check them, and that there is a law to punish them for sin; and whereas
finne should be poison in their souls to wou^d them, it becomes as meat to
nourish them, They sleep not except they have done mischief, (says the
Wiseman,) and their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall; Prove.
4.16.17.
they (...) the bread of wickedness, and drink the Wine of violence. So far
it is from being poison unto them* and so far are they from being troubled with
sin, that it is their meat and pastime to sin; Just Esau* like: What did
he? Genesis 2^.
When he had eat and drunk, he rose up to play, and this was all he looked
after: When he had passed away his title to heaven, and happiness, and
esteemed of Christ and heaven no more then of a mess of pottage; he ate and
drank; his heart was never touched for what he had done, he did not smite upon
his thigh, as Ephraim did, and say, What have I done? Have I sold away my
birthright for nothing? You that know the world, you know there are many that
sit upon the ale-bench, and swear, and drink, and rail against Gods
servants, and are never troubled for it; Nay, the world is come to this pass,
that it is their greatest vexation that they are hindered in their sinful
courses.

It was the guise of the old world: Haman went home sick, because he wanted
the Cap and knee from Mordecay: Amnon was sick of incest, and Ahab was sick
of covetousness, and Ahitophel was sick because his counsel was not
followed; The Lord of heaven knows, the adulterer is sick because he cannot
get the heart and company of his queen; many a man is sick of envy, it is
rottenness to his bones; yea many a man goes up and down sick of it, and is
not quiet, because he cannot vent his rage against a faithful minister that
checkes him: You swearers does not your hearts rise against the King and state,
for making a law against that sin: Do you not hate the constable and
witness that come in against you, you account these the greatest plague to you
in all the world; I appeal to the hearts of you all, that hear me this day;
can you say you are troubled for sin, and yet grieve, because you cannot commit
sin still: Woe woe to your souls that thus delight in sin. There are many
that despite the spirit of grace and stick not to say, I did swear such a
man out of the house, and I did drink such a man under the table dead: Read
that place of the Apostle and there you shall see your doom, 2. These. 2.13.
and if there be any such in your families, or amongst your neighbors, throw
this in their faces, and if they will go down to hell, let them go with
pain, that all they might be damned (says the text,) which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. God is not partial, but says,
that all they might be damned: it would almost shake a man's heart to think of
it.

How many notorious vile wretches may say, Good Lord, what will become of our
families* and villages? we are all opposers of God and his grace, shall all be
damned? I dare not say what God will do to thee, the text says so. This, me
thinks might lie as poison and rats-bane upon the heart of a sinful creature:
the Lord in mercy look upon you and make sin as loathsome and bitter unto
you, as ever it has been sweet and pleasant. You see how the matter will go
with you: you that thus jibe and jest at the Saints, and sport yourselves in
sin, the time may come that it will be a dry feast as it was with Dives that
was drunk and fared deliciously every day, Luke 16.25.
he had a dry feast in hell, and could not have a drop of water to cool his
tongue. So it will be with you, you must either buckle and mourn for sin, or
else burn for ever.

Secondly, It condemns such as are in a fair strain; such are they that have
a slight sense of sin; but it never goes down to the heart, the skin is
ripled a little, but the kall of their heart was never broken for their
abominations. Naaman was to wash seven times in Jordan, so this water of godly
sorrow is of a healing nature, but these men do not rub and reince their
souls in it, they only dippe their souls in a little sorrow, but you must
wash it thoroughly and fully, if ever you desire to have the leprosy of sin
purged out: Men bathe their sins with tears, but they do not drown them;
they do as parents do with their children, they will correct them a little,
and presently cocker them again; so the hypocrite uses to trouble his
corruptions; and complain of them and vex them a little with sorrow; but in
the mean time cocker them and dandle them again. But sin will not be so
killed, and the heart will not be so easily broken, this kind of sorrow is too
slight and overly.

As it is with a debtor, that has borrowed money, he will complain he had an
ill bargain, and desires that either he might have the debt abated, or the day
put off, he puts it off with mere talking; such a generation there are of the
whining hypocrites, that will outwardly complain of their corruptions, but keep
the corruptions still; As Ahab did, he hated Micaiah, and afterward he fasted
and prayed, 1. King^ 21.
that he might sin more freely without suspicion: So there is many a cursed
hypocrite that lives in a fair course, and yet will cheat and lie, and deal
marvelous unjustly; and then he will complain of his sin, and confess, only
to bath his sins, but drown his sins and subdue them he will not, and this he
does that he may sin more freely again; it is but fasting and praying, etc.

O brethren it is a desperate hypocrisy, that sorrow which God has appointed
as a means to purge out sin, should be a means to cover his sin: will a
few wambling tears do the deed, and break the heart? is this acceptable
sorrow? you your selves are ashamed of this work, and do you think God will
accept of it? No, no, it is not the rending of the garments, nor the weeping of
the eyes, that will do the deed, but you must break your hearts: If you only
cut off the legs or wings of a foul, it will live for all that: so you cut off
the arms or hands of sin, but so long as the heart is not wounded, and
driven to any amazement for sin, it will live with you here and in hell too.

Oh do not cozen your own souls; it is not the tears of the eye, but the
blood of the heart that your sins must cost, and if you come not to this,
never think that your sorrow is good; and therefore you that find your selves
guilty, lay your hands upon your hearts and say, Good Lord, this is my portion,
the Lord knows I have confessed my sins, and yet have taken liberty to sin:
but my heart was never burdened with this evil and vileness of sin; and
therefore to this day I never had this true sorrow.



Thou accountest it thy glory and credit that thou can bear all, and art
metal of proof, and no bullets can pierce thee, thou wast troubled before,
but now thou have shaken it off; This I say is thy shame, and will aggravate
thy condemnation, nay, I take it to be one of the forest tokens under heaven,
of a graceless heart; If thou have had thy conscience awakened, and have been
troubled for sin, and now do fly off, It is a sign of Gods high displeasure
toward thee; thou take the right course, as if God had inve^ted a way to
destroy thy soul, as you may see in Esaias, Go thy ways, Esaias 6.7.8.9.
says the Lord, Speak to this people, but they shall not hear; make the
heart of this people fat: as though he had said, there are a company of people
in such a place; Go thy ways to them, open their eyes, and touch their
hearts, and awaken their consciences, and when thou have done, then let their
consciences be feared and fatted, and then they will go the right way to
destruction; for if they would awaken, and sorrow kindly, and repent, I must
needs save them.

Let these men remember that it is a heavy sign God has forsaken them; me
thinks this should trouble their souls exceedingly, and force them to cry
out, I am the man that have my heart fatted, and would not be touched and
converted.

Now if all be true that I have said, there are but few sorrowers for sin,
therefore few saved; here we see the ground and reason, why many fly off from
Godliness, and Christianity: This is the cause; their souls were only
troubled with a little hellish sorrow, but their hearts were never kindly
grieved for their sins. If a man's arm be broken and disjoynted a little, it
may grow together again; But if it be quite broken off, it cannot grow
together; so the terror of the Law affrighted his conscience, and a powerful
minister unjointed his soul, and the Judgments of God were rending of him;
but he was never cut off altogether: and therefore he returns as vile, and as
base, if not worse then before, and he grows more firmly to his corruptions.

It is with a man's conversion, as in some men's ditching; they do not pull up
all the trees by the roots, but plash them: so when you come to have your
corruptions cut off, you plash them, and do not wound your hearts kindly, and
you do not make your souls feel the burden of sin truly: this will make a
man grow and flourish still, howsoever more cunningly and subtly. This
lopping professor grows more subtle in his wickedness: the soul that has
been terrified for his lusts, he is now grown a plashed adulterer, and
Alehouse haunter, he will be drunk more cunningly and secretly: and so he
that has been an open opposer of Gods children, will now jibe and jest at
them in a corner, and when he comes amongst his old companions, then he can
vent out all his malice.

This is the reason why all wicked men that were in some good way of
preparation of soul, they turn their backs upon Christ; even because they
were never cut off kindly from their sins, but only unjointed, and that is
the reason why they fall to their old corruptions again. This is the maine
cause of all the hypocrisy under heaven: there was never any soul that made
profession, and falls again, but the ground of it is here.

Use 3.
The third use is for exhortation: If every sorrow will not do it, and if
slight sorrow will not do it, what then remains to be done, then if ever thou
would be comforted, and receive mercy from the great God, labor to take the
right way, and never be quieted, til you do bring your hearts to a right pitch
of sorrow; let it never be said of as it was of you them in Hosea, They have
not cried unto me with their hearts, when they how led upon their beds, Hosea
7.14.
they assembled themselves for corn and wine, but they rebel against me. Thou
have a little slight sorrow, but oh labor to have thy heart truly touched,
that at last it may break in regard of thy many distempers; the longer seed
time, the greater harvest; and so howsoever this sorrow is troublesome now, it
will be very comfortable in the end; and though it be tedious to lay all these
cursed abominations upon thy heart; yet it will not be harsh when the Lord
remembers you in his Kingdom; it will never repent you that you have had your
hearts humbled and broken, when the Lord comes to heal you; and it will never
repent you that you have wept, when the Lord comes to wipe away all tears from
your eyes. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Man. 5.
says our Savior, but Woe to you that are at ease in Sion; Amos 6.1.
there is a time of mourning for sin; you cannot have ease and quietness
always, you had better now be wounded then everlastingly tormented. And
therefore if you desire to see the face of God with comfort, and to have Christ
speak for you, and say, come you poor heavy hearted sinners, I will ease you,
if ever you desire this, labor to lay load on your hearts with sorrow for your
sins. Oh what comfort shall ^ poor broken heart find in that day! David
says, Psalm. 5.^^
A broken and contrite heart (O Lord) thou will not despise.

When men go into a far country for merchandise, they will not take rattles
and such toies for their money; but such commodities as they may get something
by: so when the Lord comes for broken hearts, you must not think to put the
Lord off with a little painted sorrow: No, no, it is a broken heart that the
Lord will not despise. Would you know what kind of heart the Lord will accept
and never cast off? It is a broken heart: tell your friends and neighbors of
it, me thinks you look as if you would find acceptance with God, and go to
heaven; oh then get an humble, lowly, broken heart; the Lord regards not all
the rivers of oil in the world; not a hundred thousand fasts; but it is a
broken heart that God will bless and glorify.

Look as it is with a woman's conception, those birthes that are hasty, the
children are either still borne, or the woman most commonly dies; so do not
thou think to fall upon the promise presently. Indeed you cannot fall upon it
too soon upon good grounds; but it is impossible, that ever a full soul or a
haughty heart should believe, thou may be deceived, but thou can not be
ingraftted into Christ: therefore when God begins to work, never rest till you
come to a full measure of this brokennesse of heart. Oh follow the blow, and
labor to make this work sound and good unto the bottom, and then you shall
be sure to receive comfort, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 123.2.
Our eyes are up unto thee till thou have mercy on us. Let your consciences be
wounded thoroughly and kindly, and resolve not to hear the cursed counsel of
carnal friends, that say, what need you mourn; O poor fools, there is not
any, even the civillest professor in the Kingdom, but if God did discharge his
sins to his heart as he could do, it were enough to make him go howling
with sorrow to his grave; therefore humble your selves before God and never be
at rest, till the Lord show mercy to your souls, never unburthen your souls
before God ease you; and do not break prison. For if you do, God will send
after you with a witness. No, no, When God has put thee into prison, break
not out til God send to deliver you; and then your hearts will be filled with
comfort: soundly humbled, soundly comforted: If a man be lost, Christ will seek
him up and save him.





First, when the Lord begins first to work upon you, and you begin to see your
corruptions, then possess your souls with the apprehension of the
ticklishnesse of your condition wherein you are: this work is great and
marvelous inward, and you may be easily deceived, and the danger is great if
you be deceived: it is in this case with the soul, as it is with a ship on the
sea, when the mariners pass by and see the rocks where such and such ships
have been split; and the men and all lost; they are very wary to steer aright
and to direct their compass aright; but near sands and rocks they will not
come: So it is with this humbling of the heart, many have been cozened and
deceived therein: therefore now hold this rule, Let that soul whose eyes God
has opened, and brought under his blows (let such I say) rather fear he is
not sound in the work, then fear that he shall not have ease; for every man
says, I pray you (Sir) comfort and refresh me, and will God never give me
comfort? Oh now you go wrong; many perish because they go off from this work
so soon; but never did any perish because he received the work soundly.
Therefore reason thus with thy own heart; and say, Good Lord be merciful to
me, my condition is very tickle; If now I be deceived, the^ farewell comfort.

Was not Cain and Judas vexed and disquieted and yet damned?

This is a great point of wisdom, and sinks many a Christian, (I know what I
say,) as it is with child bearing, a woman when her throws come often and
strong, there is some hope of deliverance; but when her throws go away,
commonly the child dies, and her life too. So it is in this great work of
contrition, which is nothing else, but the childbirth of the soul; when your
throws go away, take heed that your salvation goes not too; once you could
say, the minister spoke home to my heart, I remember the time full well; Why
then what becomes of all your sorrow? You can be as carnal and as secure as
ever? it is certain you are in childbearing, but your throws have left you,
and your brokennesse of heart is gone, and therefore you are in an ill case,
surely at some low ebb of grace.

Again, if a man's heart be soundly broken, though he fall into some sin, he
may be recalled; but if he have not his heart soundly broken; he is undone. If
the foundation be naught, the building must needs fall; So it is in this
preparation of the soul for Christ, if this be naught, all comes to naught;
therefore be so much the more fearful of your souls, because your condition
is so much the more tickle in this, then in any thing else, and rather desire
soundness then quietness.

wrought upon by any reproves or admonitions, take that truth, and labor to
maintain the power of it upon your hearts all the week after; and let your
souls be awed by it.



Now I come to the fruits of godly sorrow, which are from these words, They
said to Peter and the other Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? In
these words there are three things presumed; and three things plainly expressed.

Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Men and brethren, advise us what to do: if there be any help, ye know it.

What shall we do? surely there is some way to find help, if we could tell
it.

Again, there are three things plainly expressed in these words; they make an
open and plain confession of their sins; when they were sick at the hear^,
they could make open confession, and lay the hand upon the sore; and say, If
there be any vile wretches under heaven, we are they.





First, I come to the three things presumed; and because I shall have occasion
afterward to handle the two former, Therefore now I come to the last of the
three, which is this, Men and brethren, What shall we do? Surely there is some
course to be taken. Is there not? you that are Gods Prophets tell us, if there
be any hope for such poor distressed sinners as we are.

So the Doctrine is this, Doctrine.
there is a secret hope of mercy, wherewith God supports the hearts of those
that are truly broken hearted for their sins; howsoever these men did see
themselves miserable, yet they did not throw off all, and say, Men and brethren
there is no hope for us, therefore we will hear no more; but, seeing we must
go to hell, we will take our pleasure while we live here in the world, while we
may, and if we must be damned we will be damned for some thing; No, these
people had some hope that they should find mercy, the Lord bruised the heart,
but he did not break it; the Lord will not quench the smoking flax, but
kindles it further, and the Lord draws on the work of the soul and pluckes
it to himself, and makes it look up to him and wait upon him for help and
mercy.

I confess, it is true, that sometimes the soul in some desperate fit, and in
some horror of heart, when temptation grows violent and long, and the
distempers of a man's heart stir exceedingly, then a man may seem to cast of
all, and resolve with David when he had been long persued by Saul, I shall one
day fall by the hand of Saul; So the soul says, God will one day leave me,
and I shall perish; And as David says in another place, Psalm. 77.6.11.
All men are liars, that is, they said I shall be King of Israel, but they are
all deceived; They all liars; but it was in his haste, in a proud, impatient,
haughty humor of soul.

This is our nature, if God buckle not to our bow, and hear us not even when
we will; then (in a proud humor) we are apt to say, oh my sins will never be
pardoned, and I shall never get ground against my corruptions; a man that is in
a swoune, lies as if he were dead, but yet he comes to himself again, and
looks up and speaks; So how ever the soul in some unruly humor is driven to
a swoune, and thinks it impossible to find mercy, or overcome his corruption?
yet still he recovers again, and the soul that is truly broken for sin,
Jonah. 2.4.
is upheld; as Jonas said, I am cast out of thy presence, I am eve^ sinking,
yet will I look toward thy holy temple; So howsoever the soul may be
overwhelmed in a drunken fit of pride, or impatience; yet aftes the soul has
prayed, it says, I will wait upon God for mercy.

God deals with poor sinnners in this case, as men do that pound precious
powder, as Bezar stone or the like, to make some potion withal, they will
break it, and pound it all to pieces, yet they cover it up close, and will not
loose the least sand of it, as they break it, so they keep it close that none
be lost: So when God does purpose to do good to your souls, he will break
you, and melt you,; and then you think he has cast you off in his anger; No,
no, he is pounding of you, but he will preserve those souls notwithstanding,
and will not lose such poor sinners whom he purposes to do good unto.

As it is with pocket dy^ls, a man may shake them this way and that way, The
soul has many shakings.
but they are still northward by virtue of the loadstone; so there are many
shakings in the soul, sometime it fears God will not be merciful, he
sometimes hopes that he will; thus it is tossed to and fro, but still it is
heavenward, and there is a hope that it may be otherwise: For the Lord holds
the soul by a secret virtue to himself, and draws the heart to seek for
mercy.

When the Prodigal child was brought to a desperate strait, he began to
consider what he had done, Luke 15.18.
whereas before he said; shall I ever be a slave in my fathers family? but at
last when all was spent, what does he do? he says, It is true, I can look
for no help and favor, and I cannot tell whether my Father will receive me or
no; yet my Fathers servants have bread enough, and I shall starve for hunger; O
wretch that I am, I have left a kind fathers house; yet, come what will, I
will home to my father, and say, Father, I have sinned; Thus the soul thinks
with it self, Oh the many sweet and gracious calls that I have had! how often
has Christ come home to my heart, and desired entrance? and yet I shut the
door upon him: shall I now go home to the Lord Jesus Christ? How justly may
he reject me that have rejected him? he may damn me, and yet he may save me,
and therefore I will wait upon him for mercy: thus the soul will not off from
God, but it has a secret hope wherewith the Lord keeps the heart to himself.

Reason 1.
The first reason is, because unless the Lord should leave this hope in the
heart, it would utterly be overthrown with despair: You that make nothing of
your loose thoughts, and vain speeches, I tell you, if God did set but one
sinful thought upon thy heart, thy soul would sink under it, and the Lords
wrath would drive thee to marvelous desperation: were it not that the Lord does
uphold thee with one hand, as he beats thee down with the other, (I say) it
were impossible but the soul should despair, (as the proverb is,) But for
hope the heart would break, Who can stand under the Almighty hand of God,
unless he does uphold him: God has broken off the sinner by this sorrow, but
he will not throw him to hell: As the gardener cuts off a graft to plant it
into a new stock, not to burn it: So the Lord cuts off a sinner from all
abomination, but he will not cast him into hell; and the Lord melts the heart of
a poor sinner, but consumes him not, but as the goldsmith melts his gold, not
to consume it all away, but to make it a better vessel: So the Lord melts a
poor sinner to make him a vessel of glory: the Lord will fire those proud
hearts of yours, and clip off those knotty lusts, but if you belong to him, he
will leave a little remainder of hope, that you shall be formed and fashioned,
not consumed.

It is the argument of the Lord by the Prophet, Esaias. 57.16.
He will come and dwell with, and refresh the broken soul, and he will not
contend for ever, lest the Spirit should fail before him: If the Lord should
let in but one scattering shot of his vengeance into the heart, it were enough
to drive the soul to despair, but God will lay no more upon us then will do
good to us.

Secondly, Reason.
if the Lord did not leave this hope in the heart, a man's endeavors in the use
of the means would be altogether killed: if there be no hope of good, then
there is no care of using the means, whereby any good may be obtained. Good is
the loadstone of all our endeavors, a man will not labor for nothing:
therefore despair killes a man's labors, and pluckes up the root of all his
endeavors. If there be any good present, hope makes us labor to increase it,
if any good be to come, hope labors to attain it: But good there must be.

So hope provokes the soul to use the means and to say, I am a damned man,
but if there be any hope I will pray, and hear, and fast; who knows but God
may show mercy to my poor soul?

Now gather up all: if without this secret hope the heart would fail, and if
without it a man's endeavors would be utterly crushed and come to nothing, then
it is no wonder that the Lord in his infinite mercy and wisdom, when he will
do good to the soul, leaves some secret hope of mercy.

Use 1.
First, we may here take notice of the marvelous tenderness, and the loving
nature of God in dealing with poor sinners; that in all his courses of justice
remembers some mercy; and in all the potion of his wrath still he drops in some
cordials of comfort: he deals not with us as he might; but so, as might be
most comfortable every way, and useful to work upon our hearts, and to draw
our souls home unto himself. Should the Lord come out against a poor sinner,
and in his wrath let fly against him, his soul would sink down under him;
but blessed be God, that he does not deal with our hearts as we deserve, if he
were as rigorous against us, as we have been rebellious against him, we should
sink in sorrow and fall into despair never to be recovered any more.

But as the Lord batters us, so he releeves us; as we may see in Saul, he had
gotten letters to Damascus, and now he hoped, Acts 9.
being general of the field, to bind and to imprison all, and he would not
spare the poor Christians a jot; but Christ meets him in the field, and threw
him down, and might have killed him too: but the Lord desired rather that he
might be humbled then confounded: I cannot read that ever he showed his
letters, but laid all flat down before the Lord, and so was accepted; the
Lord showed him his misery, yet he lets him not perish there, but gives him a
little crevise of comfort.

When the Lord dealt with the children of Israel, he said, I will allure her
and bring her into the wilderness, Hosea ^.15.
and there I will give her the valley of Achor for the door of hope; When
Achan was stoned for stealing the wedge of gold, Ios.7.24.
the Israelites called it the valley of Achor, and so it is called to this day.

The valley of Achor is the valley of trouble, of stoning, or consternation, so
the Lord does here; he draws the soul into the wilderness of sorrow for
sin, but does he leave the soul there? no, there is the door of hope also,
and there the soul shall sing as in former times. And hereupon the soul
says, there is some hope that God will do good unto me for all this; there is
hope the Lord is melting me, to make me a vessel of glory: that is a gloomy
night when there is neither moon nor candle to be seen: so though the soul be
marvelous gloomy and heavy, yet there is some crevise of light and consolation
let into the heart, still chearing and refreshing it: the Lord knows what
metal we are made of, and remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103.
therefore he so corrects us, that he may leave an inkling of mercy and favor
in our hearts.

O therefore let us admire and bless this good God; and not quarrel with his
ministers nor providence, and say, other men have comfort, and therefore why am
I so troubled and disquieted? how now? It is endless mercy that thou live,
therefore down with thy proud heart, and stifle those distempers of Spirit,
and say, The Lord has broken and wounded me, but blessed be his name, that I
may come to Church, and that he has not dealt with me as I have deserved but
in goodness and mercy; I hope God in his season will do good to my soul.

Use 2.
Secondly, let us be wise to nourish this same blessed work in our hearts for
ever; let us have our hearts more and more strengthened, because thereby our
hearts will be more and more enabled to bear and undergo any thing; if you
have but a little glimpse of hope, cover it, and labor to maintain it, and if
ever God let in any glimpse of mercy into your hearts, let it not go out; it
is ever good to take that way that God takes; the Lord sustaines our hearts
with hope; hope is the sinews of the soul, therefore strengthen it.

As a mariner that is tossed with a tempest in a dark night, when he sees no
stars, he casts anchor, and that cheares him; this hope is the anchor of the
soul, whereby it looks out and expects mercy from God: the poor soul sees
no light nor comfort, nothing but the wrath of an angry God, and he says, God
is a just God, and a jealous God, even that God whose truth I have opposed, is
displeased with me, then the soul is tossed and troubled, and runs upon the
rocks of despair, how shall the soul be supported in this condition? you
will find this true one day, therefore look to it before: you vile drunkards
are now sailing in a fair gale of pleasure, and carnal delight, but when the
Lords wrath shall seize upon you, when he shall let in the flashes of hell fire,
then you are tossed, sometimes up to heaven, now down to hell: therefore cast
anchor now, and this hope will uphold you, Hebr. 6.19.
for this hope is called the anchor of the soul. Thou do not yet see the
Lord refreshing of thee, but it may be otherwise. The people of Ninivi^e said,
Who knowe's but God may repent, Jonah 3.9.
this upheld their hearts, and made them seek to the Lord in the use of the
means, and the Lord had mercy on them. If you belong unto the Lord, he will
come against those drunken proud hearts, and rebellious hearts of yours, and
dragge them down to hell, and make them sorrow for their sins. And remember
this against that day, Who knows but the Lord may show mercy? and therefore
yet hear, and pray, and fast, and seek unto him for mercy. We fence those
parts of our bodies most that are most precious, and the hurt whereof is most
dangerous. Hope is called the helmes of salvation, 1. These. 5.8.
and the assurance of Gods love is the head of a Christian, now take away a
Christians head, and he is clean gone: the devil ever labors for that, and
says, You come to heaven? prove it: Lo, you think God has need of drunkards
and adulterers in heaven? and will God provide a crown of glory for his
professed enemies? Has God made heaven a hog-f^ie for such unclean wretches
as you are? No, no, there is no such expectation of mercy: this wounds the head
of the soul, but hope is the helmet that covers the head of a Christian, makes
him say, I confess I am as bad as any man can say of me: heaven is a holy
place, and and I have no goodness at all in me, yet there is hope the Lord may
break this proud heart of mine, and take away these distempers of Spirit: Now
by this means the head of a Christian is kept sure.



Al-sufficiencie of God, as he has revealed himself in his word; Means how
to maintain our hope, when God seems to walk contrary to us.
say not as many do, I cannot conceive it, or I cannot find it, but what does
the word say? Is not God able to pardon thy sins? (away then with those, I
cannot conceive It is as easy for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,
Mat. 15.24.
as for a rich man to go into heaven? Good Lord, said they, Who can be saved?
But Christ said, with God all things are possible; if you look unto man how he
is glued to the world, so that all the ministers under heaven cannot pull him
away, but still he will lie, and cozen: Reason and Judgment cannot conceive
how this man should be saved, but with God all things are possible: See what
the Apostle says, Abraham above hope believed under hope, Romans 4.18.21.
that he should be the Father of many nations; this he did, because he knew he
which had promised was able to perform it; and this did feed his hope, he did
believe above hope in regard of the creature, under hope in regard of God. As
if he had said, I have a dead body, but God is a living God; and Sarah has a
barren womb, but God is a fruitful God.

It may be thou say,

Howsoever thou can not do it, Apostles had prayed that the minds of the
Ephesians might be opened, and that they might be able to know the love of
Christ; because some one might say, how shall we know that which is above
knowledge, the text says, Now to him that is able to do abu^dantly above all
that we can think or ask, Ephesians. 3.19.20.
according to his mighty power that works in us, to him be glory: As though
he had said, though you cannot think or ask as you should, yet God is able to
do exceeding abundantly more then we can think or ask, so then no more but
this, we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, yet there is
sufficient power in God, and though we are dead hearted and damned wretches,
yet there is sufficient salvation in God. Let us hang the handle of hope on
this hook.

Secondly, Means 2.
the freeness of Gods promise marvelously lifts up the head above water; as
the beggar says. The doale is free, why may not I get it as well as another.
This sometimes dasheth our hopes: when the soul begins to think what mercy is
offered, he says,



I will take away the heart of stone, and give you a heart of flesh, and cause
you to walk in my ways, Ezech. 36.26.
says the Lord: hold this truth in thy soul: As there is no worth in the
soul that can deserve any thing at Gods hands: so there is no sin (the sin
against the holy Ghost only excepted) that can hinder the freenes of Gods grace
from saving of us: if thou belong to him, he will hale thee to heaven and pull
thee from hell, he will make thee lie in the dust, and wait for mercy, and come
grovelling for his grace, and that freely, without any thing on thy part: Who is
a God like to thee (says Micah) who pardonest iniquity, Mich. 7.18.
because mercy does please thee?

The Lord shows mercy, not because thou can please him, but because mercy
pleases him. And in Esaias he says, Esaias. 43.24.25:
I am he that blotteth out thy offenses, for my own names sake.

But the soul may say,

Thou have brought me no corn, neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy
sacrifice: but thou have wearied me with thy transgressions, yet the Lord
says, I am he that pardons thy sins: Thou say, if thou could pray,
and humble thy self, there were hope of mercy; the text does not say, It is a
sinner, but it is I, a God, that must do it, this is the freenes of his grace.

But some may object,



Mean.
consider the abundance of mercy and goodness that is in God, whereby he not
only strives with us in the midst of all rebellions, but he is more merciful
then we are or can be rebellious; this helps the heart of another thing that
cuts it. For when the soul sees all his sins for number, for nature, so
many, and so abominable, he says,



Apostle says, Where sin abounds, grace abounds much more: lest any man
should say, Romans 4.20.
Let us sin that grace may abound, the text says in another place, whose
damnation is just. This knockes off fingers, though a sinful wretch abuse God
and Grace, yet mercy will overcome the heart in this case, but it will cost him
dear; though thou turnest the grace of God into wantonness, the Lord will
turn that wantonness of thine into bitterness; the Lord will sting that
heart of thine one day, and make thee see whether it be good to forsake mercy
when it is offered; it will be easier for Sodom then for thee, when thou shall
see a company of poor Sodomites fry in hell; howsoever God may bring thee to
heaven, yet he will make thee fry in hell, and he will make thee think a
Sodomite to be in a better condition for the present then thou art.



For answer to this, see what Saint James says, Mercy rejoices, or
triumphs, over Justice: howsoever Justice says, he must be plagued, yet
Mercy says, Christ has made a plentiful satisfaction for him, then mercy
triumphs over judgment: so then if God be all-sufficient, and his promise
free, and his mercy superabundant, then we may be stirred up to hope for mercy
from God, our hearts may be supported herein for ever.

Now I come to some other particulars that are plainly expressed in our text.

First, they made a free and open confession of their sins, they did not stay
till the Apostle went to their houses, but they went to him, and said, Men and
brethren, you have spoken against the sin of murder, and we confess we are
guilty of this sin; they saw their sins and confessed them openly before
the Apostles.

The Doctrine which arises from hence is this: Doctrine:
When the heart is truly broken for sin, it will be content to make open and
free confession thereof, when a man is called thereunto: or thus, sound
contrition brings forth bottom confession. Men and brethren, What shall we do
to be saved? as if they had said the truth is, we have heard of the fearful
condition of such as have killed the Lord Jesus, and we confess whatsoever you
have said he was persecuted by us, and blasphemed by us, we are they that cried
Cucifie him, crucify him, we would have eaten his flesh, and made dice of his
bones; we plotted his death and gloried in it, these are our sins, and happily
a thousand more that then they revealed; and this is remarkable, They go to
Peter and the other Apostles, they did not go to the Scribes and Pharisees,
and that cursed crew.

Note.
Whence observe this by the way, when the soul is thus truly broken, generally
it will never repair to such as are carnal and wicked men: for these people
knew that the Scribes and Pharisees had their hands as deeply imbrued in
Christ's blood as themselves; and besides they knew them to be such naughty
packes, that they would rather encourage them in their sins, then any way
ease them and recover them from the same: therefore they went to the Disciples,
because they were holy and gracious persons, and willing to succor them; and
it is certain, that soul was never truly broken for sin, that goes for
help to such as are guilty of the same; it is suspicious that these men go
only to stop the mouth of conscience, but never to have conscience awakened.
You see our converts here went to the Apostles, not to the Scribes and
fellow-murtherers; but this by the way only: I go on in the former point.

A broken hearted sinner knows more by himself then any man can do, when a
man is pinched with famine or drought, he will open his wants fully and freely,
and so a man that is sick and has some heavy disease upon him, will tell of
more pains and gripings then any Physician can do: So it is with the soul
that is deadly sick in the ^ight of his sins and abominations.

May not a wicked man that never was truly brokenhearted make a large and open
confession of his sins?

dog returning to his vomit, and with the Sow to her wallowing in the mire;
now the hog that is kept in a clean meadow, will look somewhat white, but
if he comes from thence, h^ will lie down in the first durty puddle he comes
at; so there are some sinners that have been well trained up, and live in a
good family, they are a little cleansed; but when they come to live among
wicked companions, they grow as profane as the rest; and yet all this while
they are hogs, and will murmur at others that are more holy then themselves;
Now the dog is he that has had his eyes opened, and his conscience awakened,
and some horror laid upon his soul, and this does make him disgorge himself
for a while, to ease him of his horror; but when that man returns to his
sins, he will snarle and bite too, and fall heavily upon Gods people, so much
the more because he has confessed his sins; thus it was with Judas, he
swallowed down his thirty pence, but God made him come and acknowledge his
sin, and take shame to himself, and yet a Judas, a devil, and at this day in
hell: I tell you, this his confession out-bide most people in our generation;
the fish is content to nibble at the bait, and so is taken with the hook, and
when it has the hook and bait too, it would be rid of both: so when horror
of conscience has fastened upon the soul of a man because of sin, he could
be content to vomit his sin and all up, and yet he is a very beast.



Judas nor no carnal heart under heaven comes to this, and you must know,
there is no word spoken by the one but may be spoken by the other, and
therefore the difference is not from the words, but from the inward frame of
the heart, and for the opening of this truth I will propound and show these two
things.

First, the confession of a poor broken hearted sinner.

Secondly, I will show you when the Saints of God are called to confess.

Difference betwixt true and false confession of sins.
For the first, the difference between the true and the false confession is
discovered in these three particulars.

Gospel which he has so much dishonored, to discover the vileness of his
person and of his sin, that he has so much set up; he is willingly content
that the glory of it may be Gods, and the shame his own. Consider that passage
of the good Thief upon the Cross, Luke 23.40.
when the reprobate was going to be executed for his sin, Note.
he railed upon Christ, (whence observe this by the way, a wicked man will be a
wretch though he should go to hell presently;) now when he was railing, see
what the Good thief replies; Fear thou not God? we have sinned and are
justly punished for our sins, to die and go to hell too* if God be not the
more merciful; this man, you see, was content to fall out with himself, and
his sins, and to honor the justice and holiness of God in condemning of him.

So in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 16.16.
the text says, They shall remember their ways that were not good, and shall
be ashamed. that is, they shall take shame to themselves, they shall not
shrink for the same; a gracious heart cannot tell what to do to make sin
and it self base enough before God; that his soul and sin may fall out one
with another. As in the example of Zacheus, Luke 19.28.
whereas the confession of a carnal hypocrite comes not so currantly off, it
sticks in his teeth, he begins to confess something, and then he stands; he
says something, and calls it back again, and is loath to take any shame for
the evil committed* and therefore happily he will come when he is called, and
go away and confess nothing at all; Nay, if a minister hear any thing of
him, he will hide it and tell a flat lie, rather then take shame to himself
for it; it is true, a carnal hypocrite may confess sometimes to give the
minister content, as commonly such do; he may confess, to get inward with a
man, and to get commendations, nay, he may confess, to sin more freely
without suspicion; for charity believes this, that when a man has confessed
his sin, he will never sin in that kind again, nay sometimes he does it
to stop the mouth of conscience, and therefore when conscience is full of
horror, to quiet conscience and to still the clamor thereof, he is content to
reveal his sin, that so he may have some secret peace for his sin: thus
far they differ in their ends.

of all, that there may be a perfect killing of all: nay, it labors to sweep
out the most secret sins of all, without any ifs, or ands, and he says, Oh
this proud, wretched, adul^erous heart of mine, has bin my bane, and it will be
my destruction for ever, if God be not more merciful, now the coare and all
comes out; whereas the hypocrite that feels only the fear, and horror, and
punishment of sin, executed or threatened, he confesses no more then may
procure his case, he desires not so much to have his corruptions removed, as to
be freed from horror; The hollow hearted confessions of hypocrites.
And therefore a hypocrite will scumme over all his confessions, his talk will
be a hundred miles from his sins, he never comes to that maine sin which
keeps his heart from God; and it is remarkable, one man complains he is
troubled with wandering thoughts in hearing the word, and his soul is taken
aside with strange distempers; but follow that soul home, and you shall
commonly find some base corruptions that take up his heart; and another man
complains of his hard heart, it stirs not at the word of God, and Gods
Judgments do not melt him, when yet in the mean time he nourishes that
pride, and selfe-uncleannesse, that is the cause thereof, and there are many
besides these: as it is with a dog, he does not gorge up his meat because he
loathes it, but because his stomach is troubled with it, and therefore when
his pain is over, he takes it with greediness again; so it is with an
hypocrite, his heart is burdened with extreme sorrow, and therefore he
throws out so much as did trouble and gal his conscience, and may work him
some ease; but afterward he returns to it again; and this is the cause why
we have so many revolters, and backesliders, after such open confessions; they
confess only to ease themselves of the horror, and therefore when the horror
is gone, they fall to their old sin again, whereas a sound Christian does
confess his sin, only from the loathsomeness of it.



Whereas the hypocrite that is in fear of some judgments, and the wrath of
God has seized upon his soul; that he may get ease, will promise any thing,
and be marvelous open, and yet confident in himself, and say, if God would
give me health, and raise me up again, all the world shall see I will be a new
man, and they shall see how holy, and how careful, and how exact I will be:
yet, poor soul, when he is out of his trouble, he returns to his vomit, and
is worse then before, and so much the worse, because he has made an open
confession. As it is with a debtor, an honest man comes freely, and does
acknowledge his deb^, and desires the creditor to satisfy himself with his
body and goods, he desires he may be no loser by him, he suspects he shall
not be able to pay him, but he hopes, so far as he is able, to give him
content: but another cunning mate promises to pay all, if he will give him
further day, but intends no such matter. Just so it is with a soul that is
truly broken for sin, he lays himself in Gods presence, and referres
himself into Gods hands, and says, The truth is, Lord, I know, this proud
corrupt heart of mine will not yield, it will deceive me: I am afraid I shall not
be able to walk holily: take this heart of mine, and do what thou will with
it, only purge out my sin and corruption: this is the manner of his
confession.

But some man may say,

When a man is bound to confess his sins.
when the soul ha^h had a true sight of sin, and has confessed it to the
Lord abundantly, and through Gods mercy has gotten some assurance of the
pardon thereof: then he need not look to men for pardon, because the end of
confession is accomplished already. A man therefore confesses his sin, that
he may find some help against it: not that a Minister can absolve or pardon
any (as the popish shavelings imagine) but that he may have the direction, help
and prayers of a godly Minister.

Confess your sins one to another, James 5. 16.
and pray one for another.

own murderer. It is just so with the soul of a man that is sorrowful for
sin: when he has conscionably used all means, and yet his closset prayers, and
his closset fastings will not do the deed, then he is bound to seek out to a
faithful Minister, for he is the physician that God has appointed, whereby all
the sicknesses of the soul may be eased and cured.

I was a persecutor and blasphemer, says Paul: so it will be with your proud
and rebellious hearts, if ever God open your eyes and awaken your consciences,
as they must be eyth^r here or in hell.

Therefore when your companions come about you, cry shame of your selves, and
say, The Lord knows, and all the country knows, that I have been a drunkard,
and an adulterer; it is the gall of my heart. Now if God had not been
merciful unto me, I had drunk, and drunk my last: it has cost me dear, and
so it will be with you too. It is strange to see how God throws some upon
their deathbeds, and fills their consciences full of horror, and yet a man
cannot wrest a word from the^. Nay, though all their drunken companions come
about them, they have not a word to say to the^, I do not think that the
heart of any Christian will endure it, if ever God break his heart kindly.

Thus you see when a man is bound to confess his sin, this is far enough
from the tyrannical confession of that strange popish doctrine of auricular
confession: they hold, all men are bound, whatsoever their condition be,
whether their sins be pardoned or unpardoned, they are bound to confess all
their mortal sins, and to expect their pardon authoritatively from the
Priests hand, Popish confession, wha^
upon the pain of great matters. The aim of the papists herein is, first, to
snare men's consci^nces; and secondly, to pick men's purses: for when a man has
confessed his mortal sins, his conscience is snared, and then they must give
so much money for the pardon of them agreeable to the offense. Now we bind no
man upon pain to come necessarily, but if he can get pardon from God in the
use of the means, and get power against his corruptions, in this case we
injoyne no man to confess; but when the Saints do come, it is not because we
will or can sell pardons, but only to fit them for mercy. And this is the truth,
and that our Church holds.

This falls marvelous heavy and foul upon those, Use 1.
that are so far from this duty, that they are opposite against it, and
account it a matter of madness and childishness, to acknowledge their
offenses to any man. Men would be comforted in regard of the sorrow they feel,
but they would not be content to open their sins, and take shame to
themselves: This harbors in the hearts of many carnal wretches, and so they
are deprived of the fruit of the Gospel: They think it all their cunning, to
shift, and shelter, and mince their sins, and to keep them close from the
knowledge of the Minister.

It may be, the wife is sick, and the husband says, I pray you show her some
comfort. Why, says the Minister, what needs ^hee any comfort, seeing she was
never in distress? Oh! says he, she has lived an honest quiet woman: and
so by this means we hear of nothing, but good. I would feign wrest this
madness out of the hearts of carnal wretches. When the Lord has them upon
the rack, then their consciences are full of horror, and they know not which
way to take; yet they scorn to acknowledge any thing: shall they be (convicted
of their sins, and) such babies, to cry their sins at the marketcrosse? they
have a better course then so: for (say they) who knows it? and, let him prove
it, or the like. What if no man ever yet knew it? thy own conscience, and God,
knows it.

If thou go to a Physician thou will lay open all thy soars and all thy
pains to him, or else thou expectest no help from him; and can thou look
for any comfort from a minister, and never discover thy sins, whereby thou
art hindered in a good course; men would be comforted, and yet never knew why
they were afflicted;

You that keep your sins so close, and maintain them so tenderly, the God
of heaven will pluck those sweet morsels from your mouths, and lay them upon
you, when you would be rid of them; As a man that is sick, he will not send to
the Physician, because he thinks he is able to bear it out, till at last the
disease begins to fester inwardly, and all the Physicians under heaven cannot
cure him; if he had sent in time, he might have been eased; so it is with many
sinful creatures, out of a sturdy stoutnesse of heart, they scorn to confess
their corruptions; well, now God opens their eyes, and they begin to say, this
is not well, and that is not well; but you will not send for the minister all
this while, if it be horror of conscience, you will bear it; well, at last
you come to your death beds, and the Lord lays his heavy hand upon you, and
then you cry for the minister and all; oh says one, woe to me because of this
adulterous heart, this drunkenness, and this malice, and this madness against
God and his people; I was a cunning persecutor, and with such a woman I
committed adultery, and at last, when he has ended his confession, he sinks
and dies. Now the minister comes too late; ye will bear the check of
conscience, and in time the wound grows soar, and your soul sinks into
irrecoverable misery; Oh, woe to that soul, this is all because he would not
have his heart launced; well, if thou will not, then take that cursed heart of
thine, and expect Gods wrath with it, if thou repent not. See how God deals
with a sinner in this kind; the text says, His bones are full of the sins
of his youth, Job. 10.11.12.
which shall ly with him in the dust: Although sin be sweet in his mouth, though
he spare it, and keep it close as sugar under his tongue, it is as the gall of
aspes within them; take heed how you keep your sins close, when conscience and
horror calls upon you to confess them, and God has you upon the rack, and
says, these sins you have committed in secret, either confess them, or they
shall turn to the gall of aspes; if still you will have your sins, remember
that the God of heaven bears witness this day against that soul, that will
not come off, but hides his sin; take heed that God say not Amen, when thou
art going the way of all flesh; Then thou will cry for mercy, but then the Lord
will say, remember, that impostumed heart of thine might have been launced and
cured; but thou would needs keep thy lusts and corruptions still.

For the Lord Jesus Christ's sake now pity your selves, if you desire your
everlasting comfort, now take shame to your selves, that you may be for ever
glorified; O now lance those proud rebellious hearts of yours, that you may
find some ease; tear now in pieces those wretched hearts, that the coare
being let out, the cure may be good and sound.

Use 2.
Secondly, this reproves the cunning hypocrit, howsoever he is content to be
ashamed for his sin and to show the foulness of it, yet it is admirable to
consider what sly passages and tricks he will have before he comes to open any
thing; sometimes he sends for a faithful minister, and it is his entendment to
confess his folly, and yet he goes back again and confesses nothing at all;
but if the Lord follow the close hearted hypocrit and let in some more of his
indignation, and make his wrath to seize upon his soul, then he sets down a
resolution to confess all; and yet there is such dawbing and such secret
acknowledgment of sin; it sticks in his teeth, something he will say that
may be every man can say against him, and then he speaks of hardness of
heart, and of wandering thoughts, and that which even the best of Gods people
are troubled withal; but he never comes to those sinful lusts that lie
heavyest upon his soul.

If a man that is sick have a foul stomach, but yet is unfit to vomit, it
may be he casts the uppermost up, but the spawne of it remains; so it is with
the hypocrite, he says something, and now and then a word falls from him, and
he would feign bite it in again if he could, but there is a witness within
that must not be seen.

When Rachel had stolen her Father Labans Idols, he followed after Jacob for
them: and searched among the stuff, but Rachel being something foolishly
addicted that way, sat still upon them, and Laban must not search there: So it
is with the close hearted hypocrite, he is content to confess that which all
the world cries shame of him for, but there is some Idol lust, as secret
uncleannes, or private theft, that he will not confess.

Now for the terror of all such graceless persons, I desire to discover two
things in the point. First, that this is a marvelous fearful sin: Secondly,
it is a dangerous sin.

First, me thinks the sin it self is like the sin of Ananias and Saphyra:
Acts 5.3. opened.
he sold all that he had, and as the Lord moved him, and commanded him, he
gave way to it that it should be given to the poor: But when it was sold, he
kept back one part of it: and when Peter said, Did you sell it for so much? Is
this all the price? Yes, says he. To hide our sins, a fearful sin.
Now mark what Peter says, Why has Satan filled thy heart, that thou have not
lied to man, but to God. Satan many times steps into the heart; but when he is
said to fill the heart, he shuts out the work of judgment and reason, and the
Word, and Spirit, and all good Resolutions in those particular occasions, which
concern a man.

As if Satan should say, Knowledge shall not direct him, the Spirit shall not
persuade him, and the word shall not prevail with his heart: but I will take
possession of him in despite of all these; this is Satan's filling of the heart.

Thus it is with the Hypocrite: his conscience is awakened, and says, Thou
must confess thy sins, or else thou shall be damned for them: the word
commands thee, and the Spirit persuades thee to confess thy sin; and
hereupon thou say, This is my condition, and there is no ease nor comfort to
be had in private means, and therefore I must go to some faithful Minister,
and reveal my self to him: and when thou have done, thou keep back half
from him, and thou lie against Conscience, the Word, and Spirit, and all: and
when the Minister says, Is this the bottom of thy sin? Did thou not
commit such and such a sin? Oh! no; I was never guilty of any such matter:
and yet thou lie. Mark what I say, this is to have Satan fill thy heart,
thou give up thy heart into the possession of the Devil: Knowledge directs
thee not, the Spirit persuades not, and the Word prevails not; but the Devil
crowds into every corner of thy heart, and thou will cover thy sins, and so
perish for them everlastingly.

He that hides his sins, shall not prosper, Prove. 28.13.
says the Wiseman. Howsoever thy heart may be still for a while, yet thou
shall not prosper in thy Family, nor in the Word and Sacraments, but all means
are accursed to thee, thou shall receive no* mercy at all: he that confesses
and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy; but he that confesses not his
sins, shall not find mercy.

As we use to have a neast egg to breed upon, so it is the Devils cunning to
leave a neast egg, some bosom lust or other in thy soul, and the Devil sits
upon this same, as upon a neast egg: and when the Devil is cast out by a
slight overly confession of your sins, yet there is some secret lust still
left in the heart, and that will breed a thousand abominations more in you. For
(I beseech you take notice of this) the Devil returns and brings seven Devils
more then himself, and he hatcheth seven times more uncleanness then there
was before: therefore as you desire that Satan may not fill your hearts, and as
you desire to have any means blessed to you; come off kindly and currantly,
either not confess at all, or else confess currantly, that you may find
mercy in the time of need.

The second Use is for Instruction, Use 2*
to show us, that a broken hearted sinner is easily convicted of his sins,
and willing to under-goe any reproof; he that will confess his sins freely
of himself, will easily yield when he is called upon to do it. If the word
lay any thing to his charge, he will not deny it, a man need not bring any
witnesses against him: he will never seek to cover his sin, but if any
occasional passage of speech come, that may discover his sin, he takes it
presently, and yields to it, and says, I am the man, I confess, this is my
sin and my folly: he does not fence his heart against the truth.

To whom shall I look (says God) even to a man that has a contrite heart,
Esaias 66.2.
and trembles at my word: this is the root, and this is the fruit: the heart
must be contrite and broken by the hammer of Gods Law, before it can shake at
the hearing of the word; A broken heart comes not to flout at the minister
(nay, that is a sturdy heart) but a broken heart shakes at the word of God; if
there come a promise, a broken heart trembles lest he has no share in it; and
if there be any command, he trembles lest he should not be able to obey it, but
if the Lord meet with some maine lust, as secret malice against the Saints of
God, and secret uncleanness; or the like: if the Lord give a wipe at these
things in the word, the^ this broken heart has enough, he has his load, and
longs to be private, he remembers that truth; and the wound being fresh bleeds
again, and he mournes again, and lays hold on his heart, and says, Good
Lord, I was this malicious wretch, I intended this mischief to thy Saints, and
(if it had been in my power) I could have sucked their blood, I was that
unclean wretch; shall all these sins be pardoned? and shall all these cursed
abominations be removed? Can these corruptions be subdued?

Brethren (ye cannot be ignorant how) a wounded heart is affected with every
touch, you that have broken hearts you know it, I shall not need to tell you:
Therefore when ever the Lord comes to rake in those filthy and drunken hearts
of yours, they will shake within you, and you will say, this is my sin, and
these are my abominations, whereby God has been so much dishonored.

Use 3.
The third use is for exhortation, if you know these things (as I am persuaded
you do) then be entreated in the name of the Lord Jesus to walk in that way
which God has revealed; this is the baseness of our hearts, we are loath to
unbuckle our vile and secret distempers, they are shameful themselves, and yet
we are loath to take shame for them. Therefore deal openly and freely with
your souls, confess your sins freely, that God may deal comfortably with
you; has the Lord at any time let in this horror into thy soul; and is thy
heart now troubled at the word; and after all thy tears, and pains, and
means using with uprightness, do thy corruptions still remain? are they not
yet subdued as they might be? can thou not get any assurance of the pardon of
them? I say then, cast away thy shameful hiding and concealing of sin, and
do not say, what will the world, and ministers say of me? away with these
shifts, God calls thee to confession, the Saints have done it, and thou must,
nay, thou will do it, (if ever thy heart be kindly broken, as it should be,)
in some measure pleasing unto God, and profitable to thy self.





To whom we should lay open our sins by confession.
for every wide mouthed vessel is not fit to receive precious liquor; so this
confession is not to be opened to every carnal wretch, that will blaze it
abroad; the minister to whom you confess, ought to have these three graces.

A skillfull minister.
one that is trained up, and is master of his Art, and so experienced, that he
may be able in some measure to find out the nature of the disease: (Not that
any Minister under heaven can be so wife and holy, as to give pardon to a poor
sinner: but only he is able ministerially to do it under God) He must be
able to approve himself the Minister of God: he must have the tongue of the
learned, and be able to break the heart, and prepare the soul for Christ; and
then to apply the cooling promises of the Gospel to him.

There are many, who in stead of curing of the soul, kill it, and by popping
the Sacrament into a man's mouth, think to send him to heaven: but in
conclusion send him to hell.

A merciful Physician.
he that has been tossed in the sea will pity others that have been in the
same danger. If these people had gone to the Scribes and Pharisees, they had
been well helped. No, but they went to Peter, and therefore found help: when
Judas had sinned, and betrayed his Master, and his soul was full of horror,
he went to the Pharisees and confessed his sins, but what succor found he?
they answered him, what is that to us? Mat. 27.4.
Have thou sinned, then bear it, and look to it thy self; so it is with
carnal wretches, what comfort yield they to a poor distressed conscience?
they add sorrow to sorrow, and say, it is nothing but melancholy, and he has
gotten this by hearing some fiery hot minister, or by reading too much in some
books of election, and reprobation.

A faithful minister and how known.
in speaking what they would have him; but his faithfulness must appear in
two things.





Now what remains, Motives to confess our sins.
but that you all be moved to take up this duty, and provoke your hearts freely
to confess your evil ways; to which purpose let me give you three motives.



But (I assure you brethren) there is nothing that does more set forth the
honor of a Christian, and win the love of a minister, then this. Indeed it
is a shame to commit sin, but no shame to confess it upon good grounds; Nay,
when the heart comes kindly off, it is admirable to see how a faithful
minister will approve of such persons, his love is so great toward them; O,
says the minister, it did me good to hear that man confess so freely, I hope
the Lord has wrought kindly in him, certainly now he is in the way to life
and happiness; oh how I love him, I could even be content to put that man in
my bosom.

Whereas this overly, and loose dealing of yours, is loathsome to us; do you
think we perceive it not? Yes, we may feel it with our fingers, and (when you
are gone, I tell you what we think) surely that man is an hypocrite, he has a
hollow heart, he is not willing to take shame to himself for his sin, his
confession never comes to the bottom.

Motive 2.
Secondly, confession is a matter of great safety; I take this to be the only
cause, why many a man goes troubled, and gets neither comfort in the pardon of
the sin, nor strength against it, because he comes not off kindly in this
work of confession.

When you do nakedly open your sins to a faithful minister, you go out in
battle against sin, and you have a second in the field to stand by you: but
especially there is comfort in this particular, for the minister will discover
the lusts and deceits, and corruptions, that you could not find out, and he
will lay open all those holds of Satan, and that means of comfort that you
never knew: I am able to speak it by experience, this has broke the neck of
many a soul, even because he would go out in single combat against Satan,
and (do what he could,) not revealing himself to others for help, was
overthrown for ever.

As it is with the impostumed part of a man's body, when a man lets out some of
the corrupt matter, and so skins it, never healing it to the bottom; at last
it cankers inwardly, and comes to a gangrene, and the part must be cut off, or
else a man is in danger of his life; so when you let out some corruptions by an
overly confession, but suffer some bosom lust to remain still, as malice, or
uncleanness, etc. Then the soul cankers, and Satan takes possession of it,
and the soul is carried into fearful abominations.

Many have fallen foully, and lived long in their sins, and all because they
would not confess freely; therefore as you desire to find out the
deceitfulness of your corruptions, confess them from the bottom of your
souls.

Thirdly, Motive 3.
this open and free confession, may maintain the secrecy of the soul; for the
onl^ way to have a man's sins covered, is to confess them, that so they may
not be brought upon the stage before all the world.



our sins, God will cover them; if you take shame to your selves, God will
honor you; but if you will not confess your sins, God will break open the
door of your hearts, and let in the light of his truth, and the convicting
power of his Spirit, and make it known to men and Angels, to the shame of your
persons for ever.

If Judas had taken notice of his sin, and yielded to Christ's accusation, and
desired some conference with Christ privately, (and said, Good Lord, I am that
Judas, and that hell-hound that have received mercy from thee in the outward
means, and have been entertained among thy people, yet it is I that have taken
the thirty pence, Lord pardon this sin, and never let this iniquity be laid
to my charge;) I doubt not but though Judas his soul could not be saved
(because that now we know Gods decree of him) yet God would have saved him
from the public shame that was cast upon him for it: but he did not do so,
but hid his malice in his heart, and professed great matters of love to
Christ, and kissed him, and thus he thought to cover his sin wisely: but what
became of that? the Lord forced him to come and to indite himself in the high
priests hall, before the temporal and spiritual counsel.

So you that keep your sins as sugar under your tongues, and will be loose,
and malicious, and covetous still; well, you will have your thirty pence
still, and they are laid up safe, as Achans wedge of gold was; remember this,
God will one day open the clossets of your hearts, and lay you upon your death
beds, and then happily ye will prove mad, and vomit up all: were it not better
to confess your sins to some faithful minister now?

If you will not give the Lord his glory, he will distraine for it, and have it
from your heart blood, as Julian the apostata said, when the arrow was shot
into his heart, he plucked it out, and cried saying, thou Galilean, thou have
overcome me, the Lord distrained for his glory, and had it out of his heart
blood.

Now I come to the second fruit of contrition, which is here plainly expressed,
and it is this, A restless dislike of themselves and their sins: as if they
had said, Men and brethren, we care not what we do against those evils of
ours, whereby the Lord has been so much dishonored, and we endangered,
command us what you will, we must not rest thus, so loathsome are our sins
that we will do any thing rather then be as we are.

So from hence the doctrine is this, Doctrine:
The soul that is truly pierced for sin, is carried against it with a
restless dislike and distaste of it: or thus, Sound contrition of heart, ever
brings a through detestation of sin; this they professedly proclaim before
the Apostles. As if they had said thus much in more words;

You say we are they that have crucified the Lord of life, and we confess it,
oh happy had it been for us if we had never listened to the plots of the
Scribes and Pharisees, but that which is past cannot be undone or recalled.

What must now be done? if we rest here, we perish forever: can nothing be done
against these our sins, that have done so much against the Lord Jesus? we
must loath ourselves, and our sins, and we must get out of this e^^ate, or
else we are undone for ever.

Now for the further opening of this point, I will discover these three things.

First, I will show what a distaste and dislike this is.

Secondly, wherein this hatred and dislike of sin consists.

Thirdly, I will show the reason, why it must be so.

Dislike and hatred of sin what it is.
there is a hatred in preparation, and secondly, a hatred in ^sanctification;
both are saving works, but both are not sanctifying works: vocation is a
saving work, but not a sanctifying work: they are two distinct works.

This hatred in preparation, is that which the Lord works upon the soul, and
smites upon the soul, and thereby puts this kind of turning into the heart;
not that the heart has any powerful inward principle of grace before, (for
this is the first that the Lord works) so that as before the soul was forced
to see sin, and to feel the burden of it; so the heart is now brought to
dislike sin; this is a work wrought upon the soul, rather then any thing
done by the soul; the Lord is now fitting and preparing the soul for the
presence of his blessed Spirit.

And in this great work of preparation the Lord works these three things. How
the soul is prepared for Christ.


First, he stoppes the soul from going on any longer in sin.

Secondly he wearieth the soul with the burden of sin.

Thirdly, by hatred the soul is brought to go away from those carnal lusts
and corruptions, with a secret dislike of those sins which he has been
wearied withal.

In all these, the soul is a patient, and undergoes the work of humbling, and
breaking, rather then (it is any way) active and operative.



So the will and affections of a man which are the great wheels of this curious
clock of the soul these wheels do naturally of themselves run all helward, and
sin-ward, and devil-ward: now before the soul can receive a new principle of
grace, first, the Lord unmaskes a man, and makes him come to a stand, and makes
him see hell gaping for him; thus the heart is at a maze.





Now you must know, that all this while I speak of the first work, when the
soul is turned by the spirit against his sin, being formerly burdened with
the same sin: This does ever accompany a heart truly broken for sin.

Difference betwixt sorrow for sin, and hatred of sin.
There is this difference between sorrow and hatred; sorrow feels the
burden, but hatred flings it away; sorrow loosneth the heart, but hatred lets
out the corruption; sorrow says, does sin thus pinch the soul? and hatred
says, no more sin then; thus the Lord by his Spirit prepares the soul.

For the proof of this point, see what the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 30.31.
You shall consider your ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves. A poor Christian would tear his heart in pieces in the
apprehension of his own vileness, and says, Good Lord, shall I ever be
plagued and annoyed with this sturdy malicious heart? and shall I ever carry
this vile heart about me, that will one day carry me to hell, if thou be not the
more merciful? this makes a man even fall out with himself. Again, see what
the Apostle says, for this thing you have had godly sorrow, but what has it
wrought in you? does it work a holy indignation and revenge against your
sinful courses? that when thy soul sees his filthy abominations rising,
swelling, and bubling within thy heart, it takes on exceedingly, and will scarce
own it self; but looks away from sin, and is weary of it self, in regard
of the same; Nay, (if it were possible) that thou could be content to live
without a heart, even to forgo thy self, that so thou may not be troubled
with that vile heart of thine, and so dishonor God no longer. I beseech you
observe it, when a man is brought thus far, oh he cries to God, and says,
Lord was there ever any poor sinner thus pestered with a vile heart? Oh that
this heart should ever be so opposite against the Lord? Lord, except I had a
better heart, I would I had none at all: thus the heart loathes it self, and
in what measure the soul is carried with a restless dislike of sin, as it
is sin, in the same degree it is most violent against those sins, whereby
he has most dishonored God; Luke 19.8.
as you may see in Zacheus, his heart did most rise against his master sin;
so the Lord having humbled the repentant Church, Esaias 30.21.22.
thou shall defile thy graven Images of silver, and the ornaments of thy golden
Images, thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and say, get you
hence. They hated all sin, but especially their Idolatrous courses; so it
will be with the heart that is truly broken, he will cast away with hatred all
his pleasing and profitable sins: thus much of the first passage.





Wherein a true dislike of sin consists.
He desires to have his sin discovered.
and they will entertain him kindly, and reward him for it.

When the Ziphites came to Saul, 1. Sam. 25.20.21.
and told him where David was, mark what he says, Oh blessed be ye of the
Lord, for you have had compassion upon me. Just so it is with a broken bleeding
heart, that has an open hatred against his corruptions; if any Minister or
Christian will make known some base lusts that lurk in his soul, he will not
fly out, and say, What is that to you? Every tub must stand upon his own
bottom, and if I sin I must answer for it: Nay, he will bless the Lord for
it, and say, Blessed be the Lord, and blessed be such a Minister, and blessed
be such a neighbor, for they have showed me my sin, and had compassion upon
my soul.



Hence it comes to pass, that the soul which truly hates sin, is ever
seeking to those means, that are most able to give strength to him, and to
over come his corruptions; and is well pleased that any minister should meet
with the base haunts of his heart; He labors to have his sin killed.
and if the word hit and wound that master-sinne of his, he is marvelous
content therewith, he cares not from whom the help comes. The sharpest and
keenest reproves, that will shake his very heart, and draw blood out of sin,
and the most powerful deliverer of Gods word, that divides between the marrow
and the bones, he likes best.

Nay, though the great Cannons roar, and Gods ordinances work mightily upon
his heart; so that his corruptions may be killed and subdued, he blesses the
Lord, and says, Blessed be the Lord, I have had a good day of it, the Lord
laid battery against this wretched heart of mine; I bless God for these
reproves and judgments threatened; my heart is in some measure broken under
them, I hope my corruptions have gotten their deaths wound this day.

He hates sin in others.
so he is not able to see sin in others, but so far as God has put
authority and opportunity into his hands, he pursues it with deadly indignation.

As a man that hates a murderer, he will not only keep him from his own
house, but he pursues him even to the place of Justice: So the Soul that
truly hates sin, will not only keep sin from his own heart, but he will
pluck it from the hearts of others, so far as possibly he may.

When Haman had a spleen against Mordecai, he was not only desirous to kill
him, but he would kill all the nation of the Jews, this was hatred indeed: so
it is with a broken heart. If a broken hearted father have had a proud heart,
and has been wearyed with it, he labors to kill all the brood of those
cursed distempers in his children.

has such a secret grudge against the thriving of sin, He hates all
occasions and means of sinning.
that it lothes all occasions that may maintain his sin: as the drunkard and
adulterer hate the place where they went in to commit sin.

As in war, happily they cannot take the enemy, but they will drive him out of
the Country, and burn down all his Forts, and fill up all his Trenches, that
he may find no provision: so the heart that truly hates sin, and has been
truly broken for it, will hate all occasions and whatsoever may be any means
to strengthen it. Even all these proud and whorish locks, and these Spanish
cuts, and all these wanton and garish attires, and light behaviors, which were
nothing else but the Tent wherein his vain filthy light heart has lodged.

Thus it was with Mary Magdalen: and the reason why it is so, Luke 7.38.
is this: because the heart that has been broken for sin, and burdened with
the evil of it, has now found by woeful experience, that sin is the
greatest evil of all others: and therefore (for the preservation of it self)
it will hate that sin which separates between God and the Soul, and with
which the safety of the soul cannot stand.

Every thing in reason desires the safety and preservation of it self; the
soul knows sin to be the greatest enemy, and therefore it is most invenomed
with violence against sin, and ^aith, Whence come all these miseries? and
what is the mint out of which all these plagues and Judgments come? Is it not
my sin? It is not poverty, it is not sickness, nor disgrace that pincheth
me, but my sin first caused all these.

It is the poison of sin in poverty, and the poison of sin in shame, and
the wrath of God in all these by reason of my sin. These evils were not
evil to me, but that my sins make them so.

Had I a heart to fear GOD, and to love him, and depend upon him, in poverty
God would enrich me, and in shame he would honor me, and in misery he
would comfort me: It is not poverty, nor shame, that does hurt me; but sin
lies, and venomes my soul.

And therefore the soul now cries, Men and Brethren, What shall I do to be
freed from these corruptions? Great are the evils that I have found, and
mavelous are the plagues that I have felt, by reason of my sins: but far
worse will that portion be, that I shall have in hell, in endless torments
hereafter: this will be the perfection of all misery; let it be any thing
rather then this: it is better here now to be plagued, then everlastingly
damned.

Use 1.
The first Use is a ground of admirable comfort, and strong consolation to all
such as have found this dislike and hatred of sin: he may be sure his heart
has been broken for sin, and so consequently, he shall certainly have
Christ and grace.

I doubt not but every soul is persuaded of this, Object.
and says, Indeed if I could find my soul greeving within me for my
rebellions, and sins, then I did not doubt it; but how shall I know whether
my soul has been ever as yet truly wounded for sin, as sin.

How to know that your souls are truly broken for sin.
except thou have found some evil in it? and how can thou be an enemy to
corruption, except thy heart has been wounded with it? therefore let me
advise all those that desire to have an evide^ce of the work of grace in their
souls, to go in secret, and examine their hearts, whether they can make hue
and cry after their corruptions; can you be content that all your sinful
distempers, (even those that would affect you most) should be made known
either in public by the ministry of the word, or in private by some faithful
Christian? and can you be content that he should come home to your hearts, and
dragge out your corruptions before the world? then you have been wounded for
sin, and are enemies against it, (as David says) Try me O Lord, and examine
me, and prove my heart, and my reins; Psalm. 39.24* opened.
and see if there be any wickedness in me. He deals like a good subject that
locks all the doors, and bids the officers search if there be any traitor in
his house, if any one hide the traitor, he is a traitor himself in so doing;
so David as it were sets open the door of his heart, and says, Good Lord, if
there any wickedness in me, yet not discovered, Lord let that word, that
Spirit, and that messenger of thine, find it out; reprove me, convince me
Lord, and discover my hypocrisy, and pride of heart, This is an honest heart
certainly.



As it is amongst men, when a man has found his enemy, he follows the law
hotly, and he will have his life or else it shall cost him a fall, he pursues
him from one court to another, and makes all the friends that he can, that he
may plague him; and if all the law in the land will do it, he will have him
hanged; this is a right hatred indeed; so the soul can do little of it self,
yet it endeavors, and makes a levy of forces, and prayers, and will not leave
sin with life, it pursues sin hotly, and if all Gods words and all the
promises, and if the grace of Christ will do the deed, it will not rest til it
see the decay of sin, and therefore it will even dragge sin before the Lords
tribunal, and there cry for judgment, and say, Lord kill this proud malicious
heart of mine, these are thy enemies, and the enemies of thy grace; Lord they
sought my blood, let me have their blood; blood for blood, tooth for tooth, O
let me see their destruction.

The second use is a word of instruction; Use 2.
Is this contrition? and does it bring forth such fruits? the^ true broken
godly sorrow is rare in the world, and there are few that have it even amongst
those that think themselves some body in the bosom of the Church; therefore
save me a labor, and cast your eyes abroad in the world and enquire in the
houses and villages where you dwell, and knock at your neighbors hearts, and
say, is there any broken hearts here? it will appear, there are but few broken
hearts here to be found amongst the professors of the Gospel; and so, few
shall be saved.

If this true hatred be a true evidence of broken heartedness, what will become
of a world of profane persons, that are carried on with the pursuit of sin,
from which they will not be pulcked; the drunkard will have his cups, and the
adulterer his queanes, and the chapman his false weights; they are so far
from this dislike of sin, that they hate every thing save sin; they hate
the godly magistrate that would punish them; nay, they hate the Lord himself,
and say, it was pity there was such a law made to punish sin, what shall we
do? let us do any thing rather then be hindered in our pleasures; what shall
we do that we may not be checked and reproved? get you down to hell, and there
you shall have elbow room enough, there you may be as wicked and as profane
as you will, and that will be your portion, unless the Lord be merciful unto
you. Consider what the wise man speaks, Prove. 28.29.
and do not think, a little humbling of your souls before God, and a few
prayers will serve your turn, No, no, then shall they cry (says the text) But
I will not answer, Prove. 1.28.
they shall seek me early, but shall not find me, because they hated
knowledge, and did not seek the fear of the Lord. Oh how fearful is the doom,
and how certain is the desolation of such poor wretches!

Now the Lord, for his mercies sake, settle these truths in every one of your
hearts, Amen.

FINIS.

