AN ANSWER Made by Rob. Bishop of VVynchester, to a Book entitled, THE
DECLARATION OF SVCHE Scruples, and stays of Conscience, touching the Oath of
the Supremacy, as M. John Fekenham, by vvrytinge did deliver unto the L. Bishop
of Winchester, with his Resolutions made thereunto.

DEC. C. 23. Q. 5. Let the Princes of the world know, that they of duty
shall render an account to God for the Church, which they have taken of
Christ to praeserue. For whether the Peace and Discipline of the Church be
increased by faithful Princes, or it be loosed, he does exact of them an
account, who has delivered his Church, to be committed to their power.
Imprinted at London in Fleetstreate, at the sign of the Oliphante, by Henry
VVykes. Anno. 1566.

The Praeface.
IT is now an whole year paste, since I herd of a book secretly scattered
abroad by M. Fekenham emonge his friends: And in April last I came by a
copy thereof. When I had read the book, and perceived both the matter and
the manner of the man's doings therein: I saw his proofs so sclendre: and
his manner of dealinge so shameless: that I stood in doubt what to do, whether
to discover the man by writing, or to shake him of with silence. If I had not
seen a further meaning in his settinge forth and publishinge the book, then
he durst plainly utter, or then his cunninge could by any means Answer
unto: or then, that I with a good conscience might have neglected: I would
have paste it over with silence, as a piece of work not worthy of Answer.
But seeing the chief end and principal purpose intended, as may be justly
gathered in publishyng the book, was, to ingrafte in the minds of the
subjects a mislikyng of the Queens Majesty, as though she usurped a power,
and authority in Ecclesiastical matters, whereto she has no right: to
sclandre the whole Realm, as though it were stranged and directly against the
Catholic Church, renouncinge and refusinge to have Communion therewith: And
under my name to deface the mynisters of Christ's Church: I could not choose,
oneles I would wilfully neglect my duty to her Majesty, show my self
overmuch unkind unto my native Country, and altogether become careless of
the Church Mynisterie, but take pen in hand, and shape him a full and plain
answer, without any curiosity. Wherein I follow the order of M. Fekenhams
book: I make the proofs according to his request: and besides my proofs
forth of the Scriptures, the ancient Doctors, the General councelles and
National: I make proof by the continual practice of the Church, in like
government as the Queens Majesty takes upon her, and that, by such
Authors, for a great sort of them, as are the more to be credited in this
matter, for that they were most earnest fautours of the Romish sea, infected
as the times wear, with much superstition, and did attribute unto the sea of
Rome, and so to the whole Clergy so much authority in Church matters, as
they might, and much more then they ought to have done. Their judgments and
sentences shall appear in readinge by the form of letter: for leuinge forth
the Latin to avoid tediousnes, I have put into English the Authors minds
and sentences, and caused them, for the most part, to be Printed in Latin
letters, that the English reader may know and decerne the Authors sayings
from mine.

If this that I have done, work that effect in the English Reader which he
ought to seek, and I do wish, I have won that I wrought for: but
otherwise, let men say and judge what they list, I have discharged my
conscience and showed the truth. Anno Domini. 1565. Feb. 25.

Rob. Wynchester.

AN ANSWER TO Master Io. Fekenham.
Master Fekenham. The declaracion of such scruples and stays of conscience
touching the Oath of Supremacy as M. John Fekenham by writing did deliver
unto the L. Bishop of Winchester, with his resolutions made thereunto.


The Bishop of Wynchester. THe proprety of him that means to declare rightly
any matter done, is to set forth the truth without malice, to observe the
due circumstances of the matter, persons, and times: and to use simple
plainness without guileful ambiguities. This Title is so replenisshed with
untrue report, and ambiguous sleightes, without the note of any necessary
circumstance, yt there is not almost one true word therein: whereby you give
at the first a taste to the indifferent reader, what he must look for in the
sequel.

You pretend, and would have your friends to think, that the first four
chief points set forth in your book, were devised by you, put in writing,
and so delivered unto me, as the matter and ground whereupon, the conference
to be had betwixt me and you should stand: And that I made thereunto none other
but such resolucions, as it has pleased you untruly to report. In the first
part, you conueigh an untruth under a coulorable and ambiguous meaning, in
these words, as M. John Fekenham by writing did deliver unto the L. Bishop
of VVynchester. In the other part, you make an untrue report without any
color at all. I do grant and will not deny, that you delivered to me a
book: which, I thank God, I have to show, whereby to disprooue you. The
same will declare the time when, the place where, the occasion wherefore, the
persons to whom the book was written, and what is the matter in general
therein contained: Whereunto must be added, at what time the same was delivered
unto me, upon what occasion, and to what end. All which circumstances you
omit in your book published, least you should have bewrayed your self, and
have appeared in your own likeness.

The book by you delivered unto me, touching the Oath, was written in the
Tower of London (as you your self confessed, and the true title thereof does
plainly testify) in ye time of the Parliament holden Anno quinto of the Q.
Majesty. Ianuarij. 12. at which time you little thought to have soiourned with
me the winter followinge, and much less meante, to deliver me the scruples and
stays of your conscience in writing, to be resolved at my hands. And
although you would have it seem by that you have published abroad, that the
cause why you wrote, was to be resolved at my hand: yet the truth is (as you
your self reported) that you and your Towerfellowes, hearing that the Statute
moved for the assurance of the Queens royal power, would pass and be
established, did conceive that immediately after the same session, Commissioners
should be sent unto you, to exact the oath. Wheruppon you to be in some
areadines, to withstand and refuse the duty of a good subject, not without
healpe of the rest (as may be gathered) devised the matter contained in the
book, committed the same to writing, and purposed to have delivered it for
your aunsweare touching the Oath of the Supremacy to the Commissioners, if
they had come. This may appear by the title of that book that you first
delivered to me which is word for word as follows.

The answer made by M. John Fekenham Priest, and prisoner in the Tovver, to
the Queens highness commissioners, touching the Oath of the Supremacy.

In this title there is no mention of scruples and stays delivered to the
Bishop of Wynchester, but of aunsweare to the Queens commissioners. I am not
once named in the title, ne yet in the book delivered to me: neither is there
one word as spoken to me: although in the book set abroad, you turn all as
spoken to me. In your book published are found these kinds of speeches: To
the L. Bishop of VVynchester. When your L. shall be able etc. I shall join this
issue with your L. etc. But it is far otherwise in your book delivered to
me, namely: To the Queens highness commisioners. When ye the Queens highness
commisioners shall be hable etc. I shall join this issue with you, that when
any one of you, the Queens highness commisioners. etc. From October, at what
time you were sent to me, unto the end of January, there was daily conference
betwixt us in mattiers of Religion, but chiefly touching the four points,
which you term scruples and stays of conscience, and that by word of
mouth, and not by any writing. In all which points, you were so answered,
that you had nothing to obiecte, but seemed resolved, and in a manner fully
satisfied. Whereupon, I made afterward relation (of good meaning toward
you) to certain honorable persons of the good hope I had conceived of your
conformity. At which time, a certain friend of yours standing by, and
hearing what I had declared then to the honorable in your co^mendacion, did
shortly after report the same unto you, which as it seemed you did so much
mislike (doubtinge that your confederates should understand of your revolt,
which they ever feared, having experience of your shrinkyng from them at
Westminster in the conference there, the first year of the Queens Majesty)
that after that time I found you always much more repugnant, and contrary to
that wherein ye before times seemed in manner thoroughly resolved: And also to
go from that you before agreed unto. By reason whereof, when in debatinge
betwixt us, you vsinge many shifts, amongst other did continually quarrel in
Sophistication of words, I did will you, to the end we might certainly go
forward in the points material, that you would write your Positions or
Assertions in form of Propositions: which I could not cause you to do in
any wise, but ye would still stand uncertainly in grauntinge and deniyng at
your pleasure: Yea, although I for the better agreement to be had, did draw
such in form of Assertion, and gave them in writing unto you, as I gathered
of your own mouth to be your opinion: yet would ye in no wise stand to,
and rest in any one certainly, but used still your accustomed wra^glinge and
wanderinge at large. Which your behavior so much misliked me, that I could
not but ernestly chardge you with inconstancy, in that ye would sometimes
deny, that ye before had granted: and also grant, that ye before had
denied. Then being so much pressed herewith, and perceiving that your froward
quarellinge with the plain words of the Statute, could no longer cover your
evil meaning, at the length you did require, that I would put in writing
the words of the Oath, with the sense or interpretation added thereunto, as
you consideringe theruppon, might devise the form of your Propositions,
whereupon we might afterward debate. By this it may appear, both how untrue
it is, that you hitherto had delivered unto me any such scruples of yours in
writing, as you pretend in the title (for then I needed not to have sought
any Propositions of your Assertions) and also how untrue this is, that the
interpretation of the Oath which I wrote at your request, before I ever saw
any writing of yours, was to aunsweare your scruples and stays delivered to
me in writing.

After this in February followyng, certain persons of woorship resorted to my
house, partly to see me, and partly to hear somewhat betwixt me and you. And
after that we had reasoned in certain points touching Religion, wherein ye
seemed openly to have little matter to stand in, but rather did yield to the
most in substance that I had said: nevertheless being after withdrawn in
some of their companies, although ye did seem openly to consent and agree
with me in that I had said: Yet (said you,) The mattier itself is grounded
here, (pointing to your breast) that shall never goo out. Which being told
me, I did vehemently then challendge you for your double dealinge, and
colorable behavior: saying, that I thought you did not that you did, of any
conscience at all: and therefore compted it but lost labor, further to travail
with such a one as had neither conscience nor constancy. But you, to show
that ye did all of conscience, showed me both what ye had suffered for the same
in diverse manners, and also how the same was grounded in you long before.
For proof whereof, ye offered to show me a book of yours, that ye had
devised in the Tower, and the same shortly after did deliver unto me, not as
your scruples and doubts to be resolved at my hand, wherein ye seemed in our
conference before had, resolved: but only to declare, that the mattier had
been long before settled in you, and this was thonly and mere occasion of the
delivery of the said book unto me, entitled as is before declared and not
otherwise.

But as you have cast a miste before the eyes of the readers, under the speech
of a delivery in writing, without notinge of any circumstance that might make
the mattier clear, wherein you show your self to have no good meaning: even
so have you set forth resolucions of your own devise under my name, because
you are ashamed to utter mine, whereunto you yielded, and were not hable to
answer.


M. Fekenham. For as much as one chief purpose and intent of this Oath is, for
a more saulfgarde to be had of the Queens royal person and of her highness
most quiet and prosperous reign: I do here presently therefore offer my self
to receive a corporal Oath upon the Evangelists, that I do verily think
and am so persuaded in my conscience, that the Queens highness is thonly
supreme governor of this realm, and of all other her highness Dominions and
Countries according as thexpresse words are in the beginning of the said
Oath. And further I shall presently swear, that her highness has under God,
the sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons borne within these her
highness realms of what estate (either Ecclesiastical or Temporal) so ever
they be.


The B. of Wynchester. How so ever by words you would seem to tender her
Majesty's saulfty, quietness, and prosperous reign, your deeds declare your
meaning to be clean contrary. What saulfty mean you to her person, when you
bereue the same of a principal part of the royal power? what quietness
seek you to her person, when one chief purpose and intent of your book
published, is to stay and bring her subjects to an heretical misliking of her
royal power, which is a preparation to rebellion against her person? How
much prosperity you wish to her Majesty's reign appears, when that with
diepe sighs and groans you look daily for a change thereof, and tharche
Heretic of Rome, your God in earth, to reign in her place. If I knew you
not right well, I should marvel, that you shame not to affirm, saying: I
do here presently therefore offer my self to receive a corporal Oath: and
further I shall presently swear etc. Seeinge that you never made to me any
motion of such an offer, neither did I at any time require you to take any
Oath.

You think and are so persuaded in conscience (if a man may trust you) that
the Queens highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and of al her
dominions and countries, and has under God, the sovereignty and rule over all
manner of persons, borne within her dominions of what estate either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal so ever they be. Whereunto I add this consequent
which does necessarily follow, Ergo: Your holy father the Pope is not (as you
think in your conscience) the supreme governor over her highness dominions,
nor has the sovereignty or rule under God over any persons borne within the
same.

The Queens majesty must needs herein take you but for a dissembling
flatterer, in that you will seem sometime in general speech, to attribute unto
her thonly Supremacy under God, over her dominions and subjects which you
mean not, for within a while after in plain words you deny the same. And
your holy Father will give you his curse, for that being his sworn Advocate,
at the first entry in to the plea, you give from him the whole title of his
unjust claim, to wit, the supreme governance over the Queens highness
dominions and people. You must now therefore make some shifte, and call to
remembrance one slight or other by some distinction, whereby to avoid your
holy Fathers curse, that you may continue under his blessinge. You will
expound your meaning by restreiguyng the supreme government of the Queens
majesty only in causes Temporal, and not in causes or things
Ecclesiastical. But this distinction comes to late, and will do you no
ease, for that in both these kinds of causes you have already granted unto
her the only supreme government: and that as you verily think persuaded in
conscience: wheruppon you offer to receive a corporal Oath upon the
Evangelists. And this your grant passed from you by these words: Over all
manner persons borne within her dominions of what estate either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal so ever rheybe: In this that you grant unto her
highness thonly supreme rule over the Lay and Ecclesiastical persons: you have
also concluded therewith in all causes both Ecclesiastical and Temporal,
which is plainly and firmly proved by this argument followyng.

A supreme governor or ruler is one, who has to ouersee, Definition of a
governor.
guide, care, provide, order and direct the things under his government and
rule, to that end, and in those actions which are appointed and do properly
belong to the subject or thing governed. So that in every government and rule
there are three things necessarily concurraunt: the Governor, the Subject, or
mattier governed, and the object or mattier wherabout and wherein the
government is occupied and does consiste. But the Queens highness, by your own
confession, is the only supreme governor over al manner persons
Ecclesiastical borne within her dominions: Ergo: Her highness thonely supreme
governor over such persons has to ouersee, guide, care, provide, order, and
direct them to that end and in those actions which are appointed and do
proprely belong to Ecclesiastical persons. And so by good consequent you
have renounced al foreine government. For this exclusive, Only, does shut out
all other from supreme government over Ecclestasticall persons: and also ye
do affirm the Queens majesty to be supreme governor in those actions
which are appointed, and that do proprely belong to Ecclesiastical persons,
which are no other but things or causes Ecclesiastical.


M. Fekenham. And of my part I shall swear to observe and perform my
obedience and subjection with no less loyalty and faithfulness unto her
highness, then I did before unto Queen Mary, her highness sister of famous
memory, unto whom I was a sworn Chaplain and most bounden.


The B. of Wynchester. Like an unfaithful subject contrary to your Oath made to
King Henry, and continued all the reign of King Edward, you helped to spoil
Queen Mary of famous memory of a principal part of her royal power, right
and dignity, which she at the beginning of her reign had, enjoyed, and put
in ure. The same obedience and subjection, with the like loyalty and
faithfulness, ye will swear to observe and perform to Queen Elizabeth, but
she thanketh you for naught, she will none of it, she has espied you, and
thinks, ye profer her to much wrong.


M. Fekenham. And touching the rest of the Oath, whereunto I am required
presently to swear, viz. That I do utterly testify and declare in my
conscience, that the Queens highness is the only supreme governor of this
realm, asvvell in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as
Temporal: I shall then of my part be in like readiness, to receive the same,
when your L. shall be able to make declaration unto me, how and by what
means, I may swear thereunto, without committinge of a very plain and
manifest perjury: which of my part to be committed, it is damnable sin,
and against the express word of God written, Leuit. cap. 19. Non periurabis
in nomine meo, nec pollues nomen Dei tui. And of your part to provoke me or
require the same, it is no less damnable offense. S. Austine in witness
thereof, says: Ille qui hominem prouocat ad iurationem etc. He who does
provoke an other man to swear, and knovveth that he shall forsvveare him
self, he is worse then a murderer: because the murderer sleeth but the
body, and he sleeth the soul, and that not one soul, but two as the soul of
him whom he provoke to perjury, and his own soul also by ministringe the
occasion thereof. And the points of this Oath, whereunto I cannot presently
swear without most plain and manifest perjury, are these four
follovvinge.


The B. of Wynchester. As in that which goes before, you covertly uttered
many untruths? although sometime ye stomble on the truth against your will:
so in the rest you fall to plain and manifest untruths: least men should not
perceive what you are. You were never by me required to swear, and therefore
this is an impudent kind of dealinge, to say: whereunto I am presently
required to swear, etc. I had none authority nor commission to require the
Oath of you, neither might I tender it unto you without peril to my self: you
being committed unto me by the most Honorable Counsel, without whose
order, I could attempt no such mattier. You have already showed in plain
matter, although not in plainness of speech, and that as you think, and are
persuaded in conscience, yt her highness is the supreme governor, so well in
causes Ecclesiastical as Temporal. For having supremacy over the
Ecclesiastical person, the same being not otherwise person Ecclesiastical,
but in respect of Ecclesiastical functions, things and causes annexed and
properly belonging to Ecclesiastical persons: she has the Supremacy over
the person in Ecclesiastical functions, things and causes, these being the
only matter or object where about or wherein the rule over an Ecclesiastical
person is occupied and does consiste.

This seems to be your glory amongst your friends, y^ you make me an offer,
to receive this part of y^ Oath, when I shall be able to declare by what means
you may swear without co^mittinge plain and manifest perjury: Mine ability
herein shall appear in mine answer to your four points: God make you as
ready to perform, for duties sake, as ye will seem ready to offer, whereby
to purchase to your self a glorious estimacion. But wherefore did you not make
this offer unto me, either by word or writing all ye time of your aboade with
me? You play now after your return into your hold, as you did after ye
Parliament before you came out of ye Tower to me. When you saw the end of the
Parliament, and understood right well, yt the Oath was not like to be tendered
unto you, than sent you copies of ye book devised for your answer touching
ye Oath, abroad to your friends, to declare your constancy and aredines, to
refuse ye Oath, whereby they might be the rather enduced, to continue their good
opinion conceived of you, and also pay your chardges weakly in the Tower sent
unto you every Saturday by your servant, who wrote and delivered ye copies
abroad, as you told me your self. Now you are returned again in to the
Tower, and perceiving y^ your friends, (as you gave the^ just cause) have some
mistrust of your revolt and waueryng inconsta^cie, whereby your estimacion and
fame, with their service to your God ye belly is decayed, you have devised to
set abroad the self same book again yt you did before, and to the self
same end, altering or changing nothing at al, saving that you have given it a
new name and Title, and seem as in this place, as though ye spoke to me by
these words: when your L. etc. When as in very deed, there was never any
such word spoken or written to me: and in the book you delivered to me, your
speech is directed to the commissioners, and not to me, in these words:
When ye the Queens highness commisioners shall be able etc.


M. Fekenham. First is, that I must by a book Oath utterly testify, that the
Queens highness is the only supreme governor of this realm, and that asvvell
in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal. But to
testify any thing upon a book Oath, no man may possibly therein avoid
perjury, except he do first know the thing which he does testify, and
vvherof he bears witness and gives testimony. And touching this knowledge,
that the Queens majesty, is the only supreme governor asvvell in Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical causes as in Temporal, besides that I have no such
knowledge, I know no way nor mean whereby I should have any knowledge
thereof. And therefore of my part to testify the same upon a book Oath,
being without (as I am in deed) all knowledge, I cannot without
committinge of plain and manifest perjury. And herein I shall join this issue
with your L. that when your L. shall be able, either by such order of
government, as our Savior Christ left behind him in his Gospel and nevve
Testament, either by the writing of such learned Doctors both Old and
Nevve, which have from age to age witnessed the order of Ecclesiastical
government in Christ's Church, either by the general Councelles, vvherin the
right order of Ecclesiastical government in Christ's Church, has been most
faithfully declared and shevved from time to time: or else by the continual
practice of the like Ecclesiastical government, in some one Church or part
of all Christendom. When your L. shall be able by any of these four means,
to make proof unto me, that any Emperor, or Empress, King or Queen, may
claim or take upon them any such government, in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
causes: than I shall herein yield, and with most humble thanks reken my self
well satisfied, and shall take upon me the knowledge thereof, and be ready to
testify the same upon a book Oath.


The B. of Wynchester. The reason or argument yt moves you, not to testify
upon a book Oath, the Q. Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, is this: No man
may testify by Oath that thing whereof he is ignorant and knows nothing,
without committinge perjury. But you neither know that the Q. highness is the
only supreme governor as well in causes Ecclesiastical, as Temporal: neither
yet know you any way or mean whereby to have any knowledge thereof: Therefore to
testisie the same upon a book Oath, you cannot without committing of plain
and manifest perjury.

For answer to the Minor or second Proposition of this argument: Although I
might plainly deny, that you are without all knowledge, and utterly ignorant
both of the matter and of the way or mean, how to come by knowledge thereof,
and so put you to your proof, wherein I know, you must needs fail: yet will
I not so answears by plain negative, but by distinction or division of
ignorance. And so for your better excuse, declare in what sort you are
ignorant and without all knowledge. There are three kinds of ignorantes, the
one of simplicity, the other Thom. Aquin. quaest. 3. de malo.
of wilfulnes, and the third of malice. Of the first sort you cannot be, for
you have had long time, good opportunity, much occasion, and many ways,
whereby to come to the knowledge hereof. Yea, you have known and professed openly
by deed and word the knowledge hereof many years together. For you did
know, acknowledge, and confess, this supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical to be in King Henry the eight and his heirs, when your Abbay
of Euesham, by common consent of you and the other Monks there under your
coue^t seal, was of your own good wills without compulsio^ surrendered in to
his hands, and you, by his authority, reformed, forsook your foolish vow,
and many horrible errors, and superstitions of Monkery, and became a secular
Priest, and Chaplain to D. Bell, and afterward to D. Boner, and so duringe
the life of King Henry the eight, did agnise profess and teach openly in your
sermons the kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. This knowledge
remained steadfastly in you all the time of king Edward also. For although you
were in ye Tower in his time, yt was not for any doubt you made of his
Supremacy, for that you still agnised: but for other points of Religion
touching the ministracion of the Sacraments, whereunto you also agreed at the
last, and promised to profess, and preach the same in open auditory
whersoeuer you should be appointed. Whereupon a right woorshipfull gentleman
procured your deliverance forth of the Tower, and so were you at liberty,
never mencioninge any doubt in this matter: but agnising the Princes Supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastical. Wherefore I may saulfly say, that the ignorance and
want of knowledge which you pretend in your Minor Proposicion, is not of
simplicity, and therefore must needs be of wilfulnes, or malice, or mixte of
both.

The way and mean whereby to have this ignorance removed, you assign with
this issue, that when I prove unto you, by any of the four means, y^ any
Emperor, or Empress, King or Queen may take upon them any such government
in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes, then you will yield, take upon you the
knowledge thereof, and be ready to testify ye same by book Oath. Truly, I
have often and many times proved this same that you require, and by the self
same means in such sort unto you, that you had nothing to say to the
contrary. And yet nevertheless you continue still in your wilful and malicious
ignorance, which causes me to fear that this sentence of the holy ghost
will be verified in you: In maleuolam animam non introibit sapientia. Yet I will
ones again prove ^a^ien. 1.
after your desire, even as it were by puttinge you in remembrance of those
things which by occasions in conference, I often and many times reported unto
you, whereof I know you are not simply ignorant.

You require a proof hereof, that an Emperor or Emperesse, King or Queen,
may claim or take upon them any such government (meaning as the Queens
majesty, our Sovereign, does now chalendge and take upon her) in Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical causes. For aunsweare I say, they ought to take upon them
such government, therefore they may lawfully do it. The former part is
found true by the whole discourse of the holy Scriptures both of the Old
and new Testament: by the testimony of the Doctors in Christ's Church: by
the general Counsels: and by the practice of Christ's Catholic Church
thorough out all Christendom.

The holy Scriptures describinge the conditions, and Deuter. 17.
propreties required in a King, amongst other does command, that he have by
him the book of the Law, and The duty of a King.
do diligently occupy him self in readinge thereof, to the end he may
thereby learn to fear the Lord his God, (that is, to have the fear of God
planted within him self in his own heart) to keep all the words, and to
accomplish in deed all the ordinances, or (as the old translation has it)
all the ceremonies by God commanded (that is) to govern in such sort. That
he Gloss. ordinar.
cause, by his Princely authority, his subjects also to become Israelites. To
wit, men that see, know, and understand, the will of God. Redressinge the
peruersenes of such, as swerue Aben. Ezra.
from Gods ordinances or caeremonies. Whereupon it is, that God does
command the Magistrate, that Deuter. 13.
he make diligent examination of the Doctrine taught by any, and that he do
sharply punish both the teachers of false and superstitious Religion, with
the folowers, and also remove quite out of the way all manner of evil.

The best and most godly Princes that ever governed Gods people, did
perceive and rightly understand this to be Gods will, that they ought to
have an especial regard and care for the orderinge and settinge forth of
Gods true Religion, and therefore used great diligence with fervent zeal to
perfour^^ and acco^plishe the same. Moses was the supreme governor over Gods
people (and was not the chief Priest or Bishop, for that was Aaron) whose
authority, zeal, and care in appointinge and orderinge Religion amongst
Gods people, prescribinge to all the people, yea to Aaron and the Levites,
what, and after what sort, they should execute their functions, correctinge
and chasteninge the transgressors, is manifestly set forth in his book
called the Pentateuche. After the death of Moses, the people as yet not entered
and settled in the promised Land, the chardge of chief government over Gods
people both in causes Temporal and Ecclesiastical, was committed to Iosue,
and not to Eleazar, for to him belonged only the ministration of the things
belonginge to the Priestly office. And to Iosue the Prince belonged the over
sight both over the Priests and people, to govern, guide, order, appoint and
direct each estate, in all things that apperteined to each of their callinges.
Of the one ye seem to have no doubt at all: the other is as plain. For at
the appointment of Iosue, the Priests removed the Arc of covenant and
placed the same. He Iosue. 3.
did interpret unto the people the spiritual meaning of Iosue. 4.
the twelve stones, which they had taken by Gods commandment forth of
Jordan to be as Sacraments or Signs. He circumcised the children of Israel
at the second Iosue. 5.
time of the great and solemn Circumcision. He calls the Priests,
commands some of them to take up the Iosue. 6.
Lord's Ark: other seven of them to blow seven trompettes before the Arc,
and appoints to them the order of proceedinge. He builded an altar unto the
Lord God of Israel, according to ye Law of God: he sacrificed thereon, Iosue.
8.
burnt sacrifices and burnt offringes: He wrote there upon the stones, the
Deuteronomy of Moses: He read all the blessings and cursinges, as they are
set forth in the book of the Law: And he read all what so ever Moses had
commanded before all the congregation of Israel, etc. Last of al Iosue, to
show that causes of Religion did specially belong to his charge and care,
makes a long and a vehement oration unto the Israelites, wherein he exhorts
them to cleave unto the Lord with a sure faith, a constant hope, and a
perfect love, obeiynge and seruinge him with such service as he has appointed
in his Law. And does zelously and with great threats dissuade them from all
kind of Idolatry and false Religion. Iosue. 23. 24


David whom God appointed to be the pastor, (that 2. Sam. 5.
is, the king over Israel) to feed his people, did understand that to this
pastoral office of a king, did belong of duty, not only a charge to provide
that the people might be governed with justice, and live in civil honesty,
peace, and tranquilite, public and private: but also to have a special
regard and care, to see them sed with true doctrine, and to be fostered up in
the Religion, appointed by God him self in his Law. And therefore immediately
after he was with some quietness settled in his royal seat, the first thing that
he began to refourme and restore to the right order, as a thing ye apperteined
especially to his princely charge and care, was Gods Religion and Service,
which had been decayed and neglected long before in the time of king Saul.
For the better perfourmaunce whereof, as the supreme governor over all the
estates both of the Laytie and of the Clergy, in all manner of causes: after
consultation had with his chief Counsailours, he calls 1. Paral. 13.
the Priests and Levites, and commands, appoints, and directs them in all manner of things and causes, apperteining to their ecclesiastical functions
and offices. He prepares a seemly place for the Arc in his own City. He
goes with great sole^pnitie to fetch the Ark of the lord. He commands
Sadoc and Abiathar the priests, and the 1. Paral. 15.
chief among the Levites, to sanctify them selves with their brethren, and
than to carry the Arc upon their shoulders unto the place appointed. He
comptrolleth them that the Arc was not carried before on their shoulders
according to the Law: and therefore lays to their charge the breach that was
made by the death of Vsa. He commands also the chief of the Levites, to
appointe among their brethren, Musicians to play on diverse kinds of
instruments, 1. Paral. 16.
and to make melody with ioyfulnes. He sacrifices burnt and peace offringes.
He blessed the people in the name of the Lord. He appoints certain of the
Levites, to minister continually before the Ark of the Lord, to rehearse his
great benefits, to the honor and praise of the lord God of Israel. And for
that present time he made a Psalm of Gods praise, and appointed Asaph and his
brethren to praise God therewith. He ordained the Priests, Levites, singers,
and Porters, and in some, he appointed and ordered all th officers and offices,
required to be in the house of the Lord, for the setting forth of his service
and Religion.

Solomon deposed Abiathar the high Priest, and placed 3. Reg. 2. 3. Reg. 5.
Sadoc in his rowme. And he builded the Temple, placed the Arc in the place
appointed for the same. Hallowed or dedicated the Temple, offered sacrifices,
blessed the people, directed the Priests, Levites, and other church officers,
in their functions, according to the order before taken by his father David.
And neither the Priests nor Levites* swerued in any thing (perteining to their
office) from that, that the 2. Paral. 8.
king commanded them.

Iosephat has no small commendation in the Scriptures, for that he so
studiously used his princely authority in the reformation of Religion, and
matters apperteining, thereunto. He removed at the first beginning of his reign
all manner of false Religion, and what so ever might be cause of 2 Paral. 17.
Gloss. ord.
offense to the faithful. He sent forth through his kingdom Visitours, both
of his Princes, and also of the Priests and Levites, with the book of the
Law of the Lord, to the end they should instruct, and teach the people, and
refourme all manner abuses in ecclesiastical causes according to that book.
After a while he made a progress in his own person throughout al his
country, and by his preachers reduced and brought again his people from
supersticion, and false Religion, unto the Lord the God of their fathers. He
appointed in every town throughout his kingdom, 2. Paral. 19,
as it were Justices of the peace, such as feared the Lord, and abhorred false
Religion, to decide controversies in civil causes: and in like sort he
appointed and ordained the high Priests with other Priests, Levites, and of
the chief rulers among the Israelites, to be at Jerusalem to decide, and judge
controversies of great weight, that should arise about matters of Religion and
the Law. He did command and prescribe unto the chief Priests and Levites,
what fo^^me and order they should observe in the ecclesiastical causes and
controversies of Religion, that were not so difficult and weighty. And when
any token of Gods displeasure appeared, either by wars orother calamity,
he gave order to his subjects for common prayer, and enjoined to them publiqu^
fast, with earnest preaching 2. Paral. 20.
of repentance, and sekinge after the will of the Lord to obey and follow the
same.

Ezechias the king of Judah, has this testimony of the holy Ghost, that the
like governor had not been, neither 4. Reg. 18.
should be after him amongst the kings of Judah. For he cleaued unto the
Lord and swerued not from the precepts which the Lord gave by Moses. And to
express, that the office, rule, and government of a godly king consists,
and is occupied according to Gods ordinance and precept, first of all in
matters of Religion, and causes Ecclesiastical, the holy ghost does commend
this king for his diligent care in refourming Religion. He took quite away
(says the holy ghost) al manner of Idolatry, superstition, and false Religion,
yea, even in the first year of his reign, and the first month he opened the
doors of Gods house: He calls as it were to a Synod the Priests, and
Levites, be makes unto them a 2. Parali. 29.
long and pithy oration, declaringe the horrible disorders and abuses that has
been in Religion, the causes, and what evils followed to the whole Realm
thereupon: He declares his full determination to restore and refourme Religion
according to Gods will. He commands them therefore, that they laiyng aside
all errors, ignorance, and negligence, do the parts of faithful ministers.

The Priests and Levites assembled together, did sanctify them selves, and
did purge the house of the Lord from al uncleanness of false Religion, at the
commandment of the king concerning things of the Lord. That done, they came
unto the king, and made to him an account and report what they had done. The
king assembleth the chief Rulers of the City, goes to the Temple, he
commands the Priests and Levites, to make oblation and sacrifice for whole
Israel. He appoints the Levites after their order in the house of the Lord,
to their musical instruments, and of the Priests to play on Shalmes,
according as David had disposed the order by the counsel of the Prophets. He
and the Princes commands the 2. Parali. 30.
Levites to praise the Lord with that Psalm that David made for the like
purpose. He appointed a very solemn keaping and ministering of the Passover,
whereunto he exhorts all the Israelites, and to turn from their Idolatry and
false Religion unto the Lord God of Israel. He made solemn prayer for the
people. The king with comfortable words encouraged the Levites that were
zealous, and had a right judgment of the Lord, to offer sacrifices of thanks
giving, and to praise the Lord the God of their fathers, and assigned the
Priests and Levites to mynister, and give thanks, according to their offices
in their courses and tournes. And for the better continuance of Gods true
Religion, he caused a sufficient and liberal provision to be made from the
people, for the Priests and Levites, that they might wholly, cheerfully, and
constantly, serve the Lord in their vocations. These doings of the king
Ezechias touching matters of Religion, and the reformation thereof, says 2.
Parali. 31.
the holy ghost, was his acceptable service of the Lord, dutiful both to God
and his people.

Josias had the like care for Religion, and used in the 4. Reg. 23.
same sort his princely authority, in refourming all abuses in all manner
causes ecclesiastical. These godly kings claymed and took upon them the
supreme government over the ecclesiastical persons of al degrees, and did
rule, govern, and direct them in all their functions, and in all manner causes
belonging to Religion, and received this witness of their doings, to wit, that
they did acceptable service, and nothing but that which was right in Gods
sight. Therefore it follows well by good consequent, that Kings or Queens may
claim and take upon them such government in things or causes
ecclesiastical. For that is right, says the holy ghost: they should than do
wrong if they did it not.

You suppose, that ye have escaped the force of all these and such like godly
kings (which do marueilously shake your hold) and that they may not be
alleged against you, neither any testimony out of the old testament, for that
ye have restreignes the proof for your co^tentation, to such order of
government as Christ has assigned in the Gospel, to be in the time of the
new Testament, wherein you have sought a subtyle shift. For whiles ye seek to
cloak your error under the shadow of Christ's Ghospel, you bewray your
secret heresies, turnyng your self naked to be seen of all men, and your
cause notwithstanding, left in the state it was before, nothing helped by this
your poor shift of restreynt. So that where your friends took you before but
only for a Papist: now have you showed your self to them plainly herein to be
a Donatist also. When the Donatistes troubled the peace of Christ's catholic
Church, and divided them selves from the unity thereof, as now you do: The
godly fathers travailed to confute their heresies by the Scriptures, both of
the old and new Testament: and also craved aid and assistaunce, of the
Magistrates and Rulers to refourme them, to reduce them to the unity of the
Church, and to repress their heresies, with their authority and godly laws
made for that purpose, to whom it belonged of duty, and whose especial
service to Christ is, to see, care, and provide, that their subjects be
governed, defended, and maintained in the true and sincere Religion of Christ,
without all errors, superstitions and heresies, as S. Augustine proves at
large in his epistle against Vincentius a Rogatiste, in his epistle to
Bonifacins, and in his books Epist. 48. Epist. 50. Lib. 2. cont. lit. Pet.
Lib. 2. cont. Epi. Gaud.
against Petilian, and Gaudentius letters. Against this catholic doctrine,
your ancestors the Donatistes, arise up and desende them selves with this
color or pretense, that they be of the catholic faith, and that their
church, is the catholic church: (Which shifte for their defense against Gods
truth, the Popish sectaries do use August. Epist. 48.
in this our time, being no more of the one, or of the other, than were the
Donatistes and such like, of whom they learned to cover their horrible
heresies under the same fair cloak) that the seculer Princes have not to meddle
in matters of Religion or causes ecclesiastical. That God Cont. lit. Petil.
lib. 2. cap. 92. Lib. 2. con. Epist. 2. Gaud. ca. 26
committed not the teaching of his people to kings, but to Prophets. Christ
sent not soldiers but fishers, to bring in and further his Religion, that
there is no example of such order, found in the Gospel or new Testament,
whereby it may appear, that to secular Princes it belongs Epist. 48. and. 50.
to have care in matters of Religion. And that (as it seems by that S.
Augustine by prevention obiecteth against them) they subtly refused all
proufes or examples avouched out of the old Testament (as ye craftily do also,
in bynding me only to the new Testament) which S. Lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil.
ca. 92.
Augustine calls, an odious and wicked guyle of the Donatistes. Let your
friends now, whom ye will seem to please so much, when you beguyle them
most of all, weigh with aduisement, what was the erroneous opinion, thouching
the authority of Princes in causes ecclesiastical of the Donatistes (as it is
here rightly gathered forth of S. Augustine) and let them consider wisely these
foul shifts they make for their defense: And then compare your opinion and
guylefull defenses thereof to theirs, and they must needds clappe you on the
back, and say to you Patrisas* (if there be any upright judgment in them)
demyng you so like your great grandsier Donatus, as though he had spit you out
of his own mouth. But for that S. Augustines judgment and mine, in this
controuesie is alone, as your opinion herein differs nothing at all from the
Donatistes: I will use no other confirmation of my proufes alleged forth of
the old Testament, for the reproufe of your guylful restraint, the^ Christ's
catholic Church, uttered by that catholic Doctor S. Augustine, against all the sects of Donatistes, whether they be Gaudentians, Petilians, Rogatistes,
Papists, or any other petit sects sprung out of his loins, what name so ever
they have.

S. Augustine against Gaudentius, his second epistle Lib. 2. ca* 26
affirms, saying: I have (says he) already heretofore made it manifest, that
it apperteined to the kings charge, that the Ninevites should pacify Gods
wrath, which the Prophet had denounced unto them. The kings which are of
Christ's Church, do judge most rightly that it apperteineth unto their cure
that you (Donatistes) rebel not without punishment against the same. etc. God
does inspire into kings, that they should procure the commandment of their
Lord, to be performed or kept in their kingdom. For they to whom it is said:
and now ye kings understand, be ye learned ye Judges of the earth, ferue the
Lord in fear: do perceive that their authority ought so to serve the Lord,
that such as will not obey his will, should be punished of that authority.
etc. Yea, says ye same S. Aug. Let the kings of the earth serve Christ, eue^
in making laws for Christ: Epist. 48.
meaning for the furtherance of Christ's religion. How then does kings (says
S. Aug. to Bonifacius, against ye Donatistes) serve the lord with reverence,
but in forbidding and punishing Epist. 50.
with a religious severity, such things as are done against the Lords
commandments For a king serves one way in that he is a man, an other way,
in respect that he is a king. Because in respect that he is but ^ man, he
serves the Lord in living faithfully: but in that he is also a king, he
serves in making Laws of convenient force to command just things, and to
forbid the contrary, etc. In this therefore kings serve the Lord, when they
do those things to serve him, which they could not do were they not kings,
etc. But after that this began to be fulfilled which is written: and all the
kings of the earth shall worship him, all the Nations shall serve him, what
man being in his right wits, may say to kings? Care not you in your
kingdoms, who defends or oppugneth the Church of your Lord? Let it not
apperteine, or be any part of your care, who is religious in your kingdom, or
a wicked deprauer of Religion.

This was the judgment of S. Augustine, or rather of Christ's catholic
Church, uttered by him against the Donatistes, touching the Service,
authority, power, and care, that kings have or ought to have in causes
spiritual or ecclesiastical, the which is also the judgment of Christ's
catholic Church, now in these days maintained and defended, by the true
mynisters of the same catholic Church, against all Popish Donatistes: with
the force of Gods holy word, both of the old and new Testament, even as S.
Augustine did before. Who to prove and confirm this his assertion to be true
against the Donatistes, did auouche many mo examples, than I have cited out of
the old Testament: As of the king of Niniue, of Darius, Nabuchodonozor, and
others: Epist. 48.
affirmyng that the histories and other testimonies, cited for this matter out
of the old Testament, are partly figures, and partly prophecies, of the power,
duty, and service that kings should owe and perform in like sort, to the
furtherance of Christ's Religion, in the time of the new Testament. The
Donatistes in the defense of their heresy, restrained S. Augustine, to the
example and testimony, of such like order of Princes. Service in matters of
Religion, to be found in the Scriptures of the new Testament: meaning that it
could not be found in any order that Christ left behind him, as you also
fantasied when you wrote the same in your book following, yea, going even
cheek by cheek with them. But S. Augustine makes answer to you all for him
and me both: Who, rehcarsing the acts of the godly kings of the old
Testament, takes this for a thing not to be denied, to wit, That the
ancient acts of the godly kings, mentioned in the Prophetical books, were
figures of the like factes, to be done by the Epist. 48.
godly Princes in the time of the new Testament.

And although there was not in the time of the Apostles, nor of long time
after, any kings or princes, that put the same ordinance of Christ in
practice, all being infideles for the most part: Yeat the service of kings
was figured (as S. Augustine says) in Nabuchodonozor and others, to be Epist.
50.
put in practice, when this of. 71. Psalm should be fulfilled: and all the
kings of the earth shall worship Christ, and all nations shall serve him
etc. As yet in the Apostles time, this prophecy (says he) Epist. 48.
was not fulfilled: and now ye kings understand, be learned ye that judge the
earth, and serve the Lord in fear with reverence. When the christian
Emperors and Princes, (says this catholic father) shall hear that
Nabuchodonozor, after he had seen the marvelous power of almighty God, in
saving the three young men, from the Lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil. ca. 92. Danie.
3.
violence of the fire, walking therein without hurt, was so astonished at the
miracle, that he him self being before this but a cruel Idolatour, began
forthwith upon this wondrous sight, to understand and serve the Lord with
reverent fear: Do not they understand; that these things, are therefore
written and recited in the Christian assemblies, that these should be examples
to them selves of faith in God, to the furtherance of Religion? These Christian
rulers, therefore minding according to the admonition of the Psalm, to
understand, to be learned and to serve the Lord with reverent fear, do very
atte^tiuely give ear, and mark what Nabuchodonozor after said: for he, says
the Prophet, made a decree or statute, for all the people that were under his
^beissance: that who so ever should after the publicatio^ thereof, speak any
blasphemy against the almighty, they should suffer death, and their Goods be
confiscate. Now if the Christian Emperors, and kings, do know, that
Nabuchodonozor made this decree against the blasphemers of God, surely they
cast in their minds, what they are bound to decree in their kingdoms, to
wit, that the self same God, and his Sacraments, be not lightly set by and
contemned. Thus far S. Augustine: By whose judgment, being also the judgment
of the catholic church, it is manifest, yt the order, rule, and government,
in Ecclesiastical causes, practiced by the kings of the old Testament,
being figures and prophesies, of the like government, and service, to be in
the kings under the new Testament, is the order of government, that Christ
left behind him in the Gospel and new Testament: and so directlye confuteth
your erroneous opinion. Now I will conclude on this sort, that which I
affirmed: namely that kings, and Princes, ought to take upon them government
in Ecclesiastical causes.

What government, orde, and dutifulnes, so ever Romans 1.
belongyng to any, God has figured and promised before hand by his Prophets,
in the holy Scriptures of the old Testament, to be performed by Christ, and
those of his kingdom: that is the government, order, and dutifulnes, set
forth and required, in the Ghospel, or new Testament. But that faithful
Emperors, Kings, and Rulers, ought of duty, as belonging to their office,
to claim and take upon them the government, authority, power, care, and
service, of God their Lord, in matters of Religion, or causes Ecclesiastical,
was an order and dutifulnes for them: prefigured and fore promised of God by
his Prophets, in the Scriptures of the old Testament, as S. Augustine has
sufficiently witnessed: Ergo. Christian Emperors, Kings, and Rulers, owe of
duty, as belonging to their office, to claim, and take upon them, the
government, authority, power, care, and service of God their Lord, in
matters of Religion: or Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical causes, is the
government, order, and dutifulnes, set forth, and required, in the Gospel or
new Testament.

This that has been already said, might satisfy any man that erreth of simple
ignorance. But for that your wilfulnes is such, that you delight only in
wranglinge against the truth, appear it to you never so plain, and that no
weight of good proufes, can press you, you are so slippery, I will load you
with heaps, even of such proufes, as ye will seem desirous to have.

The holy Ghost describing by the Prophet Esaias, what shall be the state of
Christ's Church in the time of the new Testament, yea now in these our days
(for this our time is the time that the Prophet speaks of, as S. Paul
witnesses to the Corinthians) adds many comfortable 2. Cor. 6.
promises, and amongst other makes this to Christ's Catholic Church, to
wit, Kings shall be Nourshing Fathers, Esa. 49.
and Queens shall be thy nources. Nourishing Fathers says the gloss enterlined,
In lacte verbi. In the milk of the word, meaning Gods word. Lyra
adds: This prophecy is manifestly fulfilled in many Kings and Queens, Lyra
in Esa. cap. 49.
who receiving the Catholic Faith, did feed the poor faithful ones. etc.
And this reverence to be done by Kings, (says Lyra) was fulfilled in the time
of Constantine and other Christian Kings. Certainly, Constantine the
Emperor, showed him self to understand his own duty of nourishing Christ's
Church appointed by God in his Prophecy: for he like a good, tender, and
faithful Nourcefather, did keep, defend, maintain, uphold, and feed the
poor faithful ones of Christ: he hare them being as it were almost weried
and forhayed with the great persecutions of Gods enemies, and maruelously
shaken with the controversies and contentions amongst them selves, even as a
nource Father in his own bosom: he procured that they should be fed with
the sweet milk of Gods word. Yea he him self with his public
proclamations, did exhort and allure his subjects to the Eusebius. li. 3, de
vita Constable.
Christian Faith. As Gusebius does report in many places, writing the life of
Constantine, He caused the Idolatrous religion to be suppressed, and utterly
banisshed, and the true knowledge and Religion of Christ, to be brought in and
planted among his people. He made many wholesome laws, and godly constitutions,
wherewith Lib. 2.
be restrained the people with threats, forbiddinge them the Sacrificinge to
Idolles: to seek after the Deuelish and superstitious sothsaiynges: to set up
Images: that they should not make any privy Sacrifices: Li. 4. de vita Constable.
and to be brief, he reformed all manner of abuses, about Gods service, and
provided that the Church should be fed with Gods word. Yea, his
diligent care in furtheringe and settinge forth the true knowledge of Christ,
wherewith he fed the people, was so watcheful, that Eusebius does affirm him
to be appointed of God, as it were the common or Vneuersall Lib. ^.
Bishop: And so Constantine took him self to be: and therefore said to the
Bishops assembled together with him at a feast, that God had appointed him to
be a Bissoppe. But of this most honorable Bishop and nourshinge father, Lib. 4.
more shall be said hereafter, as of other also such like.

Our savior Christ meante not to forbid or destroy, touching the rule,
service, and chardge of Princes in Church causes, that which was figured in
the Law, or prophesied by the Prophets. For he came to fulfill or accomplis
he the Law and the Prophets, by remoouinge the shadow Math. 5.
and Figure, and establishing the Body and Substance to be seen, and to
appear clearly without any miste or dark cover: yea, as the power and
authority of Princes was appointed in the Law and Prophets, as it is
proved, to stretche it self, not only to civil causes, but also to the over
sight, maintenance, settinge forth, and furtherance of Religion and matters
Ecclesiastical: Even so Christ Math. 22.
our Savior confirmed this their authority, commanding all men to attribute
and give unto Caesar that which belongs to him: admonishinge notwithstanding
all Princes and people, that Caesar's authority is not infinite, or without
limits (for such authority belongs only to the King of all Kings) but
bounded and circumscribed within the bounds assigned in Gods word, and so
will I my words to be understood, when so ever I speak of the power of
Princes.

And this to be Christ's order and meaning, that the Kings of the nations
should be the supreme governors over their people, not only in Temporal, but
also in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes, the blessed Apostles Peter and
Paul, do plainly declare. The supremacy of 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13.
Princes they set forth, when they command every soul (that is every man,
whether he be as Chrysostom says, an Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, Priest,
Monk, or of what so ever calling he be) to be subject and obey the higher
powers, as Kings and their Lieutenauntes, or governors under them. And they
declare that this supreme government is occupied and exercised in, or about the
praysinge, furthering, and aduauncinge of virtue or virtuous actions, and
contrary wise in correctinge, stayinge, and repressinge all manner of vice or
vicious actions, which are the propre object or mattier hereof. Thus does
Basilius take the meaning of the Apostles: saying, This seems to Epist. 125.
me to be the office of a Prince, to aid virtue, and to impugn vice. Neither
S. Paul, neither the best learned amongst the ancient Fathers did restreine
this power of Princes, only to virtues and vices, bidden or forbidden, in the
second table of Gods commandments, wherein are contained the duties one
man owes to an other: But also did plainly declare them selves to mean, that
the authority of Princes ought to stretche it self to the maintenance,
praise, and furtherance of the virtues of the first Table, and the suppression
of the contrary, wherein only consists the true Religion, and spiritual
Service, that is due from man to God. S. Paul in his epistle to Timothe,
teaches the Ephesians, that Kings and rulers 1. Tim. 2.
are constituted of God, for these two purposes: that their people may live a
peaceable life, thorough their government and ministry, both in godliness,
which is (as S. Augustine interprets it) the true and chief or propre
worship Lib. 14. De Trin. ca. 1.
of God: and also in honesty or seemelines: in which two words (godliness,
and honesty) he contained what so ever is commanded either in the first or
second Table. S. Augustine also shows this to be his mind, when describing
the true virtues, which shall cause princes to be blessed, now in Hope, and
afterward in deed, adds this as one especial condition, required by reason
of their chardge and calling. If that, (says he) they make Lib. 5. De Ciuit.
De^, cap. 24.
their power which they have a servant unto Gods Majesty, to enlardge
most wide his woorship, Service, or Religion. To this purpose also serve all
those testimonies, which I have cited before out of S. Augustine against the
Donatistes: who in his book, De. 12. abusionum gradibus, teaches that a
Prince or ruler must labor to be had in awe of his subjects, Grad. 6.
for his severity against the transgressors of Gods Law. Not meaning only
the transgressors of the second table in Temporal matters: But also against
the offenders of the first table, in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes or
matters. Which his meaning he declares plainly in an other place, where he
avouches the saying of S. Paul. The Prince bears not the Sword in vain,
to Romans 13.
prove therewith against Petilian the Donatiste, that the power or authority
of Princes, which the Apostle speaks Lib. 2. ca. 83
of in that sentence, is given unto them to make sharp Laws, to further true
Religion, and so suppress Heresies, and Schisms: and therefore in the same
place, he calls the catholic Church, that has such Princes to govern to
this effect: A Church made strong, whole, or fas^ened together with
catholic Princes: meaning that the church is weak, rent, and parted in
sonder, where catholic Governors are not, to maynteine the unity thereof in
Church matters, by their authority and power.

Gaudentius the Donatist, found him self agreeued, that Emperors should
entremedle, and use their power in matters of Religion: affirmyng, that this
was to restreyne men of that freedom that God had set men in. That this was a
great injury to God: if he (meaning his Religion) should be defended by men.
And that this was nothing else, but to esteem God to be one, that is not able
to revenge the injuries done against him self. S. Augustine does answer, and
refute his objections, with the authority of S. Paul's saying to the Romans:
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers etc. For he is Gods mynister,
to take vengeance on him that does evil: interpreting the mind of the Apostle
to be, that the authority and power of Princes, has to deal in
Ecclesiastical causes, so well Lib. 2. cont. 2. Epist. Gaud. ca. 11.
as in Temporal. And therefore says to Gaudentius and to you all. Blotte out
these sayings (of S. Paul. 13. Rom.) if you can, or if you cannot, then set
naught by them, as ye do. Reteyne a most wicked meaning of all these sayings
(of the Apostle) least you loose your freedom in judging: or else truly for
that as men, ye are ashamed so to do before men, cry out if you dare: Let
murderers be punished, let adulteriers be punished, let all other faults, be
they never so heinous or full of mischief be punished (by the Magistrate) we
will that only wicked faults against Religion be exempt from punishment by
the Laws of Kings or rulers. etc. Harken to the Apostle, and thou shalt have
a great advantage, that the kingely power cannot hurt thee, do well, and so
shall thou have praise of the same power etc. That thing that ye do, is not
only not good, but it is a great evil, to wit, to cut in sund^e the unity
and peace of Christ, to rebelle against the promises of the Gospel, and to
bear the Christian arms or badges, as in a civil war against the true and
high King of the Christianes.

Chrysostom shows this reason, why S. Paul does attribute this title of a
minister woorthely unto the Kings, or civil Magistrates: because that
thorough frayinge of the wicked men, and commendinge the good, he prepares the
minds of many to be made more appliable to the doctrine of the word.

Eusebius alluding to the sentence of S. Paul, where he calls the civil
Magistrate, Gods minister, and understanding that Ministry of the civil
Magistrate to be about Religion, and Ecclesiastical causes, so well as
Temporal, does call Constantine the Emperor: The great light, and most shrill
preacher, or setter forth of true godliness: The one and only God (says he)
has appointed Constantine to be his mynister, and the teacher of godliness to
all countries. And this same Constantine, Lib. 1. d^ vit. Constable.
like a faithful and good mynister, did thoroughly set forth this: and he did
confess himself manifestly to be the servant and mynister of the high King.
He preached with his imperial decrees or proclamations his God, even to the
bounds of the whole world. Yea Constantine him self affirms, as Eusebius
reports: Lib. 2. De vit. Constable.
That by his mynisterie he did put away and overthrow all the euilles that
pressed the world* meaning all superstition, Idolatry, and false Religion. In
so much (says this godly Emperor,) that there withal I both called again
mankind, taught by my mynisterie, to the Religion of the most holy Law
(meaning the word of God) and also caused, that the most blessed Faith
should increase and grow under a better governor (meaning than had been
before) for (says he) I would not be unthankful to neglect namely the best
mynistery, which is the thanks Iowe (unto God) of duty.

This most Christian Emperor did rightly consider, as he had been truly
taught of the most Christian Bishops of that time, that as the Princes have
in chardge the mynistery and government in all manner causes either Temporal
or Spiritual: Even so, the chiefest or best part of their Service or
Mynistery to consist in the well ordering of Church matters, and their
diligent rule and care therein, to be the most thankeful, acceptable, and
duetifull Service that they can do or owe unto God. For this cause also
Nicephorus in his Preface before his Ecclesiastical history, does compare
Emanuel Paleologus the Emperor, to Constantine, for that he did so nearly
imitate his duetifulnes in rulinge, procuringe, and refourminge Religion to the
pureness thereof: Which among all virtues, belonginge to an Emperor, is
most seemly for the imperial dignity, and does express it most truly,
as Nicephorus says: who makes protestacion that he says nothing in the
commendacion of this Emperor, for favor or to flatter, but as it was true in
deed in him. And so reherseth his noble virtues exercised in dischardge of his
imperial duty toward God in Church matters, saying to the Emperor, who
has glorified God more, and showed more feruente zele toward him in pure
Religion, without feyninge, than thou haste done? who has with such fervent
zeal sought after the most sincere faith much endaungered, or cleansed
again the holy Table? When thou saw our true Religion brought into peril
with new devises, brought in by conterfaict and naughty doctrines, thou
did defend it most painefully and wisely. Thou did show thy self, to
be the mighty supreme, and very holy anchour and stay in so horrible waueringe
The princes supremacy in repayringe Religion decayed.
and error, in divine matters, beginning to fainte, ard to peris he as it
were with shipwreck. Thou art the guide of the profession of our Faith. Thou
have restored the Catholic and Universal Church, being troubled with new
matters or opinions, to the old state. Thou haste banished from the Church
all unlawful and impure doctrine. Thou have cleansed again with the word of
truth, the Temple from choppers and chaungers of the divine doctrine, and from
heretical deprauers thereof. Thou haste been set on fire with a Godly zeal
for the divine Table. Thou haste established the doctrine: thou haste made
Constitutions for the same. Thou haste entrenched the true Religion with
myghtie defenses. That which was pulled down, thou haste made up again, and
haste made the same whole and sound again, with a convenient knittinge
together of all the parts and members, (to be short, thou haste says
Nicephorus to the Emperor) establissed true Religion and godliness with
spiritual butiresses, namely the doctrine and rules of the ancient Fathers.
These, and such like Christian Emperors, are not thus much commended of the
Ecclesiastical writers, for their notable dooinges in the maintenance and
furtheraunce of Religion, as for dooinges not necessarily appertayninge to
their office or calling: But for that they were examples, spectacles, and
glasses for others wherein to behold what they are bound unto by the word
of God, and what their subjects may look for at their hands, as matter of
chardge and duty both to God and his people. Which S. Paul does plainly
express, where he exhorts the Christians, to make earnest and continual
prayer 1. Tim. 2.
for kings, and all that are in authority, to this end and purpose, that by
their rule, mynistrie, and service, not only peace and tranquillity, but also
godliness and Religion, should be furthered and continued amongst men:
attributing the furtherance and continuance of Religion, and godlynes, to the
Magistrates, as an especial fruit and effect of their duty and service to God
and his people. Chrysostom expounding this place of the Apostle, does
interpret his meaning to be understood, not only of the outward peace and
tranquillity furthered, maintained, and defended, by the Magistrates, but
chiefly of the inward peace of the mind and conscience, which can not be
atteyned without pure Religion, as contrariwyse, godlynes can not be had
without peace and tranquilite of mind and conscience. This would be noted with
good aduisement, that S. Paul him self shows plainly prosperity, amongst
Gods people, and true Religion, to be the benefits and fruits in general,
that by Gods ordinance springs from the rule and government of kings and
Magistrates, unto the weal of the people. The which two, although diverse in
them selves, yet are so combyned and knyt together, and as it were incorporated
in this one office of the Magistrate, that the nouryshinge of the one, is the
feeding of ye other, the decay of the one, destroys or (at the least) deadly
weakeneth them both. So that one can not be in perfect and good estate, without
the other. The which knot and fastening together of Religion, and prosperity
in commonweals, the most Christian and godly Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinianus, did wisely ses, as appears in this, that they wrote unto
Cyrill, saying: The suertie of our common weal; depends upon Cyril. Epi. 17.
to 4.
Gods Religion, and there is great kindred and society betwixt these tweyne,
for they clean together, and the one grows with the increase of the other,
in such sort, that true Religion helped with the endeavor of Justice, and the
common weal helped of them both, flourishes ^eing therefore, that we are
constituted of God to be the kings, and are the knitting together or ioynture
of godliness and prosperity in the subjects, we keep the society of these
tweyne, never to be sondred: and so far forth as by our forsight, we procure
peace unto our subjects, we minister unto the augmenting of the common weal:
but as we might say, being servants to our subjects in all things, that
they may live godly, and be of a Religious conversation as it becomes godly
ones, we garnis he the common weal with honor, having care, as it is
convenient for them both (for it can not be, that diligently providing for the
one, we should not care, in like sort also for the other.) But we travail
earnestly in this thing above the rest, that the Ecclesiastical state may
remain sure, both in such sort, as is seemly for Gods honor, and fit
for our times, that it may continue in tranquillity by common consent without
varia^ce, that it may be quiet through agreement in Ecclesiastical matters,
that the godly Religion may be preserved unreprovable, and that the life of
such as are chosen into the Clergy, and the great priesthood may be clear
from al fault.

Hitherto I have proved plainly by the holy Scriptures, and by some such
Doctors, as from age to age, have wytnessed, the order of Ecclesiastical
government in the Church of Christ: yea by the confession, testimony, and
example of some of the most godly Emperors them selves, that such like
government in Church causes, as the Queens majesty takes upon her, does of
duty belong unto the cyuill Magistrates and Rulers, and therefore they may,
yea, they ought to claim and take upon them the same. Now remains that I
prove this same by the continual practice of the like gouernenement in some
one part of Christendom, and by the general counsayles, wherein (as ye
affirm) the right order of Ecclesiastical government in Christ his Church,
has been most faithfully declared and showed from time to time.

The government that the Queens majesty takes most justly upon her in
Ecclesiastical causes, is the guydyng, caringe, prouidyng, orderyng,
dyrectynge, and ayding, the Ecclesiastical state within her dominions, to the
furtheraunce, mayntenaunce, and setting forth of the true Religion, unity,
and quietness of Christ's Church, ouerseyng, vysiting, refourmyng,
restrayninge, amendinge, and correctyng, all manner persons, with all manner
errors, superstitions, Heresies, Schisms, abuses, offenses, contemptes, and
enormities, in or about Christ's Religion whatsoever. This same authority,
rule, and government, was practiced in the catholic Church, by the most
Christian kings and Emperors, approved, confirmed, and commended by the best
counsels, both general and national.

Constantinus (of whose careful government in Church causes, I have spoken
somewhat before) took upon him, and did exercise the supreme rule* aund
government in repressing all manner Idolatry and false Religion, in reforming
and promoting the true Religion, and in restreining and correcting al manner
Errors, Schisms, Heresies, and other enormities, in or about Religion, and
was moved hereunto of duty, even by Gods word, as he him self reports in a
vehement prayer, that he makes unto God, saying: I have taken upon me, and
have brought to pass healthful things, (meaning reformation of Religion.)
Being persuaded (thereunto) by thy word. And publishing to Fuseb. li. 2. De vi.
Co^st.
all Churches, after the council at Nice, what was there done: He professes
that in his judgment, the chiefest end and purpose of his Imperial
government, ought to be the preservation of true Religion, and godly quietness
in all Churches. I have judged, (says this godly Emperor,) Eusebius. li. 3. De
vi. Co^st.
this ought before all other things to be the end or purpose, (whereunto I
should address my power and authority in government) that the unity of
faith, pure love, and agreement of Religion toward the almighty God, might be
kept, and maintained amongst all Congregations of the catholic Church.

He did not only abolishe al superstitions and false Religions, which had been
amongst the gentiles, but also he repressed by his authority, Laws, and
Decrees, all such Heresies as sprung up amongst the Christians, sharply
reproving and correcting, the authors or mainteinours of heretical doctrines,
as the Nouatians, Valentinians, Paulianes, and Cataphrygia^s, as Eusebius says
of him. Eusebius. li. 3. De vi. Co^st.
And Theodoret us does recite a part of an Epistle, that Constantine wrote
unto the Nicomedians, wherein the Emperor has this saying. If we have chaste
Bishops, of right opinion, of courteous behavior, we rejoice. But if any be
enflamed rashly Lib. 1. ca. 19
and unadvisedly, to continue the memory and commendation of those pestilent
Heresies, his foolebardy presumtion shall forthwith be corrected, and kept under
by my correction, which am gods minister. Co^stantinus also, gave Iniuctions to
the chief mynisters of the churches, that they should make special
supplication to God for him. He enjoined all his subjects, that they should
keep holy certain days dedicated to Christ, and the Saturday. He gave a Law
unto the Rulers of the nations, that they should celebrate the Sunday in like
sort after the appointment of the Emperor. And so the days dedicated to the
memory of martyrs and other festiual times etc. And al such things (says
Eusebius) were done according to the ordinance of the Emperor. Lib. 4. De vit.
Constable.
He commanded Eusebius the bishop, to draw certain Instructions and lessons,
as it were Homelies, forth of the holy scriptures, yt they might be red in ye
churches. Which was done inco^tine^t, according to The^perours commandment.
When the Emperor herd of the great schism moved betwixt Arius and Alexander
the Bishop of Alexandria, wherewith the Church was piteously tormented, and as
it were rent in sondre, he took upon him, as one that had the care and
authority over all, to send Hosius a great learned and godly Bishop of Spain
to take order, and to Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 7.
appeace the contention, writing to Alexander and to Arius, a grave and also a
sharp letter, chardging Alexander with vanity, Arius with want of
circumspection, showing them both, that it was unseemly for the one to move
such a question, and for the other to answer therein, and indiscreetly done
of them both. And therefore commands them to cease of from such contentious
disputatio^s, to agree betwixt them selves, and to lay aside from thencefoorth
such vain and trifeling questions. He pacified also the Schism at Antioche
begone about the choosinge Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16.
of their Bishop, to whom for that purpose he sent honorable Ambassadors
with his letters to a great number of Bishops that than were at Antioche
about that business, and to the people, exhortinge them to quietness, and
teachinge them (says Eusebius) to study after godliness in Eusebius. li. 3. de
vit. Co^st.
a decent manner: declaringe unto the Bishops, as one that had authority
over the^, even in such matters, what things apperteined and were seemly for
them to do in such cases, and notes unto them a direction, which they should
follow. And after he had (says Eusebius) given such things in commandment
unto the Bisshoppes or chief mynisters of the Churches, he exhorted them that
they would do all things to the praise and furtheraunce of Gods Word.

This supreme authority of the Emperor in Church causes, is most lively
expressed by S. Augustine and Eusebius, where they make mention of the horrible
Schism, stirred by the Donatistes, against Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage:
whose election and orderinge to be Bishop of Carthage, Donatus and others of
his companions misliked, and therefore made a Schism in that Church. The
question in controversy was, whether Cecilianus being ordered Bishop, having
the imposicion of hands by Felix, were Lawfully consecrated and ordered or not.
This controversy made a lamentable trouble amongst the Churches in Aphrike.
At the length, the Donatistes accused Cecilian unto the Emperor: desired the
Emperor to appointe some Delegates to judge of this controversy. And for that
all the Churches in Aphrique were banded, Aug. Epist. 50.
either to the one party, or the other, and for that France was free from this
contention, they require judges to be appointed by his authority from amongst
the French Bishops. The Emperor much grieved, ye the Church Eusebius. lib.
10. cap. 5.
was thus torn in sundre with this schism, does appoint Melciades Bishop of
Rome, and Marcus to be his delegates and commissaries in this controversy,
with certain other Bishops of France, Melciades colleages or fellow
Bishops, whom the Emperor had commanded to be there with them for that
purpose. These commissioners with certain other Bishops according to the
Emperors commandment met at Rome, and after due examinacion had, do
condemn the Donatistes, and pronounce Cecilianus cause to be good. From this
sentence of the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops his colleages being the
Emperors delegates, the Donatistes appeal unto the Emperor, not only
accusinge Cecilianus, but also Melciades the Bishop of Rome, and the other
Commissaries. Wherefore the Emperor causes a Synod to be had at Arclatum,
August. Epist. 48.
committinge the cause to the Bishop thereof, and other Bishops assembled
there by his commandment, to be herd and discussed. Whereunto he calls
Crestus the Bishop of Syracufe a City in Sicily by his letters. Eus. lib.
10. cap. 5.
Wherein he declares in plain terms, that it belongs to his imperial
cure, to see these controversies in Church causes to be determined and ended.
Donatus and his companions, being condemned also by these Bishops, in the
Synod at Arclatum, and Cecilianus cleared, do again appeal unto the
Emperor from their sentence, besechinge him to take the hearing and
discussinge of the controversy. Who called both the parties together before
him self at August. Epist. 166.
Millayne, and after he had herd the whole matter, and what was to be said on
both sides, he gau^e final sentence with Cecilianus, co^demning ye Donatistes.
Who after all these August. Epist. 162. Epist. 166.
things thus done, as S. Augustine faith, made a very sharp Law against the
Donatistes, the which also his Sons after him commanded to be observed.

Athanasius also that most godly Bishop, being over much wronged in the
Council at Tire, did ^lie and appeal from the judgment of that Synod unto
Constantine the Emperor, declaringe unto him his griefs, beseechinge him to
take the hearing of the matter before him self: which the Emperor assented
unto; writing unto the Synod assembled at Tire, commanding them without
delaie to come unto his Court, and there to declare Socr. lib. 1. cap. 34.
before me (says this most Christian Emperor) whom ye shall not deny to
be Gods sincere mynister, how sincerely and rightly ye have judged in your
Synod. When this Synod was assembled at Tire, the Catholic Bishops of
Egypt Theod. lib. 1. cap. 28.
wrote unto the honorable Flauius Dionysius, whom the Emperor had made his
Lieutenaunt, to see al things well ordered in that Council, and did desire him
that he would reserve the examinacion and judgment to the Emperor him self:
yea they do adjure him that he do not meddle with their matter; but refer
the judgment thereof to the Emperor, who they ^^ne we well, would judge
rightly Athanas. Apol. 2.
according to the right order of the Church.

There were no Church mattiers, or Ecclesiastical causes, wherein the
continual practice of the Church of Christ, in this Emperors time, yea and
many hundredth years after, did not attribute the supreme rule, order, and
authority unto Emperors and Kings, upon whom all Church mattiers did
depend, as witnesses Socrates, who shows this reason of that he does
thoroughout In Proaem. lib. 5.
his Eccesiasticall History mention so much the Emperors. Because that of the
Emperors (says he) after they began to be Christians, the Church matters
do depend, yea the greatest Councelles have been, and are called together,
according to their appointment. Eusebius commends the great bountifulnes
Lib. 1. De vit. Constable.
of Constantine toward al estates, But, (says he) this Emperor had a
singular care over Coddes Church, for as one appointed of God to be a common
or universal Bishop, he called Synodes or conuocations of Gods mynisters
together into one place, that thereby he might appeace the contentious
striainges that were among them in sundry places. He disdayned not to be
present with them in their Synodes, and to sit in the midst of them, as it
had been a meaner personnage, commendinge and approuinge those that bente
themselves of good meaning to godly unity, and showed him self to mistike on
the other side, and to set naught by such, as were of contrary disposition.

The Ecclesiastical histories make mention of many Synodes or councelles,
called or assembled at the appointment and order of this Emperor. But the most
famous and notable, was the Nicene council: about the which, consider and
mark, what was the occasion, by whose authority it was summoned and called
together, and what was the doings of the Emperor from the beginning unto
the dissolueion thereof: and ye shall see plainly as in a Glass, that by the
order and practice of the Catholic Church, notified in the order of this
general Council, the supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, is in the
Emperor and civil Magistrates, and your opinion condemned by the uniform
agreement of. 318. of the most Catholic Bishops in the world, commendinge,
and allowynge for most godly, what so ever the Emperor did in, or about this
council. The occasion of this famous and most godly council, was the great
dissension kindled, partly about a necessary Article of our belief, partly
about a ceremony of the Church. Arius incensed with ambitious envy, against
Alexander his Bishop at Alexandria, who disputed in one of his lessons or
treatises, more subtily of the divinity than advisedly, as the Emperor lays
to his chardge, quarelled Sophistically against him, and maintained an horrible
Heresy. Besides this, the Churches were also divided amongst them selves,
about the order or ceremony of keepinge the Easter day. The Emperor sent
Hosius with his letters, as I said before, into the East parties to appeace
the furious dissension about both these matters, and to reconcile the parties
dissentynge. But when this duetifull service of the Emperor, took not that
effect which he wisshed and hoped for, then as Sozomenus writes, he summoned
a council to be holden Lib. 1. ca. 17.
at Nice in Bythinia, and wrote to all the chief Mynisters of the Churches
every where, commaundinge them that they should not fail to be there at the
day appointed. The self same also does Theodoretus affirm, both touching
the occasion, and also the summons Lib. 1. ca. 7.
made by the Emperor. Eusebius also writing the life of Constantine, shows
with what carefulnes, the godly Emperor endeavored to quench these fires. And
when the Emperor (says Eusebius) saw that he Lib. 3. De vit. Constable.
prevailed nothing by sending of Hosius with his letters, Considering this
matter with him self, said, that this war against the obscure enemy
troubling the Church, must be vanquished by an other (meaning him self.)
Therefore, as the capitaines of Gods army, toward his voyage, he gathered
together a Synod ecumenical, and he called the Bishops together by his
honorable letters, and that they should hasten themselves from every place.
These things, touching the occasion and calling of this general counsel by
the Emperor, are affirmed to be true also, by Nicephorus the Ecclesiastical
historian. Yea, the whole Lib. 8. ca. 14
counsayll in their letters, to the Churches in Aegipt, and the East parts,
do testify the same Synod, to be called by the Emperor, saying: The great
and holy Synod, was gathered Theod. li. 1. cap. 9.
together at Nice, by the grace of God, and the most religious Emperor
Constantine. etc. The Bishops (as I said before) when they thought them
selves, or their Church iniuried by others, were wont to appeal and fly unto
the Emperor, as the supreme governor in all matters, and causes Temporal, or
Spiritual, the which appears most plain, to be the practice of the
Church, by these Bishops called unto the Nicene counsel. For when they came
to Nice, supposing them selves to have now good opportunity, being nighe unto
the Emperor, to revenge their private quarelles, and to have redress at the
Emperors hands, of such injuries as they thought them selves to sustain at
others bishops hands, each of them gave unto the Emperor, a Libell of
accu^satio^s, signifiyng what wrongs he had sustained of his fellow Bishops,
and prayed aid and redress by his judgment. The Emperor forseyng that these
pryuate quarelings, if they were not by some policy, and wise devise
sequestered, and laid aside, would much hinder the common cause, took
deliberation, appointing a day, against the which they should Sozom. li. 1 cap.
17.
be in a readiness, and commanded them to prepare and bring unto him all their
libelles and quarelling accusations, one against an other: (Mark by the way,
the craft and practice of Satan, to stay and overthrow good purposes, that
even the godly fathers and Bishops, wanted not their great infirmities,
preferring their own private trifles, before the weighty causes of Gods
Church. And the wisdom, zeal, and humblenes, of this most christian
Emperor, who so little esteemed his own honor, and authority, that he would
rather seem to be inferior, or for the time no more than equal with his
subjects, to the end, he might by his humbling of him self, advance and
exalt Gods glory, to the edifiyng and quietness of his Church.) The day came
(which was the day before the first Session should be in the council, as
Socrates says) the Bishops did not sleep their own matters, but Lib. 1.
ca. 8.
had their bills in a readiness, and delivered them unto the Emperor. This
vigilant noursefather unto Gods Church, had cared and devised so diligently
for the common cause, as the Bishops had done for their private quarelles:
and therefore, when he had received their Libelles, very politiquely, says:
(because he would irritate none of them for that time,) That the day of
general judgment should be a fit time for these accusations, and Christ
the Judge, then would judge all men: As for me, it is not leafull to take upon
me the judgment of such Priests, accused, and accusing one an other.
Whereunto, nevertheless, he added this Sozom. li. 1. cap. 17.
privy nippe, to pynche them withal. For of all other things (says he) this
is least seemly, that Bishops should show them selves such, as ought to
be judged of others. And so caused the Libelles to be cast into the fire,
giving them an earnest exhortation to peace and quietness. The next day after,
Theod. li. 1 cap. 7.
after, they assembled at the Emperors palayce, he commanded them to go into
the council house, to consult of the matter, (the council house was within
Themperours Eusebius. li. 3. De vi. Co^st.
pallayce, trimly furnished with seats, aptly ordered for such purpose, as it
were in rows.) They entered in, and waited without any doings, till the
coming of the Emperor, whose seat was of gold, placed at the first beginning
of the rows: who being entered and placed in his feate, makes an oration unto
them, declaring the conte^tions sprung up amongst them selves, to be the
occasion wherefore he called them together: and the end is, (says he) that
this disease might be healed through my ministry. After this he makes an
earnest exhortation, moving them to quietness, Socr. lib. 1. cap. 8.
forgiving one an other, for Christ commands (says he) that who will
receive pardon at his hand, shall also forgive his brethren. After this most
grave exhortation to unity, and concord, in truth, he gives them leave to
Theod. li. 1 cap. 7.
consult of the matters in hand, prescribes unto them a rule, whereby they
must measure, try, and discuss these, and all other such disputations, and
controversies, in matters of Religion, to wit, Sanctissimi spiritus doctrinam
praescriptam, The doctrine of the most holy spirit before written. For (says
he) the books of the Evangelists, and of the Apostles, and also the
prophecies of the old Prophets, do evidently teach us of Gods meaning.
Wherefore laiyng a side al discord of enemitie, let us take the explications
of our questions, out of the saiyngs of the holy Ghost. When the parties waxed
warm in the disputations, and the contention, somewhat sharp, then the
Emperor, as a wise moderatour, and Ruler, would discourage none, but myldely
caulmed such as he saw over hasty, with wild words cooling their heat: and
commended such as reasoned deeply with gravity. When they had agreed of the
chief points, wherefore Eusebius. li. 3. De vi. Co^st.
they were assembled, the Emperor him self calls forth Acesius, a Bishop at
Constantinople, of the Nouatians Religion, and examineth him openly, touching
these articles, whereunto the whole counsel had agreed and subscribed. He
writes his lettres to the Church at Alexandria, Socr. lib. 1. cap. 8.
where the controversy, touching the divinity of Christ began, declaring,
that he him self together with the Bishops in the counsayl, had taken upon him
the searchinge forth of the truth, and therefore assures them, that all
things were diligently examined, to avoid all ambiguitie and doubtfulnes:
wherefore, he exhorts and wills them al, that no man, make any doubt or
delases, but ye cherefully they return again into the most true way. He
writes an other to al Bishops, and people where Soc. li. 1. c. 9.
so ever, wherein he commands, that no writing of Arius, or monument
containing Arius doctrine, be kept openly or secretly, but be burnt, under
pain of death. After that all the matters were concluded, and signed with
Theod. li. 1. cap. 13.
their hands subscription, the Emperor dissolueth the counsel, and
licenseth every one of them to return home to his own Byshoprike, with this
exhortation, that they continue in unity of faith: that they preserve peace
and concord amongst them selves: that from thence forth, they abide no more
in contentions: and last of al, Sozom. li. 1 cap. 25.
after he had made a long oration unto them, touching these matters, he
commands them, that they make prayer continually for him, his children, and
the whole Empire.

Arius counterfeyting a false, and feyned confession of belief, like an
hypocrite, pretending to the Emperor, that it was agreeable unto the faith of
the Nicen counsayl, humbly beseching the Emperor, That he would unity and
restore him to the mother Church, and therefore having Theod. li. 1 cap. 14.
friends in the Emperors Court (as such shall never want fautours about the
best Princes) was brought into his presence, whom the Emperor him self
examined diligently, and perceiving no disagrement, (as he thought) from the
agreement made in Nicene council, absolved and restored him again: whereunto
Athanasius, who knew Arius thoroughly, would not agree, and being accused
therefore unto the Emperor, was charged by lettres from him, that he should
receive Arius, with these threats, that if he would not, he would depose him
from his Byshoprike, and commy^ him to an other place. The Arians heaped up
many and horrible accusations, and slanders Socr. lib. 1. cap. 28.
upon Athanasius, whereupon the Emperor does sommon a counsel at Tire, and
sends commandment by his letters to Athanasius, that without al excuse, he
should appear there, for otherwise, he should be brought whether he would or
no. He writes to the counsel his letters, Theod. li. 1. cap. 27.
wherein he declares the causes why he called that council. He showed what he
would have, and they ought to do, and prescribes unto them the form and
rule, whereby they shall judge and determine in that Synod. Athanasius
appeared, appealed, fled to the Emperor, and declared Soc. lib. 1. cap. 34.
the injuries offered against him in that council. The Emperor took upon him
the hearing of the cause, sent his letters to the whole Synod, commau^ding
them without all excuse or delay, to appear before him in his palayce, and
there to show how uprightly and sincerely they had judged in their Synod, as
I have showed before. Wherein observe diligently, that the Emperor takes upon
him, and no fault found therewith, to examine and judge, of the doings of the
whole council. Thus far of Constantine and his doings, in the execution of
his ministry, and especially in perfourming that part, which he calls the
best part, that is his government, and rule, in Ecclesiastical matters,
wherein it is manifest, that by the practice of the catholic Church for his
time, approved and commended by all the catholic priests and Bishops, in
the Nicen counsel, the supreme government, authority, and rule, in all
manner causes, both Ecclesiastical, and Temporal, were claimed and exercised by
the Emperor, as to whom of right, such like power and authority, belonged
and apperteined.

Constantines sons, claymed and took upon them, Lib. 3. ca. 17
the same authority, that their father had done before the^: and as Zozomen
reports of them, did not only uphold and maintain, the ordinances made by
their father Constantine, in Church matters, but did also make new of their
own as occasion served, and the necessity of ye time required.

Constantinus, after the death of his father, restored Athanasius, Theod. li. 2
cap. 1.
(whom his father had deposed) to his Bishoprike again, writing honorable and
loving letters to the church of Alexandria, for his restitution.

Constantius deposed Liberius, the Bishop of Rome, for that he would not
consent to the condemnation of Athanasius, Sabell. Platin.
in whose place Foelix was chosen, whom also the Emperor deposed for the like
cause, and restored again Liberius unto his Bishoprike, who being moved with
Themperous kindness (as some write) or rather overcome with ambition, became an
Arian. This Emperor deposed diverse Bishops, appointing others in their
places. He called a Synod at Millayn, as Socrates witnesses, saying: The
Emperor commanded by his edict, that there should be Socr. lib. 2. cap. 36.
37.
a Synod holden at Millayn. There came to this counsel above 300.
Bishopppes, out of the West countries. After this he minded to call a general
council of all the East and West Bishops to one place, which could not
conveniently be brought to pass, by reason of the great distaunce of ye
places, and therefore he commanded the council to be kept in two places, at
Ariminum in Italy, and at Nicomedia in Bythinia.

Valentinianus the Emperor, after the death of Auxentius, Theod. li. 4 cap. 5.
6. 7.
an Arian bishop of Millayn, calls a Synod of bishops at Millayn, to consult
about the ordering of a new bishop. Princes by Synodes do ordeine and condemn
Bishops.
He prescribes unto them in a grave oration, in what manner a man qualified
ought to be, who should take upon him the office of a bishop. They pass to the
election, the people were divided, til at the last they al cry with one
consent, to have Ambrose, whom although he did refuse, the Emperor commanded
to be baptized, and to be consecrate bishop. He called an other Synod in
Illirico, to appeace the dissentio^s in Asia and Phrygia, about certain
necessary articles of the christian faith: and did not only confirm the true
faith by his royal assent, but made also many godly and sharp Laws, as well
for the maintenance of the truth in doctrine, as also touching many other
causes, or matters Ecclesiastical. Theodosius, was nothing inferior to
Constantine the great, neither in zeal, care, or furthera^ce, of Christ's
Religion. He bent his whole power, and authority, Theod. li. 5 cap. 20.
to the utter overthrow of superstition, and false Religion, some what crept
in again, in the times of Iulianus and Valens, the wicked Emperors. And for
the sure continuance of Religion reformed, he made many godly Laws, he
defended the godly bishop of Antioche Flauianus, against the bishop of Rome,
and other bishops of the Weste, who did falsely accuse him of many crimes:
and at the length, by his careful endeavor in Church matters, and his
Supreme authority therein, this most faithful Emperor, says Thedoretus,
set peace and quietness Li. 5. c. 23. 24
amongst the Bishops, and in the Churches. He called a convocation of the
Bishops, to the end that by common consent, all should agree in unity of
doctrine confessed by the Nicen council, to reconcile the Macedodians unto the
catholic Church, and to elect and order a Bishop in the sea of
Constantinople, which was than vacant. When the two first points could not
be brought to pass, as the Emperor wished, they went in hand with the third,
to consult amongst them selves touching a fit Bishop for Constantinople. The
Emperor, to whose judgment many of the Synod consented, thought Gregory of
Nazianzene, most fit to be Bishop: but he did utterly refuse that charge. Than
the Emperor commands them, to make diligent inquisition for some godly man,
that might be appointed to that rowme. But when the Bishops could not agree,
upon Sozom. li. 7 cap. 6. 7. 8.
any one, the Emperor commands them to bring to him the names of all
such, as every one of them thought most apt to be Bishop, written in a paper
together. He referued to him self (says Zozomenus) to choose whom he lyked
best. When he had read over once or twyse, the sedule of names, which was
brought unto him, after good deliberation had with him self, he chose
Nectarius, although as yet he was not christened: and the Bishops maruailing at
his judgment in ye choice, could not remove him. And so was Nectarius
baptized, and made bishop of Constantinople: who proved so godly a bishop, that
al me^ deemed this election to be made by The Emperor, not without some miraculous
inspiratio^ of ye holy ghost. This emperor perceiving, yt the church had been
long time molested, and drawn into parts by the Arianisme, and like to be
more grievously torn in sonder with the heresy of M^cedonius, a B. of
Constantinople, and knowing yt his supreme government, and empire, was given
him of God, to maintain the common peace of the Church, and confirmacion of
the true faith, summoneth a Synod at Constantinople, in the third year of
his reign (which is the second great and general council of the four
notable and famous oecumenicall councelles) and when all the Bishops whom he
had cited, were assembled, he comes into the council house amongst them, he
made unto them a grave exhortation, to consulte diligently, like grave Fathers
of the matters propounded unto them. The Macedonians depart out of the City,
the Catholic Fathers agree, conclude a truth, and send the canons of their
conclusion to the Emperor to be confirmed, writing unto him in these words:
The holy counsel of Bishops assembled at Constantinople to Theodosius
Emperor, the most reverent obseruer of godliness, Religion, and love toward
God: We give God thanks, who has appointed your Imperial government for
the common tranquillity of his Churches, and to establishe the sound faith.
Sith the time of our assembly at Constantinople by your godly commandment,
we have renewed concord amongst our selves, and have prescribed certain
Canons or rules, which we have annexed unto this our writing: we beseech
therefore your clemency to command the Decree of the Counsel to be
stablished by the letters of your holiness, and that ye will confirm it, and
as you have honored the Church by the letters where with you called us
together: even so, that you will strengthen also the final conclusion of the
Decrees with your own sentence and seal.

After this he calls an other Council of Bishops Socr. lib. 5. cap. 10.
to Constantinople of what Religion so ever, thinkinge that if they might
assemble together in his presence, and before him confer touching the
matters of Religion, wherein they disagreed, that they might be reconciled, and
brought to unity of Faith. He consulteth with Nectarius, and sits down in
the council house amongst them al, and examineth those that were in Heresy,
in such sort, that the Heretics were not only astonished at his questions, but
also began to fall out amongst them selves, some likinge, some mislikinge the
Emperors purpose. This done, he commands each sect, to declare their faith
in writing, and to bring it unto him: he appoints to them a day, whereat
they came as the Emperor commanded, and delivered unto him the fourmes of
their faith in writing: when the Emperor had the sedules in his hands, he
makes an ernest prayer unto God, for the assistaunce of his holy spirit, yt
he may discern the truth, and judge rightly. And after he had read them all,
he condemns the Heresies of the Arians and Eunomians, rentinge their sedules
in sundre, and allows only, and confirms the faith of the Homousians, and
so the Heretics departed ashamed, and dashed out of countenance.

Theodosius left his two sons Emperors, of the which I will say but little:
yet wherein it may most manifestly appear, that the supreme government in
causes Ecclesiastical belonged to the Emperors.

Archadius the Emperor, when Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople was dead,
and so the sea vacant, was certified thereof: he causes John Chrysostom to be
called from Antioche: he commands the other Bishops collected into a
Synod, yt they admonish Chrysostom of Gods graces, and what belongs to
such a chardge, and that they choose and order him to be the Bishop of
Constantinople. In which dooinge, (says Theodoretus) the Emperor declared
Lib. 5. ca. 27
what careful endeavor, he had about the holy Church matters. But this
supreme authority, to care, appoint, and procure worthy and good Pastors or
Bishops, when the seas were vacant, appears more plainly in Honorius the
Emperor, brother to Archadius, whom the Bishop of Rome him self in his
decrees, and his Glosars on the same, confess and acknowledge to have the
oversight, rule and government in the elections and orderinge of Bishops, yea,
over the Bishop of Rome him self.

After the death of Pope Sozimus, were two Popes choosen at ones in a great
Schism, the one Bonifacius primus, the other Eulalius, whereof when the
Emperor Honorius had notice being at Millayne, he caused them Luthprand.
both to be banished Rome: But after seven months, Bonifacius was by the
Emperors commandment, called again and confirmed by his authority in the
Apostolical sea. This Bonifacius being now settled in the Papacy, by humble
suite to ye Emperor, provides a remedy against such mischiefs in time to
come. The case was this, says the Glosator, Boniface the first, did beseech
Honorius the Emperor to make a Law, whereby it might appear, Did. 79. ^*
duo.
what were to be done, when two Popes were chosen at ones by the vndiscreetnes
of the Electours, contendinge amongst them selves. Honorius did than
constitute that neither of those twain should be Pope, but that in a new
Election a third should be chosen by common consent. If two (says the
Emperor in his Law made at the humble suit of Bonifacius) by chance against
right be chosen, thorough the indiscreet contention of the Electours: we
permit neither of them to be Priest or Pope: but we judge him to remain in
the Apostolic sea, whom the divine judgment, and the common consent does
appointe from amongst the Clergy in a new Election. Upon this word, where
the Emperor says (we permit) the Glosar says, and so the Emperor does
not only abrogate the claim of both those that be chosen in the contention,
but does make them both for that time unable, and does decree an other to be
taken out of the Clergy for that time. Again the Glosar interpretinge this,
(the divine judgment) says: this is the meaning that the Emperors will and
election must stand, the Clergy and the whole people acceptinge with
thankful mind whom the Emperor does choose. For the Emperors were called
in those days holy, and their rescriptes and judgments Divine. Here you see
by the Popes decrees and Glosars, that the Emperor had the supreme rule and
government in Church causes, and this was the continual practice of the
Church for the most part, yea, even the Bishops of Rome before they
Gratian. did. 63.
were ordered and consecrated, had their election ratified and confirmed by the
Emperors, their Lieutenaunt, or other Princes. Sabellicus speakinge of the
contentious entrance of Damasus the first into the Papacy, which was not
without great bloodshed, as Volateranus says, does note the ambition of the
Prelates, to be the cause of such contention about their atteininge of such
roumes. For now (says he) the ambicious desire of honor, had by little and
little, begone to enter into the minds of the Bishops. The which was proved
over true, not only in the elections of the Bishops of old Rome, but also in
many Bishops of other Cities, especially of new Rome. These diseases in the
Church mynisters, and the disorders thereout springyng: the Emperors from
time to time studied to cure and refourme: wherefore Theodosius and
Valentinianus when they saw, the great hoouing and shoouinge at
Constantinople, about the election of a Bishop after the death of Sismius: some
speakinge to prefer Philippus, other some Proclus, both being Socr. lib. 7.
cap. 29.
mynisters of that Church, did provide a remedy for this mischief, to wit,
they them selves made a decree, that none of that Church should be Bishop
there, but some stranger from an other Church, and so the Emperors sent to
Antioche for Nestorius, who as yet was thought both Liberat. cap. 4.
for his doctrine and life, to be a fit pastor for the flock, and made him
Bishop of Constantinople.

As Constantinus and Theodosius the elder, even so Theodosius the second a
very godly Emperor, having and practisinge Nicep. li. 14 cap. 34. 35.
the supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, seeinge the horrible
Heresies spronge up, and deuidinge the Church, but specially by Nestorius, did
by his authority call the third general council at Ephesus, named the
first Ephesine council, geuinge straight commandment to all Bishops
wheresoever, that they should not fail to appear at the time appointed, and
further used the same power and authority, in the orderinge and gouerninge
thereof by his Lieutenaunt Ioannes Comes Sacrensis, that other Godly Emperors
had been accustomed to use before him, according to the continual practice
of the Church, as it is plainly set forth in the book of general
Councelles.

In this council there happened so grievous contention betwixt Cyrillus Bishop
of Alexandria, and John Bishop of Antioche, both being otherwise godly and
learned men, that the council was divided thereby into two parts: the
occasion of this Schism was partly, that Cyrillus and certain other with him
had proceeded to the condemnation of Nestorius, before that Ioannes with his
company could come, and partly for that Ioannes of Antioche Liberat. cap. 6.
suspected Cyrillus of certain Heresies, misdeeminge that Cyrill had made the
more haste to confirm them before his coming. He therefore with his
associates complains, and lays to Cyrilles chardge, that he did not tarry
according to the commandment of the Emperor for the coming of the
Bishops of other Provinces, which were called thither from all parts, by
the commandment of the Emperor: That when the noble Earl Candidianus
commanded him by writing, and without writing, that he should presume no
such matter, but that he and those that were with him, should abide the
coming of the other Bishops, nevertheless he proceeded: that he and his
company were the authors of dissension and discord in the Church: and that
they had given the occasion, that the rules of the Fathers, and the decrees of
the Emperors were broken, and trodden under foot: wherefore they judge Cyrill
of Alexandria, with Memnon Bishop of Ephesus, to be deposed from their
Bishoprikes, and Ecclesiastical mynistery: and the other their associates to
be excommunicate. The which their doings they signify to the Emperor
Theodosius by their Sydonical letters, to understand his pleasure, in allowing
or disallowyng of their Synodicall acts. After this came the Bishop of Romes
legates, before whom in the council Cyrillus and Memnon offered up their
libelles, deposinge a contestation against John and his party to have them
cited, and render the cause of their deposition. The Bishop of Romes legates,
with the consent of the council, on that part, sends for Ioannes and his
parties, who returns this answer: Neither send you to us, nor we to you,
because we look for an answer from the Prince touching you. Therefore
says Liberatus: Cyrill and Memnon, seekinge to revenge them selves, did
condemn John and all those that stood with him, who suffered many
displeasures at Ephesus thorough the pride of these twain. The Emperor
sends to the whole Council his answer in writing, on this sort: We
allow the condemnation of Nestorius, Cyrillus, and Memnon: the other acts and
condemnations, which you have made* we disallowe, obseruinge the Christian
Faith, and vprightnes which we have received of our Fathers and
progenitors. etc. Certain of the Bishops did satisfy the Emperor, whom
he commanded to enter into the Church, and to ordeine an other Bishop for
Constantinople in the place of Nestorius. These things thus done, the
Emperor dissolved the Council, and commanded the Bishops to depart every
man to his own country. Within a while after the Emperor Liberat. cap. 8.
perceiuinge the dissension betwixt Cyrill and John to continewe, which he
thought was not to be suffered: called Maximianus, and many other Bishops
that were then at Constantinople, with whom he consulted, how this Schism of
the Churches, might be taken away. Whose advise had, the Emperor sent a noble
man, named Aristolaus with his letters to Cyrill and John, commaundinge them to
come to an agreement and unity betwixt them selves, otherwise he would
depose and banishe them both. Whereupon followed a reconciliation between
the two Bishops, and much quietness to the Churches.

Eutyches stirred up much trouble in these days: wherefore he was cited to
appear before Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, and other Bishops
assembled in a Synod, to answer unto his heresies: who would not appear
but fled unto the Emperor Theodosius, and declares unto him his grief. The
Emperor sends unto the Synod with Eutyches, one of his chief officers
Florentius, with this mandate: Because we study carefully for the peace of
Gods Church, and for the Catholic Faith, and Liberat. cap. 11.
will by Gods grace have the right Faith kept, which was set forth by
the Nicene Council, and confirmed by the Fathers at Ephesus, when Nestorius
was condemned: we will therefore the^e be no offense committed about the
aforenamed Catholic Faith, and because we know the honorable Florentius,
to be a faithful and an approved man in the right faith, we will that he
shall be present in your Synod, because the conference is of the Faith. He was
there asistaunt unto the Fathers and examined Eutyches openly in the Synod,
diverse times of his faith: and finally said unto him: He that (says
Florentius) does not confess in Christ two natures, does not believe aright:
and so was Eutyches excommunicate, deposed, and condemned. Eutyches rested not
here, but obtained that the Emperor did command a new Synod to be had at
Constantinople, Niceph. li. 14. cap. 47.
wherein to examine the acts of the former, whether that all things touching
the proceeding against Eutyches, were done orderly and rightly or no. He
appoints besides Florentius, diverse other of his nobles to be in this
council, to see the dooinges thereof. But when Eutyches could not win his
purpose in neither of these Synodes, he procures by friendship of the
Emperesse Eudoxia and others, that the Emperor should call a Synod again at
Ephesus: to the which Synod the Emperor prescribes a form of proceedinge.
This Synod was a wicked conuenticle, wherein the truth was defaced and
Heresy approved, the Emperor being seduced by Chrysaphius, one of the
privy chamber, and in most favor with him.

Leo the first, Bishop of Rome a learned and a godly Bishop, although not
without all faults, makes humble supplication unto Theodosius the Emperor,
and unto Pulcheria: that there might be a general council called in Italy, to
abolishe the wicked error in Faith, confirmed by the violence of Dioscorus,
The self same Bishop of Rome with many Bishops Liberat. cap. 12.
kneelinge on their knees, did most humbly beseech in like sort Valent
inianus the Emperor, that he would vouchesaulfe to entreat and exhort
Theodosius the Emperor to call an other Synod, to revoke those evil acts
and judgments, which Dioscorus had caused to be done in the condemnation of
Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople and others. In which examples it is
manifest, that the Bishops of Rome did acknowledge the supreme government,
direction and authority in calling of councelles, which is one of the
greatest amongst the Ecclesiastical causes or matters, to be in the
Emperors, and Princes and not in them selves.

Marcianus, a godly Emperor, and very studious about the Christian Religion,
succeeded Theodosius, who besides that of him self, he was much careful to
suppress al heresies, Nicep. li. 15 cap. 1. 2.
and to refourme the Churches, restoring Religion to purity without error,
was also hastened hereunto by the earnest suit of Leo Bishop of Rome: who in
diverse Leo. ep. 44.
and sondrie epistles, declaring unto him in most humble wise, the miserable
state of the Church, does beseech him, that he would vouchsaulfe to call a
general council. Many other Bishops make the same suite unto the Emperor, and
to the same end: complaining unto him, of the miserable destruction, and
horrible disorders, in church causes. An example and pattern of their
supplications, whereby may appear, that they acknowledged the Emperor to be
their Supreme governor, also in Ecclesiastical causes, or matters, is set
forth in the Chalcedon council, in the supplication of Eusebius, the Bishop
of Dorelaum, Act. 7.
unto the Emperor: who makes humble supplication as he says, for him self,
and for the true or right faith. We fly unto your godliness (says this Bishop
unto the Emperor) because both we and the Christian faith, have suffered much
wrong against all reason: humbly craving justice, and for that Dioscorus has
done many, and that no small offenses, both against the faith of Christ and
us: prostrate, we beseech your clemency, that you will command him to
answer to the matters, we shall obiecte against him: wherein we will prove him
to be out of the catholic faith, defending heresies replete with impiety.
Wherefore we beseech you to direct your holy and honorable commandment,
to the holy and universal council of the most religious Bishops, to examen
the cause betwixt us, and Dioscorus, and to make relation of all things, that
are done, to be judged as shall seem good to your clemency. The Emperor In
Epist. praeamb.
protesting that they ought to preserve the furtheraunce of the right faith
and Christian Religion, before all other affairs of the common wealth: sends
their letters of summons to all Bishops, commaundinge them to repair to
Nice, a city in Bithynia, there to consulte and conclude, an unity and
concord in Religion, and matters perteining thereunto, that hereafter all
altercation and doubtfulnesse be taken clean away, and an wholesome truth in
Religion established, addinge threats, and punishment to them that would
refuse to come at the time appointed. When thassembly was made at Nice of all
the Bishops, and that the Emperors could not come thither, to be present in
the Synod personally, which they had promised and did much coueite, they
write unto the whole Synod, willing them to remove from Nice unto Chalcedon
with out delay: where they assembled at the Emperors commandment, to the
number of. 630. Bishops. The Emperor assigns Judges and rulers in the
Sinode about. 24. of the chiefest of his Nobles and Senators. After all the
Bishops and the Judges were assembled in the council house, which was in S.
Euphemies church: the Emperor Martianus, with Pulcheria, enters in amongst
them, and makes an Oration unto the whole Council, to this effect. First he
declares, what zeal and care he has for the maintenance and furtherance of
true Religion: Act. 1.
Then he shows, that partly the vanity, partly the avarice of the
teachers, had caused the discord and error in Religion: He adds the cause
wherefore he chardged them with this travail: And last of al he prescribes a
form, after which they must determine the matters in controversy. This done,
the Judges sat down in their places, and the Bishops arowe, some on the
right hand, and others on the left hand. And when that Dioscorus was accused,
and the Judges willed him to use his lawful defense, there began to be amongst
the Bishops whote schools, wanting some modesty, wherefore the Judges at the
first stayed them with mild words. VVilling them to avoid confusion: but
being earnest, they ouershot the modesty of so grave men: wherefore the
honorable Judges and Senate of the Laity, appointed by the Emperor, did
reprove the^, saying: These popular acclamations, neither becomes Bishops,
neither yet help the parties: be ye quiet therefore, and suffer al things to be
rehearsed and heard, in order with quietness. When the Judges and Senate, had
duly examined the causes, they gave sentence to depose Dioscorus and others:
So that this their judgment seemed good to the Emperor, to whom they
referred the whole matter.

In the next action, the Judges and Senate after rehearsal Act. 2.
made, what was done before, do propounde unto the Synod, what matters were
now to be consulted of, and wills them to make a pure exposition of the
faith, and that without any sinister affection, declaring that the Emperor and
they, did firmly keep and believe, according to the faith received in the Nicen
council: whereunto the Bishops also accord, and says, that no man makes,
or may attempt to make any other exposition. Certain of the Synod desired to
hear the Symbol of the Nicen council recited, which the Senate and Judges
granted unto them.

After that it was agreed upon, by the whole Synod, that Dioscorus should be
deposed, the Synod writes unto the Emperous Valentinianus, and Martianus,
saiynge in this form: Grievous diseases neadeth both a strong medicine, and
also Act. 3.
a wise Physician: For this cause therefore, the Lord oueral, has appointed
630. bishops confess the Princes supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes.
your goodlines as the best and chief Physicion over the diseases of the whole
world, that you should heal them with fit medicines. And you most
Christian Emperors, receiuinge commandment from God above other men, have
given competent diligence for the Churches, framing a medicine of concord unto
the Bishops. This, thus in way of Preface said, they declare what they have
done touching Dioscorus, they show the cause and reasons, that moved them
thereunto: both that the Emperor should consider his wickedness, and also the
sincerity of their sentence.

In the fourth Action, when the rehearsal of all things Act. 4.
passed before was done, the Judges and Senate asks if all the Bishops
agree: whereunto they answered, yea, yea. The Synod had requested the Judges
and the Senate, to make suite to The Emperor for five bishops, which otherwise
must be deposed, as was Dioscorus, which they did, and made this relation unto
the Sinode: That the Emperor, perceiuinge the humble suite of the Synod,
does license them to determine touching the five, what they thought good:
admonisshinge them notwithstanding, to give good heed what they did: for that
they must make an account to god of their dooinges.

In the fifth Action, the Judges willed the Synod, to Act. 5.
read those things, which were agreed upon touching the Faith: whereabout
began a great contention, one part of them allowinge, an other sort
disallowing that was read amongst them. The Judges seeinge the exclamations
and confusion, that was amongst them, appoints a Committy, choosinge forth
of sundry parts a certain number to go aside with the Judges, to make a
resolution. When they prevailed nothing, they threatened the whole Synod,
that they would signify these disordered clamours unto the Emperor, which
they did. The Emperor immediately of his Supreme authority, appoincted the
order of Committies, which the Judges had devised before: giving them in
commandment, that goinge aside by them selves, they should consult and
conclude a truth in Faith, with such plainness, that there might no more
doubts arise thereof, whereunto al should agree. The Synod obeyed, and
followed the Emperors direction, and the Committies with the Judges, goes
aside into a secret place, makes conference, concludes, and comes again
into the Synod, and recites their determination, whereunto the whole Synod
gave their consent, and so the Judges commands, that this their definition
should be showed unto The Emperor.

The Emperor comes into the Synod place, in Act. 6.
his own person, with Pulcheria, his nobles, and Senators, and makes unto
the Synod an Oration, of this effect. He cares for nothing so much, as to
have all men rightly persuaded in the true Christian faith: He declares the
occasions, why he sommoned the Synod: He commands that no man be so hardy,
hereafter to hold opinion, or dispute, of the Christian faith, otherwise than
was decreed in the first Nicen council, he charge them therefore, that all
partaking, contention, and covetousness laid apart, the only truth may
appear to al men. He declares his coming into the Synod, to be for none
other cause, then to confirm the faith, and to remove from the people in time
to come, all dissension in Religion. And last of all, he protests this to be
his whole care, and study, that all people may be brought into an unity, and
vnifourme agreement in pure Religion, by true and holy doctrine. The chief
Notarie, humbly asks of the Emperor, if it will please him to hear their
definition read: The Emperor wills that it should be recited openly, he
enquireth of them all, if every man consented thereunto: they answer, that it
is agreed upon by all their consentes. Whereunto they add many acclamations,
commending the worthiness of his Imperial government, concluding: By thee O
worthy Emperor, the right faith is confirmed, haeresies banished, peace
restored, and the Church reformed. After these acclamations, the Emperor
does openly declare unto the Synod a statute, which he makes to cut of and
put away from thencefoorth, al manner occasion of contention about the true
faith, and holy Religion. The whole Synod desires the Emperor, to dissolve
the council, and to give them leave to depart: whereunto the Emperor would
not consent, but commands that none of them depart.

Bassianus, of late the Bishop at Ephesus, complains unto the Emperor, to
direct his letters to the Synod, to Act. 11.
have his cause heard. The Emperor commands the Synod to hear the
matter. The Judges, commands Stephanus Bishop of Ephesus, to make answer
unto Bassianus his complaint. After due examination had by the Judges, openly
in the Synod in this controversy, the Judges asked of the Synod, what they
judged to be done. The Bishops adjudged Bassianus to be restored. But the
Judges appointed by the Emperor, would not allow that sentence, but deemed
neither of them both worthy to occupy that Byshoprike, and that there should
be a third chosen, and admitted to that sea, to the which judgment, the
whole Synod did accord. After the end of this council, the Emperor does
confirm the determination thereof by his public Decree.

This Synod being finished, the Emperor banished Dioscorus into the City of
Gangren. Which thing done: Cap. 14.
The Nobles of the City (says Liberatus) assembled together to chose one,
both for life and learning, worthy of the Byshoprike: for this was commanded
by the Emperors Decrees. At the length Proterus was made Bishop: against whom
the sedicious people raised one Timotheus Hellurus, or Aelurus, who in
conclusion, murdered Proterius. The catholic Bishops, which maintained
the Chalcedon council, made humble supplication unto Leo the Emperor, both to
revenge the death of Proterius, and also to depose Timotheus Hellurus, as Libe.
ca. 15.
one not Lawfully instituted in the Bishoprike: on the contrary part, other
Bishops make supplication unto him, in the defense of Timotheus, and against
the Chalcedon council. When Leo the Emperor had considered the matter of both
their supplications, for good and godly considerations, he wrote his letters to
the Bishops of every city, declaring both these causes, and willing them to
send him their advise, what was best to be done: from whom he received
answer, that the Chalcedon council is to be maintained even unto death:
whereupon the Emperor writes to Stila his Lieutenant of Alexandrea, that he
should maintain the Chalcedon council. Stila did as the Emperor commanded:
he expelled Timotheus Hellurus, and placed Cap. 16.
another in his room, named Timotheus Sale facialius, or Albus, who lived
quietly all the reign of Leo, and Zeno, the Emperous, till Basilicus gat the
Empire, who restored Timotheus the Heretic: But when Zeno recovered the
Empire, this Timotheus poisoned him self, in whose place the Heretics chose
one Peter Mogge. After that Zeno the Emperor knew of the crafty dealing of ye
heretics, he wrote to his Lieutenaunt Anthemius, that he should deprive Peter
Mogge, and restore Timotheus to the Byshoprike, and further, that he should
punish those, that were the authors to enstall Peter Mogge. Anthemius
receyuinge the Emperors mandate, did depose Peter Mogge, as one that was but a
counterfayte made Bishop, contrary to the Laws of the catholic Church, and
restored Timotheus Salefacialius, who being restored, sent certain of his
Clergy to the Emperor to render him thanks.

After this Timotheus, Ioannes de Talaida was chosen, whereof when Acatius
Bishop of Constantinople heard, he being offended with John, for that he had
not sent unto him synodical letters, to signify of his election, as ye manner
was,) he joined him self with the fautours of Peter Mogge, and accused John
unto the Emperor, as one not sound in Religion, nor fit for the Byshoprike.
Peter Mogge espying this oportuniti, edissembleth an unity and reconciliation,
and by his friends, wynneth Acatius, who breaks the matter to the Emperor,
and persuades him to depose Ioannes de Talaida, and to restore Peter Mogge: so
that the same Peter would first receive and profess the Henoticon, that is the
confession of the unity in faith, which the Prince had set forth, whereof
this is the effect. Zeno the Emperor, Lib. ca. 18.
to al Bishops and people, throughout Alexandry, and Aegipt, Lybia, and
Pentepolis: For so much as we know, that the right and true faith alone, is
the beginning, continuance, strength, and invincible shylde of our Empire: we
labor night and day in prayer, study, and with Laws to increase, the
Catholic, and Apostolic Church by that faith. All people next after God,
shall bow down their necks under our power. Seeing therefore, that the pure
faith, does on this wise preserve us, The princes supremacy in all causes
and the Romain common wealth, many godly fathers have humbly beseched us, to
cause an unity to be had in the holy Church, that the members displaced and
separated through the malice of the enemy, may be coupled and knit together.
And after this, declaringe his faith, to agree with the Nicen council, and
those that condemned Nestorius, and Eutyches, (he says.) we curse those that
think the contrary. After which curse, declaring all the articles of his
faith, he concludes with an earnest exhortation unto the unity of faith. The
Emperor, says Liberatus, supposing that Ioannes de Talaida, had not meant
rightly of ye Chalcedun counsel, but had done al things fainedly, wrote his
letters by the persuasion of Acatius, to Pergamius, and Appolonius his
Lieutenantes, to depose John, and enstall Peter Mogge. John being thus thrust
out, repaired to the B. of Antioche, with whose letters of co^mendacion, he
went to Simplicius Bishop of Rome, and desired him to write in his behalf unto
Acatius Bishop of Constantinople, who did so, and with in a while after, died.

This Pope Simplicius consideringe the great contentions that were accustomably
about the election of Popes, did provide by decree, that no Pope should
hereafter be chosen without the authority of the Prince, which decree,
although it be not extant, yet it is manifest enough, by the Epistle of king
Odoacer put into the Acts of the third Synod, that Simmachus the Pope did
keep at Rome, wherein the King does not only auouche, the decree of
Simplicius, but also adds: We marvel that without us any thing was
attempted, seeing that whiles our Priest (meaning the Bishop of Rome
Simplicius) was on live: nothing ought to have been taken in hand without us

Next after Simplicius was Foelix. 3. chosen, who after his confirmacion sent
many letters, as well to the Emperor as to Acatius Bishop of Constantinople,
about the matter betwixt John and Peter, but when he could not prevail in
his suite, he made John Bishop of Nola in Campania. One of the letters that
Pope Foelix wrote unto Zenon the Act. 1.
Emperor about this matter, is put into the fifth Synod of Constantinople:
wherein the Pope after the salutation, does most humbly beseech the Emperor, to
take his humble suite in good part. He shows that the holy Church makes
this suite, that he will vouchesaulfe to maintain the unity of the Church,
that he will destroy Heresies, that breaks the bond of unity, that he will
expel Peter Mogge both out of the City and also from Church regiment: that
he would not suffer Peter being deposed, to be admitted to the Communion of the
Church: but that by his honorable letters, he would banishe him out of the
bounds of Antioche. And (says this Bishop of Rome Foelix unto the Emperor)
In his place appoint you one, that shall bewtifie the Priesthood by his works.

Anastasius the Emperor deposed Macedoniue Bishop of Constantinople, as one
that falsified the Ghospels, as Liberatus Cap. 19.
says. About the election of Symachus, Platina mentions what great division
and sedition arose, in so much Platina.
yt the parties were feign to agree to have a council holden for the
determination of the matter. And there was a council appointed at Rauenna
(says Sabellicus) to the end that the controversy might be decided
according to right, before the King Sabell.
Theodoriche: before whom the matter was so discussed, that at the last this
Pope Symachus was confirmed. Nevertheless this fire was not thus so quite
quenched, but that four years after, it blased out sorer again. VVhereat the
King (says Platina) being displeased, sent Peter the Bishop of Altine to
Rome, to enjoy the sea, and both the other to be deposed. Whereupon an other
Synod was called of. 120. Bishops, wherein (says Sabellicus) the Pope him
self defended his own cause so stoutely, and cunningly, and confuted, (says
Platina) all the objections laid against him, that by the verdict of them all,
he was acquitted, and all the fault laid to Laurence and Peter.

But to the intent it may the better appear what was the Kings authority
about these matters, mark the fourth Roman Synod, holden in the time of
this Symachus and about the same matter of his, which although it be mangled
and confusedly set forth in the Book of general Councelles, because (as it
may seem) that they would not have the whole truth of this dissension
appear: yet will it show much, that the Princes had no small entermedlinge,
and authority in Synodes and Church matters. This Synod was summoned to be
kept in Rome, by the commandment of the most honorable King Theodoriche.
He declares that many and grievous complaints, were brought unto him against
Symachus Bishop of Rome. Symachus comes into the Synod to answer for him
self, gives thanks to the King for calling the Synod, requires that he
may be restored to such things as he had lost by the suggestion of his
enemies, and to his former state, and then to come to the cause, and to
answer the accusers. The more part in the Synod, thought this his demand
reasonable: Decernere tamen aliquid Synodus sine regia notitia non praesumpsit.
Yeat the Synod praesumed not to decre^ any thing without the Kings
knowledge. Neither came it to pass as they wished: for the King commanded
Symachus the Bishop of Rome to answer his adversaries before he should
resume any thing. And so the king committed the whole debatinge and iudginge
of the matter to the Synod, which concludes the sentence with these words:
Wherefore according to the Kings will or commandment who has committed
this cause to us, we refourme or restore unto him (to Symachus) what right so
ever he ought to have within the City of Rome, or without.

As it is and shall be most manifestly proved and testified by the oecumenicall
or general councelles, wherein the order of the ecclesiastical government in
Christ's Church, has been most faithfully declared, and showed from time to
time (as you your self affirm) that such like government as the Queens
Majesty does claim and take upon her in Ecclesiastical causes was practiced
continually by the Emperors: and approved, praised and highly commended by
thousands of the best Bishops and most godly Fathers that has been in
Christ's Church from time to time: even so shall I prove by your own book of
general councelles mangled, maimed, and set forth by papishe Donatistes them
selves, and other such like Church writers, that this kind, and such like
government, as the Queens Majesty does use in Church causes, was by
continual practice, not in some one only Church or part of Christendom
(whereof you crave proof, as though not possible to be showed) but in the
notablest Kingdoms of al Christendom, as France and Spain, put in ure:
whereby your wilful, and malicious ignorance shall be made so plain, that it
shall be palpable to them whose eyes you have so bleared, that they cannot see
the truth.

Clodoueus about this time the first Christian king of France, baptized by
Remigius, and taught the Christian faith: perceyuinge that thorough the
troublesome times of wars, the Church discipline had been neglected and
much corruption crepte in, does for reformacion hereof call a national
council or Synod at Aurelia, and commands the Bishops to assemble there
together, to consult of such necessary matters as were fit, and as he
delivered unto them to consulte of. The Bishops do according as the King
commands, they assemble, they commend the kings zeal, and great care for
the catholic faith, and Religion, they conclude according to the Kings
mind, and does refer their decrees to the judgment of the King, whom they
confess to have the superiority, to be approved by his assent. Clodoueus
also called a Synod named Concilium Cabiloneu^, and commanded the Bishops
to consider if any thing were amiss in the discipline of the Church, and to
consulte for the reformation thereof: and this (says the Bishops) he did of
zeal to Religion and true faith.

Other four Synodes were summoned afterward in the same City at sundry
times, by the commandment of the king, named Childebert, moved of the love
and care, he had for the holy faith, and furtheraunce of Christian Religion, to
the same effect and purpose that the first was sommoned for.

This king Childebert, caused a Synod of Bishops to assemble at Paris, and
commanded them to take order for the reformation of that Church, and also to
declare whom they thought to be a provident Pastor, to take the care over the
Lords flock, the Bishop Saphoracus, being deposed for his just demerites.

Theodobertus king of France, calls a Synod at Aruerna in France, for the
restoring and establyshing the Church discipline. Gunthranus the king, calls
a Synod, named Matisconens. 2. to refourme the Eclesiasticall discipline, and
to confirm certain orders, and ceremonies, in the Church, which he
declares plainly in the Edict, that he sets forth for that purpose.
Wherein he declares his vigilant and studious carefulnes, to have his people
trained and brought up, under the fear of God, A princes charge.
in true Religion, and godly discipline, for otherwise (says this Christian
king) I to whom God has committed this charge, shall not escape his
vengeance. He shows the Bishops that their office is to teach, comfort,
exhort, to reprove, rebuke, and correct, by preaching the word of God. He
commands A bishops jurisdiction.
the elders of the Church, and also others of authority, in the common weal,
to judge and punish, that they asiste the Bishops, and sharply punish by
bodily punishment, such as will not amend by the rebuke and correction of the
word, and church discipline. And concludes, that he has caused the Decrees
in the council, touching discipline, and certain ceremonies to be defined,
the which be does publishe and confirm, by the authority of this edict.

After the death of Anastasius the Emperor, Justinius reigned alone a right
catholic Prince, who immediately sent Platina.
messengers unto the Bishop of Rome, who should both confirm the authority of
the sea, and also should provide peace for all Churches, so much as might be,
with which doings of the Emperor, Hormisda the Bishop of Rome, being moved,
sent unto the Emperor, with consent of Theodoriche, Legates. Martinus
P^^nitentiar^us tells, the Mar. Poeni.
cause of this legacy was, to entreat the Emperor to restore those Bishops,
which the wicked Anastasius had deposed. This godly Emperor Justinius (says
Martyn) did make a Law, that the Churches of the Heretics, should be
consecrated to the catholic Religion, but this Decree was made in John the
next Popes days. The which edict when the king Theoderiche, being an Arian
(says the same Martyn,) and king of Italy, herd, he sent Pope John (says
Sabellicus) with others in embassage unto the The Pope is the kings
Ambassador.
Emperor, to purchase liberty for the Arians. Justinius received these
Ambassadors honorably, says Platina, and the Emperor at the length
overcome with the humble suite of the Pope, which was sauced with tears,
granted The Popes humble suit to the Emperor, for the Arian heretics.
to him and his associates, that the Arians should be restored, and suffered
to live after their orders.

In this history, this is not unworthy the noting, that the Pope did not only
show his obedience and subjection to the godly Emperor, but also that the
secular Princes, ordained Laws Ecclesiastical, with the which the Pope could
not dispense. For all this busynes arose about the decree, which the Emperor
had made in an Ecclesiastical cause or matter. If the Popes authority in
these causes, had been above the Emperors, he needed not with such lowlynes,
and so many tears to have besought the Emperor to have revoked his decree and
edict.

Within a while after this John, was Agapetus Pope, Valateran^.
whom Theodatus the king, sent on his Embassage unto the Emperor Iustinianus,
to make a suite or treaty in his behalf. When the Emperor had enterteined
this Ambassador with much honor, and granted that he came for, touching
Theodatus, he earnestly both with fair Sabell.
words, and foul, assailed this Pope, to bring him to become an Eutychian:
the which when he could not win at his hand, being delighted with his free
speech and constancy, he so lyked him, that he forthwith deposed Anthemius
Bishop of Constantinople, because he was an Eutychian, and placed Menna a
Catholic man, in his rowme. Agapetus dyed in this Legacy, in whose rowme was
Syluerius made Pope, by the means, or rather, as Sabellicus says, by the
commandment of the king Theodatus, the which until this time, was wont to
be done by the authority of the Emperors (says Sabellicus,) for the
revenge whereof, Iustinianus was kindled to make wars against Theodatus.
Syluerius was shortly after quarrelled withal by the Empress, through the
means of Vigilius, who sought to be in his rowme, and was by the Emperors
authority deposed. The which act, although it were altogether unjust, yet
declares it the authority that the Prince had over the Pope: who like a good
Bishop, as he would not for any threats do contrary to his conscience and
office* so like an obedient subject, he acknowledged the Princes authority*
being sent for, came: being accused, was ready with humblenes to have excused
and purged him self: and when he could not be admitted thereunto, he suffered
him self obediently to be spoiled of the Bishoplike apparayle, to be
displaced out of his office, and to be clothed in a Monastical garment.

The same measure that Vigilius did give unto Syluerius, he him self being
Pope in his place, received shortly after, with an augmentation, for he was in
like sort within Sabell.
a while, deposed by the Emperors authority, because he would not keep the
promise which he had made unto the Emperesse, and was in most cruel wise
dealt with all: which cruelty was the rather showed to him by the means and
procurements (as Sabellicus notes) of Pelagius, whom Vigilius had placed to be
his Suffragan in his absence.

About this time, Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople, as Liberatus says,
died, in whose rowme the Empress Cap. 20.
placed Anthymus. About which time, was great strife between Gaianus and
Theodosius, for the Bishoprike of Alexandria, and within two months, says
Liberatus, the Empress Theodora, sent Narses a noble man, to enstall
Theodosius, and to banishe Gaianus: Theodosius being banished, the sea was
vacant: whereunto Paulus (who came to Constantinople to plead his cause before
the Emperor, against certain stubborn monks) was appointed, and he received
(says Liberatus) authority of the Emperor, to remove heretics, Cap. 23.
and to ordeine in their places men of right faith. This Paulus was shortly
after accused of murder, whereupon the Emperor sent Pelagius the Popes
proctour, liyng at Constantinople, joining unto him certain other Bishops,
with commission, to depose Paulus from the Bishoplike office, which they did:
and they ordered for him zoilus, whom afterward Ibid.
the Emperor deposed, and ordered Apollo, who is now the Bishop of Alexandria
(says Liberatus) Certain Monks met with Pelagius in his return from Gaza
(where Paulus was deposed) toward Constantinople, bringing certain articles,
gathered out of Origenes works, minding to make suite unto the Emperor, that
both Origin and those articles might be condemned, whom Pelagius for malice he
bare to Theodorus Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia, an ernest fautor of Origin,
did further all that he might. Pelagius therefore does earnestly entreat the
Emperor, that he would command that to be done which the Monks sued for:
to wit, that Origin with those articles should be damned. The which suite
the Emperor granted, being glad to give judgment upon such matters, and
so by his commandment, the sentence of the great curse against Origin, and
those Articles were drawn forth in writing and subscribed with their hands,
and so sent to Vigilius the Bishop of Rome, to zoilus Bishop of Alexandria,
Euphemius of Antioche, and Peter Bishop of Jerusalem. These Bisshops
receiuinge this sentence of the curse, pronounced by the Emperors
commandment, and subscribinge thereunto: Origin was condemned being dead,
who before long ago on live was condemned.

When Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia herd of this condemnacion, to
be revenged, he labored ernestly Cap. 24.
with the Emperor, to condemn Theodorus Mopsuestenus a famous adversary of
Origin, the which he brought to pass by ouermuche fraud, abusinge the
Emperor to the great slander and offense of the Church. Thus in all these
Ecclesiastical causes, it appears the Emperor had the chief entermedlinge,
who although at the last was beguiled by the false Bishops: yet is it
worthy the notinge by whom this offense in the church came, which appears
by that, that follows: I believe that this is manifest to all men (says
Liberatus) that this offense entered into the Church, by Pelagius the Deacon,
and Theodorus the Bishop, the which even Theodorus him self, did openly
publis he with clamours: cryinge, that he and Pelagius were worthy to be
burnt quick, by whom this offense entered into the world.

This Pelagius as yet was but Suffragan or proctor for the Pope, who afterward
in the absence of Pope Vigilius his master crepte into his sea, in the midst
of the broiles that Totylas king of the Goths made in Italy, when also he
came to Rome. In the which history is to be noted the Popes subjection to
Totylas, whom humbly on his knees he acknowledged, to be his Lord appointed
thereto of God, and him Sabellicus.
self as all the rest to be his servant. Note also how the king sent him
Ambassador, what chardge, and that by Oath, of his voyage, of his message, and
of his return, the King straightly gave unto him: how buxomely in all these
things he obeyed: How last of all toward the Emperor (being commanded by
him to tell his message) he fell down to his feet, and with tears both to
him and to his nobles, he ceased not to make most lamentable, and humble
supplication, till without speed, but not without reproach, he had leave to
return home. But least you should take these things, to set forth that
Princes had only their Jurisdiction over the Ecclesiastical. persons, and
that in matters Temporal, and not in causes Ecclesiastical, mark what is
written by the Historians. Platina amongst the decrees of this Pope Pelagius,
tells, (and the same witnesses Sabellicus) that Narses the Emperors other
deputy, Jointly with Pelagius did decree, that none by ambition should be
admitted to any of the holy orders. Pelagius more over writes unto Narses,
desiringe him of his aid against all the Bishops of Liguria* Venetiae and
Histria, which would not obey him, puttinge their affiaunce in the authority
of the first Council of Constantinople. In which Epistle amongst other
things, he writes on this wise: Your honor must remember what God wrought
by you at that time, when as Totyla the tiraunt possessinge Histriam and
Venetias: the French also wastinge all things you would not nevertheless
suffer a Bisshoppe of Myllaine to be made; until ye had sent word from
thence to the most mild Prince (meaning the Emperor) and had received
answer again from him by writing what should be done, and so both he that
was ordained Bisshoppe, and he that was to be ordained, were brought to
Rau^enna at the appointement of your high authority. Not long after,
Pelagius. 2. because he was chosen Iniussu Principis, without the Emperors
commandment; and could not send unto him, by reason the Town was besieged,
and the huge risinge of the waters stopped the passage: as soon as he might,
being elected Pope, he sent Gregory to crave the Emperors perdone, and to
obtain his good will. For in those days (says Platina) the Clergy did
nothing in the Popes election, except the election had been allowed by the
Emperor.

About the time of Pelagius the first his Papacy was there a Council holden
at Towers in France, by the license and consent of Arithbertus the King, for
the reformacion of the Church discipline, wherein appears, that the Kings
authority was necessarily required, to confirm, and strengthen the
discipline. For where they decree of the maids or widows that shall not be
married, without the consent of the parents, which is an especial matter
Ecclesiastical, they declare the strength thereof, to depend upon the
commandment of the Prince. Not only (say they) the Kings, Childebert and
Clotharius of honorable memory, kept and preserved the constitution of the
Laws touching this matter, the which now the king Charibert their
successor has confirmed, or strengthened by his praecept.

The Emperor Iustinianus calls the Bishops of all Churches unto a general
Council at Constantinople, the which is called the fifte oecumenicall Synod,
to repress the insolence of certain Heretics, who taught and maintained
Heresies and Schisms, to the great disquieting of the Church against the
doctrine established Euag. li. 4. Cap. 38.
in the four forenamed general Councelles. In the time of this council
Menna, the Bishop of Constantinople, departed out of this life, in whose rowme
the Emperor placed Eutychius. The Emperor governs and Niceph. li. 17. Cap.
27.
directs all things in this Council, as the Emperors before him had done
in the other general Synodes, as appears by the writing, which he sent
unto the Bishops, wherein he shows, that the right beleeuinge godly
Emperors his ancestors did always labor, to cut of the Heresies spronge up
in their time, by calling together into Synod the most religious Bishops,
and to preserve the holy Church in peace: and the right faith to be sincerely
preached and taught. He alleges the examples of Constantinus Magnus,
Theodosius the elder, Theodosius the younger, and Martianus the Emperors: who
(says he) called the former general councelles, were present them selves in
their own persons, did aid and help the true confessors, and took great
travail upon them, that the right faith should prevail, and be preached.
Our forenamed ancestors of godly memory (says he) did strengthen and
confirm by their Laws, those things which were decided in every of those
councelles, and did expulse the Heretics, which went about to gainesaie the
determinations of the four forenamed general councelles, and to unquiet the
Churches. He protests, that from his first entrance, he made these the
beginninges and foundation of his imperial government, to wit, the unity in
Faith agreeable to the four general councelles, amongst the church
ministers, from the east to the weast: the restraigninge of schisms and
contentions stirred up, by the fautours of Eutyches and Nestorius, against the
Chalcedon council: the satisfiynge of many that gainesaide the holy Chalcedon
council, and the expulsion of others, that perseuered in their errors, out of
the holy Churches and Monasteries: To the end that concord and peace of the
holy Churches, and their Priests, being firmly kept, one, and the self
same faith, which the four holy Synodes did confess, might be preached
throughout Gods holy Churches. He declares how he had consulted with them
by his letters and messengers about these matters, and how they declared their
judgments unto him by their writings: notwithstanding seeinge certain
Heretics continue in their heresies: Therefore I have called you (says he)
to the royal City (meaning Constantinople) exhortinge you being assembled
together, to declare once again your minds touching these matters. He
shows that he opened these controversies to Vigilius the Pope, at his being
with him at Constantinople: And we asked him (says he) his opinion herein: and
he, not once nor twice, but oftentimes in writing, and without writing, did
curse the three wicked articles, etc. We commanded him also by our The
Emperor commands the Pope to come to the Synod.
Judges, and by some of you, to come unto the Synod with you, and to debate
these three articles together with you, to the end that an agreeable form
of the right faith might be set forth: and that we asked both of him and you
in writing touching this matter: that either as wicked articles, they might
be condemned of all: or else, if he thought them right, he should show his
mind openly: But he answered unto us: that he would do seuerly by him
self concerning these three points, and deliver it unto us He declares his
own judgment and belief, to be agreeable with the faith set forth in the
four general Councelles. He prescribes unto them the special matters, that
they should debate and decyde in this Synod: whereof the final end is,
(says he) That the truth in every thing may be confirmed, and wicked
opinions condemned. And at the last, he concludes with an earnest and godly
exhortacion, to seek Gods glory only, to delare their judgments agreeable
to the holy gospel, touching the matters he propounds, and to do that with
convenient speed. Dat. 3. Nonas Maias, Constant inopoli. The Title prefixed to
the first general council, sommoned by the commandment of Justinian, tells
in effect generally, both the matter and also who had the chief authority in
the orderinge thereof: for it is entitled: The divine ordinance and
constitution of Justinian the Emperor against Anthymus, Seuerus, Petrus, and
Zoaras. Mennas the universal Archbishop and Patriarche of Constantinople, was
present in this Council, who had adjoined unto him, placed on his right hand,
certain Bishops, coadiutours, named and appoincted by the commandment of the
Emperor, sent out of Italy from the sea of Rome. When they were set thus in
council, The Emperor sent Theodorus one of the Masters of the Requests, or
his Secretary, a wise man, unto the Synod: Bishops, Abbottes, and many
other of the clergy, with their bills of supplications, which they had put
up unto the Emperor, for redress of certain matters Ecclesiastical.
Theodorus makes relacion unto the Synod hereof, delivers the Bills of
supplication to be considered on: presents the parties to the Synod, and
shows that this is the Emperors pleasure, that they should dispatche and
end these matters. Paulus the Bishop of Apamea, in his bill of supplication,
offered to the most godly Emperor in the name of all his, acknowlegeth him to
be the highest Potentate in the world next unto God: who has magnified his
Empire, The prince the highest potentate next to god in all causes
and thrown his aduersaris under him: because he mainteineth the only and
pure Faith: offreth unto god pure Leven, that is to say, true doctrine as
incense, and burns the chafe (meaning false Religion) with unquenchable
fire. And after the Declaration of their Faith, talkinge of the Eutychian or
counterfaite catholic, He desires the Emperor, to whom God has reserved
the full authority to direct, to cut him from the Church, and to expulse God
reserueth to the prince the fulness of direction in Ecclesi. causes.
him out of his Dominions. In like sort the Religious men, and the Monasteries
of Secunda Syrta, do offer up a book of supplication unto the Emperor,
beseechinge him, that he will command the Archebishoppe Mennas, president of
the council, to receive their book, and to consider of it according to the
Ecclesiastical Canons. The Emperor makes a law and constitution, to ratify
and confirm the judgment of ye Sinode against Anthymus, and other heretics:
wherein also he decrees touching many other ecclesiastical matters or causes:
as, No man to Rebaptize: to profane the holy Communion: to call Conuenticles:
to dispute further in those matters concluded on: to publishe or set forth the
Heretical books: to communicate with them. And so knitteth up all, with this
conclusion. We have decreed these things for the common peace of the most
holy Churches: these things have we determined by sentence.

All things being thus done, by the commandment of the Emperor, in the
first Action, and so forth, in the second, third, and fowrth, after many
acclamations, the Presidente of the Council Mennas, concludes: saiynge to the
Synod: That they are not ignorant of the zeal and mind, of the Godly
Emperor, toward the right Faith, and that nothing of those that are moved
in the Church, ought to be done Nothing may be don in Church matters,
without the princes authorite.
without his will and commandment.

Such is the authority of Princes in matters Ecclesiastical, that the Godly
ancient Fathers did not only confess, that nothing moved in Church matters,
ought to be done without their authority, but also did submit them selves
willingly with humble obedience, to the direction of the Godly Emperors, by
their laws, in all matters or causes Ecclesiastical, which they would not
have done, if they had thought, that Princes ought not to have governed in
Ecclesiastical causes. The same zealous Emperor does declare, that the
authority of the Princes laws does rightly dispose and keep Cod. lib. 1. tit.
17.
in good order, both spiritual and temporal matters, and drives away all
iniquity: wherefore he did not only gather together as it were into one
heap, the laws that he him self had made, and other Emperors before him,
touching civil or temporal matters: but also many of those laws and
constitutions, which his ancestors had made in Ecclesiastical causes: Yea,
there was nothing perteininge to the Church gouernmente, which he did not
provide for, order, and diricte by his laws and constitutions: wherein may
evidently appear the authority of Princes, not only over the persons, but
also in the causes Ecclesiastical. He made a common and general Novel.
constable. 3.
law to all the Patriarchs, touching the orderinge of Bishops, and all
other of the clergy, and Church The Emperors Ecclesiastical laws.
ministers: prescribinge the number of them to be such, as the revenues of the
Churches may well sustain: affirminge that the care over the Churches, and
other Religious houses, perteine to his oversight: And does further inhibite,
that the ministers do pass forth of one Church to an other, without the
license of the Emperor or the Bishop: the which ordinance he gave also to
those that were in Monasteries. He gives authority to the Patriarche or
Bishop, to refuse and reiecte, although great suite by men of much
authority be made. He prescribes in what sort, and to what end the church
goods should be bestowed, and threatens the appointed pains to the Bishop
and the other ministers, if they transgress this his constitution.

He prescribes in what sort, the Bishop shall dedicate a Monastery: he gives
rules and fourmes of examination, Constable. 5.
and trial of those that shall be admitted into a Monastery, before they be
professed: in what sort and order they shall live together: He prescribes an
order and rule, whereby to choose and ordeyne the Abbot: He requires in a
Monastical person, diuinorum eloquiorum eruditionem, and conuersationis
integritatem: Learning in Gods word, and integrity of life. And last of all,
he charge the Archebishoppes, Bishops, and other Church ministers, with the
publishing and observing of this his constitution: Yea his Temporal officers
and Judges also, threatening to them both, that if they do not see this his
Law executed and take the effect, they shall not escape condign punishment.

He protests, that Emperors ought not to be careful Constable. 6.
for nothing so much, as to have the mynistery faithful toward God, and of
honest behavior toward the world, which he says, will easily be brought
to pass, if the holy rules which the Apostles gave, and the holy fathers
kept, and made plain, be observed and put in ure. Therefore, says he, we
following in all things the sacred rules (meaning of the Apostles) do ordeine
and decree. etc. and so makes a constitution and Law, touching the qualities
and condition, that one to be chosen and ordered a Bishop, ought to have, and
prescribes a form of trial and examinacion of the party, before be be
ordered:: adding that if any be ordered a Bishop, not qualified according to
this constitution, both he that orders, and he that is ordered, shall lose
their Bishoprikes. He adds furthermore, that if he come to his bishoprike by
gifts or rewards, or if he be absent from his Bishoprike above a time
limited, without the commandment of the Emperor, that he shall incur the
same penalties. The like orders and rules he prescribes in the same
constitucion for Deacons, Diaconisses, Subdeacons, and Readers: commanding ye
Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops to promulgate this co^stitution, and to
see it observed under a pain.

He affirms that this has been an ancient Law, and does by his authority,
renew and confirm the same: that no man have private chapels in their houses,
wherein Constable. 57.
to celebrate the divine mysteries: whereunto he adds this warning to Mennas
the Archbishop, that if he knew any such to be, and do not forbid and
refourme that abuse, but suffer this constitution of the Emperor to be
neglected add broken, he him self shall forfait to the Emperor fifty pounds
of gold.

Also that the mynisters keep continual residence on their benefices:
otherwise the Bishop to place others in their rowmes, and they never to be
restored. Constable. 58.


When this Emperor understood, by the co^plaintes that were brought unto him
against the Clergy, Monks and certain Bishops, that their lives were not
framed according to the holy Canons, and that many of them were so ignorant,
that they knew not the prayer of the holy oblation and sacred Baptism:
Perceiving further, that the occasion hereof was partly, by reason that the
Synodes were not kept according to the order appointed, partly for that the
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and the residue of the Clergy, were ordered,
both without due examination of the right faith, and also without testimony of
honest conversation: Protesting that as he is mindful to see the civil Laws
firmly kept, even so he ought (of duty) to be more careful about the
observation of the Sacred rules and divine Laws, and in no wise to suffer them
to be violated and broken. He renueth the constitutions for the Clergy,
touching Church causes, saying: Following therefore those things, that are
defined in the sacred Canons, we make a pragmaticall or most full and
effectual Law, whereby we ordeine that so often as it shall be neadfull, to
make a Bishop. etc. And so goes forward in prescribing the form of his
election, examination, and approbatio^. And shuts up ye Law about the
ordering of a Bishop with this clause: If any shall be ordered a Bishop against
this former appointed order, both he that is ordered and he also that has
praesumed to order against this form, shall be deposed. He decrees also by
Prouiso, what order shall be kept, if it chance that there be any occasion or
matter laid to the charge of him that is to be ordered, either Bishop,
Priest, Deacon, Clergy man, or else Abbot of any Monastery. But about all
things says he, we enact this to be observed, that no man be ordered Bishop
by gifts or rewards: for both the geuer, taker, and the broker, if he be a
Church man, shall be deprived of his benefice, or clericall dignity, and if he
be a Lay man, that either takes reward, or is a woorker in the matter between
the parties, we command that he pay double to be given to the Church. He
gives license nevertheless, that where there has been somethyng given, by him
that is ordered Bishop, of custom, or for enstallation, that they may take
it: so that it exceed not the sum prescribed by him in this Law. We
command therefore that the holy Archebishoppes, namely of the elder Rome, of
Constantinople, Alexandria, Theopolis, and Jerusalem, if they have a custom
to give the Bishops and Clerks, at their orderinge under twenty pounds in
gold: they give only so mutche as the custom allows: But if there were
more given before this Law, we command that there be no more given then
twenty pounds. And so he sets a rate to al other Ecclesiastical persons in
their degrees, and according to ye ability of their Churches, concluding
thus: Surely if any presume by any means to take more than we have appointed,
either in name of customs, or enstallations, we command that he restore
threefolde so much to his Church, of whom he took it. He does utterly
forbid Bishops and Monks, to take upon them gardianship: nevertheless, he
licenceth Priests, Deaco^s, and Subdeaco^s, to take the same on them in
certain cases. He commands two Synodes to be kept in every Province
yearly. He prescribes what, and in what order, matters shall be examined, and
discussed in them. Besides these, he enioyneth, and does command all
Bishops, and Priests, to celebrate the prayers in the ministration of the
Lords supper, and in baptism, not after a whispering or whyst manner, but with
a clear voice, as thereby the minds of the hearers, may be sturred up with
more devotion in praising the Lord God. He proves by the testimony of S.
Paul, that it ought so to be. He concludes, that if the Religious Bishops,
neglecte any of these things, they shall not escape punishment by his order.
And for the better observing of this constitution, he commands the rulers of
the provinces under him, if they see these things neglected, to urge the
Bishops, to call Synods, and to accomplish all things, which he has
commanded by this Law to be done by Synodes. But if the Rulers see
notwithstanding, that the Bishops be slothful and slake to do these
things, then to signify thereof to him self, that he may correct their
negligence: for otherwise he will extreemely punish the Rulers them selves.
Besides these, says this Emperor, we forbid and enjoin the Religious
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, and every other Clergy man,
of what degree or order so ever he be, that they play not at the table plays
(as cards, dyce, and such like plays, used upon a table) nor to associate or
gase upon the players at such plays, nor to be gasers at any other open
sightes: if any offend against this decree, we command that he be
prohibited from all sacred mynistery for the space of three years, and to be
thrust into a monastery. After these constitucions made for the government of
the secular clergy (as you term it) in causes Ecclesiastical, the Emperor
descends to make statutes, ordinances and rules for monastical persons
(commonly called Religious) declaringe, that there is no manner of thing,
which is not thoroughly to Constable. 133.
be searched by the authority of the Emperor, who has, (says he) received
The Prince has supreme government over al persons in all manner causes.
from God the common government and principality over all men. And to show
further that this principality is over the persons, so well in
Ecclesiastical causes as Temporal, he prescribes orders and rules for them,
and commits to the Abbottes and Bisshoppes (jurisdiction) to see these rules
kept, concludinge that so well the Magistrates, as Ecclesiastical persons,
ought to keep incorrupted all things which concern godliness: but above all
other the Emperor, who ought to neglect no manner of thing pertaininge to
godliness. I omit many other Laws and constitutions, that not only this
Emperor, but also the Emperors before him made, touching matters and causes
Ecclesiastical, and do remitte you unto the Code, and the Authentiques, where
you may see that all manner of causes Ecclesiastical, were ouerseene, ordered
and directed by the authority of the Emperors, and so they did the duetifull
service of Kings to Christ, In that (as S. Augustine says) they made laws
for Christ. August. Epist. 48.


Arriamirus King of Spain, commanded two councelles to be celebrated in a
City called Brachara, the one Bracha. 1. 2.
in the second year of his reign, the other the third year, wherein were
certain rules made or rather renewed touching matters of faith, touching
constitucions of the Church, and for the duties and diligence of the Clergy
in their offices.

Wambanus King of Spain, seeing the great disorders in the Church, not
only in the discipline, but also in the matters of Faith, and about the
administration of the Sacraments, calls a Synod at Brachara, Brach. 3.
named Council. Brachar. 3. for the reformacion of the errors and disorders
about the Sacraments and Church discipline.

About this time after the death of Pelagius 2. the Clergy and the people
elected Gregory the first, called afterward the great. But the custom was
(says Sabellicus) which is declared in an other place, that the Emperors
should ratify by their consent, the election of him that is chosen Pope. And
to stay the Emperors approbation (says Platina) he sent his messengers with
his letters, to beseech the Emperor Mauritius, that he would not suffer the
election of the people and clergy to take effect, in the choice of him. etc.
So much did this good man (says Sabellicus) seekinge after heavenly things,
contemn earthly and refused that honor, for the which other did contend so
ambiciously. But the Emperor being desirous to plant so good a man in that
place, would not condescende to his request but sent his Ambassadors, to
ratify and confirm the election.

Richaredus King of Spain, rightly taught and instructed in the Christian
faith, by the godly and Catholic Bishop Leander Bishop of Hispalis, did
not only bring to pass, that the whole nation, should forsake the Arianisme
and receive the true faith, but also did carefully study how to continue his
people in the true Religion by his means newely received. And therefore
commanded all the Bishops within his Dominions to assemble together at
Toletum, in the fourth year of his reign, and there to Tol. 3.
consulte about stayinge and confirminge of his people in true faith and
Religion of Christ by godly discipline. When the Bishops were assembled in
the convocation house, at the kings commandment: the king comes in amongst
them, he makes a short, but a pithy and most Christian oration unto the whole
Synod: Wherein he shows, that the cause wherefore, he called them together
into the Synod was, To repair and make a new form of Church discipline,
by common consultation in Synod, which had been let long time before by
the Heretical Arianisme, the which stay and let of the Arians haeresies, it
has pleased God (says he) to remove and put away by my means. He wills
them to be joyful and glad, that the ancient manner to make Ecclesiastical
constitutions for the well ordering of the Church, is now thorough Gods
providence reduced and brought again to the bounds of the Fathers by his
honorable industry. And last of all he does admonish and exhort them, before
they begin their consultation, to fast and pray unto the Almighty, that he
will vouchesaulfe to open and show unto them a true order of discipline,
which that age knew not, the senses of the Clergy were so much benu^med,
with long forgetfulness. Whereupon there was a three days fast appointed.
That done the Synod assembleth, the king comes in, and sits amongst
them: he delivers in writing to be openly read amongst them the
confession of his Faith, in which he protests, with what endeavor and care,
being their king, he ought not only to study for him self, to be rightly
given to serve and please God with a right Faith in true Religion, but also to
provide for his subjects, that they be thoroughly instructed The duetifull
care of a Prince about Religion.
in the Christian Faith. He affirms and thereto takes them to witness, that
the Lord has styrred him up, enflamed with the heat of Faith: both to
remove and put away the furious and obstinate Heresies and Schisms, and also
by his vigilaunt endeavor and care to call and bring home again the people
unto the confession of the true faith, and the communion of the Catholic
Church. Further alludinge to the place of S. Paul, where he says, that
thorough his mynistery in the Gospel, he offreth up the Gentiles unto God, to
be an acceptable Sacrifice: he says to the Bishops, That he offreth by
their mynisterie, this noble people, as an holy and acceptable Sacrifice to
God. And last of all with the rehersall of his faith, he declares unto the
Bishops, That as it has pleased God by his care and industry to win this
people to the faith, and unite them to the Catholic Church: so he chardgeth
them, now to see them staide and confirmed by their diligent teachinge, and
instructinge them in the truth. After this confession was read, and that he
him self, and also his Queen Badda, had confirmed and testified the same with
their hands subscripcion: the whole Synod gave thanks to God with many and
sundry acclamacions, saying: That the Catholic King Richaredus is to be
crowned of God with an everlasting crown, for he is the gatherer together of
new people into the Church. This King truly ought to have the Apostolic
reward, who has performed the Apostolic office. This done, after the Noble
men and Bishops of Spain, whom the worthy King had converted, and
brought to the unity of Faith, in the Communion of Christ's Church, had also
given their confession openly, and testified the same with subscription: the
King willinge the Synod to go in hand to repair and establishe some
Ecclesiastical discipline, says to the Synod, alludinge to S. Paul's saying
to the Ephesians, to this effect: That the care of a king ought to stretch
forth it self, and not to cease till he have brought the subjects to a full
knowledge and perfect age in Christ: and as a king ought to bend all his
power and authority to repress the insolence of the evil, and to nouris he
the common peace and tranquillity: A princes special care for his subjects.
Even so ought he much more to study, labor and be careful, not only to
bring his subjects from errors and false Religion, but also to see them
instructed, taught, and trained up, in the truth of the clear light. And for
this purpose he does there decree of his own authority, commanding the
Bishops to see it observed, that at every Communion time, before the receipt
of the same, all the people with a loud voice together, do recite distinctly
the Symbol, or Creed, set forth by the Nicen council. When the Synod had
consulted about the discipline, and had agreed upon such rules and orders, as
was thought most mete for that time and Church, and the king had considered
of them, he does by his assent and authority, confirm and ratify the same,
and first subscribeth to them, and then after him all the Synod. This zealous
care and careful study of this, and the other above named princes, providing,
ruling, governing, and by their princely power and authouritie, directing their
whole Clergy, in causes or matters Ecclesiastical, was never disallowed, or
misliked, of the ancient fathers, nor of the Bishops of Rome, till now in
the latter days, the insaciable ambicion of the Clergy, and the ouermuche
negligence and wantones of the Princes, with the gross ignorance of ye whole
Laity, gave your holy father, the child of perdicion, the full sway, to make
perfect the mystery of iniquity: Yea, it Li. Epist. 7. Epist. 126.
may appear by an Epistle that Gregorius surnamed great, the Pope at that time
commended the Princes government in causes Ecclesiast
Bishop of Rome, writes unto this worthy king Richaredus, that the Bishop of
Rome did much commend this careful government of Princes in causes of
Religion. For he most highly commends the doings of this most Christian
king. He affirms that he is ashamed of him self, and of his own slacknes,
when he does consider the trauaill of kings in gathering of souls to the
celestial again. Yea, what shall I (says this Bishop of Rome to The prince
calls councils and governs Ecclesiastical causes with out any doing of
the Pope therein
the king) answer, at the dreadful doom, when your excellency shall lead
after your self flocks of faithful ones, which you have brought into the
true faith, by careful and continual preaching. etc. Although I have meddled
and done nothing at all with you, doing this altogether without me, yet am I
partaker of the joy thereof with you. Neither does Gregory blame this king as
one medlyng in Church causes, wherein he is not Ruler: but he prayseth God for
him, that he makes godly constitutions against the unfaithfulness of
miscreantes: and for no worldly respect will be persuaded to se the^ violated.

Next after Sabinianus, an obscure Pope, enemy and successor to this Gregory,
succeeded Bonifacius. 3. Who although he durst not in plain dealing deny, or
take from the Emperors, the authority and jurisdiction in the Popes election,
and other Church matters: yet he was the first that opened the gappe
thereunto: for as Sabell testifies, Sabell. Plat. Paul. Diac. Volater.
Naucler. Martinus.
with whom agree all other writers, for the most part: This Bonifacius
immediately upon the entrance into his Papacy, dealte with Phocas, to win
that the Church of Rome, might be head of al other Churches, the which he
hardely obtained, because the Grecians did challenge that prerogative for
Constantinople. After he had obtained this glorious and ambicious title, of the
bloody tyrant Phocas, and that with no small bribes: like unto one that having a
beam in his own eye, went about to pull the mote out of his brothers, he made
a decree, that every one should be accursed, that prepared to himself a way
into the Papacy, or any other Ecclesiastical dignity, with friendship or
bribery. Also that the Bishops in every city, should be chosen by the people
and Clergy: and that the election should be good, so that the Prince of the
City did approve the party by them chosen, and the Pope adding his authority
thereto, had ones said, volumus and iubemus: we will and command. But says
Sabell. both these decrees are abolished.

Now began this matter to brue by little and little, first he obtained to be the
chief over all the Bishops, then to cover vice with virtue, and to hide his
ambicion, he condemned all ambicion in laboring Spiritual promocion, and in
the election of Bishops, where the confirmation before was in the Emperors:
because the Emperor gave him an Inche, he took an elle, because he had given
him a foot, he would thrust in the whole body, and turn the right owner out.
For leuing out ye Emperor, he puts in the Princes of the Cities, from whom
he might as easily afterward take away, as for a show he gave falsely that
unto them, that was none of his to give: granting unto them the allowance of
the election: but to him self ye authority of ratifiyng, or infringing the
same, choose them whether they would allow it or no. And to show what
authority he would reserve to him self, borowing of the tyrant, speaking in
the singular no^bre. Sic volo, sic iubeo, So will I, so do I command: for the
more magnificence in the plural nombre, he princely lappeth up all the matter
with volumus and iubemus, we will and command: Which words, like the Law of
the Medes and Persians, yt may not be revoked, if they once pass through the
Popes holy lips, must needs stand, allow or not allow, who so list, with
full authority the matter is quite dashed. But thanks be to God for all this
(the decree is abolished) follows immediately. For shortly after, Isacius ye
Emperors Lieutenant Sabel.
in Italy, did confirm and ratify the election of Seuerinus the first of that
name, for says Platina. The election of the Pope made by the Clergy and
people in those days, was but a vain thing, onles the Emperor, or his
Lieutenant had confirmed the same*

Sisenandus the king of Spain, calls forth of al parts Tol. 4.
of his dominions the Bishops to a City in Spain, called Toletum. The purpose
and manner of the kings doings in that council, the Bishops them selves set
forth, first as they affirm: They assemble together by the praeceptes and
commandment of the king, to consult of certain orders of discipline for the
Church, to refourme the abuses that were crept in about the sacraments and
the manners of the Clergy. The king with his nobles, comes into the council
house: He exhorts them to careful diligence, that thereby all errors and
abuses, may be wypt away clear out of the Churches in Spayn. They follow the
kings direction, and agree upon many wholesome rules. When they have concluded,
they beseech the king to continue his regiment, to govern his people with
justice and godliness. And when the king had given his assent to the rules of
discipline, which they had agreed upon, they subscribed the same with their
own hands.

The like Synod Chintillanus king of Spain, did conuocate Tol. 5.
at Toletum, for certain ceremonies, orders, and discipline, which was
confirmed by his precept and decree, in the first year of his reign. And an
other also by the same Tol. 6.
king, and in the same place, and for the like purpose, was called and kept the
second year of his reign.

Chindasuindus king of Spain, no less careful for Church matters and
Religion, than his predecessors, appoints Tol. 7.
his Bishops to assemble at Toletum in convocation, and there to consult for
the stablishing of the faith, and Church discipline, which they did.

Reccessiunthus king of Spain, commanded his Bishops to assemble at Toletum,
in the first year of his reign, and there appointed a Synod, wherein besides
the Bishops and Abbottes, there sat a great company of the noble men of
Spain. The king him self came in amongst them, he makes a grave and very
godly exhortation unto Tol. 8.
the whole Synod, he professed how careful he is, that his subjects should
be rightly instructed in the true faith, and Religion. He propounds the
form of an Oath which the clergy and others of his subjects were wont to
receive, for the assurance of the Kings saulfty. He exhorts them to ordeine
sufficiently for the maintenance of godliness and justice. He moves his nobles
that they will assist and further the good and godly ordinances of the Synod.
He promises that he will by his princely authority, ratify and maineteine
what so ever they shall decree, to the furtherance of true Godliness, and
Religion. The Synod makes ordinances: the clergy, and nobility there
assembled subscribeth them: and the king confirms the same with his royal
assent and authority. He called two other Synodes in the same place for such
Tol. 9.
like purpose, in the seventh and eight years of his reign. Tol. 10.


Vitalianus being chosen Pope, sent his messengers with Synodicall letters
(according to the Custom, says Gratian) Did. 631. cap. 21.
to fignifie unto the Emperor of his election. In this Popes time (says the
Pontifical) came Constantinus the Emperor to Rome, whom this Pope with his
clergy, met six miles out of the City, and did humbly receive him. It is
wonderful to consider (although the Historians, being Papists for the most
part, cover the matter so much as may be) what practices the Popes used to
catch from the Emperors to them selves, the superiority in gouerninge of
Church matters: When they saw, that by stowte and brave presumption, their
ambitious appetites could not be satisfied, they turned over an other leaf,
and coueringe their ambitious meaning with a patched cloak of humility and
lowliness, they wan much of that, which with pride and presumption they had
so often before this time attempted in vain.

With this wily lowliness, Donus the next saving one to Vitalianus, brought
under his obedience the Archebyshop of Rauenna. There had been an old and
continual dissension betwixt the Archbishop of Rome, and the Archbishop of
Rauenna, for the superiority: The Rauennates accompting their sea equal in
dignity, and to owe none obedience to the sea of Rome, for they were not
subject thereunto: To finishe this matter, and to win the superiority,
Pontifical.
Donus first practiced with Reparatus the Archbishop of Rauenna, to give over
unto him the superiority, and become his obedientiary, and that (as it mays
appear by the sequel) without the consent of his Church. After the death of
Reparatus, which was within a while, Theodorus a familiar friend to Agatho
the Pope, and a stout man, (whom Agatho did honor with his Legacy unto the
syxth general council at Constantinople) because his Clergy would not wait
on him on Christmas day, so solempnely conductinge him unto the Church as the
manner had been, did give over the title, and made his sea subject to the Pope
for envy and despite of his Clergy, (says Sabellicus) wherewith the
Rauennates were not content, but being ouercomme by the authority of the
Emperor Constantine, who much favored Agatho, they bare it as patiently as
they might. And Leo the second, successor to Agatho, made an end hereof,
causing the Emperor Justinian to show great cruelty unto the whole City of
Rauenna, and to Foelix their Bishop, because they would have recovered their
old liberty. And so this Pope Leo by the commandment and power of the
Emperor Justinian, brought Rauenna under his obeisaunce, as the Pontifical
reports. These Popes through their feyned humility and obedience unto the
Emperors, which was but duty, wan both much favor and aid at the
Emperors hands, to achieue their purpose much desiered.

But Benedictus the second, who succeeded next to Leo the second, went in this
point beyond all his predecessors, for Constantine being moved with his
humanity, piety, and fauourablenes toward al men, when he sent to the
Emperor for his confirmation: the Emperor sent says Platina a decree, that
from henceforth, look whom the Clergy, the people, and the Romain army, should
chose to be Pope, all men, without delay, should believe him to be Christ's true
vicar, abiding for no confirmation by the Emperor, or his Lieutenant as it had
been wonted to be done. etc. For that was wont to be allowed in the Popes
creation, that was confirmed by the Prince him self, or his vicegerent in
Italy.

Here first of al it appears (if this story be true) how this interest of the
Prince in this Ecclesiastical matter thus continuing long time, although many
ways assailed, and many attemptes made by the Popes, to shake it of, was at
the length through their flattery (which their Parasites call humility)
given unto them of the Emperors, to whom it apperteined. But whether this
story be true or not, or if it were given, how it was given, or how long the
gifts took place, or how it was taken away and returned to the former right,
may well be called into question, for there is good tokens to show, that it
was not given in this sort. For these two Popes who sat in the Papal seat
but. 10. months a piece or there abouts, were in no such favor with
The Emperor, as was their predecessor Agatho, who made great suite unto the
Emperor for such like things, and obtained his suite, but with a special
Prouiso for the reservation of this authority, still to remain unto the
Emperors, as witnesses the Pontifical and Gratian. He received from the
Emperor letters (say they) according to his petition, whereby the sum of
money was releassed that was wont to be given (to the Emperor) for the Popes
Consecration: but so that if there happen after his death any election, the
Bishop elect be not consecrated before the election be signified to the
Emperor by the general decree (he means the Synodicall letters) according
to the ancient custom, that the orderinge of the Pope may go forward, by
the Emperors knowledge or consent and commandment. The Glossar upon Gratian
notes upon these words: which sum Did. 63.
was wont to be given: For every Bishop was wont to give something to the
Emperor at his election. But did not the Emperor commit Symonie in
releasinge this right under this condition, that his consent should be required
in the election? answer, no^ because both these belonged to him of right
before, wherefore he might now remitte the one.

But as I said, let it be true, that Constantine gave over this jurisdiction,
yet Volateranus adds to this suspected donacion, this clause, found true by
experience, which donation (says he) was not long after observed. And in
deed it was kept so small a while, that within one year after or little more,
when the electours after long altercation, had agreed on Conon: Theodorus the
Emperors Lieutenaunt (as says Sabellicus) gave his assent: and Platina
shows the same, although not so plainly. So that by this also it appears,
that if still it apperteined to the Emperors Lieutenaunt, to give his assent
to the Popes election, that than this gift is either fained of the Papists
(and that the rather under the name of Constantinus, to bleare therewith the
ignorauntes eyes, as though it were the grant of Constantine the great, as
they do about Images with the name of the Nicene Council) or bylike the gift
was not so authentically ratified, as it was unadvisedly promised: but how so
ever it was, it held not long: the Pope him self solempnely with the consent
and decree of and whole Council, resigning all the foresaid grant unto the
Emperor for evermore. But I return again to Agatho, who (as I said) being
in great favor with Constantine the Emperor, Determined (says Platina) to
have a council to decide the error of the Monothelites. But because he could
not him self by his own authority, call a general council, for that
belonged to the Emperor, who in that time was busy in the wars against the
Saracens: He waited (says Platina) for the return of the Emperor.

This Constantinus surnamed Pogonatus, about the year of the Lord. 680.
calls the Bishops out of all coasts unto a general Council: in his
letters of Sommons to Donus, (but committed to Agatho Bishop of Rome, Donus
being dead) he admonishes him of the conte^tion betwixt Constable. 6.
the sea of Rome and Constantinople, he exhorts him to lay aside all strife,
feruencie, and malice, and to agree in the truth with other, addinge this
reason: For God loves the truth, and as Chrysostom says: He that will be the
chiefest amongst all, he must be mynister unto all, (by which reason made by
the Emperor, it may seem, that the pride of those two seats, striuinge for
superiority and supremacy, was a great nourishment of the Schism, which was
chiefly in outward show only for doctrine.) He protests that he will show
him self indifferent, without parcialitie to any part or faction, only
seeking, as God has appointed him, to keep the Faith that he had received
wholly and without blotte. He exhorts and commands the Bishop of Rome,
not to be an hinderaunce, but The Bishop of Rome. at the Emperors
commandment in Eccl. matters.
to further this Council with sendinge such as are fit for such purpose.
The Bishop of Rome obeys the Emperors commandment. And the like letters
the Emperor sends to George Bishop of Constantinople, and others. The
Emperor sat in the council him self, as President and moderatour of all that
action: having Act. 1.
on his right hand a great company of his Nobles, and of his Bishops on
his left hand. And when the holy Ghospelles was brought forth, and laid
before them, as the judges, whose sentence they ought to follow, as it was
also wont to be done in the forenamed Councelles: The deputies for the
Bishop of Rome stands up, and speaks unto the Emperor in most humble
wise, calling him most benign Lord, affirminge, the Apostolic seat of
Rome to be subject unto him, as the servant unto the Master: and beseechinge
him, that he will command those that took part with the Bishop of
Constantinople, which had in times paste brought in new kinds of speech:
and erroneous opinions, to show from whence they received, their new devised
Heresies. The Emperor commands Macarius Archebishoppe of Antioche, and his
side to answer for them selves. And after diverse requests made by him to
the Emperor, and granted by the Emperor unto him, the Emperor commands
the Synod to stay for that time. In the next session after the self same
order observed, as in the first, Paulus the Emperors Secretary Act. 2.
began to put the Council in remembrance of the former days proceedinge.
The Emperor commands the Acts of the Chalcedon Council to be brought
forth and read. At length when a manifest place was alleged out of Leo the
Pope, the Emperor him self disputed with Macarius on the understanding
thereof. The Secretary having offered the books of Act. 3.
the fifte Council, the Emperor commands the Notary to read them. The
Notary began to read, and within a while the Popes Legates risinge up, cried
out this Book of the fifte Synod is falsified, and there alleged a reason
thereof: wherewith the Emperor and the judges being moved, began to look
more narrowly to the book, and espyinge at the last, that three quaternions
was thruste into the beginning, the Emperor commanded it should not be
read. Note here, that the Popes Legates were but the plaintiff parties in this
Council, and not the Judges thereof, the which more plainly follows:
either parties striuynge upon a like corrupt place. The Emperor commanded
the Synod and the Judges (which were Lay men) to peruse the Synodicall
books, and to determine the matter, which they did. George the Archbishop of
Constantinople most humbly beseeches the Emperor that he will cause the
letters which Agatho the Pope, and his Synodo sent unto the Emperor to be
read ones again: the Emperor grants his request.

In the next session the order and form observed as Act. 4.
in the first, the Emperor commanded first of all Pope Agatho his letters
to be read: in the which letters is manifestly confessed by the Pope him
self: so well the Emperors supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, as
the Popes obedience and subjection unto him in the same. For in the beginning,
he declares what pleasure and comfort he conceived of this, that the Emperor
sought so carefully, that the sincere Faith of Christ should prevail in all
Churches: that he used such mildenes and clemency, therein followynge the
example of Christ, in admonishynge him and his to give an account of their
Faith, which they preached: that being emboldened with these comfortable
letters of the Emperor, he performed his ready obedience in accomplishinge
the Emperors praeceptes effectually. That he made inquisicion for satisfiynge
of his obedience (to the Emperor) for apt men to be sent to the council: the
which thing, says the Pope to the Emperor, the studious obedience of our
service, would have performed sooner, had it not been let, by the great
circuit of the Province, and long distances of place. He protests that he
sends his Legates according to yt Emperors commandment, not of any
sinister meaning, but for the obedience sake (to the Emperor) which (says
he) we owe of duty. He makes a confession of his faith, concerning the
controversy, adding the testimonies of many ancient fathers. And he does
proteste, that he with his Synod of the Western Bishops, believes that God
reserved the Emperor to this time for this purpose. That he (the Emperor)
occupiynge the place and zeal of our Lord Jesus Christ, him self here in
earth, should The prince is Christ's Vic^r in earth, in causes Ecclesiastical
by the Popes confession. Act. 5.
give just judgment or sentence, on the behalf of the Evangelical and
Apostolical truth.

In the next session, the Emperor sits as President, and Moderatour,
accompanied with many of his nobles, sitting about him. On his right hand sat
Georgius the Archbishop of Constantinople, called new Rome, and those ye were
with him: on the other side, upon the Emperors left hand, sat the Legates
of the Archbishop Agatho of old Rome, these two as agent parties. When they
were thus set, the Emperors Secretary brought forth the Ghospelles, puts
the Emperor in mind, what was done the session before, and desires his
majesty to cause Macarius and his party, to bring out likewise their
testimonies, as the Legates from Agatho of old Rome had done, for their party.
The Emperor commands, Macarius obeith, and desires that his books may be
read: the Emperor commands they should so be.

After the showing of the allegations on both sides, the Legates of old Rome,
desire the Emperor that they Act. 7.
may know, if the adversaries agree on the tenor of their two forsayde
suggestions. The adversaries beseech the Emperor, that they might have the
copies of them: the Emperor commands, that without delay their request
should be fulfilled. The books were brought forth and sealed with the seals
of the Judges, and either of the parties. This again proves that the Popes
Legates were none of the Judges, but one of the parties. And so in the eight,
nynth, and tenth action, the same order of doing is observed in like sort, as
before, in such wise that no one in the Synod, neither the whole Synod, does
any thing without license, and the direction of the Emperor, the president and
chief ruler in all those causes.

In the end of the eleventh Action. The Emperor Act. 11.
assigns certain of his noble counsailours, to be the directours in the
Synod, for that he was to be occupied in other weighty affairs of the common
weal. Hitherto we see how the Emperor in his own person with his lay
Princes also, was the supreme governor, was the President, ouersear,
commander, ratifier, and directour, of all things done in the council. The
Popes Legates and all the whole counsel, humbly yelding al these things unto
him alone. The residue of the acts, or any thing therein done, was likewise
his deed, by his deputies, although he him self in person, was not present.
The Act. 12.
Bishops and Clergy, which were of the Province of Antioche, when Macarius was
deposed by the judgment of the Synod, do make supplication unto the Judges,
the Emperors deputies and counsailours, that they will be means unto the
Emperor to appoint them an other Archbishop in the place of Macarius now
deposed.

The Judges make them answer, that it was the Emperors pleasure, that they
should determine amongst Act. 13.
them selves, whom they would have, and bring their decree unto the Emperor.
At the last the whole Synod do offer their diffinition subscribed with their
hands to the Emperor, besechinge him to examen and confirm the same. The
Emperor within a while says: we have read this definition, and give our
consent thereunto. The Emperor asked of the whole Synod, if this definition be
concluded by vnifourme consent of all the Bishops, the Synod answered: We all
believe so, we be al of this mind, God send the Emperor many years: Thou
have made all heretics to fly, by thy means all Churches are in peace,
accursed be all Heretics. In the which curse, the whole Synod curses
Honorius Pope of Rome with the great curse, whom the Synod names in. 17.
action, one of the chiefest of these Heretics, who ar herecursed. The
Emperor protests that his zeal to conserve the christian faith undefiled,
was the only cause of calling this Synod. He she weth what was their parts
therein, to wit, to weighe consideratly Gods holy Scriptures, to put a way all
novelty of speech or ^ssertion, added to the Wherein consists the office of
bishops.
pure Christian faith, in these latter days by some of wicked opinion, and to
deliver unto the Church this faith most pure and clean. They make a
commendatory oration unto the Emperor with much ioyfulnes declaring, that
this his fact about this Synod in procuring to his subjects true Godliness,
and to all the Church a The princes most acceptable service to god.
quiet state, was the most comely thing, the most acceptable service, the most
liberal oblation or sacrifice, that any Emperor might or could make unto
God. And declaring the humble obedience to his precept or sommons of the
Bishop of Rome, who sent his Legates, being sick him self, and of them
selves being present in their own persons, they do most humbly beseech him
to set his seal unto their doings, to ratify the same with the Imperial
wryt, and to make edictes and constitutions wherewith to confirm the acts of
this council, that all controversy in time to come, may be utterly taken
away. All which the Emperor granted unto them, addinge his curse, as they
had do^n before, so well against all the other Heretics, as also against
Honorius late Pope of Rome, a companion, fautour, and confirmer, (says he) of
the others heresies in all points. After this, the Emperor directs his
letters to the Synod at Rome of the Western Bishops, wherein he commends
their diligence about the confuting of the heresies. He describes the
miserable estate the Church was in, by means of the Heresies: for, says he,
the inuentours of Heresies are made the chief Bishops, they preached unto
the people contention in stead of peace, they sowed in the Church forrowes,
cockle for wheat, and all Church matters were troubled, and clean out of
order. And because these things were thus disordered, and impiety consumed
Godliness, we set forward thither, whereunto, it becommed us to direct our
goinge (meaning to seek by all means the redress of these disorders in
Church matters) we labor with earnestnes for the pure faith, we attend
upon Godliness, and we have our special care about the Ecclesiastical
state. In consyderation whereof, we called the Bishops out of far
distaunte places to this Synod, to set a Godly peace and quietness in the
Church matters. etc. To this epistle of the Emperor, Leo the second Bishop
of Rome, makes answer (for Agatho was dead) by letters, whereof this is the
effect. I give thanks unto the king of kings, who has bestowed on you an
earthly kingdom, in such wise, that he has given you therewith a mind to
seek much more after heavenly things. Your piety is the fruit of mercy, but
your authority is the keeper of discipline: by that the Princes mind is joined
to God: But by this the subjects receive reformation of disorders. Kings
ought to have so much care to refourme and correct naughtynes amongst their
subjects, as to tryumphe over their enemies: for in so dooinge they make their
authority subject to serve him, by whose gift and protection they reign.
Wherefore saying that the holy mother the Church, which is the Body of
Christ, enjoys by means of you her sincere and principal child, an
invincible soundnes. Therefore it is written of you, most merciful Prince, and
of that same holy Church dispersed thorough out all the world, Kings shall be
thy noursinge fathers, and in like sort it is written, the Esa. 49. Psalm. 98.
honor of the King loves judgment: in that you set much more by heavenly
than by earthly things, and do prefer without comparison the right faith,
before all worldly cares: what other do you herein, than make right judgment
bond and serviceable to Gods honor and religion, and to offer unto his
divine Majesty, an oblation and burnt Sacrifice, of sweet savor upon the
altar of your heart? God inspire, increase and replenishe your princely heart,
with the light of the Catholic doctrine, whereby the clouds of the
haereticall prauitie, may be driven away. I received most joyfully the
Synodicall acts, with your letters of highest authority, by the legates your
humble servants, which were sent unto the Council, from my praedecessour
Agatho, at your commandment. Wherefore with thanks geuinge I cry unto the
Lord: O Lord save our most Christian King, and hear him in the day he
calls upon thee: By whose godly travail the Apostolic godly doctrine or
Religion, shines thorough the world, and the horrible darkness of heretical
malice is vanished away. For thorough your travail, God assistinge the same,
that mischief which the wicked craft of the Devil had brought in, is
overthrown: the benefit of the christian Faith, that Christ gave to the
salvation of man, has won the over hand. The holy and great general
Council, which of late has been congregate at Constantinople by your order
and praecept: wherein for the Service and Mynisterie sake that ye owe to God,
you had the chief rule and government, has in all points followed the
doctrine of the Apostles, and approved Fathers. I do detest therefore and
curse all Heretics, yea Honorius The Pope accursed for Heresy by the
sentence of the Emperor, the Synod, and the Bishop of Rome.
also late Bishop of this sea, who labored profanely to betray and subuerte
the immaculate faith. O holy Church, the mother of the faithful, arise, put
of thy mourninge weed, and clothe thy self with ioyefull apparaile, behold
thy Son the most constant Constantine, of all Princes thy defendour, thy
helper (be not afraid) has girded him self with the swoorde of Gods
word, wherewith he deuideth the miscreauntes from the Faithful: has armed
him self in the coat armor of Faith, and for his helmet the hope of
Salvation. This new David and Constantine, has vanquished the great Goliath
thy boastinge enemy, the very Prince and chieftaine of all mischief and
errors the Devil: and by his careful travail the right faith has recovered
her brightness, and shines thorough the whole world.

Bamba King of Spain commanded a Synod to be had at Toletum in the fourth
year of his reign: the occasion Tol. 11,
was this. There had been no Synod by the space of. 18. years before, as it
is said in the preface to this Council, by means whereof the word of God
was despised, the Church discipline neglected, all Godly order distourbed, and
the Church toste and tumbled, as a ship without a rower and stern,
(meaning a King to call them together in Synod). By the careful zeal of
this King, being called together, they consulte how to refourme errors about
Faith, corruption of discipline, and other disorders against godliness and
Religion. And at the end they do give great thanks unto the noble and
virtuous King, by whose ordinance and careful endeavor, they were commanded
to this consultacion: who as they affirm of him, coming as a new repayrer
of the Ecclesiastical discipline in these times, not only intended to restore
the orders of the Councelles before this time omitted, but also has decreed
and appoincted, yearly Synodes to be kepts hereafter.

Eringius king of Spain commands the Bishopps Tol. 12.
and other of his Clergy, to assemble together at Toletum in one Synod the
first year of his reign. And called an Tol. 13.
other to the same place, the fourth year of his reign: to consulte about
reformation of the Church discipline. When the Bishops, and the residue of
the Clergy were assembled in their convocation, at the commandment of the
king: he him self with many of his nobility and counsailours, comes in to
them: he declares the cause wherefore he summoned this Synod: he shows the
miseries the whole country has sustained, and the plagues: he declares the
cause, to be Gods wrath kindled by means of the contempt of Gods word
and commandment: And be exhorts them that they will with Godly zeal,
study to purge the land from prauitie, by preachinge, and exercise of godly
discipline, and that zealeouflye. He does exhort his nobles, that were there
present, that they also would care diligently for the furtherance hereof: he
delivers unto the Synod a book, conteininge the principal matter whereof
they should consulte. And last of all, he promises by his hand subscription,
that he will confirm and ratify what the clergy and nobility shall
conclude, touching these articles, for the furtherance of godliness and
Church Discipline.

Egita, King of Spain, caused in his time also three Councelles to be had
and celebrated at Toletum, for the preservation of Religion, with the Church
Discipline in sincerity and purity: who also confirmed and ratisied the same
with his Royal assent and authority.

Although about this time the Popes devised horrible practices, whereby to
win them selves from under the oversight and controlment of the Emperor or
any other and to have the only and supreme authority in them selves over al,
as they had already obtained to their church the Supreme title, to be head of
other Churches: Yeat the Emperoures had not altogether surrendered from them
selves to the Popes, their authority and jurisdictions in Church matters. For
when the Church was grievously vexed with the controversy about Images, there
were diverse great Synodes or Councelles called, for the deciding of that
troublesome matter by the Emperors: and at the last, that which is called
the seventh general or oecumenicall Conncell was called and summoned to be
holden at Nice in Bithynia, by Constantine and Irene the Emperesse his Mother,
who was the supreme worker and governor (although but an ignorant and very
superstitious woman, I will say no worse) in this matter. For her Son was but
about ten years old, as Zonoras affirms, and she had the whole rule,
although Zonoras Tom. 3.
he bare the name. After the death of Paul, the Emperor appoints Tarasius
the Secretary to be Patriarche at Constantinople, the people lyked well
thereof. But Tarasius the Emperors Secretary refused the office, and would
not take it upon him, till the Emperor had promised to call a general
Council, to quiet the brawles in the Church about Images. The Emperor
writes to the Patriarche of old Rome, and to the other Patriarchs, willinge
them to send their Legates, unto a Council to be holden at Nice in Bithynia.
The Bishops assemble at Nice by the commandment and decree of the Emperor,
as they confess in diverse places of this Council. When the Bishops were
set in Council, and many Lay persons of the nobility with them: and the
holy Ghospelles were brought forth, as the manner was (although the holy
Ghospelles were not made Judges in this council, as they ought to have been,
and were in all the forenamed general councels) Tarasius commends the
vigilant care and fervent zeal of the Emperors, about Church matters: for
ordering and pacifiyng whereof, they have called says he, this council. The
Emperor sends unto the Synod, certain counsailours with the Emperors
letters patentes, to this effect. Constantinus and Irene, to the Bishops
assembled in the second Nicene Synod, by Gods grace our favor and the
commandment of our Imperial outhoritie. He shows that it apperteineth to
the emperial office, io maintain the peace, concord, and unity, of the whole
Romayne Empire, but especially to preserve the estate of Gods holy Churches,
with all possible care and council. For this cause, he has with pain
gathered this council together: gives license also and liberty to every man
without al fear, to utter his mind and iudgemont frankely: to the end the
truth may the better appear. He shows the order he observed, in making
Tarasius Bishop: He prescribes unto the Bishops what is their office, and
what they should do: propoundinge unto them the holy Ghospelles, as the right
and only true rule they should follow. After this he mencioneth letters
brought from the Bishop of Rome by his Legates, the which he commands to be
openly read in the council: and so appoints also other things that they
should read. There was nothing attempted or done in this council, without the
authority of the Emperors, as in all the former general councels. And so at
the end, the whole council put up a supplication to the Emperor, for the
ratifiyng of all their doings. The which when the Emperor had heard openly
recited and read unto them, they forthwith allowed, signed and sealed.

Gregorius. 3. sent into France for succor to Charles Martell, yelding and
surrendering up unto him, that which the Pope had so long sought, by all
subtle and mischievous means, to spoil the Emperor and the Princes of. This
same Gregory the third (says Martinus Poenitentiarius,) When Rome was
besieged by the king of Lombardy, sent by Ship unto Charles Martell, Pipines
father, the keys of saint Peter's confession, beseching him to deliver the
Church of Rome from the Lombardes. By the keys of S. Peter's confession, he
means all the pre-eminence, dignity, and jurisdiction, that the Popes claim
to them selves (more and besides that, which all other Church ministers have)
over and above all manner persons Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, as given of
Christ only to S. Peter, for his confession, and so from him to the Popes of
Rome by lineal succession. Seeing that this Pope, who was passingly well
learned, both in divine and profane learning, and no less godly, stout, and
constant (if you will believe Platina) yeldeth and commits all this
jurisdiction, and claim that he has, over all persons Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, so well in things or causes Ecclesiastical as Temporal, unto
Charles Martel a Lay Prince, and great master of France: it appears that
Princes may Lawfully have the rule, government, and charge, in Church
matters. The heirs and successors of this Charles Martell, did keep these
keys from rusting. They exercised the same jurisdiction and government in
Ecclesiastical causes, yt the Emperors and kings had done, from the time of
Constantine the great, until their time, which was almost. 400. years. For
Carolomanus son to king Pepin, and nephew to Charles Martell, no less
Princelike than Christianly, exercised this his Supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical causes, and made notable reformation of the Ecclesiastical
state. He sommoned a council of his Clergy, both Bishops and Priests.
742. year from the incarnation Synod. Francica.
of Christ: wherein also he him self sat with many of his nobles and
counsailours. He shows the cause why he called this Synod. That they should
give advise (says he) how the Law of God and the Church religion (meaning
the order and discipline) may be restored again, which in the time of my
praedecessours, being broken in sonder, fell clean away. Also by what means
the Christian people may attain to the salvation of their souls, and peris he
not, being deceived by false priests. He declares what ordinances and
decrees were made by his authority in that Synod. We did ordeine Bisshoppes
through the Cities (says he) by the council of the Priests, and my nobles,
and did constitute Bonifacius to be the Archebissop over them. We have also
decreed a Synod to be called together every year, that the decrees of the
Canons, and the Laws of the Church, may be repaired in our presence, and the
Christian Religion amended. etc. That the money whereof the Churches have been
defrauded, be restored. We have degraded the false Priests, Deacons, and
Clerks, being Nauclerus.
adulterers, and fornicatours, and have driven them to penance. We have
utterly forbidden, all manner hunting and haukinge to the Clergy. We decree
also, that every priest dwelling in ye diocese, be subject unto his own
bishop, and that always in Lent, he make an account and show to the bishop the
manner and order of his ministry, touching baptism, the catholic faith,
prayers and the order of Masses. And wha^soeuer the Bishop shall go his circuit
to confirm the people, the priest shalve ready to receive him with a
collection and help of the people. That ye priest seek for new chrysme always
on Maundy thursday at the Bishops hand, that ye Bishop may be a witness of his
chaste life, of his faith and doctrine. We decree further, that no unknown
Bishop or Priest, be admitted into the church ministry, before he be allowed
by the Synod. He makes many such like, for the reformation of y^ Clergy, in
what sort they shall be punished, if they commit whordome, and likewise against
sorcery wytchcraft, diuinacions, incantations, and all kind of profane
superstitions. If there were no more examples of any church history, but this
of Caroloman, it would suffice to make plain that to the Princes authority
apperteineth, to make Laws, and to the Clergy to give him counsel out of
Gods word, how to frame the discipline, to the edifiyng of Gods Church.

About this time was one Bonifacius not Pope, but as they call him the great
Apostle of the Germans, the like for all the world to our Apostle here in
England, Augustinus Anglorum Apostolus: Either of them might be called, the
Popes Apostles, whose great champions they were. And even such Ecclesiastical
matters as our Apostle treats of, has this Apostle in his Epistles to the
Pope, as this. He asks his holiness when fat bakon should be eaten: The Pope
answers, when it is well smoke dried or resty, and then sodden. Likewise he
asks whether we shall eat Dawes, Crows, Hares, and wild Horses: The Pope
bids him to beware of them in any wise. Also he asks him how, if Horses
have the fallinge sickness, what we shall do to them: The Pope answers,
hurl them into a ditche. He asks what we shall do with Beasts bitten with
a mad dog, the Pope bids him keep them close, or hurl them into a
pit. He asks if one Nonne may was he an others feet, as men may: the Pope
answers, yea, on Gods name. Also he asks, how many Crosses, and where
aboutes in his body; a man should make them. These and a great many such
like, are the Popes and his Apostles, Ecclesiastical matters. But leauyng
these tryfles, note that in those Ecclesiastical matt^^s, which he did to any
purpose the lay Princes had the entermedling, as appears by the Pope
Zacharias Epistle to this Boniface. It is no marvel though this king
Charloman, as also Charles the great, and other noble Princes, after their time
established by their authority in Synodes many superstitions, and idolatrous
obseruances, as of Masses, Chrysmes, and such like abuses, being moved with
the zeal, that all Princes ought to have, But wanting the pure knowledge that
good and faithful Bishops should have instructed them withal: saying such
blind bussardes as this Boniface had the teachinge of them, who like blind
guydes, led them in the bottomless pit of all supersticions and false Religion.

Adrianus the first, Pope, being much vexed through his own furious pride,
by Desiderius king of Lombardy, sends to Carolus Magnus, and requires him
of his aid against the Lombardes, promysing to make him therefore Emperor of
Rome: Charles comes, vanquisheth Desiderius, and so passes into Rome, whom
the Pope received with great honor, giving to him in part of recompense, the
title of most Christian king, and further to augme^t his benevolence toward
Charles, desired him to send for his Bishops into France, to celebrate a
Synod at Rome: wherein were gathered together of Bishops, Abbottes, and other
Prelates, about. 154. In which council also Carolus him self was present as
says Martinus.

Gratianus makes report hereof out of the Church history on this wise.
Charles after he had vanquished Desiderius, Did. 63.
came to Rome, and appointed a Synod to be holden there with Adrian the Pope.
Adrian with the whole Synod, delivered unto Charles, the right and power to
elect the Pope, and to dispose the Apostolic sea. They granted also unto
him, the dignity of the ancient blood of Rome. whereby he was made a
Patrician, and so capable of ye emperial dignity. Furthermore he decreed that
the Archbisshops and Bishops in every province should receive their inuestiture
of him: so that none should be consecrate, unless he were commended and
inuestured Bishop of the King. Whoso ever would do contrary to this decree,
should be accursed, and except he repented, his goods also should be
confiscate. Platina adds, Charles, and the Pope, the Romans and the
French, swear the one to the other, to keep a perpetual amity, and that
those should be enemies to them both, that anoyed the one.

Not long after, Charles, perceiving the Churches to be much molested and
drawn into parts, with the Heresy of Foelix, calls a council of all the
Bishops under his dominions in Italy, France, and Germany, to consulte and
conclude a truth, and to bring the Churches to an unity therein, as he him
self affirms in his Epistle written to Elepandus Bishop of Tolet, and the
other Bishops of Spain: We have commanded (says Charles) a Synodall
council to be had of devout Fathers from all the Churches thoroughout our
signiouryes, to the end that with one accord it might be decreed, what is to
be believed touching the opinion we know that you have brought in with new
assertions, such as the holy Catholic Church in old time never herd of.
Sabellicus also makes mention of this Synod which was conuocated to
Frankeforth: ad Caroli aedictum: at the commandment of Charles.

Carolus Magnus, calls by his commandment the Bishops of France to a
Synod at Arelatum, appoints the Archebishops of Arelatum and Narbon. to be
chief there. They declare to the Synod assembled, that Carolus Magnus of
fervent zeal and love toward Christ, does vigilantly care to establishe
good orders in Gods Church: and therefore exhort them in his name, that
they diligently instruct the people with godly doctrine, and examples of life.
When this Synod had consulted and agreed of such matters as they thought fit
for that time, They decree that their dooinges should be presented unto Carolus
Magnus, beseching him, that where any defectes are in their decrees, that he
supply the same by his wisdom. If any thing be otherwise than well, that he
will amend it by his judgment. And that which is well, that he will ratify,
aid and assist by his authority.

By his commandment also was an other Synod celebrated at Cabellinum,
whereunto he called many Bishops and Abbottes: who as they confess in the
Preface, did consult and collect many matters, thought fit and necessary for
that time: the which they agreed nevertheless to present unto Charles to be
examined, and by his judgment to be allowed, and confirmed, amended or
disallowed. As this council refers al ye Ecclesiastical matters to ye
judgment, correction, disallowinge or confirminge, of the Prince: so amongst
other matters, this is to be noted, that it prohibiteth the covetousness, and
cauteles wherewith the Clergy enriched them selves, persuadinge the simple
people to give their lands, and goods to the Church for their souls health.
Can. 6.
The Fathers in this Synod complain, that the ancient Can. 25.
Church order of excommunicacion, doing penance, and reconciliation is quite
out of use: Therefore they agree to crave ye Princes order, after what sort, he
yt does commit a public offense, may be punished by public penance. This
council also enueigheth against, and conde^pneth gaddinge on pilgremage in
Church Mynisters, Lay men, Can. 45.
great men, and beggars: all which abuses (says the Synod) after what sort
they may be amended, the Princes mind must be known.

The same Charles calls an other council at Moguntia. In y^ beginning of
their preface to the council, they salute Charles: the most Christian
Emperor, the author of true Religion, and mainteinour of Gods holy Church,
etc. Showing unto him yt they his most humble servants are come thither,
according to his commandment: that they give God thanks: Quia sanctae
Ecclesia suae piu^ ac deuotum in seruitio suo concessit habere rectore^.
Because he has given The Prince is the governor of the Church appointed of
God in Ecclesiastical causes.
unto his holy Church a governor godly, and devout in his service: who in
his times openinge the fountain of godly wisdom, does continually feed
Christ's sheep, with holy food, and instructs the^ with divine knowledge,
far passinge thorough his holy wisdom in most devout endeavor the other
kings of the earth. etc. And after they have appointed in what order, they
divide ye states in the council: the Bishops and secular Priests by them
selves, ye Abbottes and religious by them selves, and the Lay nobility, and
Justices by them selves, assigninge due honor to every person: it follows
in their petition to ye Prince, They desire his assistaunce, aid and
confirmation, of such Articles as they have agreed upon, so that he judge
them worthy: beseching him, to cause that to be amended which is found
worthy of amendment. In like sort did the Synod congregated at Rhemes by
Charles, more priscoru^ Imperatoru^, as the ancient Emperors were wont to
do, and diverse other, which he in his time called. I would have you to note,
besides ye authority of this noble Prince Charles ye great in these Church
matters (which was none other, but the self same, ye other Princes from
Constantine the great had and used) that the holy council of Moguntia does
acknowledge and confess, in plain speech, him to be the ruler of the Church
(in these Ecclesiastical causes) and further that in all these councelles,
next to the confession of their faith to God, without making any mention of
the Pope, they pray, and command prayer to be made for the Prince.

Pope Leo. 3. as the French Chronicles, and Nauclerus witnesses, sent forth
with after he was made Pope Peter's keys, the Banner of the City, and many
other gifts unto Charles: requiring him, yt he would cause ye people of Rome to
become subject unto the Pope, and that by Oath. Charles mindinge to gratify
and pleasure Pope Leo (there was a cause wherefore) sent an Abbot on this
business, and assured the people of Rome to the Pope by oath. This Leo (his
straight dealinges with the Romans was so hateful unto them) was brought
shortly into much daungier of his life, but far more of his honesty.
Certain of Rome came to Charles to accuse this Pope: Charles puts of Sabell.
the examinacion of the matter till an other time, promisinge that he would
within a while come to Rome himself: which he did, after he had finished his
wars. He was honorably received of the Pope. The eight day after his cominge
into Rome, he commanded all the people, Sabell.
and the Clergy to be called together into S. Peter's church: appointing to
here and examine the Pope, touching that he was accused of, in the open
assembly. When the Clergy and the people, were assembled, the King examineth
them of the Popes life and conversation: and Platina.
the whole company being willed to say their minds: answer, that the
manner has been, that the Popes Sabell.
should be judged of no man, but of them selves. Charles being moved with so
sore and grievous an answer, gave over further examinacion. Leo the Pope
(says Piatina) who did earnestly desire that kind of judgment (to give
sentence he means in his own cause) went up into the pulpit, and holdinge
the Ghospels in his hands, affirmed by his Oath, yt he was guiltes of all
those matters wherewith he was chardged. Whereunto Sabellicus adds, the Popes
own testimony of him self, was so weighty, as if it had been given on him
by other: so much avails a man's own good report made of himself in due
season, for want of good neighbors. This matter, if it were as the Popes
flatterers write, thus subtily compassed: although Martinus says flatly, that
he was driven to purge him self of certain crimes laid to his chardge: yet
not withstanding, the king took upon him, both to examine the matter, and to
determine therein: and, as appears, took their answer no less
insufficient, than grievous: although he winked at it: because he looked for a
greatter pleasure to be showed him again in consecratinge him Emperor,
promised long before: which this Pope performed, and solemply with great
acclamations of the people, crowned him Emperor of Rome: For says Platina:
The Pope did this to show some thankefulnes again to him, who had well
deserved of the Church. Ansegisus Abbas gathers together the decrees, that
this Charles and his son Lodouicus had made in their times for the
reformation of the Church causes: Amongst other these: The Canonical
Scriptures only to be read in the Churches: For the office of Bisshops in
dilligent preaching, and that only out of the holy Scriptures: that the
communion should be received three times in the year: The abrogatinge and
taking away a great number of holy days besides sondaies: and that children
before ripe years, should not be thrust into religious houses: And that no man
should be professed a Monk, except license were first asked and obtained of
the King. He decreed also, and straightly commanded. that Monks being
Priests, should study diligently, should write rightly, should teach
children in their Abbayes, and in Bisshops houses. That Priests should eschew
covetousness, Joan. Aue^tinus.
glotony, ale houses or tauernes, seculer or profane business, familiarity of
women under pain of deprivation or degradation. He provided to have, and
placed fit pastors for the Bishoprikes and cures to feed the people. He
ordained learned Scholemaisters for the youth, and made devout abbottes to rule
those that were enclosed in Cloisters, says Nauclerus. As it is said of king
David, yt he set in order 1. Paral. 16.
the Priests, Levites, singers and porters, and ordered all the offices and
officers required to be in the house of the Lord, for the setting forth of
his service and Religion: Even so this noble Charles left no officer
belonginge to Gods Church, no not so much as the singer, porter or Sexten,
vnapointed and taught his office and duty, as Nauclerus tells. Besides the
authority of this noble Prince in governing and directing al Church matters,
his zeal and care therefore (in such sort as the knowledge of yt superstitious
time would suffer) is plainly showed in an Iniunction, that he gave to al
estates both of the Layty and Clergy to this effect. I Charles, by the grace
of God, King and governor of the Kingdom of France, a devout and humble
maintainour, and ayder of the Church: To al estates both of the Layty and the
Clergy, wish salvation in Christ. Considering the exceeding goodness of God
toward us, and our people, I think it very necessary we render thanks unto
him, not only in heart and word, but also in continual exercise and
practice of well doing, to his glory: to the end that he, who has hitherto
bestowed so great honor upon this kingdom, may vouchesaulfe to preserve us
and our people with his protection. Wherefore it has seemed good for us, to
move you, o ye pastors of Christ's Churches, leaders of his flock, and the
bright lights of the world: that ye will travail, with vigilant care and
diligent admonition to guide Gods people thorough the pastures of eternal
life, etc. Bringinge the stray sheep into the foulde least the wolf devour
them, etc. Therefore they are with earnest zeal to be admonished and exhorted,
yea to be compelled to keep them selves in a sure faith, and reasonable
continuau^ce, within and under the rules of the Fathers. In the which work
and travail know ye right well, that our industry shall work with you: For
which cause also we have addressed our messengers unto you, who with you by
our authority, shall amend and correct those things that are to be amended.
And therefore also have we added such Canonical constitutions, as seemed to
us most necessary. Let no man judge this to be praesumptio^ in us, that we
take upon us to amend, that is amiss, to cut of that is superfluous. For we
read in the books of Kings, how the holy King Josias: travailed, going
the circuytes of his kingedome or visitinge, correctinge and admonishinge his
people, to reduce the whole kingedome unto the true Religion and Service of
God. I speak not this as to make my self equal to him in holiness: but for
that we ought always to follow the examples of the holy kings: and so much
as we can, we are bound of necessity, to bring the people to follow virtuous
life to the praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And anon after
amongst the rules that he prescribes unto them, this follows: First of al,
that all the Bisshoppes and Priests, read diligently the Catholic Faith,
and preach the same to all the people, For this is the first precept of God
the Lord in his Law: Hear o Israel, etc. It belongs to your offices o ye
pastors and guydes of Gods Churches, to send forth thorough your Diocesses,
Priests to preach unto the people, and to see that they preach rightly and
honestly. That ye do not suffer new things, not Canonycall, of their own
mind forged, and not after the holy Scriptures, to be preached unto the
people. Yea, you your own selves preach profitable, honest and true things,
which do lead unto eternal life. And enstructe you others also that they
do the same. First of all every preacher must preach in general, that they
believe the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost to be an omnipotent God.
etc. And so learnedly proceeds thorough all the articles of our Faith, after
which he comes to the conversation of life, etc. And we do therefore more
diligently enioine unto you this thing, because we know, that in the latter
days shall come false teachers, as the Lord him self has forwarned, and the
Apostle Paul to Timothe does witness. Therefore beloved let us furnishe our
selves in heart and mind, with the knowledge of the truth, that we may be
able to withstand the adversaries to truth, and that thorough Gods grace,
Gods word may increase, pass thorough and be multiplied, to the profit of
Gods holy Church, the Salvation of our souls, and the glory of the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Peace to the preachers, grace to the obedient hearers,
and glory to our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

This noble Prince was moved to take upon him this government in
Ecclesiastical matters and causes, not of presumption, but by the word of
God, for the dischardge of his princely duty, as he had learned ye same both
in the examples of godly kings co^me^ded therefore of the holy ghost, and also
by the instructions of the best learned teachers of his time, whereof he had
great stoare, and especially Alcuinus an Englisheman of great learning, who
was his chief Scholemaister and teacher: whom, as Martinus tells, Charles
made Abbot of Towers. Amongst other many and notable volumes, this Alcuinus
writes one, entitled De Fide Sanctae and in diuiduae Trinitatis, which as
most meet for him to know, he dedicateth to Charles the Emperor. He
begins his epistle dedicatory, after the salutation and superscription,
thus: Seeinge that the Emperial dignity ordained Alcuinus.
of God, seems to be exalted for none other thing, then to govern and
profit the people, Therefore God does give unto the^ that are choosen to that
dignity power and wisdom: Power to suppress the proud, and to defend the
humble against the evil disposed: wisdom to govern and teach the subjects
with a godly carefulnes. With these two gifts O holy Emperor, Gods favor
has honored and exalted you inco^parably above your au^cestours of the same
name and authority, etc. What than? what must your carefulnes most devoutly
dedicated to God bring forth in the time of peace the wars being finished,
when as the people hasteneth to assemble together, at the proclamation of your
commandment (he means that he expresses afterward, by this assembly or
concourse, the council that was now in hand assembled, as he says,
Imperiali praecepto: by the Emperors precept.) And waits attentively before
the throne of your grace, what you will command to every person by your
authority: what I say ought you to do? but to determine with all dignity
just things, which being ratified, to set them forth by commandment, and
to give holy admonitions, that every man may return home merry and glad,
with the precept of eternal Salvation. etc. And least I should seem not to
help and further your preachinge of the Faith, I have directed and dedicated
this book unto you, thinkinge no gift so convenient and worthy to be
presented unto you: seeinge that all men know this most plainly, that the
Prince of the people ought of necessity to know all things, and to preach
those things that please God: neither belongs it to any man to know better
or m^e things, than to an Emperor, whose doctrine ought to profit all the
subjects etc. All the faithful has great cause to rejoice of your godliness
seeing that you have the priestly power (as it is mete so to be) in the The
prince has a priestlie power to set forth gods word
preaching of the word of God, perfect knowledge in the Catholic faith, and
a most holy devotion to the salvation of men. This doctrine of Alcuinus, which
no doubt, was the doctrine of all the catholic and learned fathers in that
time, confirms well the doings of Charles and other Princes, in calling
councelles, in making decrees, in giving Injunctions to Ecclesiastical persons,
and in ruling and governing them in all Ecclesiastical things and causes. If
the government of this most Christian Prince in Ecclesiastical matters be well
considered, it shall well appear, that this Charles the great, whom the Popes
do extolle as an other great Constantine, and patron unto them, (as he was in
deed, by enriching the Church with great revenues and riches) was no whit
greater for his martial and Prince-like affairs in the politic governance,
than for his godly ordering and disposing the Church causes: although that in
some things he is to be borne with, consideringe the blindness and superstition
of the time.

Although herein Lodouicus Charles his son, were somewhat inferior to his
father: Yet not withstanding, he reserved these Ecclesiastical causes to him
self, and with no less care he ordered the same, although in some things,
being a very mild Prince, he winked and bare overmuch with the ambition of the
Popes. Shortly after, when as the foresaid Leo was departed, was Stephen next
elected Pope, and without the confirmation of the Emperor, took the Papacy
upon him. All the histories agree, that he came shortly after into France to
the Emperor, but wherefore, most of them leave uncertain. Platina thinks to
avoid the hurley burley in the City that was after the death of Leo.
Sabellicus thinks the Emperors coronation to be the cause. Nauclerus says,
he went in his own person unto the Emperor Lodouike about, or for the
Church matters, which proves that the Emperor had chief authority in
ordering the Church business. But our English Chronicles, as some writers
affirm, do plainly declare, that his coming into France was, to make an
excuse of his unlawful consecration, against the decrees made to Charles by his
predecessors, Adrian and Leo, fearing therefore the fequele of the matter, he
first sent his Legates before him to be a preparatiue to his purgation, and
afterward came him self to crave his pardon. And the rather to please
The Emperor, brought a most beautiful crown of gold for him, and an other for
the Empress: whereof followed, as Nauclerus says: Omnia quae petiit a pio
Imperatore obtinuit, he obtained whatsoever he asked of the godly Emperor.

Now when Stephen had dispatched all his matters, he returned home: and
shortly after, an other Ecclesiastical cause happened, for within a while the
Bishop of Reatina died, and there was an other chosen. And when the sea of
Reatina (says Nauclerus) was void, the Pope would not consecrate the elect
Bishop onles he had first license thereto of the Emperor. The circumstances of
this story, make the matter more plain. The earl Guido, had written unto Pope
Stephen to consecrate that Bishop, whom the Clergy and the people had elect:
but the Pope durst not enterprice the matter, till he were certified of ye
Emperors pleasure, and thereupon writes again unto Ther^e, the tenor whereof
follows, after Gratianus report: I have red your letters, wherein you require
me to consecrate the newly elect Bishop of Reatin, chosen by the consent Did.
63.
of the Clergy and people, least the Church should be long destitute of a
propre pastor? I am sorry for the death of the other: but I have defered the
confecration of this, for that he brought not with him, the Emperors license
(vt mos est) as the manner is. I have not satisfied your mind herein, least
that the Emperor should be displeased at my doing. Therefore I require you (for
otherwise I ought not to meddle) to purchase the Emperors license directed unto
me by his letters, vt prisca consuetudo dictat, as the ancient custom does
will, and then I will accomplis he your desire. I pray you take not this my
doing in evil part. Whereof it is manifest enough (says Nauclerus) that of
the Emperors at that time, the Bisshops had their inuestitures: although Anto.
does gloss otherwise, saiynge that perhaps, this elect Bisshoppe was
belonging to the Court, who ought not to be ordered. Not only the textes of
many decrees in this destinctio^, does confirm this to be true, but also
Gratian himself, and the glossars, do in many places affirm, that this Did.
63.
was the ancient custom, and constituion in the Church, that the elections
of the Bisshops of Rome, and of other Bishops also, should be presented to the
Emperors and Princes, before they might be cosecrated.

Immediately after the death of Stephen Paschalis. 1. was chosen Pope: He being
encouraged, by all likelihood, by his predecessors like entrance, thinking to
entreat the Emperor so easily as Stephen had done. And boldened with a late
made Canon by Stephen, suffered him self to be enstalled, and consecrate without
Themperours inuesturing, leave and authority: Nevertheless being better
advised, (mistrusting his presu^pteous and disobedient fact would displease
The Emperor, as it did in deed) he sent by and by his Legates to The Emperor to
excuse him self, and lays all the fault on the people and Clergy. The Emperor
accepting this excuse for that time Platina, Sabel.
warns the people and Clergy of Rome, that they take good head, that they do
no more offend against his majesty, but that hereafter they do warely
observe and keep the old orders and constitutions. He calls this attempt
plain treason.

This Emperor called a council at Frankforth, he bestowed Naucleru^.
Spiritual promocions, and instituted his brother Drogo, the chief mynister or
Bishop at Mettes.

In the mean while dies Pope Paschalis, next to whom followed Eugenius, but
elected not without contention, and lived but a while: after whom succeeded
Vale^tinus, who lived in the papacy but forty days. Next unto him was chosen
Gregory the fourth, who was of so great modesty, says Platina, that being
elected Pope of the Clergy, and people of Rome, he would not take upon him the
office, before he had his confirmation of the Emperors Ambassadors, whom the
Emperor had sent to Rome for that purpose, and to examen diligently that
election. And Lodouicus the Emperor did this not of pride, but that he would
not loose the privileges and rightes of the Empire. Note all these things
well, the Pope on the one part, wha^ he was chosen without any contention, yet
would he not be consecrate without the Emperors confirmation: otherwise he
thought it an immodest part. The Emperor on the other side, not only sends
his Ambassadors to confirm, but or ever they confirm him, to examyn and
diligently to discuss, after what sort he came in, and whether he were
elected lawfully or no. And this he did, not of a pride (say they) much less
of any usurpation, but because he would not loose or diminishe the right
herein, that belonged to the Imperial majesty. Here say they, he did it of
purpose, because he would not lose his right, and not his only, but the right
of the Empire. But least it should seem he did tyrannously herein, and
oppressed the Church, or enfringed her liberties, it follows, all most word
for word in both these writers, Platina, and Nauclerus. For he was a mild,
merciful, and most gentle Prince of nature, and one that did always maintain
the right and dignity of the Church. Loo how great clemency this is compted
in him, and the defense of the dignities and rightes of the Church: the which
afterward, and now of the Popes, is compted the greatest tyranny and
oppression of the Church that can be. But further to approve this deed of
Lodouike, the foresaid authors recite many Canons, decrees, and
constitutions, that this Emperor made in Ecclesiastical causes and things:
and especially for the reformation of the disordered behauiours of the
Bishops and Clergy. In so much that Platina comparinge the dissoluteness
of the Churchemen in his time, cries out: Would God (O Lodouike) thou were
alive in these our times, for now the Church wants thy most holy
ordinances, and thy discipline. The self same Lodouicus (says Platina)
called a council of many Bisshoppes at Aquisgrane, to Gods honor, and the
profit of the Church dignity. The Prelates in the preface to this Sinode, do
declare, what was the care and authority of the Godly Emperor, in this
Sinode. They affirm that the most Christian Emperor, had called an holy and
general congregation or Council at Aquisgrane: He began therein thoroughly
to handle the matter, with wisdom void of curiosity: He counseled, yea
warned the holy Synod assembled, what was needful to be done, touching
certain chief ministees of the Churches: He warned them further, to draw out
of the Holy Canons, and the sayings of the holy Fathers, a form of
institution for the simple so^rte of Ministers, whereby they might more easily
learn to walk in their duties without offense. The Synod gives God thanks,
that he had praeferred so holy, wise, and devout a Prince to have the chardge,
and oversight of his Church, and the Churches needful business or matters.
The Synod, according to the kings advertisement, furthered also with his
help otherwise, collecteth a form of Institution, wherein is contained at
large, after what sort the Prelates ought to frame their lives, rule, or
govern the people committed to their cures, etc. This done, they bring to the
Prince their form of institution, which they had devised.

This Emperor called an other Council at Ticinum in Italy for the causes
hereafter expressed. The matters or causes which the honorable Emperor
Lodouicus did command his Bishops to consider of, are these: touching the
state of his kingedome: of the conversation of the Bishops, Priests, and
other Churchmen: of the doctrine and preachinge to the people: of writing out
of Books: of restoring of Churches: of ordering the people, and hospitalles
for strangers: of Monasteries both for men and women. What so ever is out of
order in these forenamed states, either thorough the negligence of the guides,
or the slothfulness of the inferiors, I am (said he) very much desirous
to know, and I coueite to amend or refourme them, according to Gods will,
and your holy advise, in such sort* that neither I be found reproueable in
Gods sight, neither you nor the people incur Gods wrathful indignation
for these things, how this may be searched, found out, and brought to
perfection, that I committee to be entreated by you, and so to be declared unto
me. The lesser matters also, which in general touch all, but in especial,
some, and need reformation: I will that ye make inquiry of them, and make
relation unto me thereof: as for example if the rulers in the countries
neglect, or sell Justice, if they be takers or oppressors of the Churches,
widows, orphans, or of the poor. If they come to the sermons. If they do
reverence and obey duly their Priests. If they presume to take in hand any
new opinions or arguments that may hurt the people. etc. The Bishops after
they had consulted upon these matters, do make relation unto the Emperor,
what they had done: showing him, that they had found some of the Bishops
and chief Mynisters faulty, and humbly pray the Emperor on their behalf,
that he will of his goodness grant these, some space to amend their faults.
They complain to the Emperor of Bishops and Priests, for lack of
preachinge, and that noble men and gentle men, come not unto those few sermons
that be. And so then recyte many other enormities, as about tithes, incest,
and such like, especially in religious persons, who for the most part are
clean out of order. And to bring these to their former order and state,
rests, (say they) in your disposicion* Thus does this King take upon him,
and thus do the Bishops yield unto him the government, as well of
Ecclesiastical as Temporal causes and things. On this wise did Lodouicus
always exercise him self: in so much that for his careful government in
Church matters, he was surnamed Pius, the godly, as his father before him, was
called Magnus, the great.

Pope Leo. 4. writes his humble letters unto Lotharius on the behalf of one
Colonus, who was chosen to be Bishop of Reatina, but he might not consecrate
him without the Emperors license first obtained thereunto, and therefore
prays the Emperor of his favor toward Colonus: Vt vestra licentia
accepta, ibidem, Deo adiuuante, eum consecrare Did. 65.
valeamus Episcopum: That having your license, we may have authority by
Gods help to consecrate him Bishop there. Upon this word, License, The
Glossar notes, the consent of the Prince to be required after the election be
made. Next to Leo, sauinge the woman Pope Johan, was Benedictus. 3. chosen,
who was ratified and confirmed by the Emperors authority: who sent his
Ambassadors to Rome Sabell. Platina.
for that purpose. This Pope is commended for his great godliness: But he was
over godly to live long in that sea: nevertheless he was not so godly as the
most of his successors were al together ungodly, as your own writers make
report. And to note this change the better: Nauclerus tells of diverse
wonders: how the Devil appeared in an ugly shape, and hurled stones at men as
they went by: set men together by the ears: bewraied thieves, and priests of
their lemmans, and such like: How it rained bloudde three days, and three
nights: How great Grassehoppers with six wings, and six feet, and two
teethe harder then any stone, covered the ground, and destroyed the fruits:
not altogether unlike those Grassehoppers, that S. John notes in his Apoc. 9.
Revelation, to come from the bottomless pit, after the star was fallen.
After this followed a great pestilence: Which woonders, if they be true be not
unworthy the notinge, consideringe the change that followed. For hitherto
still from time to time, although some Popes did privily attempt the
contrary, yet the Emperors always kept the confirmation of the Pope, the
inuesturinge of Bishops, and the orderinge of many other Ecclesiastical
matters, till the next Pope began openly to repine at the matter, and his
successor after him to Curse, and some of those that followed, fell from
chidinge and cursinge, to plain fightinge for the same. In the which combat,
though with much adooe, at length they wroonge them selves from under the
Emperors obedience: Yet always even hitherto, Princes have had no little
interest in Ecclesiastical causes, as hereafter shall appear.

After Benedictus, was Nicolas chosen, whom the Emperor him self being
present, did confirm, as witnesses Nauclerus: At the same time, was the
Emperor Lodouicus. 2. at Rome, who confirmed the Popes election. The same also
says Martyn, to the which Volateran adds of the Emperor and the Pope: De
communi consilio ambo cuncta gereba^t. All things were done by common
counsel or consent of both, the Emperor and the Pope. And least it might be
thought he means not as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal matters: Sabellicus
makes the matter more plain, affirming that the Emperor and the Pope had
secret conference together many days, and had consultation both touching the
matters perteining to Christian Religion, and also of the state of Italy. And a
little after talking of the Pope: The Pope decreed by the consent of Lodouicus,
that from thence forth, no Prince, no not the Emperor him self, should be
present in the council with the Clergy, onles it were when the principal
points of faith were treated of. Hitherto in all these Ecclesiastical causes,
the Emperor has the doing, as well or more than the Pope. But this last
decree, that by the allowa^ce of the Emperor, the Pope made, exempteth
Temporal Princes from Ecclesiastical matters in their councelles, though in
the most principal matters Ecclesiastical, concerning faith, it leueth to them
their interestes.

Martinus the second, gat into the Papacy malis artibus, by naughty means
says Platina, and as is noted in the margent, it was in this Popes time, that
first of all the creation of the Popes was made without the Emperors
authority: But this Pope died so shortly, as he came in naughtily. After whom
Adria^ the third, like unto his predecessor, the second of that name (who by
cunning slight practiced to defraude the Emperor of his authority) espying
opportunity, by reason, that Charles the Emperor, as Sabellicus says, was
far of, busied in the wars, does promote this matter to be decreed by the
Senate and the people, and this he did immediately after he was made Bishop, and
persuadeth them, that they do not hereafter wait for the Emperors
approbation, and confirmation, in appointing their Bishop, but that they
should keep to them selves, their own fredome. The which thing also Nicolaus
the first, with others attempted, but could not bring it to pass, as
Platina reports. Who also writes, that the Romans had conceived an hope of
great liberty in the hauty courage of this Pope, being a Roman borne. But
to their great grief, he within a while was taken from them.

The next Pope Stephen had an obscure time, saving that Charles therein called
a council at Collen, and after him Arnulphus the Emperor, other two: the one
at Moguntia, the other at Triburum. Of these Popes and those that followed, as
Formosus, Stephanus, Romanus, Benedictus, Leo, Christophorus, Sergius, and a
great company moa, the Historians give but an homely testimony, and Naeuclerus
says, that to satisfy their voluptuous lusts, they did maliciously malice
one another, as most cruel Tyrants, and he added this reason. Cum non extarent
qui eorum vitia coercerent, because there was none to correct and chasten them
for their evil doings. For so long as the Princes exercised their authority
in ouerseing carefully the Church matters, and the mynisters, so well the
Popes, as other Bishops, there grew no such intolerable disorders, neither
were there such monsters, (for so Nauclerus terms these Popes) that
continued any space: But were by the Princes authority suppressed, and
therefore Nauclerus cites out of Platina, and affirms it to be true, that the
cause of these monstrous Rebels in the Church was: Quod Resp. ignauos and
desides principes habeat. Because the common wealth had improfitable and
slothful Princes. Thus these writers burdeine and charge the Princes with the
disorders and enormities in Christ's Church, wherein they do them wrong, if
they thought not, that it apperteined to the Princely authority to ouersee,
care, and provide for the good order of Christ's Church: and to redress,
punish, and remove the inordinate euilles therein. Yea, Sabellicus so
wondereth at these tragical examples of the Bishops of this time, and their
horrible oblivion of Godly Religion, that he ascribes the good and godly
moderation that was in the Bishops, and the dutiful execution of their office,
from Charles the great, till the end of the French Empire, which was an
whole age: to be not so much of them selves, and their own good wills, as of
the^ awe and fear they had of the Princes, kings, and Emperors, who were
their guardians. And therefore concludes, that it may be truly said, that this
was the calamity of France, Italy, and of the Church of Rome: Quod in ea
gente desitum esset imperari: because there was no king nor Emperor to bear
rule, meaning that although there were kings and Emperors, yeat did they not
execute their Princely office and authority, in ouerseing, correcting and
reforming the Church matters, and her mynisters, and therefore the state was
miserable. In this confusion were al things, but especially in the Church of
Rome, till God stirred up the wise and mighty Prince Otho the first, whose
zeal, stoutnes and travail in reforming Religion and the disordred Church,
no tongue is able to express, says Nauclerus.

At this time was John. 13. Pope, a man replete and lode^ with all dishonestie
and villainy, against whom two of the chiefest amongst the Clergy (the one
was a Cardinal Sabellicus. Platina. Naucler.
says Luithpra^dus, the other, master of the Rolls) made complaint unto
Otho, most humbly beseching him, to have some compassion on the Church, which
if it were not speedely reformed, must needs come to utter decay. After who^
came the B. of Millain, and so one after another a great many mo, making the
same suit unto Otho: who being moved of his own zeal to gods glory, but now
enflamed by ye lamentable suplicatio^s of these Bishops, Rex pijssimus, says
Luithp. non quae sua sunt, sed quae Jesus Christi cogitans: The most religious
king having careful cogitations, not for his own things, but for Jesus
Christ's matters, addressed him self with all convenient speed into Italy, to
refourme Rome from whence all the mischief sprange. When the Pope understood
of his coming, he prepared to receive him in most honorable wise, and with
such humility behaved him self toward the Emperor, and showed such fair
face of repentance, that the well meaning Emperor, thought he had meant as he
pretended, swear the Pope to obedience and loyalty against Bere^garius and
Adalbertus, as Luithprandus writes, and so returned into his country. This
Luithprand is the more to be credited, for that he was living a famous writer,
and Deacon Cardinal, even in the same time. The Pope immediately against both
oath, and honesty, practiced with Adalbertus, to depose this godly Emperor,
and promised him by oath his aid. The reason or cause why John the Pope should
hate this most Godly Emperor, who Luithpra^d.
had delivered him out of the hands of Adalbert his enemy, and wherefore the
Devil should hate God his creator, seems not to be unlike. For the Emperor,
as we have had good experience, understands things pertaining to God, he
works, he loves them, he mainteineth, with maine and might the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal matters, he decketh them with manners, and
amendeth them by Laws: but John the Pope is against all these things. The
Emperor seeks by diverse ways to reconcile this Pope, and to bring him from
his filthy life, to some honesty, and regard of his office. When by no
persuasions he can win him, he determines to depose him, and for that
purpose, he calls a council of the Bishops of Italy, to the end he may
seek the reformation, which he minds, and saw to be ouermuch^ needful,
by their advise.

Pope John seeing him self to be tried by a Synod, runs away, when all the
people saw their Pope was run away from them, they swear fidelity to the
Emperor, promisinge by their Oaths, that they would never hereafter elect or
make any Pope without the consent of ye Emperor. Within three days after there
was a great assembly in S. Peter's Church at the requests of the Bishops and
people: In which council sat the Emperor with many Archebishops and others:
to whom the godly Emperor propounds the cause of their assembly, exhorts
them to do al things with upright judgment: and the Bishops, Deacons,
Clergy, and all the people make solemn protestation, and obtestation of
their just and upright dealing in the cause propounded. And because the chief
matter touched the Pope that was ru^ne away: the holy Synod said, if it seem
so good to the godly Emperor, let letters be sent to the Pope, and cite him
to come and purge him self: the Letters were directed in this form: Otho by
Gods grace Emperor, with the Archebishoppes of Liguria, Tuscia, Saxonia, and
France, send greeting in the Lord to John the Pope: we coming to Rome for
our Service to God, and enquiringe the cause of your absence from your church,
were enfourmed by the Bishops, Cardinals, Priests, Deacons, and the whole
people of such shameful dooinges by you, as we are ashamed to rehearse:
whereof these are part they chardge you with: Murder, perjury, sacrilege,
inceste with twain of your own sisters: that in your banquettes (which is
horrible to be rehearsed) ye drink wine in the love of the Devil: in your
play at dice, you crave the help of Jupiter, Venus, and other Deuilles:
wherefore we pray you to repaier unto us your self. To this the Pope writes
this answer. I here say ye will make an other Pope, which if ye attempt, I
excommunicate you all that ye may have no license or power to order any, etc.
To this short answer the Emperor with the Synod replie^h, tellinge him they
had written, to let him understand of the crimes wherewith he was chardged, and
that he had sent them such an answer as rather became the folly of a child,
then the gravity of a Bishop: as for the power of bindinge and losinge, they
say, he once had as Judas had, to whom it was said Quaecunque ligaueritis
super terram, etc. What so ever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven,
etc. But now he has no more power against the Emperor and the Synod, then
Judas had when he went about to betray Christ his master. These letters were
sent unto him by two Cardinals, who returned, not findinge him: and
therefore the Synod proceeds to his Deposition: They beseech the Emperor to
remove Monstrum illud, That Monster, and to place some worthy Bishop in his
room. Tunc Imperator, placet inquit, quod dicitis: Your request pleases me,
says The Emperor. The Clergy and the people (says Nauclerus) does make
humble supplication unto the Emperor, to provide for them a worthy Bishop:
to whom the Emperor answeareth: Choose you your selves one, whom, having God
before your eyes, ye may judge worthy, and I will confirm him: The Emperor
had no sooner spoken this (says Luithpr) than they all with one assent named
Leo: The Emperor gave his consent: Et Ottho Imperator, Leonem creat
Pontificem, And Ottho the Emperor created Leo Pope (as Sabellicus and Platina
says). Here Luithprandus tells at large, how after this creation of Leo, ye
Emperor dissolved ye Synod, and what mischief ye monstrous Pope John wrought
afterward. For by his friends in Rome, Pope Leo was driven away. And after
this monster was dead, the Romans elected Benedictus in his place, and
requires the Emperor who was than at Spolet, to confirm him: the Emperor
would not, but compelled them to receive Leo again. And here the Emperor
summoned again a new^ Platina.
Synod, wherein he sat him self, for the canonical depoficion of Benedictus.
not withstandinge this, says Nauclerus, Leo being weary of the inconstancy of
the Romans, did constitute by their consent in the Synod holde^ at Rome,
that the whole authority of chosinge the Bishop, should remain in the
Emperor, as it is rehearsed in the decrees in these words: Being in the
Synod at Rome in the Church of the holy Savior: like as Adrianus Bishop of
Rome granted to Charles the Did. 63.
great, the dignity of patricians hip, the ordering of the Apostolical sea,
and the inuesturing of Bissops: So I also Leo Bishop of Rome, servant of
Gods servants, with the consent of all the Clergy and people of Rome, do
co^stitute, confirm, and corroborate, and by our Apostolical authority, we
do grant and give unto the Lord Ottho, the first King of Dutchmen, and to his
successors in this kingdom of Italy for ever, the authority to elect after
us, and to ordeine the Bishop of Rome: and so Archbisshops, and Bisshops, that
they receive of him, as they ought the inuesturing, and consecration: excepting
those, whom the Emperor has granted to the Popes and Archbisshops: And that
noman hereafter of what dignity or Religion soever, have power to elect one,
to the dignity of consulles Blood, or to be Bishop of the Appostolique sea, or
to make any other Bishop, without the Emperors consent. And if any be chosen
Bishop, without he be commended, and invested by the King, that in no wise he
be consecrated, under pain of excommunication. As Sabellicus notes this for a
renowned matter, ye the right of creatinge the Pope, was now restored to the
Emperial dignity: even so Nauclerus affirms, this godly Imperour Ottho, to
be borne In totius Ecclesiae consolationem, for the consolation of the whole
Church.

When this godly Prince was dead, whilst his son Ottho 2. was busied in the
wars against the Sarazens: and after him his Son Ottho 3. was yet in
noneage, the Popes began to wax so evil, and the state of Christ's Church
to decaie as much as ever it did before: So dangerous a matter it is, to want
godly Princes to govern Gods Church, and to ouersee the Mynisters thereof.
About this time Hugh Capet the French king, looked better to his Clergy in
France, and calling a Council at Rhemes of all the Prelates of France,
deposed Arnucphus, whom Charles had made Bishop there, Nauclerus.
and made Gilbert the Philosopher Bishop, whom afterward Ottho. 3. made
Archebishoppe of Rauenna. After Hugh, Robert his son succeeded, a Prince very
well learned, and a diligent labourer about divine or Church matters, which is
the propre part of a right king, says Sabellicus. When Ottho 3. (surnamed
for his excellent virtues in that vicious Abb. Vrsp.
age, Mirabilia mundi, the maruailes of the world) herd of the great misorder
in Rome, for the reformation thereof he came into Italy: but or ever he entered
into Rome, Pope John 17. died, and there fell no contention (says Nauclerus)
in the Popes Election, because the Prince appointed by his commandment, Bruno
to be pronounced Pope, who was called Gregory. 5. So soon as the Emperor
departed from Italy, the Romans thrust out Gregory, and placed one
Placentinus, whom they call John. 18. The Emperor hearing hereof, came to
Rome, hanged up the Consul, and put out John's eyes, and restored Gregory into
his sea again. I marvel that the historians, (says Platina) do reken this
John amongst the Popes, Platina.
which undoubtedly was in his Papacy a thief, and a robber, for he entered not
in by the door, as of right he should have done, for he came in by a
faction, corruptinge, with money and large gifts Crescentius the Consul, a
most covetous wretch, and no less ambicious. Whereby, the sharp judgment of
the Emperor, is declared to be but upright justice. So that Platina making
Gregory to be the true Pope, and to have entered in by the door, of whom he
says, Ottonis 3. authoritate pontifex creatur, he is created Pope by the
Emperors authority, and declaring the other that came in without ye Emperors
consent to be a thief and a robber: seems to be of this opinion (although to
flatter the Popes withal, he durst not so plainly open his mind) y^ without
the Pope be creat with the Emperors confirmation and authority, he is but a
thief and a robber.

Next, unto him, says Nauclerus, was Syluester the second placed, by the
Emperous appointment. Who being a Coniurer, had sold his soul to the Devil
for this promotion. Nevertheless, he was, says he, so witty, so learned, and
seemed so holy, that he not only deceived the Emperor that made him Pope, but
all the world besides. In which Otho the Emperor remaining at Rome, did
deliberate after what sort, and by what means he might reform, not only the
Empire, but also handeling Ecclesiastical matters, how Nauclerus.
he might reform the Laws of the Church, and bring them into the ancient
estate. Such was the careful travel of the Godly Princes, in governing not
only in Temporal, but also in Ecclesiastical things and causes.

Benedictus the ninth, sold the Papacy to Gregory the Sabellicus*
sixth. Syluester the third, thrust in amongst them by friendship and bribery.
To this case was the Papacy brought now (says Platina) that only he that was
most mighty in ambition and bribery, obtained this dignity: there was no room
for good men. Henricus the third, surnamed Pius, came to Rome to thrust out
these three monsters, says Sabellicus, and to bring this to pass in better
order, he calls a Synod, wherein he deposes these three monstrous beasts,
and does create Clement the second. The which done, he swears the Romans,
that they shall never after be present at the election of any Pope, onles they
be compelled thereunto by the Emperor. But after the Emperors departure from
the city: Stephan perceiving the people to grudge somewhat at Clementes
election, despatched him out of the the way with a medicine for a Pope. Venenum
illi miscuit, he poisoned him (says Sabellicus,) and immediately after his
death, entruded himself into the Papacy, without consent, either of the
Emperor, people or priest, and called himself Damasus 2. But with in a while
he died also. In ye mean time the Romans sent to the Emperor, besechinge
him to appointe them some good man to be their Bishop. who made Bauno Sabell.
Pope, and was named Leo 9. After this Leo, whom Hildebrand rid out of the
way, says Benno Cardinalis, was Victor the second made Pope, by the
Emperors authority or privilege. Platina. Abb. Vrsp.
Shortly after, this Godly Emperor died being greatly praised, and surnamed,
Pius Henricus, for his dealinge in the reformation of Church matters. This
Emperor had called two councels, the one at Constance, wherein he was him self
present, and after ye another at Moguntia, wherein both the Emperor and the
Pope, sat in Synod. This Pope says Nauclerus, came into Germany about the
church matters, and ordered al things therein, (says Abbas Vspurg.) by the advice and counsel of the Emperor and other seculer Princes, and the
Bisshoppes. And as this Emperor had yeat this interest in the councelles, and
in the creation of the Pope him self, so had he the placing and displacing,
allowing and disallowing, in other spiritual promotions, as at large appears
in Nauclerus. Stephen 9. was chosen Pope after that Victor had dronken of
Hildebrandes cup. But this Stephen lived not long: for says Benno, If any
other than Hildebrand were chosen Pope, Gerardus Brazutus, Hildebrandes
familiar friend would soon dispatche him out of the way with poison. Alexander
2. was Sabellicus.
chosen without the Emperors authority or knowledge, with whose election the
whole Clergy of Lombardy was much offended, and refused to owe unto him any
obedience, beseching the Emperor that he would give them license to choose one
of their own: persuading him that there ought none to be elect without the
consent of the king of Italy. After they had license, they chose Cadolus the
Bishop of Parma, whom all the Clergy of Lombardy obeyed as their lawful Pope.
The Cardinals (says Benno) knowing well Hildebrandes ambition, did win with
much suit the Emperors favor and aid to their new elected Pope Cadolus:
the which did so deeply perce the heart of Hildebrande, that he became a
deadly enemy to the Emperor for ever after, contrary to the faithful duty
that he had sworn unto him. Hard hold there was betwixt these two Popes, so
well with strokes as with words: they both gathered great armies, and with
their armies came into the field in their own persons, and fought two
cruel and bloody battles, and so ruled the Schismatic Church with Paul's
swoorde, Peter's keys, being fast locked from them both in Christ's Church:
til the Emperor sent Otto the Archbishop of Collein, giving him full
authority, as he should see cause, to set in order the Church matters. When
Otto came to Rome with this large commission, Platina*
he did sharply reprove Alexander at the first, Because he had taken upon him
the Papacy without the Emperors commandment, and contrary to that order,
which the Law it self and the long custom also has praescribed. Whose
words Nauclerus tells thus: How comes this to pass (says he) my brother
Alexander, that contrary to the manner of old time hitherto observed, and
against the law praescribed to the Romain Bisshops many years agoo, thou have
taken upon thee the Roman Papacy without the commandment of the king, and
my Lord Henry: and so beginning from Charles the great, he names many
Princes, by whose authority the Popes were either chosen, confirmed, or had
their election ratified: and when he was going forward in his oration,
Hildebrand Tharchdeaco^ takes ye tale out of his mouth, saying in great heat:
O Archbishop Otto, the Emperors and kings, had never any right at al, or rule
in the election of the Romain Bishops. Tharchbishop gave place to Master
Archedeacon by and by: For Hildebrand knew well enough, says Sabellicus, that
Otto would relent easily, and agree with him. In such sort also have other
godly Princes been beguyled, trustinge ouermuche popish Prelates with their
embassages. Within a while after, when the Emperor heard of these doings, he
sent Sabel.
straight to Pope Alexander, to gather together the Prelates, promising that he
him self would come to the counsel: to set an order in the Church matters,
that all things might be done in his own presence, who used Alexander very
gently and friendly, wherewith the Pope afterward was so moved, and saw how he
him self had been abused by Hildebrands instigations against so gentle a
Prince, yt he was greatly sorry, that he had attempted to be Pope without his
assent. Whereupon says Benno, when Alexander understood, that he was elected
and enstalled by fraud and craft of Hildebrande, and other the Emperors
enemies, in his sermon to the people, he plainly declared, that he would not
sit in the Apostolic sea, without the license and favor of the Emperor: and
further said openly in the pulpit, that he would send forthwith, his letters
unto the Emperor for this purpose, so greatly he repented him of his
usurpation without the Emperors authority.

Hildebrande, who had long awayted and practiced to be Pope, impacient of any
longer tariaunce, immediadly after the death of Alexander, gatte to be made
Pope, and was called Gregory the seventh, of whose election Abbas Vrspurgens.
faith: next to Alexander succeeded Hildebrande, under whom the Romain common
weal and the whole Church, was endau^gered and brought in a great peril with
new errors and sehismes, such as have not been heard of: who climbed up to
this high dignity with out the consent of the Prince, and therefore there be
that affirm him to have usurped the Papacy, by tyranny, and not Canonically
instituted, for which cause also many did refuse him to be Pope. In this
election, Hildebrande made post haste, for fear he had come short of his
purpose. In so much that Nauclerus says, before the exequies of Alexander
were finished, the Clergy and people that came to the burial, cried out, that
S. Peter had chosen Master Archedeacon Hildebrande to be Pope, whereupon the
Cardinals went a side and elected Hildebrande. But Benno, who was a Cardinal
at Rome the same time, says, that the self same eueninge and hour, when
Alexander died, Hildebrande was enstalled by his soldiers, without the assent
of either Priest or people: fearing least delay would breed peril: to whose
election not one of the Cardinales did subscribe: in so much that Hildebrande
said to an Abbot, that came short to the election, brother Abbot ye have
tarried over long: to whom the Abbot answered, and thou Hildebrande have made
over much have, in that thou have usurped the Apostolic sea against the
Canons, thy Master the Pope being not yet buried. By which post haste,
importune clamours, and violent election, it is easy to see, how Platina and
those that follow him, do no less lie than flatter in praysinge this Pope,
and settinge forth so comely a form of his election. Nauclerus, protests
and promises in the tellinge of this Popes life to keep an indifferency and
fidelity, in the report of the Chroniclers: and first reports the state of
ye Church under this Pope word for word as I have rehearsed out of Abbas
Vrspurg. and to declare his further vprightnes in the matter, he tells what he
found written in a fine style amongst the Saxon histories: that the Bishops
of France moved the Prince not to suffer this election, which was made
without his consent, for if he did, it might work to him much and grievous
daungier: the Prince perceiuinge this suggestion to be Nauclerus.
true, sent immediately his Ambassadors to Rome, to demand the cause
wherefore they presumed without the Kings license, against the custom of
their ancestors, to ordeine a Pope: and further to command the new^ elect
Pope, to forsake that dignity unlawfully come by, unless they would make a
reasonable satisfaction. These Ambassadors were honorably received, and when
they had declared their message, the Pope himself, makes them this answer:
He takes God to witness, that he never coueted this high dignity, but that
he was chosen, and thrust violently thereunto by the Romans, who would not
suffer him in any wise to refuse it: notwithstanding they could by no means
persuade him, to take the Papacy upon him, and to be consecrate Pope, till he
were surely certified, that both the king and also the Princes of Germany,
had given their assente. When the king was certified of this answer, he was
content and willingly gave commandment, that he should be ordered Pope. He
also recites out of Blondus, and other writers, That the King gave his
Consent unto the Popes election, sending the Bisshoppe of Verselles, the
Chancellor of Italy, to confirm the election by his authority, as the manner
had been, the which thing also, Platina (says he) seems to affirm.

Afterward the Emperor called a Council, which he held (as Sabellicus
says) at Woormes, whereat were all the Bishops of France and Germany,
except the Saxons. The churchmen of Rome sent their epistles, with grievous
complaints against Hildebrand unto this counsel: Auentinus.
In quibus Hildebrandum ambitus and periurij accersunt, eundemque plaeraque
auare, superbeque facere, conqueruntur: hocque reiecto, alium pastorem
postulant: wherein they accuse Hildebrande, of ambition and perjury,
complaininge that he does many things proudly and couetously, and therefore
desire, that he may be deposed, and another pastor appoincted them.

The Fathers in this Council make a Decree for to depose Hildebrande,
recitinge therein many his grievous and horrible crimes, that moved them
thereto: And not only the Bishops of Germany and France, but also the
Bissoppes of Italy, assembled together at Ticinum, a city in Lombardy now
called Pauia, did subscribe this Decree. This Synod being thus finished, the
Emperor (says Auentinus) wrote two letters, the one to Hildebrand, the other
to the people and priests of Rome, wherein he commands Hildebrande,
according to the Decree of ye Council, to return to his pryuate life and
estate, and the Romans to forsake Hildebrande, and to choose to them selves a
Pastor, according to the manner of their ancestors. Who so lists to read
these epistles, and the seditious, traitorous, and tragical feats and
practices of the Pope against the Emperor, both before, and especially after
this Decree, he may see them in Orthwinus Gratius, in Nauclerus, Auentinus,
Sabellicus, and Platina.

Henry the. 5. came into Italy to end the controversy Nauclerus.
and discord, that was betwixt him and the Pope, for this jurisdiction, and
to make such composition as might bring quietness both to the Church and
the Empire: But Paschalis the Pope did not much like of his coming, as the
Italian writers witness. The Emperor sends to the Pope, the Pope again to
him: certain couenauntes were agreed upon, and confirmed by oath, and assured
by pledges on both the parties. But the Pope could not, or would not, keep
promise with the Emperor, for that his Bishops did withstand, and in no
wise would stand to the agreement: whereupon followed great tumult and a bluddy
fraye. The Emperor seeing they for their parts, would not stand to the
couenauntes, which were confyrmed so strongly by oath, and hostages, as might
be, would not in like wise be bound to his. Shortly after Easter following,
there was a freendly peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Pope, who
crowned Henry. 5. Emperor, delivering unto him with his holy hand such
privileges as his ancestors were wont to enioie, and confirmed the same to
him, never to be taken from him under the pain of the great Curse. After this
the Emperor took an Oath of all the inhabitauntes in every City thorough
Italy, for Nauclerus.
their faithful obedience to him, and the faithful keepinge of this his
prerogative, and privilege in Ecclesiastical things or causes.

The next Emperor to Henry, was Lotharius, who so labored with the Pope, to
retain the inuesturing of Ecclesiastical persons, and besides that, he so
travailed in other Ecclesiastical causes, so well as Te^porall, that says
Vrspurgens. Huius laus est a vindicata religione and legibus: The praise of
this Prince is, in that he reformed Religion and the Laws.

Next to whom, was Conradus Emperor, to whom the Romans wrote
supplicacions, to come and chalendge Otto Frisingen.
his right in these matters, to reduce the form of ye Empire, to the old state
which it was in, in Constantine and Justinians days, and to deliver them from
the tyranny of the Pope. To whom also the Pope wrote humble supplications, to
take his cause into his protection against the Magistrates of Rome, Nauclerus.
which took upon them to reduce the Pope, to the old order and state of the
ancient Bisshoppes of Rome.

Next to whom, followed the godly and zealous Emperor Frederike the first,
who seeinge the horrible vices of the Romish Church, commanded that no
Legate of the Church of Rome should be suffered to enter into Germany, with
Nauclerus.
out he were called or hired of the Emperor: nor would suffer that any man
under the manner of appellation should goo unto the Court of Rome.

After the death of Adrian the fowrth, the Cardinals fell out amongst them
selves for the Election of a new Pope: some stryuinge to have Rowlande, other
some co^tendinge to have Octauian, a man (says Vrspurg.) in all Vrspurg.
points honest and Religious. Hereupon sprange an horrible Nauclerus.
Schism, and great discord. Rowlande sent his Legates to the Emperor
Fredericus. 1. and desired him that Sabellicus.
he would take up and end this contention by his authority. The Emperor
commands them both to come unto him at Ticinum: where forthwith he sommoned
a counsel to be holden about this matter, mindinge to examine Vrspurg.
both their causes, and by searchinge to try, whose cause was the more
honest. Rowlande being afraid to have the matter come to this trial, gets
him to William of Sicilia, the Emperors mortal enemy, and within twelve
days puts on his Cope, and names him self Alexander: for he purposed
(beelyke) to make a conquest of the matter. He alleged his ellection to be
good out of al doubt, and that he sent for the Emperors aid, and not for
his arbytrement: and therefore thought not good to bring his case into
doubtful question. The Emperor Platina.
being offended with him, for that he would not obey his appoinctement, sent
two Bishops to cite him, to come unto the Council by the name of Cardinal,
and not Pope: But Rowlande refused, confutinge their Citacion with this Maxim
or Principle, Romanum Pontificem a nemine iudicari debere: the Pope ought not
to be judged of any man. But when these Legates from the Emperor came to
Octauia^, he straight ways obeyed, and theybrought Nauclerus*
him to Papia. Vrspur. says, that Rowlande was oftentimes monished to come,
and did contemn all those monitions. The Emperor satte in the Council, (as
Radeuicus Frisingensis, who wrote his acts, witnesses) and made an oration
Platina*
unto the Bishops, wherein he declares, and that by the example of his
ancestors Constantinus, Theodosius, Iustinianus, and of later time of Carolus
Magnus, and other, that the power and authority to call Councelles, where the
Church is troubled with any schisms, or other perilous distourbance,
belongth to the Emperor: Notwithstanding he committed the difininge of the
controversy to their wisdom, and gave them thereunto authority. The
council debateth the cause, and consulteth with men learned Vrspurg.
in the law, and so concludes, that Octauians election was good, and
adiudgeth him to be the right Bishop of Rome. When they had thus tried out the
matter, ^redericus the Emperor (says Platina) Confirmat Octauianum
Pontificem: Confirmed Octauian Pope. The Emperor within a while after, sent
Octauianus, new confirmed Pope, toward Rome, who dyed in the journey. After
whose death, the Emperor called an other council at Wirtzberge (as Auentinus
writes) wherein were a great number of Archebishoppes, and other Bishops,
and also may of the nobles and states of the Empire. In this Council a statute
or Decree was made by common consent: That from henceforth none should be
Pope, onelesse he were created by the consent of the Emperor, according as
the custom had been of long and ancient time. This worthy Emperor, whom the
Chroniclers call Christianissimum, most Christian, for his zeal toward
Gods Church, endeavored not without great peril to him self and his estate,
to retain the jurisdiction due to the Princes, and thereby to refourme the
horrible disorders that were grown so high, that they overwhelmed the
Church, as in like sort diverse other Emperors and Kings, both before and
after, had attempted, but in vain: for the wealthy pride, the fierce power,
and traiterous treachery of the Pope and his Prelates was so mighty, violent,
and subtle, that there was no earthly power able to withstand or match with
them. And therefore Erasmus compteth the In Prouer. Sileni Alcibiadi^.
Popes of this time, and those that followed, to be the Vicars and successors
of Julius Caesar, of Alexander the the great, of Croesus the rich, and of
^erxes the mighty: rather then of Christ, the only Emperor and governor of
the Church. Bernarde calls Eugenius. 3. in his great pomp, and pride,
rather the successor of Constantinus the high Emperor, then of Peter the
humble Apostle. And Abbas Vrspurg. who lived at this time, when the Popes had
spoiled the Emperor, and other Princes welnighe of all jurisdiction, rulinge
all by their own Decretalles, now about this time set forth as they listed,
makes a lamentable complainte of the horrible pride and covetousness of the
whole clergy, and concludes with these words: Gaude matter nostra Roma, etc.
Rejoice O our mother Rome, because the scluses of the hidden treasures in the
earth are opened, that rivers and heaps of money may flow unto thee in
great abundance. Be glad of the iniquity of the sons of men, because money
is given to thee for the recompense of so great euilles. Be merry and iocund for
discordes sake, which is thy helper, because she is rushte out of the infernal
pit, that ple^tiful rewards of money might be heaped upon the: thou have that
which thou have always thyrsted after: sing pleasant balades, for through
men's malitiousnesse, not by thy Godliness, thou hastouercome the world.

About this time, the king of Cicilia and Apulia, had a Otto Frisingensis.
dispensation from the Pope for money, to Inuesture Archebishoppes or Bishops
with staff or crosier, ring, palle, myter, sandalles ^r slippers: and that
the Pope might send into his dominions no Legate, unless the king should
send for him.

Our English Chroniclers make report, that the Kings of this Realm, had
not altogether leafte of their dealinge in Church matters, but continued in
Of the dooinges of the kings of this Realm, in Eccl. matters, before the
Conquest look in the book De potestate Regia set out by the Prelates, 26. Hen.
8.
part their Jurisdiction about Ecclesiastical causes, although not without
some trouble. Polychron. Polic. Fab. Polyc. Fabyan.
The Popes Legate came into England, and made a council by the assent of
king William the Conqueror. And after that in an other Council at
Winchester, * were put down many Bisshops, Abbottes, and Priours, by the
means and procurement of the King. The king gave to Lanfranke the
Archbisshoprike of Cantorb and on our Lady day the Assumption made him
Archbishop. On whit Sunday, he gave the Archbishoprike of York, unto Thomas a
Canon of Bayon. When Thomas should have been consecrated of Lanfranke, there
fell a strife betwixt them, about the liberties of the church of York. The
controversy being about Church matters, was brought and referred to the
Kings judgment, and Thomas by the Kings commandment, was feign to come
again to Lanfranke to be sacred. And afterward, when there grew greater
contention betwixt these twain about Church Polychr.
matters, the Bishop of Rome remitted the matter to be determined before the
King, and the Bisshoppes of England, and so at Windesour before king
William and the Clergy, the cause was treated. Also an other cause was moved
before the King of the misorder of Thurstan, whom the King had made Abbot of
Glastonbury, by whose judgment the Abbot was changed, and turned to Fab.
Polychr.
his own Abbay in Normandy: but the Monks scattered about by the Kings
hest. After this the king bestowed many Bishoprikes on his Chaplains, as
London, Norwiche, Chester, Couentry, etc. Fabyan.
And ruled both the Temporalty and the Spirytualty at his own will: says
Polychronicon: He took noman fro the Pope in his land, (he means that the
King would suffer no Legate to enter into the land from the Pope) but he
came and pleased him: he suffered no Council made in his own country without
his Polychr.
own leave: Also he would nothing suffer in such a council, but as he
would assent. So that in geuinge, or translatinge of Spiritual promocions, in
giving his assent to councels, and suffering nothing to pass without his
consent, in hearing and determining Ecclesiastical causes, in restreining the
Popes liberty, without his special license, and in ruling the s^iritualtie at
his own will: king William shows plain, that he took him self for the
supreme governor within this Realm in all manner of causes, so well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal. In like manner did his son William Rufus, who
made Anselme Bishop of York, and afterward translated him to Cantorbury.
But within a while, strief and contention fell between him and Anselme, Eabyan.
for Anselme might not call his Synodes, nor correct the Bisshops but as the
king would: the king also challenged the inuestiture of Bishops. This king
also forbad the paiyng of any money or tribute to Rome: as says Polychronicon.

The like inhibitio^ made Henry the first, and gave Ecclesiastical promocions,
Math. Par.
as his ancestors had done: wherefore Anselme fell out with the king, and
would not Fabyan.
consecrate such Prelates, as he being a Lay man had made: but the
Archbishop of York did consecrate them, and therefore Anselme fled the
Realm. In an other council at London, the Spiritual condescended, that the
kings Fabyan.
officers, should punish Priests for whoordome. The cause of this decree, as
it seems, was, that a Cardinal named Ioannes Simeo^ Dunelmensis. Hen.
Huntingtonus. Roge. Houedenus. Mat. Paris. Mat. vvestmonast. Polydorus.
Cremensis, that came to redress the matter, after he had enueighed against
the vice, was him self the same night taken tardy. In the which council
also, (says Polydore) the king provided many things to be enacted, which
should greatly help to lead a Godly and blessed life. After this the king
called an other counsel at Sarisbury, Sommoning thither so well the chief of
the Clergy, as the people, and swore them unto him, and unto William his
son. Whereupon Polydorus takes occasion to speak of the order of our
Parliament, though it have a French name, yet in deed to be a council of the
Clergy, and the Laity, whereof the Prince has a full ratifiyng or enfringing
voice. And not only (says he) this king did make Bisshoppes and Abbottes
(which he calls) holy rites, Laws of Religion, and Polyd.
Church ceremonies (as other likewise call it, Ecclesiastical business) Naucler.
Abb. Vrsp.
but the Princes of every nation, began every where to claim this right unto
them selves, of naming and denouncing of Bisshoppes, the which to this day
they hold fast with toothe and nail. Also Martinus here notes. Until this
time, and from thence even till our days, the king of Hungary makes and
inuestureth according to his pleasure, Bisshops and other Ecclesiastical
persons within his Dominions. And here sithen I am entered into the noting of
the practices of other countries in this behalf: I might not only note the
doings about this time of Frederike king of Sicill, and James the king of
Spain his brother, in reformation of Religion in their Dominions, as appears
in their Epistles written by Arnoldus de noua Villa: but also make a digression
to the state of other parts in Christendom, as of the Churches of Greece, of
Armenia, of Moscouia, etc. that acknowledged not any, but only their Princes,
to be their supreme governors in all things next to Christ: as especially
also to note that most ancient part of Christendom southwarde in Aethyopia,
containing. 62. kingdoms under ye ruling of him whom we misname Presbyter
Ioannes, as who say he were a Priest, and head Bishop over those Christian
Realms, having such a power with them, as the Popes usurpation has
challenged here in Europe, to be an head or universal Priest and king. If we
may believe Sabellicus, who says that he has both often talked with the
merchants, that have their traffic there, and has also diverse times
enquired the matter by an interpretour of the inhabitauntes there borne, they
all say, that his name is, neither Presbyter Ioannes, nor Pretto Ianes, but
say they, his name is Gya^, that is, mighty, and they marvel greatly what
the Italians mean, to call him by the name of Priesthood. But this they say,
that all the suites or requests even of their great Bisshoppes, are brought
before the king him self: and that all their benefices or Spiritual
promotions be obtained at his hands. So that there being, as Sabellicus
tells further, an exceadinge great number of chief Prelates or
Metropolitanes, and under every one Prelate at the least twenty Bishops, all
their suits and causes Ecclesiastical, being brought unto him, and he the
maker of all these Prelates, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons, he
is called over them all, Clergy or Lay, in all causes Ecclesiastical or
temporal, Cya^ the mighty: that is, the supreme Ruler and Governor, and even
so has continued sithen those parts were first Christened, (as they say) of
Thomas Dydimus the Apostle, until our time. But this by the way, now from
them to return to our own country.

In England also, king Stephan reserved to him self, the inuestitures of the
Prelates, as likewise after him did Mat. Paris. Polych.
Henry the second, that made Thomas Becket Archebisshoppe of Cantorburie, who
thereat was sworn to the king, and to his Laws, and to his Son.

In the ninth year of his reign, this king called a Parliament at
Northampton, where he intended reformation of many privileges Mat. Paris.
Fabyan.
that the Clergy had, and amongst these, was one: that although one of the
Clergy had committed felony, murder, or treason, yea^ might not the king put
him to death as he did the Lay men. The which thing with many other, the
king thought to redress in the said Parliament. Thomas Becket resisted him,
but he might not praeuayle against the king. For well near all the
Bisshoppes of England were against him.

In the 17* ^ere of his reign, the king made a journey into Ireland, wherewith
great travail, he subdued the Iris he, and after with the help of the Primate
of Ar^^ch, he reformed the manners of the people and dwellers in that
country, and that in three things especially: Fabyan.
first, in rulinge and orderinge of the Church by the Curates; and how they
should order their divine Service, and minister the Sacrament of matrimony as
it was in England, and other Christian Regions. The second was, how that the
Lay people should behave them selves toward their Curates, and in what wise
they should pay and offer to God their tithes. The third was, for making of
their testamentes.

In Germany, succeeded unto Frederike, Henry, and next unto him Philip, both of
them inuesturing Bishops, and suffering no Legates from Rome to come into
Apulia, nor Sicilia, according to the aforesaid composition. Next to whom
succeeded Otto, surnamed of the Clergy the defendour of Justice, for where as
the manner of Princes was, (says Abbas Vrspurgens) cheerfully and readily to
give benefices or Churches, to those that did first ask them, he would no^ so
do: but he gave all the benefices that fell, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular, to those with whom he was acquainted. etc. This Emperor came into
Italy, claimed and recovered all the right of the Empire, that the Pope usurped
under the name of S. Nauclerus.
Peter's patrimony, and called a Synod at Norinberge about this matter, and
touching the Popes authority.

In England as Henry his father had done before him: so followed king Richard in
giving Ecclesiastical promotions, in calling councel^, and ordering other
Ecclesiastical matters: yea, eue^ in his absence, being in Syria, by one that
represented his person therein, the B. of Ely, who called and made a council at
westminster, as the kings procuratour, and the Popes Polych. Fabyan.
Legate, and spoke by the kings power. But in this matter, king John did more
the^ any of his predecessors, which purchased him much hatred with the Pope
and his Monks. In this while the French king held a Council at Cenomannia
Fabyan. Antoninus.
in Turon. And after him King Jews did celebrate a solemn counsel at Paris,
whereat was praesent the Popes Legates.

In which time was Frederike the. 2. Emperor, out of doubt, says Auentinus,
an other Charles the great, and without Aue^tinus.
all controversy most pr^fitable for the Christian common wealth: which not
only held the privileges aforesaid in Apulia and Sicilia, but in all his
dominions, and about this matter, tamed diuer Popes, called and kept diverse
Councelles, as well by his Sons, as by him self: and ordained certain
Ecclesiastical laws against diverse Heretics, condemninge Novel co^st.
their heresies and appointing how they should be ordered; ordeininge likewise
many privileges for Ecclesiastical persons, In which time Henry the. 3.
King of Polyd.
England held a solemn Council, in the which both by the sentence of the
King and of the Princes, not a few privileges, were taken away from the order
of priesthood, at what time the Popes Legate required a tribute of all the
Clergy, but it was denied him. Robert Grosthed (whom ye call S. Robert)
wrote unto the Pope, a sharp Episile, because he grieved the Church of
England with ^askes and paymentes against reason: of which when he saw
Fabyan*
no redress, he with other Prelates of the land, complained unto the King,
of the wass of the goods and patrimony of the Church, by the Popes near
kinseman and other alient Bisshoppes, whom the King avoided out of the
Realm. To whom also the Emperor Mat. Paris*
Frederike wrote, that it was a shame for him to suffer any longer his Realm
to be oppressed with the Popes tyranny.

Jews the French king, called S. Jews, who as Antoninus*
Antoninus says, was so instructed, even from his infancy, in all the
wisdom of divine and good orders, that there was not found his like* that
kept the law of the high God etc. made a law against th^^e, that blasphemed
the name of the (...): adioyninge a penalty of a whoteyron to be printed in
the transgressors forehead. Also in the year of the Lord. 1228. He made a
Law against the Popes Appe^d. Math. Paris.
frauds, concerning the preuentions and reseruations of the revenues, and
dignities Ecclesiastical, complayninge that the Pope had pulled from him, the
collations of all Spiritual promotions: ordeininge that from hence forth the
election of Bisshoppes, Prelates and all other what so ever, should be free,
forcible, and effectual to the electours, patrones and collatours of them.
Also the same year he set forth an other Law against Simonie: complaininge
of the bioyng and sellinge of Ecclesiastical dignities. He made also certain
godly Laws against whoredom and Fornication. Fabyan.
Last of all in the year of the Lord 1268. he set forth Appe^d. Math. Paris.
the Law, commonly called Pragmatica Sanctio: wherein amongst other
Ecclesiastical matters against the Popes pollinges he says thus: Item, in
no case we will that exactions or grievous burdens of money; being laid on the
Church of our Kingedome by the Court of Rome, whereby our kingedome is
miserably impouerished, be levied or gathered: nor any hereafter to be laid,
except only for a reasonable godly and most urgent cause of necessity, that
can not be avoided: and that the same be done by our express biddinge, and
commandment of our own accord.

Conradus, Conradinus and Manfredus, still kept the privilege of the foresaid
Ecclesiastical matters in Sicilia and Apulia. Shortly after this time Charles
the King of Sicilia and Apulia, had all or most of the doing in the election
and making of diverse Popes, as of Martyn. 4. Celestyn. 5. Bonyface. 8. etc.
Nauclerus. Platina.


Edward the first; King of England, about this time made the Statute of
Northampton: So that after that time, noman should give, neither sell, nor
bequeath, neither Polych.
change, neither bye title, assign lands tenementes, neither rentes to no
man of Religion, without the Kings leave: which act, sense that time, has
been more straightly enacted and divised with many Eabyan. Polyd.
addicions, thereunto augmented or annexed. The which Law, says Polydore,
he made because he was Religionis studiosissimus, etc. most studiouse of
Religion, and most sharp enemy to the insolency of the Priesies.

At this time Philip le Beau the French King, began Paul. Aem.
his reign, brought up in the study of divinity, under Aegidius the Roman
divine, by whose admonitions and also of other divines, the King being
instructed in his duty, above al other things, endeavored him self about
the reformation of Religion, and orderinge of Ecclesiastical matters.
Whereupon lookinge to the state of the Clergy, he deposed a certain Bishop
for Anton. Naucler. Blond.
Heresy, and gave his Bishoprike to an other, and besides, claymed the
inuestiture of all other Bishops in his dominions: and calling Councelles at
home in his own Realm, would suffer none of his Clergy to goo to the Popes
Councelles. Aemylius. Nauclerus.
He caused the Popes Bulls to be burned. He commanded the Popes Legates to
avoid his realm: He commanded that no money should be carried out of the
Realm to the Pope. He set forth a Law that no man should goo to Rome out
of his kingedome. He called Platina.
a Council at Paris, and caused to be gathered thither all the Prelates and
Barons of France: to justify his dooinges, He showed unto them why he took
upon him to call a Council. He enueighed Nauclerus. Antoninus. Sabell.
Nauclerus. Sabellicus. Aemyl.
against the Pope for Heresy, Symonie, Homicide, Pride, Ambition. etc. and
that of right he ought therefore to be deposed. He demands of the Council,
unto whom they be lawfully sworn, and of whom they have received their
dignities? They all answer, that they are all the beneficiaries of him alone,
and that mindful of their Faith, and the Kings estate, they would suffer
death, for his glory, power and saulfegarde. Thereuppon he sets forth a
pragmaticall sanction or forceable law to diminis he the dignity of the Pope.
Append. Vrspurg.
Many other Ecclesiastical Laws he made, against the Jews, against the
Templars, against adultery. etc. He made also Clement the fifth Pope, and
swore him to certain Antoninus. Nauclerus.
co^dicions before hand: by whose importune means also, the General council
of Vienna was holden. In which Council he labored to have Pope Boniface
condemned for an Heretic, Antoninus.
affirminge that he would prove him so. But the matter was taken up, and to
satisfy the king, it was decreed that all the processes of Bonifacius against
the king were unjust, and the kings doings in any point against the Pope
should not be prejudicial to him, or to his heyers.

About the time of this Council at Vienna, the famous schooleman Durandus
sets forth a book: wherein as he rekeneth up diverse and great enormities
in Church matters: so for the reformacion of them, he always joins the
king, and secular Princes, and the Prelases, and to this purpose cites the
form of the ancient Councelles and many times enueigheth against and
complains upon the usurped authority of the Roman Bishop, warninge men to
beware, how they yield unto him: and prescribes a rule for the Princes, and
the Prelates to refourme all these enormities, not by custom were it never so
ancient, but by the word of God. About this time also the Emperor Henry
the. 7. came into Italy with great power, to reduce the Empire to the old
estate and glory of the ancient Emperors in this behalf. And on the day of
his coronation Aemyl.
at Rome, according to the manner of other Roman Emperors, he set Paral.
Vrsp. Nauclerus.
forth a Law, or new authentic of the most high Trinity, and the
Catholic faith.

Next to Henry. 7. was Jews. 4. Emperor: who had no less but rather greater
conflictes with the Popes in his time about the reformation of abuses, than any
had before him: the Pope now claiminge for an Ecclesiastical matter, the
confirminge of the Emperor, as before the Emperors were wont to confirm the
Popes. About which question, the Emperor sent and called many learned Clerks
in Divinity, in the Civil and Canon Antoninu^
Law, from Italy, France, Germany, Paris, and Bononia, which all answered,
that the Popes attemptes were erroneous, and derogating from the simplicity of
the Christian Religion. Whereupon the Emperor willed them, to search out the
matter diligently, and to dispute upon it, and to gather into books their
minds therein, which diverse did, as Marsilius Patauinus, Ockam, Dantes,
Petrarche. etc. Marius.


By whom, when the Emperor understood the Popes usurpation, he came to Rome,
called a council, and deposed the Pope, and placed an other in his rowme: In
which council, the Romans desired, to have their old order in the Popes
election ratified by the Emperor, to be renewed. This Emperor also called
avery great counsel at Fra^keforth, where besides the Spiritual and Secular
Princes of Germany, the king of England, and the king of Beam, were present,
where by the greater and sounder part, the Popes aforesaid usurpation was
abolished. Which sentence the Emperor confirmed, and published Paral. Vrsp.
writing thereof, that his authority depends not of the Pope, but of God
immediately, and that it is a vain thing, that is wont to be said, the Pope
has no superior. The Acts of this council against the Popes process were
ratified by the Emperor, as appears by his letters patentes thereupon,
Nauclerus.
beginning thus, Lodouike the fourth, by the grace of God etc. To all
Patriarchs, Archebisshoppes, Bisshoppes, and Priests etc. and ending thus:
Wherefore by the council and consent of the Prelates and Princes, etc. We
denounce and determine, that all such processes be of no force or moment, and
straightly charge and command, to all that live in our Empire, of what estate
or condition so ever they be, that they presume not to observe the said
sentences and curses of the Popes interdiction. etc. An other Council he
called afterward Nauclerus.
at the same place, about the same matter: because Pope Clement called it
Heresy, To say that the Emperor had Paral. Vrsp. Nauclerus.
authority to depose the Pope, which heresy as principal, he laid first to
the Emperors charge. Item, that the Emperor affirmed, that Christ and his
Apostles were but poor. Item, the. 3. heresy, that he made and deposed
Bishops. Item that he neglected the Popes interdightme^t, etc. Item that he
joined certain in marriage in degrees forbid (he means forbidden by the
Popes Laws) and deuorceth them that were married in the face of the Church.
Which in deed was nothing else, but that amongst other Ecclesiastical laws,
that the Emperor set forth, were some for marriages and deuorcementes, contrary
to the Popes decrees.

In France king Charles denied the Pope the tenthes Aemylius
of his Clergy. But Philip de Valoys that followed, reformed and took away
many late vpstart Ecclesiastical abuses in the Clergy, and Prelates in his
Realm: of the which, diverse complaints being made unto the king, he Pet.
Bertra^.
called a council at Paris, and sommoned thither the Bishops, as appears by
his letters wherein he complains, that they have enchroched from him and his
officers a great many of rightes: bringing in their novelties not due, and
unwonted grieves under the pretense of Ecclesiastical causes: whereby they have
broken the concord of the Clergy and the Laity, and therefore willing to
provide so much as he can by Gods help, an healthful remedy: He requires,
and nevertheless commands them to appear before him at Paris personally.
etc. The Prelates appearing at the day assigned, before the king in his
Palayce, Archebisshoppes, Bisshoppes, and making reverence to the kings
majesty, being set down with his council, and certain Barons assisting him,
a certain knight of the kings council, spoke publykely for the king in the
presence of them all, taking for his theme this text. Give that unto Caesar
that belongs to Caesar, and that unto God that is due unto God. etc. The
kings admonition being made, a great many complaints were put up unto the
king by his nobles and officers, against the Clergies usurpation, in meddling
with contractes of marriages, in their privileges of Clerks: In citations to
their Courts, in their excommunicatio^s, in wills, and hereditamentes, in
calling of provincial councelles, in making synodall Decrees, and statutes,
in meddling with realties, in pere^ptory writes, in examinations of men's
beleues, in enioyning of money penances, In shauing of children, and unlawful
persons making the^ Clerks, in whoordome and fornication, in wyddowes goods,
in bloudshead in the Churcheyarde, in inuentories, etc. and in a great many mo
matters, which ye call Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes: the French king
proving them to be (as in deed they were no other) but temporal:
nevertheless not standinge much about the name, nor taking them all away,
from their jurisdiction, he only said, he would reform them. Neuerthels, for
certain days there was much disputing to and fro, whether they belonged to
the king to reform or no, till the king by his foresaid procuratour gave
them the kings determinat answer, declaring unto them, how that they ought
not to be troubled, because the kings intention was, to keep those rightes
and customs of the Church, and Prelates which were good and reasonable, but
by reason of their faults, the judgment which were good and reasonable,
apperteined not unto the^ to determine, but to the king. Because the Decree,
Nouit etc. says, that the king of France in matters de Facto, has not his
superior etc. Whereupon he concluded, that the king would hear all the
informations: And those Customs of the which he should be fully enfourmed,
that they were good and reasonable, he would make only to be observed.

In conclusion the Prelates made such importune labor, that the forsaide
attorney answered them for the king, that if the Prelates themselves would
amend those things, that were to be amended and corrected, the king would
abide till the feast of the Nativity next to come: within which term, he
would innouate nothing: but if within the said term, the Prelates had not
amended those things that were to be amended and corrected, that then the
king would put to such remedy, as should be acceptable to God and the people.
Which in conclusion the king was feign to do, by a sharp and severe Law,
when he saw how the Prelates Aemylius.
dallied him of, with fair words, and therefore he him self, Composuit rem
sacerdotum, did set in order the matters of the Priests.

In England at this time many abuses about Ecclesiastical causes, were
reformed (although the Pope and his Clergy, did earnestly maintain them) by
king Edward the. 3. who wrote his letters to y^ Pope, admonishing him Paral.
Vrsp. Fabyan. Caxton. Polyd. Nauclerus.
to leave of his disordered doings, and when that would not serve, he
redressed them by act of parliament, and (as Nauclerus says) he commanded
that from thenceforth, no body should bring into the Realm any kind of the
Popes letters, under the pain of drowning, and expelled all persons out of
his kingdom, that wear by the Pope promoted to any benefice.

Next to Jews was Charles the. 4. chosen Emperor, who held a council at
Mentze, with ye Prelates and Princes, Nauclerus. Paral. Vrsp.
in the year of the Lord. 1359. wherein he much reproved the Popes Legate for
his disorders, and commanded the Archbishop of Mentze to reform his Clergy,
and the disorders amongst them, for otherwise he would see to it him self.
The Popes Legate seeing how the Emperor Naucler.
took upon him, gate him to his ship, and saylled to Colayn as one that
fled away. With which doings, the Emperor became very famous, for he was
a man of great works, who did lyghten the kingdom of Boheme, both with the
the settinge forth of Religion, and with the discipline of Laws and good
manners. At this time wrote Nilus the Bishop of Thessalonica, declaringe the
only cause of the division between the Greek and the Latin Church to be,
for that the Pope will not suffer free and general Councelles to be called by
the Emperors according to the ancient custom: and that his authority is
not by the Law of God, but by the positive Laws of Princes, granted only,
because that than Rome was the greatest City in the world, and has no
prerogative of Christ or Peter, more than any other Bishoprike.

King Richard the. 2. called a Council at Westminster (says Polydore)
wherein it was thought good to the King and the Princes for the weal of his
realm of England, if a part of the Popes authority were bounded within the
limits of the Occean sea, (he means that it were driven out of the Isle of
Britain) wherefore it was decreed, that hereafter it should be lawful to no
man, to try any cause before the Bishop of Rome: nor that any man be publikly
Polyd.
pronounced wicked or enemy of Religion, that is to wit, as the common people
term it, be excommunicate by his authority: nor that if any man have any
such commandment from him, they execute the same. The penalty ordained to
those that violate this law, was, that losinge all his goods, he should be
cast into perpetual prison.

The Church of Rome at this time was maruailously torn in sunder with an
horrible Schism, which continued about. xl. years, having at ones three
heads, calling them selves Popes, every one of them in most despitefull
wise, calling the other Antichrist, Schismatique, Heretic, tiraunt, thief,
traitor, the son of perdition, sower of Cockle, the child of Belial, etc.
diverse learned men of that time inueighed against them all three, as Henricus
de Hassia, 10. Cerson, Theodorych Nyem, secretary before this to Pope Boniface,
who proves at lardge by good reasons, De schis. li. 3. cap. 73
by the word of God, and by the Popes decrees, that the refourmation of these
horrible disorders in the Church belong to the Emperor, and the secular
Princes. Sigismunde the noble Emperor understanding his duty herein,
amongst other his notable acts, called a Council together at Constantia,
and brought again to unity the Pius Pap. 2.
Church divided in three parts: which Council (says Nauclerus) began by
the Emperors commandment and industry, in the year. 1414. To the which
Council came Pope John Platina.
before the Emperors coming, thinkinge to have outfaced the Council with
his pretensed authority, till the Emperor came: who geuinge to all men in the
Council free liberty to speak their minds, a great company of horrible
Sabel. Platina.
vices, were laid straight way to his chardge. To the which when he was not
hable to answer, he was deposed, and the other two Popes also, and an other
chosen chiefly by the Emperors means, called Martyn the. 5. After these
things finished, they entered into the communication of a reformation Volater.
both of the Clergy and the Layty, to which purpose the Emperor had
devised a book of Constitucions, and also willed certain learned Fathers
there, but specially the Bishop of Camera, a Cardinal there present, to
devise what faults they could find, and how they should be redressed, not
sparinge any degree, neither of the Prelates nor of the Princes them selves.
Which the Bishop did, and compiled a little book or Libell, entitled a
Libell for reformation of the Church gathered Orth. Great.
by Peter de Aliaco. etc. and offered to the Church rulers, gathered together
in Constaunce Council, by the commandment of the Emperor Sigismonde. etc.
In this Libell of reformation, after he has touched the notable enormities in
the Pope, in the Court of Rome, in the Cardinals, in the Prelates, in
Religious persons, and in Priests: in exaction, in Canons and Decretalles,
incollations of benefices, in fastinges, in the divine service, in Piaures, in
making festival days, in making Saints, in readinge their legendes in the
Church, in hallowyng Temples, in woorshippinge Relics, in calling
Councelles, in making religious Soldiers, in refourminge universities, in
studiynge liberal sciences, and knowledge of the tongues, in repayringe
Libraries, and in promotinge the learned: After all these things being
Ecclesiastical matters or causes, he concludes with the duties of Princes
for the lookyng to the reformacion of these matters, or any other that needs
amendment. The sixth, (says he) and the last consideracion shall be of the
refourminge of the state of the Lay Christians, and chiefly the Princes of
whose manners depends the behavior of the people, etc. Let them see also,
that they repel all evil customs contrary to the law of God, and the law
of man in their subjects, by the counsel of divines and other wise men. Also
let them see that they pull up by the roots and destroy more diligently, than
they have done, Magical arts and other superstitions condemned by the law
of God, and all errors and heresies contrary to the Faith. Item that they
watch and care earnestly for the exaltinge of the Faith, and the honor of
Gods Service, and the refourminge of the Church, and that they labor and
travail diligently for the reformation of all those things which are
mentioned before or here followyng, or any other things profitable. etc. When
this book was thus compiled, it was offered up to the Council (says
Orthwinus) that the most Christian Emperor Sigismonde had called together,
not so much for the agreement of the Church, as for hope of a general
reformation of their manners: hopinge verily that the Prelates would put to
their helping hands, but the Roman craft, beguiling, the German
simplicity: the new made Pope featly flouted the well meaning Emperor,
saying that he would think on this matter at laysure, etc. Thus was
Sigismonde the Emperor misused, which otherwise might seem to have been
borne, to have restored Christianity to the world again. The frustratinge of
this reformation, was on the other side, no less grievous unto the French
king, that both before the time of the Council, and in the council while,
had greatly travailed in taking away the Popes exactious, and other
ecclesiastical abuses, wherewith his realm was wonderfully oppressed: as
appears in the oration that the French kings Ambassadors made in this
Council, written by Nico. de Clemangijs, and set forth in Orthwynus Gratius,
fardell of notable things.

After this Council, was an other holden at Basil, whither came the Princes
of Spain, France, Hungary, and Germany: which dooinges of the Princes made
Pope Eugenius so to fear, that he thought to translate the Council to
Bonomia. But the Emperor and other Princes, and the Prelates which were at
Basil, not only not obeyed him, but Nauclerus.
twice or thryse admonished him to come thither. This Pope was in this Council
deposed in the. 34. session. Of this Council, the Emperor Sigismonde was the
chief, and protector, and in his absence appointed the Duke of Bauaria in his
room. He caused the Bohemes to come to this Council. And when he heard of
those matters in Religion, which Nauclerus.
were generally agreed upon, he allowed them, and commanded them to be
observed.

After the death of Sigismonde, Frederike the Emperor caused the Duke of
Sauoy, that was made Pope, to renounce his Papacy, and commanded by his
Decree, the Prelates gathered at Basil, to dissolve the Council by a certain
day. This Emperor Nauclerus.
called a Council at Mentze, to make an end, and utterly to take away the
Schism of the Church, and to deliver it from more grievous dangers. He writes
to the French King thereof, declaringe how this Schism did so oppress his
mind, and fervently Orth. Great.
solicit him, that as well for his love to Religion, as for his office called
of God, to be the chief advocate of the Church, he did not only run with
diligence to succor it, but stired up all kings and Princes, that with a pure
sincerity, delighted in the name of Christ, to run with him in this so
necessary and healthful a work, and to this purpose, he declares how, he
has appointed to all his princes and Prelates an assembly at Mentze, whereat
he entendeth, to be personally praesent, and therefore desires the French
king also to be there in his own person, or at the least that he would
send his Orators thither, instructed distinctly with all ways and means, by
the which the Church might be quiet from the calamities ready to fall on her.
Pope Eugenius sent to the French king, to desire him to take away his
pragmaticall Law. To whom the king answered, that he would have it kept
inuiolatly. Orth. Gra.
Then the Pope desired the king, neither to admit Basil council, nor yet the
council at Mentze, that was called: to the which the king answered, that he
would take advise.

Pius the second, sent his Legate the Cardinal of Cusa, into the co^treis of
Sigismond Duke of Austria, which Legate, Paral. Vrsp.
when he would have ordained certain Ecclesiastical constitutions according
to the Popes Law: Sigismonde the Duke, would not suffer that such a custom
should come into Germany.

Aeneas Syluius, who after he was made Pope, was called Pius the second, was
of this mind before he was Pope, that secular Princes might call councels,
yea, maugre the Popes head, and therefore commends that devise of Charles the
French king which (says he) is both a saulf and Epist. 54. ad Ca^cel. Imp.
a short way to still this mischief. He means to take away the Schism, and
to restore unity to the Church. Of the same mind also was his Cardinal de
Cusa, as appears in his book De Concordia Catholica, saiynge: By that Li. 3.
ca. 13.
which is aforesaid, it is gathered, that the holy Emperors always, made the
Synodall congregations of universal councels of the whole Church: and even so
I my self, having sought thoroughly the Acts of all the universal councelles,
even till the eight council inclusiue, celebrated in the time of Basil, I have
found it to be true: and so also in the same eight Synod in the fifte Act
thereof, we read, that the most reverend priest Elias and Syncellus, of the
throne of Jerusalem in the hearing of all, spoke thus: Know you that in the
times past, they were the Emperors, which gathered together Synodes from out
of the whole world, and they collected their deputies, to the disposing of
such manner causes: Whose steps therefore our Emperor following, being
also a worshipper of God, has made this universal Synod. Thus said he there,
and I have also read in the little gloss of Anastasius (the library keeper of
the Apostolical sea, who translated the same Synod out of Greek) upon the
same, saying: that The^perours were wont togather universal Synodes from all the
world, etc.

Next unto Frederike was Maximilian Emperor, to whom the Princes of Germany
put up certain greuaunces in Ecclesiastical matters, that anoyed the Empire,
in number. 10. Against Bulls, Privileges, Electio^s, reseruations,
expectatiues, Annates, unfit pastors, pardons, tithes, and the spiritual
courts etc. beseching him, to have some redress herein. Who being moved with
the admonitions, aduisementes and exhortatio^s of the learned Clergy, and the
godly Princes, at the length called a council at Triers and Colayn, for the
redress of these and other enormities, in the year of the Lord. 1512. which
was the fourth year of the reign of the most renoumed king of England, king
Henry the eight. In this council amongst other things, because there was a
suspicion of a Schism breedinge, and of Paral. Vrsp.
greuaunces in the Church, it was necessarily decreed, that the Emperor and
Princes electours, with other Princes and states of Thempire, should look about
them, and well consult by what means, these greeues might be taken away most
commodiously, and the Schism removed, and evil things reformed to
edification. It was decreed also against blasphemours, to pay either a sum
of money limited, or to suffer death. And that all men should know this decree,
it was thought good to the Princes, and states of the Empire, that al preachers
and persons, should at all high feasts preach unto the people thereof
faithfully. This being done, Maximilian set forth a decree for ye taking away
of the forsaid Ecclesiastical greuaunces: wherein he declares that though of
clemency he have suffered the Pope and Orth. Gr^.
the Clergy herein, as did his father Frederik: Yet not withstanding, since that
by his liberality, the worship and service of God, has fallen to decaie, it
apperteineth unto his duty, whom God has chosen unto the Emperial throne of
Rome, that amongst all other most great businesses of peace and wars, that
he also look about him vigilantly, that the Church perish not, that Religion
decaie not, that the worship of the service of God, be not diminished, etc. In
consideration whereof, he provides, that a man having in any city a Canonship
or Vicarship, enjoy not any prehende of an other Church in the same city,
etc. making other decrees against suing in the Ecclesiastical courts for
benefices, for defense of Lay men's patronages, for pensions, against bulls,
and cloked Symony, etc.

After this, the Emperor and Jews the French king, concluded together to call
a general counsel at Pise: to the which also agreed a great part of the Popes
Cardinals. Many (says Sabellicus) began to abhor the Popes Courts, saying
that all things were there defiled with filthy lucre, with monstrous and
wicked lusts, with poysoninges, Sacrileges, murders, and Symoniacall fayers,
and that Pope Julius him self was a Symoniake, a dronkarde, a beast, a
worldling, and unworthily occupied the place, to the destruction of
Christendom, and that there was no remedy, but a general Council to be
called, to help these mischiefs, to the which his Cardinals according to
his oath, desired him, but they could not obtain it of him.

Maximilian the Emperor, being the author of it, with Jews the French king
(because the histories do bear record, that in times past the Emperors of
Rome had wont to appointe councels) they appointe a council to be holden at
Pyse.

Maximilian the Emperor, Jews the French king, and other Princes beyond the
seas, were not more carefully bent, and moved by their learned men to refourme
by their authority the abuses about Church matters, tha^ was king Henry the
eight, at the same time king of England, of most famous memory, who following
the humble suites and petitions of his learned Clergy, agreynge thereupon by
uniform confent in their convocation, took upon him that authority and
government in all manner matters or causes Ecclesiastical, which they assured
him to belong unto his estate, both by the word of God, and by the ancient
Laws of the Church: and therefore promised unto him, in verbo sacerdotii, by
their priesthood, not to do any thing in their councelles wiehout his assent,
etc. And this Clergy was not only of Divines, but also of the wysest, most
expert and best learned in the Civil and Canon Laws, that was than or has
been sense, as D. Tonstal Bishop of Duresme, D. Stokesley B. of London, D.
Gardener Bishop of Wynton. D. Thirleby Bishop of Westminster, and after of
Norwiche, and your old master D. Bonner, who succeeded Stokesley, in the sea
of London, and many others: by whose advise and consent, there was at that time
also a learn^d book made and published, De vera differentia Regiae potestatis
and Ecclesiasticae, which I doubt not but ye have seen long sythen. Neither
was this a new devise of theirs to please the king with all, or their opinion
only, but it was and is the judgment of the most learned Cyuilians and
Canonystes, that, when the Clergy are faulty or negligent, it apperteyneth
to the Emperor to call general councelles for the reformation of the Church
causes, as Philippus Decius a famous Lawyer affirms. And the Glossator upon
this Canon Principes, affirms that the Princes have jurisdiction in diverse
sorts within Cons. 1^1.
the Church over the Clergy, when they be stubbourne, ambitious, subuerters
of the faith, falsaries, makers of Schisms, contemners of excommunication: yea
also wherein so ever, the Ecclesiastical power fails or is to weak as in
this Decree. He means where the power of the Church by the word of
doctrine prevails not, therein must the Princes authority and jurisdiction
take order for that is the plain prouiso in the decree. The words of the
decree are as follow. The seculer Princes have oftentimes within the Church
the highest authority, that they may 23. q. 5.
fence by that power, the Ecclesiastical discipline. But within the Church
the powers (of Princes) should not be necessary, sauinge that, that thing
which the Priests are not able to do, by the word of doctrine, the power
(of the Prince) may There is diverse reedinges: Imperet or Impetret.
command, or obtain that, by the terror of discipline: The heavenly
kingedome does oftentimes prevail or goo forward by the earthly kingedome,
that those which being within the Church do against the faith and
discipline, may be brought under by the rigor of Princes: and that the power
of the Princes, may lay upon the necks of the proud, that same discipline,
which the profit of the Church is not hable to exercise: and that he bestow
the force of his authority, whereby to deserve woorship. Let the Princes of
the world well know, that The Princes shall give an account to God, for the
Church, and the discipline thereof.
they of duty shall render an account to God for the Church, which they
have taken of Christ to preserve. For whether the peace and discipline of the
Church be increased by faithful Princes, or it be loosed: He does exact of
them an account, who has delivered his Church to be committed to their power.
To this effect also writes Petrus Ferrariensis, a notable learned man in ye
Laws, saying: In form. libell. quo agitur ex subst. in verbo ex suo corpore.
Thou ignorant man, thou ought to know that the Empire (the Emperor) ones
in times past, had both the swoordes, to wit, both the Temporal and
Spiritual, in so much that the Emperors then bestowed all the Ecclesiastical
benefices thorough the whole world, and more, they did choose the Pope, as it
is in C. Adrianus did. 63. And ye same Petrus in an other place, says thus:
Mark after what sort and In form. respo^s. con. ad verb. ta^q^ publ. ex com.
n. 10.
how many ways these Clergy me^, do snare the Lay, and enlarge their own
jurisdiction: but alas miserable Emperors and secular princes, which do
suffer this and other things: you both make your selves sclaues to the
Bisshops, and ye see the world usurped by them infinite ways, and yet ye
study not for remedy, because ye give no heed to wisdom and knowledge. As
Petrus Ferrariensis attributes both the swoordes, that is, both spiritual and
temporal jurisdiction to ye Emperor: So 10. Quintinus Heduus a famous
professor of the law in Paris, and one that attributes so much to the Pope as
may be, and much more than ought to be, says yt: In solo Principe omnis est
potestas: in the Prince alone is al power, and thereto avouches this saying of
Speculator, In repetit. lect. de Christ. Ciuitatis Aristocra^ia.
De iurisdict. omniu^ iudicu^: Quod quicquid est in regno, id esse intelligitur
de jurisdiction Regis: that whatsoever is in a kingdom, that is understood,
to be under the jurisdiction of the king. To which purpose he cites an
ancient learned one in ye Law whose name was Lotharius, who, says he, did
say: That the Prince is the fountain or welspring of al jurisdiction, and
protests also him self to be of ye same mind: and writing of the kings
power in Eccl. matters or causes, he cites this Canon Qua^do vult Deus forth
of the decrees, whereupon he as it were co^menteth: saying, This is the reason
wherefore, it is leafull ^^. q. ^.
for the Prince, some whiles to determine those things which concern the
Church, least the honesty of the mother (he means ye Church) should in any
thing be violated, or least her tra^quillity should be troubled specially of
the^, to whom she is committed (meaning y^ Church Mynisters). If there be any
other thing, this chiefly is an Ecclesiastical matter, namely to call or
co^uocate Cou^celles (says Quintinus) But this is the opinion (says he) of
many learned men, that the Emperor may co^uocate a general Counsel, so often,
and for any cause, when the Pope and the Cardinals be noted of any suspicio^,
and do for slow and cease, either for lack of skill: or peradventure of
some evil meaning, or of both, or else wha^ there is any Schism. Co^stantinus
(says he) called the first Nicene counsel, the other three general
Councelles, Gratianus, Theodosius, and Martianus the Emperors called by their
edict. Iustinianus called the fifte general council at Constantinople: the
Emperor Constantine. 4. did conuocate the sixte general Council against the
Monothelytes. The authority of the king Theoderike commanded the Bisshops
and Priests forth of diverse provinces to assemble together at Rome, for the
purgation of Pope Symachus the first. Carolus Magnus, as it is in our
Histories, commanded five Councels to be celebrated for the Ecclesiastical
state, to wit, Moguntinum, Remense, Cabilonense, Arelatense, and Turonense. The
Pope calls the Bisshoppes to Rome, or to some other place: the King does
forbid them to go, or he commands The king is to be obeyed in
Ecclesiastical causes, and not the Pope.
them to come to his Court or Council: the Bisshoppes must obey the kings
precept, not only in this case, but in any other matter what so ever besides
sin: for he that does not observe his bounden fidelity to the king:
whether he be a Bisshoppe, Priest, or Deacon, is to be thrown forth of his
degree or place. For the proof whereof he cites many Canons out of the
decrees, and concludes thus: to be brief, this is mine opinion: when the
king calls together the Prelates to a Council, and to reform the state of
the Church, they are bound to obey, yea although the Pope forbid it. The
people does amend or reform the negligence of the pastor Can. vlt. did. 65.
Ergo, the Prince also may do the same. If the Bishop will not; or do
forslowe to hear and to decide the controversies of his Clergy: the Bisshoppe
being slow or caryinge over long, nothing does hinder or stay (says the
Canon) to ask Episcopale iudicium, the Bisshoply judgment of the Emperor. If
it happen that the Priests be not diligent about the Altar offices: if
conte^ning the temple, neglecting the Sacrifices, they hasten into kings
palayces, run to wrastlinge places, do profane them selves in brothelles
houses, and if they convert that which the faithful have offered to Christ, to
the pleasures of them selves, and of theirs: wherefore shall not the princes,
whom the Catholic Faith has begotten, and taught in the bosom of the
church, call again, and take upon themselves the care of this matter? and so
he proves at lardge by many examples out of the Histories, and the Laws,
that this care and chardge in Ecclesiastical matters and causes belongs to
the Princes, unto the which examples, he adds this: In our Fathers time,
(says he) King Jews. 11. made a constitution, that Archebishoppes,
Bishops, Abbottes, and who so ever had dignities in the Church, or had the
cure of other benefices, should within five months, resort to their
Churches, and should not remove any more from thense, diligently there
labouringe in divine matters, and sacrifices for the saulfty of the king and
his kingdom, and that under a great pain of losinge all their goods and
lands. Here Quintinus does grievously complain of the dissolute and most
corrupt manners of the Clergy, whereto he adds, saying: wherefore than
should not Princes compel this lewd idle kind of men to do their duties?
If you delight in antiquities (says he) no man does doubt, but that in the
primative Church, the Princes did judge both of the Ecclesiastical persons
and causes: and did oftentimes make good Laws for the truth against
falsehood. Arcadius and Honorius religious Princes do depose a troublesome
Bishop both from his Bishoprike, sea, and name. L. Quicunque: De Epis. and Cler.
The. 13. first titles of the first book of Justinians Code, collected out of
the Constitutions of diverse Emperors, do plainly entreat and judge of those
things which appertain to the Bishoply cure. For what pertains more to the
office of a Bishop, than Faith? then Baptism? then the high Trinity? than the
conversation of Monks? the ordeining of Clergy men and Bishops? and than
many like laws, which doubtless: do concern our Religion, and Church. But
the Nouel Constitutions of the Emperor Justinian are full of such Laws. And
least peradventure some man might suspect, that this was tyranny, or the
oppression of the Church, John the Pope does salute this Imperour, the most
clement Son, learned in the Ecclesiastical disciplines, and the most
Christian amongst Princes. Epist. inter claras. De su^m a Trin. C. Childebertus
the King of France, did exact of Pelagius. 2. the confession of his faith and
Religion: the which the Pope both speedely and willingly did perform C. Sat
agendum. 25. q. 1. When I was in Calabria, says Quintinus, by chance I
found a fragment of a certain book in Lombardy letters, having this
inscription: Capitula Caroli. Then follows an Epistle beginning thus: I
Charles by the grace of God, and of his mercy, the King and governor of the
kingdom of France, a devout defendour of Gods holy Church, and an humble
healper thereof. To all the orders of the Ecclesiastical power, or the dignities
of the secular power: greetinge: And so recites al those Ecclesiastical Laws
and constitucions, which I have written before in Charles the great. To all
which, (says Quintinus) as it were in manner of a conclusion, are these
words put to: I will compel all men to live according to the Canons and
rules of the Fathers. Jews the Emperor, this Charles Son, kept a Synod
wherein he forbadde all Churchemen, sumptuousnes or excess in apparaile,
vanities of iewelles, and ouermuche pomp. Anno Christi. 830. He also set forth
a book, touching the manner and order of living for the Churchemen. I doubt
not, (says Quintinus) but the Church should use, and should be bound to
such laws. (meaning, as Princes make in Ecclesiastical matters) Pope Leo.
3. (says he) being accused by Campulus and Paschalis, did purge himself
before Charles the great, being at Rome, and as yet not Emperor. Can.
Auditu^. 2. q. 4. Leo. 4. offers him self to be reformed or amended, if he
have done any thing amiss by the judgment of Jews the French king, being
Emperor. Can. Nos si incompetenter. 2. q. 7. Menna whom Gregory the great
calls most reverend brother and fellow Bishop, being now already purged
before Gregory, is commanded a fresh to purge him self of the crime objected
before Bruchinild the Queen of France Ca. Menna. 2. q. 4. In which quaestion
also it is read, that Pope Sixtus 3. did purge him self before the Emperor
Valentinian. Can. Mandastis. So also John. 22. Bishop of Rome was compelled by
means of the The Pope an heretic compelled to reca^te before the French
king.
Divines of Paris, to recante before the French King Philippe, not without
triumph, the which 10. Gerson tells in a Sermon, De Pasc. The Popes Heresy
was that he thought, the Christian Souls not to be received into glory before
the resurrection of the Bodies. Cresconius a noble man in Sicilia, had
authority or power given him of Pelagius the Pope, over the Bishops in that
Province, oppressinge the Clergy with vexations. Can. Illud. 10. q. 3. The
which Canon of the law, the Glossar does interpret to be written to a secular
Prince. in Ca. Clericum Nullus. 11. q. 1. The Abbottes, Bishops, and the Popes
themselves, in some time paste, were chosen by the Kings provision. Ca.
Adrianus. 63. did. And in the same Canon. Hinc est etiam. 16. q. 1. Gregorius
wrote unto the Dukes Rodolph, and Bertulph, that they should in no wise
receive priests defiled with whoredom or Symony, but that they should
forbid them from the holy Mynisteries. Verum. 32. did. in which place the
interpretours do note, that Laymen sometimes may suspende Cleargymen from
their office, by the Popes commandment: yea also they may excommunicate,
which is worthy of memory. Hitherto Quintinius a learned lawyer and a great
mainteinour of the Popes jurisdiction, has declared his opinion, and that
agreeable to the Popes own Laws, that Princes may take upon them to govern
in Ecclesiastical matters or causes. Besides these Lawyers, this was the
common opinion of the chiefest writers of the common Law of this realm, as
appears by Braughton in these words: Sunt and sub rege etc. Under the King
are both free men and bondemen, and they Braughto^. lib. 1. cap. de Papa.
Archiepiscopis and alijs praelatis.
be subject to his power, and are all under him, and he is a certain thing or
creature that is under none but only under God. And again in the chapter the
title whereof is this: Rex non habe^ parem etc. The King has no peer or
equal in his kingdom: The king (says he) in his kingdom has no equal,
for so might he lose his precepte or authority of commaundinge, sith that an
equal has no rule or commandment over his equal: as for the King him
self ought not to be under man but under God, and under the Law, because the
Law makes a King. Let the King therefore attribute that unto the Law, that
the Law attributes unto him, to wit, dominion and power. For he is not a
King in whom will and not the law does rule, and that he ought to be under
the Law, Cum sit Dei vicarius, sith he is the vicar of God, it appears
evidently by the likeness of Jesus Christ, whose vicegerent he is in earth: and
within a little after he concludes thus: Igitur non debet mayor esse eo in
regno suo, Therefore there ought to be none greater then he in his kingedome.

Thus have I sufficiently proved, that the Emperors and Kings, ought, have,
and may claim, and take upon them such gouernemente, in Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical causes and matters, as the Queens Majesty now doothe. In
confirmation whereof I have been more large, than otherwise I would, but that
the proof hereof does reprove, and fully answer the principal matter of
your whole book: and therefore I may use more briefnesse in that which
follows. I have made proof unto you, sufficient to remove your ignorance,
both of the matter, and the way whereby to know, confessed by you in your
Minor Proposition. And this have I done by the self same Means, that you
require in your issue. I have made proof of the Supreme government in
Ecclesiastical causes, to belong unto Kings and Princes, by the express
commandment of God, where he did first describe and set forth, the duty
and office of Kings. I have made the same more plain and manifest, by the
examples of the most holy governors amongst Gods people, as, Moses, Joshua,
David, Saloman, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, the King of Niniue, Darius, and
Nabugodonosor: who expressed this to be the true meaning of Gods commandment,
by their practice hereof, so highly commended even by the holy Ghost:
whereunto I have added certain Prophecies, forth of David and Esaie: whereby
it is manifestly proved, that the holy Ghost does look for, exact, and
challenge, this service and Supreme government in church causes, at Princes
hands. I have declared that the Catholic Church of Christ, did accept, and
repute these histories of the old Testament, to be Figures and Prophecies, of
the like government and service, to be required of the Kings, in the time of
the New Testament: I have confirmed the same by the manifest Scriptures, of
the New Testament: Whereunto I have adioygned, the testimonies of aunciente
Doctors, with certain examples of most godly Emperors, who being so taught
by the most Catholic Fathers of Christ's Church, did rightly Judge, that
the vigilant care, oversight, and ordering of church causes, was the chiefest
and best part of their Ministry, and service unto the Lord. I have showed
plainly, by the order of Supreme government in Church causes, practiced, set
forth, and allowed, in the greattest and best Councelles, both General and
National: that the same order of gouernmente, has been claimed and put in
ure by the Emperors, and allowed, and much commended by the whole number of
the Catholic Bishops. I have made plain proof hereof, by the continual
practice of the like Ecclesiastical government, claymed and used by the Kings
and Princes, even until the time, that you your self did allow, confess,
and preach the same many years together: All which, to your more
contentaci^n herein, I have prcoued by those Histor^ographers, that wrote not
only before the time of Martyn Luther, least ye might suspect the^ of
parcialitie against you: but also such in deed, as were for the most part
partial on your side, or rather wholly addicte and mancipate to your holy
Father: as, Platina, Nauclerus, Abbas Vrspurgensis, Sabellicus, Aeneas Syluius,
Volateranus, Fabyan, Polychronicon, Petrus Bertrandus, Benno Cardinalis,
Durandus, Paulus Aemylius, Martinus Poenitentiarius, Pontificale, Damafus,
Polydorus Virgilius, etc. all your friends, and whom you may trust, I warrante
you, on their word, being the Popes sworn Vassalles, his Chapplaynes, his
Cardinals, his Chamberlaynes, his Secretaries, his Library keepers, his
Penitentiaries, his Legates, his Peterpence gatherers, his sworn Monks and
Abbottes, as well as you, and some of them Popes them selves, which, your
friends say, can neither lie, nor err from the truth. And besides all these,
the sour points of your issue, according to your request, proved at large,
for the better redusinge of you from wilful and malicious ignorance, to know
and acknowledge ye invincible truth hereof: I have added to your Peticion, a
fifte point, which you term a work of Supererogacion. For, to confirm my
proufes with all, I have producted for witnesses, your best learned although
otherwise Papishe, Ciuilian and Canon lawyers, who have deposed directly on my
side against you: Namely D. Tunstall, D. Stokesley, D. Gardener, D. Boner, D.
Thirlbee, D. Decius, the Glossares upon the Law, D. Petrus Ecrrariensis, D.
10. Quintinus: to whom I might add the Ciuilians and Canonistes that were in
or toward the Arches in the latter end of king Henry, and all the time of
king Edward, with all the Doctors and Proctors of or toward the Arches at
this time. Wherefore you will now I trust, yield herein, and reken your self
well satisfied, take upon you the knowledge hereof, and to be ready to testify
the same upon a book oath, for so have you promised.


M. Fekenham. The second chief point is, that I must upon a book oath, not
only testify, but also declare in my conscience, that The second point.
the Queens Highness, is the only Supreme governor of this Realm, as well
in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal. But upon a
book oath to make any such declaration in conscience, it may not possible be
without perjury, before that a man's conscience be persuaded thereunto: and
therefore (my conscience being not as yet persuaded thereunto) I cannot
praesently without most plain and manifest perjury, receive this Oath.


The B. of Wynchester. As there is no difference in matter betwixt these two
Propositions, I Testify in conscience, and I Declare in conscience, although
to seem subtle, you would have the simple conceive, by way of amplification
much diversity: Even so this which ye call the Second chief point, varieth
no whitte in matter from the first, and therefore my former answer serves to
them both, if ye will needs make two in show, of that in very deed is but
one.


M. Fekenham. And for the persuation of my conscience in this matter, I shall
again join this issue with your L. That if your L. or any other learned man
of this whole Realm, shall be able to prove, that our Savior Christ in his
Gospel and Testament, did commit the supreme government of all Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical causes in his Church, not unto his Apostles, being
Bishops and Priests, but to Emperors and Empresses, Kings and Queens,
being for the whole time of Christ's abode here upon the earth, Idolatours
and Infidelles, and so continued for the space of. 300. years after the
Assention of Christ: Constantine the Emperor being the Constantine the
first Emperor that did ioigne his svvoorde to the maintenance of God his
word. Act. 20.
very first Christian King, that we read of: when your L. shall be hable to
prove this, either by sentence or half sentence, word or half word, of
Christ's Ghospel and last Testament: Then I shall yield in this second
point, and with most humble thanks, think my self well satisfied in
conscience. And when your L. shall be hable to prove, that these words spoken
of the Apostle Paul at Miletum, unto the Bishops of Ephesus: Attendite vobis
and vniuerso gregi, in quo posuit vos Spiritus Sanctus Episcopos, regere
Ecclesia^ Dei, qua^ acquisiuit Sanguine suo: Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and unto the whole flock of Christ, vvherof the holy ghost has
appoincted or made you Bishops, to govern and rule the church of God, which
he has purchased with his blood. When your L. shall be hable to prove, that
these words do not make so full and perfect decleration, that the holy
ghost had so appoincted all spiritual gouerneme^te of Christ's flock unto
Bishops and Priests: But that Kings, Queens, or Princes, may have some
part of Spiritual government with them, or rather take the Supremacy and
chief part of Spiritual government from them: I shall then yield, and
think my self in conscience well satisfied, touching the saiynge of S.
Paul.


The B. of Wynchester. That our Savior Christ has committed, the Supreme
government in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes, to the Magistrates and
Princes, is already proved, by perfect words and whole sentences of
Christ's Ghospel, and last Testament: and therefore if your stay hitherto, has
been of conscience vnpersuaded through want of knowledge, and not of perverse
opinion, maintained with ye vain disyre of glory and reputacion, you must
needs yield, and be well satissied in conscience. You auouche this argument
as invincible. The Emperors and Empresses, Kings and Queens, were for the
whole time of Christ's abode here upon the earth, idolatours, and infidels, and
so continued by the space of. 300. years after the Assension of Christ:
Constantinus the Emperor being the very first Christian king that we read
of, Ergo, our Savior Christ did not commit the supreme government in
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes to Emperors, kings, and Princes. This
argument holds good, neither in matter nor yet in form. There was in the time
of Christ's aboade here upon earth, if we may may believe Eusebius and
Nicephorus the Nicep. li. 2.
Ecclesiastical historians, a king in Edessa, whose name was Agbarus. This
king believed in Christ, as Eusebius reports, Li. 1. ca. 13.
although as yet weakly. In his epistle which he wrote unto Christ, he
saluteth Christ, to be Jesus the good savior: he thinks by ye miraculous
works, which he has herd done by Christ, that he is either God him self,
or else Gods son: and he offers unto Christ such fruits of
thankefulnes, as so young and tender a faith, might for the time, bring forth.
And Christ in his rescript unto Agbarus, affirms that he was no infidel or
idolatour, saying: Beatus es quod in me credidisti, cum non videris me: Agbare
thou art blessed, because thou have believed in me, when thou have not seen me.
Besides this your own self, have affirmed oftentimes, and so does your
Popish tales declare, that the three wise men, that came forth of the East, to
worship the new borne king of the Jews, were kings, and lie buried in the
great doom at Colain, as the Colonistes make men to believe, called yet amongst
the vulgar Papists, the three kings of Colayn. If there be any credit to be
given, to the narracion of Eusebius and Nicephorus, touching Agbarus king of
Edessa, and to the commonly received opinion of your Popish Church,
concerning the three kings of Colayn, these four, were kings in the time of
Christ's aboade here in earth, and yet not idolatours nor infidels, all the
whole time of Christ's aboade here, but faithful worshippers of Christ:
Whereby the former part of the matter in the antecede^t of your argument is
disproued. Neither is that true, which you put in the second part, that the
Emperors and kings, continued idolatours for ye space of. 300. years after
Christ's Assention: For although for the most part, during that space, they
were such, yeat was there in that time some godly Princes that were otherwise
given. Eusebius in his Li. 6. ca. 34.
Ecclesiastical history, makes mention of one Philippus, a most Christian
Emperor, of whom, and his son also, being Emperor with him, Abbas
Vrspurgensis witnesses, that they were the first of all the Roman Emperors,
that became Christians, who also declared by their deeds and works, (as Abbas
says) that they had in them the fear of God, and the most perfect Christian
faith. Constantinus also the Emperor, father to Constantine the great, did
most diligently of all others, seek after Gods favor, as Eusebius writes of
him. He did provide by his Lib. 1. De vit. Constable.
government, that his subjects did not only enjoy great peace and quietness,
but also a pleasant conversation in holiness, and devotion toward God.
Idolatours and dissemblers in Religion, he banished out of his Court: and such
as confessed Gods truth, he re^eined and judged most worthy to be about an
Emperor, commanding such to (...) the guarde, both of his person and
dominion. He served and worshipped the only true God. He condemned the
multitude of Gods that the wicked had. He fortified his house with the
prayers of holy and faithful men; and he did so consecrate his Court and
Palaice, unto the service of God, that his household company, was a
congregation or Church of God within his palaice, having Gods mynisters, and
what s^^uer is r^quisit for a Christian Congregation* Polidor^^ in his history
of England, affirms also of this Lib. 2.
Emperor, that he studied above all other things to increase the Christian
Religion, who after his death was rekened in the number of saints. To these
few add Lucius a king of our own country, who although he was not in might
co^parable to Constantine the mighty Emperor, yet in zeal toward God, in
abolishing idolatry and false Religion, in winning and drawing his subjects by
all means to the Christian faith, in mainteining and defendinge the sincere
Christianity to the vttermoste of his power, he was equal with Constantine,
and in this point did excel him, that he long before Constantine brake the
Ise, gave the onsette, and shapte a pattern for Constantine to follow, whereby
to work that in other parts which he had achieued within his own dominion.

This noble king, of very love to true Religion, as Polydore testifies of him,
Procured him self and his subjects to be Baptized, caused his nation to be
the first of all other Provinces, that received the Gospel pupliquely, did
draw his people to the knowledge of the true God, banisshed at ones all manner
of profane worshipping of Gods, and commanded it to be left. Converted the
tempels of the Idolatours, to be Churches for the Christians. And to be short,
he employed and did bestow all his service and power most willingly to the
furtheraunce and increase of the Christian Religion, which he planted most
sincerely throughout his country: and so left it at his death, almost an
hundredth years before Constantine was Emperor: and therefore untruly said of
you, that Constantine was the very first Christian king, that joined his sword
to the maintenance of Gods word.

Sith this king Lucius, so long before Constantine, did not only these
things, that Polidore ascribes unto him, but also did them of his own
authority, with out any knowledge or consent of the Pope. Nor Eleutherius then
Bishop of Rome, to whom afterward king Lucius did write, to see some of
Caesar's and the Roman Lawe^, was any thing offended with the kings doings,
but greatly commending him therein, cou^celled him not to stand upon the Romain
laws, which, says the Pope, might be reprehended: but as he began without
them, so to go on, and draw Laws alonely out of the Scripture, which
afterward more at large, the Saxon kings, as, June and Aluredus did.

The epistle of Pope Eleutherius to king Lucius is, as follows, Peristis a
nobis, etc. You have desired of us, that the Roman Laws, and the Laws of
Caesar, might be sent over to you, the which ye would have used in (your)
kingdom of Brytanie. We may at al times reprove the Roman Laws, and the
Laws of Caesar, the law of God we can not. For ye have received of late (by
the divine mercy) in your kingdom of Brytanie, the Law and faith of
Christ. Ye have with you in (your) kingdom, both the old and new testament:
take out of them the Law (by the grace of God) through the council of your
kingdom, and by it (through Gods sufferaunce) shallye rule (your) kingdom of
Brytanie, for you are the vicar of God in (your) kingdom, according to the
Prophet king: The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass
of the world, and they that dwell therein. And again, according to the Prophet
king: Thou haste loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, wherefore God, even
thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And
again according to the Prophet king: give the king thy judgment O God, and
thy righteousness unto the kings son. For it is not: give the judgment and
righteousness of Caesar, for the Christian nations and people of (your)
kingdom, are the kings sons, which dwell and consiste in your kingdom,
under your protection and peace, according to the Gospel, even as the hen
gathers together her chickens under her wings. The nations in deed of the
kingdom of Brytanie, and the people are yours, and whom, being divided, you
ought to gather together, to concord and peace, and to the faith, and to
the Law of Christ, and to the holy Church, to revoke, cherishe, mainteyne,
protecte rule, and always defend them, both from the injurious persons and
malicious, and from his enemies. VVoe be to the kingdom whose king is a
child, and whose Princes banquet early, a king I name not for his small and
tender age, but for folly and wickedness, and madness, according to the Prophet
king: bloudthirsty and deceitful men, shall not live out half their days. By
banqueting, we understand glotonie, through glottony, riotousnes, through
riotousnes all filthy and evil things, according to king Solomon: wisdom
shall not enter into a froward soul, nor dwell in the body that is subdued unto
sin. A king is named of ruling and not of a kingdom, so long as thou rulest
well, thou shall be king, which unless thou do, the name of a king shall not
co^siste in thee, and thou shall lose the name of a king, which God forbid.
Almighty God give unto you, so to rule your kingdom of Brytany, that ye may
reign with him for ever, whose vicar ye are in the kingdom aforesaid. Who
with the father. etc.

Thus it is made manifest, that both your argument fails in truth of
matter, and you your self were beguiled through ignorance, by want of
reading. But put the case that your antecedent were true, yet is it a faulty
fallax made a dicto secundum quid, ad simpliciter, and the consequent follows
not, for that there is more contained in the conclusion, than the antecedent
does comprehend, which is such an evil favored form of argument, that
young students in the schools would be ashamed thereof. The Donatistes made
the like objection against the catholic fathers, whereto S. Augustine makes
this answer. The state of the Apostles time, is otherwise to be thought of,
than this time, al things must be done in their time: In Epist. 50.
the Apostles time, this prophecy was yet in fulfilling: wherefore do the
Psalm. 2.
Heathen rage, and the people muse upon vain things? The kings of the earth
set them selves, and the Princes consult together against the Lord and his
Christ. As yet that was not in hand which is spoken a little after in the same
psalm: and now ye kings understand, be learned ye Judges on the earth, serve
the Lord in fear, and joy in him with reverence. Therefore seeing that as yet
in the Apostles time, kings served not the Lord, but still did devise vain
things against God and his Christ, that all the foresayinges of the Prophet
might be fulfilled, than truly impieties could not be inhibited by princes
Laws, but rather be mainteyned. For such was the order of the times, that
both the Jews should kill the preachers of Christ, thinkinge to do God good
service therein as Christ had forspoken: and also the gentiles should rage
against the Christians, that the martirs might win the victory thorough
patience. But after that this began to be fulfilled which is written: And all the kings of the earth shall woorship him and all the nations shall serve him:
what man unless he be not well in his wits, Psalm. 71.
will say that Kings ought not to have a special regard for the Church of
Christ, and all manner godliness amongst their subjects? You frame an other
reason upon S. Paul's words unto the Bishops of Ephesus: whereby to prove,
that all government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes, belongs to
Bishops and Priests, and not to Princes, and Civil Magistrates, thus you
argue: The holy ghost appointed all spiritual government of Christ's flock
unto Bishops and Priests, as the words spoken by S. Paul, do make full and
perfect declaration: Ergo, Kings, Queens, and Princes, may not claim or
take upon them any part of Spiritual government, much less take the
supremacy, and chief part of spiritual government from them. For answer,
I deny this argument, for it is a naughty and deceiptfull Sophistication,
called, Fallacia aequiuocationis. There is equiuocacion in this word
(Priests) and also in these words to govern and rule the Church of God.
This word Priest, has diverse significacions which are to be observed: least
the simple readers be confirmed or brought into error thorough the
equivocation therein. The Scripture speaks of a priesthood after the order of
A^ron: after which order you will not confess the Apostles, and the Bishops
their successors to be Priests, an other kind of Priesthood is, after the
order of Melchisedech, and Christ only without any successor in y^
Priesthood, Hebr. 7.
was the alone Priest of that order. The third kind is an holy and princely
Priesthood, of the which order not only the Apostles and their true
successors, but also Kings, Queens, Princes and al manner of faithful
Christians are Priests. There is in common opinion amongst the Papists, a
fourth kind, which is a massinge and sacrificing priesthood: after which
order, Christ's Apostles, and the true mynisters of his Church were never
priests: for ye order belongs only to ye Apostolical Clergy of ye Romish
Antichrist. If your meaning therefore be, ye Christ left any kind of government
or rule of his Church to Bishops and Priests, after this popish order, your
opinion is heretical, and your assertion utterly false. Therefore where I shall
afterward in my speaking call the mynisters of Christ's Church, Priests, I
give you to understand, yt I do therein but follow ye usual, and accustomed
kind of speech which is impropre although in long use. Likewise to govern
and rule the Church of God: is of two kinds and sorts, the one is by y^
supreme authority and power of the swoorde, to guide, care, provide, direct and
aid Gods Church, to further, maintain and setfoorth the true Religion, unity
and quietness of Gods Church: and to ouersee, visit, refourme, restrain,
amend and correct all manner persons, with all manner errors, superstitions,
heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, conte^ptes and enormities in or about
Gods Church. Which government and rule apperteineth only to Kings, Queens,
and Princes, and not to the Apostles Bishops and Priests: whereof S. Paul
speaks nothing at al in this sentence by you alleged to the Bishops of
Ephesus. The other sort is to feed the flock of Christ with the Spiritual
food of Gods word, which is the only rule and government that belongs
to the Apostles, Bishops and Mynisters of Christ's Church, and of none other
manner rule speaks S. Paul to the Bishops of Ephesus, which he makes most
plain, both by yt express words of ye sentence avouched, and also by the
whole circumstaunce of the same place. The word ye S. Paul uses, does
proprely signify to feed, as the sheapeherde feeds his sheep, and by a
figurative speech to guide, govern or rule: and therefore if you would have
dealt plainly, and have uttered S. Paul's meaning according to his propre
speech, where you say, To govern and rule, doubling the words as it were to
amplify the matter, that the truth might less appear, you ought to have
said, to feed the Church of God, for that is the Apostles propre saying, and
so the old translatour of Chrysostom does translate it upon the Epistle to ye
Ephesians and also expou^ding Cap. 4. Act. 24.
this same place of the Acts of ye Apostles, vt pascatis Ecclesia^, to feed
the Church. S. Peter making the like exhortation, to this of S. Paul, to the
Bishops dispersed, uses ye self same word, saying: Pascite quantu^ in vobis
est gregem Christi: Feed so much as you may, the flock of Christ. Christ him
self also teachinge Peter, and all other Bishops, what manner of rule and
government, as properly given them by Gods word, they should have in ye
Church, does express it, with ye self same word, saying: Pasce agnos meos,
feed Joan. 21.
my La^bes. To rule and govern the L. household faithfully and prudently,
Christ expounds to be nothing else in general, tha^ to give meat unto his
family in due season. Neither Math. 24.
did our savior Christ give other power, authority or co^missio^ unto his
Apostels, and so to al other Bishops as properly belonginge and only to the
Bishoply office, then this: As my Father sent me, so I send you, receive the
holy ghost, Joan. 20.
whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, whose sins ye retain, they are
retained, goo therefore and teach all nations, Baptizinge them in Math. 28.
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teachinge
them to observe all things, that I have commanded you. So that the Bishoply
rule and government of Gods Church, consists in these three points, to feade
the Church with Gods word, to Mynister Christ's Sacraments, and to bind
and lose: all which three parts, Christ comprehends under this one saying:
to give meat to the Lords family in due season. And S. Paul in these
words, to feed the Church of God. The circumstaunce of the sentence which
you alleged forth of the Acts, does also show in the example of Paul him
self, who was inferior to none of the Apostles, and Church mynisters in any
point, that he claimed or took upon him none other rule or government, than
of feedinge Gods Church with the spiritual food of the Gospel. He sets
forth the execution of his own office, and by that example moves the
Bishops of Ephesus to the like, saying: I have served the Lord with all
humblenes of mind: I have leaft nothing undone, that might be profitable to
you: but I have declared and taught you openly and privily the repentance and
faith in God, and Jesus Christ. I received an office of mynistery from the
Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of Gods grace and to preach the kingdom
of God. I have hidden nothing of Gods council from you. Take heed therefore
to your selves, and to Christ's flock (as I have done) whereof the holy Ghost
has appointed you Bisshoppes (as he did me) to feed the Church of God, (as
you know and see that I have done). This that you call to govern and rule,
was with Paul to serve with lowlines, to mynister with watchefulnes: to
preach, teach and testify the Gospel, and the kingedome of God publicly
and privately, and to show, to the flock all the Council of God, touching
their salvation, keepinge nothing thereof back from them. To govern the
Church of God after this sort belongs to the only office of Bishops and
Church mynisters, and not to Kings, Queens and Princes, who may not, neither
do, claim or take upon them, this kind of spiritual government and rule,
or any part thereof with the Bishops, neither do they take the supremacy and
chief part of this spiritual government from the Church mynisters. As
contrary wise the Church mynisters, ought not to claim and take upon them
the supremacy of government, as the Papists of long time have done from
Kings, Queens, and Princes.


M. Fekenham. And when your L. shall be hable to prove that these words of
the Apostle Paul, and by him written in his Epistle unto the Hebrews:
Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete Heb. 13*
eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri, vt
cum gaudio hoc faciant, and non gementes. Do ye obey your spiritual
governors, and submit your selves unto them, for they watch, as men which
must give account for your souls: that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief. When your L. shall be hable to prove, that these words were not
written of the Apostle Paul, asvvell for all Christian Emperors, Kings and
Queens, as for the inferior sort of people, than shall I in like manner yield
touching that text of Paul, and think my self very well satisfied.


The B. of Wynchester. No man has or does deny, that the Church mynisters
has to govern the flock by preachinge, and feedinge with the word, which
is the rule or government, that Paul speaks of in this place also: whereto
all Princes are and ought to be subject and obedient. For this subjection and
obedience, to the word of the Ghospel, taught, and preached by the Bishops,
sittinge in Christ's chair, which is the whole rule and government they have
or ought to claim as propre to their calling is commanded so well to
Princes, as to the inferior sort of the people, as you say truly, although
your cause is no deal helped, nor my assertion any whit improued thereby.


M. Fekenham. And when your L. shall be hable to prove that these words of
Paul. Mulieres in Ecclesijs taceant etc. Let the women 1. Cor. 14.
keep silence in the Church: for it is not permitted unto them there to
speak: but let them live under obedience like as the Law of God appoints
them, and if they be desirous to learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home, for it is a shameful and rebukefull thing for a woman to
speak in the Church of Christ. When your L. shall be hable to prove, that
these words of Paul, were not asvvell spoken of Queens, Duchesses, and of
noble Women, as of the mean and inferior sort of women: Like as these
words of almighty God, spoken in the plague and punishment first unto our
mother Eve for her offense, and secondarily by her unto all women without
exception, vidz. Multiplicabo aerumnas etc. I shall increase thy dolours,
sorrows and conceyuinges, and in pain and travail, Gene 3.
thou shall bring forth thy children, and thou shall live under the authority
and power of thy husband, and he shall have the government and dominion over
thee. When your L. shall be hable to prove, any exception to be made either in
these words spoken in the old Law by the mouth of God: either in the
words before spoken of the Apostle Paul in the new: than I shall in like
manner yield, and with most humble thanks, think my self very well
satisfied in conscience, not only touching all the before alleged
testimonies, but also in this second chief point.


The B. of Wynchester. I do grant the words of the holy Scriptures in both
these places to be spoken to all states of women without exception. But what
make they for your purpose, how do they conclude and confirm your cause?
Women must be silent in the Church, and are not permitted to speak: That is
as your own doctor Nicol. de Lyra expounds it, Women must not teach and
preach the doctrine in the Church, neither dispute openly: Therefore our
Savior Christ did not commit to Kings, Queens and Princes, the authority
to have and take upon them any part of government in Ecclesiastical causes.
As though a young Nouice of your Munkishe order should have argued: Nuns
must keep silence, and may not speak in the Cloysture, nor yet at dinner
time in the fraytry: therefore your deceyuer the Pope did not commit
authority to his Prouincialles, Abbottes, Priors, and Prioresses, to have and
take upon them the government under him self in Munkishe and Nunnishe causes
and matters? What man would have thought Master Feckenham to have had so
little consideration, although unlearned, as to vouche the silence of women in
the Church, for a reason to improve the authority of Princes in Church causes?


M. Fekenham. The third chief point is: that I must not only swear upon
the Evangelists, that no forayne person, state or The third point.
potentate, has or ought to have any power or authority Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual within this Realm: but also by virtue of the same Oath, I must
renounce all forrayne power and authorities which for a Christian man to
do, is directly against these two Articles of our Creed. Credo sanctam
Ecclesiam catholicam: I do believe the holy catholic Church. Credo
Sanctorum Communionem: I do believe the Communion of Saints. And that there
is a participation and communion amongst all the believers of Christ's
Church, which of the Apostle Paul are called Saints. Adiuro vos per
Dominum 1 Thessalonians. 5.
vt legatur haec Epistola omnibus sanctis fratribus. And herin I do join this
issue with your L. that when your L. shall be hable to prove by Scripture,
Doctor, General council, or by the continual practice of any one Church,
or part of all Christendom, that by the first article, I believe the holy
catholic Church, is meante only, that there is a Catholic Church of
Christ, and not so that by the same Article, every Christian man is bound to
be subject and obedient to the catholic Church, like as every member ought
to have obedience unto the whole mystical Body of Christ. And further when
you shall be hable to prove by the second Article: I do believe the Communion
of Saints, is not so meante, that a Christian man ought to believe such
atonement, such a participation and communion, to be amongst all believers
and members of Christ's catholic Church in doctrine, in Faith, in Religion,
and Sacraments, but that it is lavvfull for us of this Realm therein to
dissent from the catholic Church of Christ dispersed in all other Realms:
and that by a corporal Oath it is lavvfull for us to renounce, and refuse to
have communion with the catholic Church so dispersed, because it is a
forrayne authority and power out of this Realm: when so ever your L. shall be
hable to prove this* by Scripture, Doctor, General council: or yet by
continual practice of any one Church, or part of all Christendom: Than
shall I in like manner, yield in this third point, and with most humble
thanks, shall think my seife very well satisfied therein.


The B. of Wynchester. This third chief point is nothing else, but a
misshapened lump of words: conteininge first an argument grounded upon a
kind of Opposition, that no wise or learned man ever read of, but is newly
forged and hammered out of your own brain: Then, an issue, to have me prove
that thing, which being rightly understood no Christian does doubt of, or
will deny. And last of all, an huge heap of flat and manifest Lies against
the whole Realm, to set a good face upon an evil favored cause, which can
find no help or ease by plain and simple truth. The weighty burden, that you
are laden with and can not bear, is that you must by oath renounce all
foreign power and authority: the cause that makes you fainte and feeble, is,
that it is directly against two articles of our Creed: So that your feeble
reason is grounded after your simple skill upon the place, ab apositis and
pugnantibus. Before I answer to the argument, I will put the Reader in
remembrance of the division which you make, chopping and changing one
article into twain, to make some show of an heinous matter. Surely it were
ouermuche detestable, if you were moved to swear but against one article of
our Creed, as ye were never moved by me, either to or fro, to swear any thing
at all. There be three symboles or Credes, which have been allowed and
received of Christ's catholic Church. The Clemens in compe^d. defide.
symbol of the Apostles, of the Nicen council, and of Athanasius. The
Apostolical is so called, because it was collected (as some say) by the
twelve Apostles, and therefore contains (as the commonly received opinion is
in Christ's Church) according to the number of the. xtj. Apostles, but twelve
articles, which are called in the usual speech of the catholic Christians,
the twelve articles of our Creed or belief. If this, I believe the communion of
saints, be a several article from this, I believe the holy catholic
Church, as you do fantasy, then there must needs be at the least thirtene
articles of the Creed, contrary to the universally received opinion of the
catholic Church. You were wont to stay your self much upon the custom of
the catholic Church, and would urge stiffly, although not so truly the
universally received opinion of the catholic Church, as a matter that might
not be rejected, or denied: and how chances it now, that you are become
such a chaungeling, that clean contrary to the use of the catholic Church,
which acknowledged but twelve, you will make thirtene articles of the Creed at
the least? Besides this, the catholic Church in the time of Cyprian and
Augustine, and before also, did not reken or judge these to be two several
articles, but did coumpte them one article, concludinge these words, the
communion of Saints, in this sentence, I believe a catholic Church of
Christ, recyting the Symbol without rehersall or mentioning, the communion of
Saints, as it is plainly set forth by S. Cyprian and Augustine, in their
exposicions of the Apostolical Creed. The mattier meant by the communion of
Saints, is uttered in these words: I believe an holy catholic Church of
Christ. Whereunto has been added sense these ancient fathers times, as it may
seem by the way of explication, a communion of Saints, to express in
plainness of speech, that Christ's catholic Church, is nothing else, but a
fellowship, and communion of faithful ones, which are saints. Now let us
see how to swear, as this third chief point of the oath sets forth, is
directly against this article of our Creed, I beleaue the holy catholic
Church, the communion of Saints. All true subjects ought and must renounce
and forsake all foreign jurisdictions, powers, superiority, preheminences and
authorities of every foreign Prince, and Prelate, state or Potentate. This is
the proposition of that part of the oath: to the which adioyne this
proposition, all true subjects ought and must beleaue, an holy catholic
Church of Christ, the communion of Saints. Espy now what opposition is
betwixt these two propositio^s, y^ they may not both match together, and be
verified in one true and faithful subject. The one, say you, is directly
against the other. Then say I, there is a direct opposition and repugnancy
betwixt them, by due examination we shall find out the oppositio^. Try the
parts of these propositions severally without the verb that coupleth them
together, and you shall not find any opposition, either contrary relative,
privative, or disparate: join them together with the verb that coupleth, and
being propositions, they are not one against the other contrary, subcontrary,
subalterne nor contradictory, and therefore untruly, and no less unskillfully
babled of you, that the one is directly against the other, when a young scholar
that has red but the rudimentes of his Logike, could have seen and judged,
that there is in them no opposition or repugnancy at all. To renounce and
forsake Antechrist and his Church by oath or otherwise, and to believe in
Christ and rightfully to acknowledge his holy catholic Church by all manner
of ways, stands neither directly nor indirectly one against the other, but
are matched together and agrees iumpe one with the other. Surely your eyes
were not matches, neither were your wits at home, when you spied cut this
repugnancy, if you had not published this learned piece of work, your friends
should never have known, what an huge heap of conning and knowledge, is
hidden in that little head of yours. The demand in your issue is easily proved
by the description or definition of Christ's true Catholic Church. The
catholic Church of Christ is a multitude, society and communion of
Saints and The diffination of the catholic Church.
faithful ones, that have been, shall be, and are now on live in the earth, how
and wheresoever they be divided, and dispersed in time and place, the which
multitude of Saints, have a participation in common amongst them selves of
all good things, given, granted, and growing from God through Christ, of
spirit, faith, Sacraments, prayer, remission of sins, and heavenly bliss:
and are united to Christ their head by faith, and fastened together amongst
them selves, as members of one body with the bond of love. To this catholic
church, every Christian man is bound to be subject and obedient as a member
ought, and may be subject and obedient to the body.

And we do teach and confess in this Church such an attoneme^t,
participation, and communion, among all the members in doctrine, faith,
Religion, and Sacraments, that neither this, nor any other Realm, may lawfully
dissent from this Church, or renounce and refuse to have communion therewith,
as God be praised we of this Realm do now show our selves by all Christian
means, never more at any time, to agree and consent in the unity of this
catholic Church, in necessary doctrine, right faith, true Religion, and the
right use of Christ's Sacraments. The foul lies that you heap together,
wherewith shamefully to defoyle your own neast and native country, neadeth
none other confutation, than only to make them plain to be seen and judged of
all men, that the Realm may be sorry, that ever it nestled so unnatural and
filthy a bird, and your friends ashamed of so malicious and impudent a L^ar.
This is a lewd Lie, that this Realm dissenteth from the catholic Church in
the forenamed points. This is a shameful Lie, that by corporal oath or any
other ways, we renounce and refuse to have communion with the catholic
Church of Christ. And this is a monsterous Lie, that the catholic Church is
a foraine authority and power out of this Realm. Who was ever so mad, as
ones to think, or so doltishe as to speak any thing against the catholic
Church, but specially to forsake it, and that because it is a foraine power
and authority. The Oath makes no mention in any one word, of the Catholic
Church, it speaks of a foraigne Prince, Prelate, and Potentate, and so of
the foraigne Power and Authority of such a foraigne state. Whereupon M.
Fekenham concludes as it were by Revelation, in a Monkishe dream, without
rhyme or reason, that therefore the catholic Church is forsaken, as though there
were no difference betwixt a foreine Prince, or prelate, and the Catholic
Church: or that the Catholic Church might be called a foreine Power, or a
forine authority to a Christian Realm. This is such a new kind of
Divinity as was never heard or read of in any writer, no not in the Legende
of Golden Lies.


M. Fekenham. The fourth and last point is, that I must swear to the
observation of this Oath, not only to the Queens highness The fourth point.
and our sovereign Lady that now is, but also unto her heyers and successors
Kings and Queens of this Realm. And because every Christian man ought to be
careful to avoid perjury therein, I vvoulde right gladly know, that if any
her highness successors should by the refusal of the said title of
supremacy, bind her subjects by the like statute law unto the clean
contrary (experience whereof was of late made here in this Realm) that it is
yet fresh in the memories of al men: In this case I vvoulde right gladly
know, what authority is hable to dispense again with this Oath. And if
there be none at all, then the subjects of this Realm in this case are bound
and that by book Oath, to live in a continual disobedience to the Laws of
their sovereign Lord or Lady, King or Queen: the case vvherof is very
Lamentable. And Christian charity vvoulde, that it should be foreseen and
provided for. And for mine own pa^te being further touched herein than I have
yet expressed) my very trust and hope is, that the charity of this our new
reformed church here in this realm, shall not be found so cold and short, as
in providing so sharp laws, and pains of death to force men to take this
Oath, of the Q. Highness Supremacy, but that it vvil provide also such means
and ways, whereby the subjects may receive the same with salfe conscience,
and without all per^ury. And in so doing, I shall most willingly submit
my self, and receive also that part of the Oath. And shall further thereupon
set forth the Q. Highness Supremacy with all Titles and Praeroga^iues, both
by pen and word of mouth, and that with as desirous heart, and glad vvil
as any subject that is this day living in her highness Realm. So that of the
premises ye may well understand, that there is in me no other cause of sta^e,
touching the later part of this Oath, then very Conscience. And that I
vvoulde before right gladly know (touching these forenamed points) how I
might swear unto them, and not committee perjury therein.


The B. of Wynchester. As every Christian man ought to be careful to avoid
Perjury both in this and al other matters: even so wise men may well know what
you mean by the conditional case ye put, of the refusal by her highness
Successors of this Title: whereto the Holy Ghost makes you this plain
answer: Spes Hypocritae peribit: The Hypocrites hope shall perish. Job. 8.
You sprinkle this doubtful case, with a powder of late experience, which
seasoneth your matter, De facto, non de Iure. For it is not lawful for any
christian Prince to refuse this Supremacy, which is the hest part of his
princely Ministry, and service unto God. Neither may he more bind his
subjects by law to become sworn to the Pope and Popery, than to the great
Turk and Turkery. For that the Pope is a more perilous ennemie unto Christ,
than the Turk: and Popery much more Idolatrous, then Turkery. And therefore
there is no human authority, that can dispe^ce with the violation of this
lawful Oath, made of duty unto the Christian Prince.

This is a lamentable case I grant, that subjects should live in continual
disobedience to the Laws of the Prince, whether it happen for that the Laws
be so ungodly, that a Christian subject may not with good conscience obey
them (experience whereof was of late made here in this Realm.) Or for that the
stubbornness of the subject mainteyned with a wicked, and yet a vain hope, be
so stiff, that wilfully he lives in a continual disobedience to the Godly
laws of his sovereign, whereof experience is made now at this time in you,
and a few others of your conspiracy. There is good cause, why ye should have
your very trust and hope (as you say ye have, how vngratiousely so ever ye
think) assured of the charity of our Church newly reformed after the rule
of Gods word, whereat ye Popish swyne grunte and groyne. For you, in your
own self, have perfect experience, that the Supreme governor under Christ
of this Realm, folowinge the example of her heavenly Father, does
bountifully, of her goodness, with much more patience, and long sufferinge,
allure you to dutiful repentance. And has further provided sundry means and
ways, whereby to remove your wilful ignorance, and to endue you with
sufficient knowledge of the truth, how ye might with salfe conscience
receive this dutiful Oath of a true subject, without all perjury.


M. Fekenham. HERE follows the Resolutions of the aforesaid Scruples, made
by my L. Bishop of Winchester.

For a resolute answer to all the said Scruples, expressed in the forenamed
poinctes, his L. said, that he did much lamente, that the right meaning of
the Oath, had not been in season opened and declared unto me, when the only
lack of the right understanding thereof, has been the cause of such stays
and distourbaunce of conscience. Whereas the Q. Majesty's meaning in that
Oath, is far otherwise than the express words are as they Lie Verbatim,
like as it does well appear by her Highness interpretacion made thereof in her
Injunctions. Thereunto my objection was, that undoubtedly her Highness did
fully mean and mind to claim and take all spiritual government upon her:
for besides the express words of the Oath, whereunto al men be bound to
swear Verbatim* as they, Lie without all change and alteracion making of
any word or sense thereof, her highness (in the Interpretacion set forth in
her Injunctions) does by very plain words, claim the same spiritual
government here in this Realm of the Church of England, that her Highness
Father King Henry, and her brother King Edward did enjoy and claim before
her: in the which Injunctions, and in the late Act of Parliament also her
Highness does claim no more spiritual government, nor no less, but so much
in every point as they had without all exception. For answer his L. did
still continue in the denial thereof, and that her highness meaning was not
to take so much of Spiritual authority and power upon her, as they did:
with affirmacion that he did most certainly and assuredly know her Highness
mind therein. Then for some issue to be had of this matter, seeing that the
meaning of the Oath, is not as the express words do purport. And seeing
that his L. did so well understand her Highness meaning therein, and thereby
the very right sense thereof, I besought him that his L. vvoulde take some
pains for truethes sake to pen the same: whereupon his L. did pen and
write the interpretation of the said Oath, as hereafter follovveth. I. A. B.
do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Q. Highness is the
only Supreme governor of this Realm, and of all other her Highness dominions
and countries, asvvell in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes,
as Temporal. That is, to have the sovereignty and rule over all manner
persons, borne within her Realms, dominions, and countries of what estate
either Ecclesiastical or Temporal so ever they be. And to have authority and
power to visit the Ecclesiastical estate and persons, to refourme, order,
and correct the same: and al manner errors, heresies, schisms, abuses,
offenses, contemptes, and enormities. Yet nevertheless in no wise meaning that
the kings and Queens of this. Realm, possessours of this crown, may
challe^ge authority or power of ministry of divine offices, as to preach
the word of God, to minister Sacraments or rytes of the Church appointed by
Christ to the office of Church ministers, to excommunicate, or to bind, or
lose. Of the which four points, three belong only to the Ecclesiastical
ministers, the fourth is commen to them with the congregation, namely to
excommunicate. And that no forain Prince Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, pre-eminence, or
authority Eclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm. And therefore I do
utterly renounce al foreign jurisdictions, powers superiorities, proheminences
and authorities: That is, as no Secular or Lay Prince, other than the kings or
Queens possessours of the crown of this Realm, of what title or dignity
so ever they be, has or ought to have, any authority, soueraintie, or power,
over this realm, over the Prince or subjects thereof. Even so no manner of
foreign Prelate or person Ecclesiastical, of what titlie, name, so ever they
be, neither the sea of Rome, neither any other sea, has or ought to have use,
enjoy, or exercise, any manner of power, jurisdiction, authority,
superiority, pre-eminence, or privilege Spiritual or Ecclesiastical within
this Realm, or within any the Q. Highness dominions or countries. And
therefore, al such foreign power utterly is to be renounced, and I do promise,
etc. Vt sequitur in forma iuramenti.


The B. of Wynchester. These that ye term Resolutions, are none of mine, they
are like him that forged them, false, feigned, and malicious. They be your
own, either ye could not, or ye were ashamed to adioine my answers to your
seely objections, and therefore ye feigned me to utter for resolutions, your
own peuish cauillatio^s. This report is false, that I should affirm ye Queens
Majesty's meaning in that oath to be far otherwise then the express words are
as lie Verbatim. This my constant Assertion, that her Highness mind and
meaning is, to take so much, and no more of Spiritual authority and power
upon her, than King Henry, and King Edward enjoyed and did justly claim,
you untruly feygne to be your objection. And that I should affirm of most
certain and sure knowledge, her Majesty's mind, or the very right sense of
the Oath, to be otherwise than it is plainly set forth, is a malicious
sclaunder, whereof I will fetch no better proof, then the testimony of your
own mouth. Ye confess that the interpretation folowinge, was penned and
written by me, to declare the very right sense and meaning of the oath,
wherein ye have acquitted me, and condemned your self, of a manifest untruth.
For the right sense and meaning declared in the interpretation that I made, and
you have set forth, does plainly show the clean contrary, if you mark it
well, to all that you have here set forth in my name, under the title of my
resolucions to your scruples. Furthermore, in the Preface to your forenamed
points, ye have declared by word and wrytinge, that I did require you
presently to swear and by oath to acknowledge, her highness to be the only
supreme governor in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes. If
this be true, that you have said, it is manifest by your own confession, that
I declared her Majesty's meaning in that Oath, to be none otherwise than the
express words are, as they lie verbatim. For when I show her meaning to be,
that ye should acknowledge in her highness, the only supreamacie, I do declare
plainly, that she means to exclude, all other men from having any
supreamacie: for this exclusive, only, can not have any other sense or meaning
And when I add this supreamacie to be in all spiritual causes or things, I
show an universal comprehension to be meant without exception. For if ye
except or take away any thing, it is not all. And you your self took my
m^aning to be thus. For ye challenge me in your second chief point, and call
for proof hereof at my hand, which ye would not do, if it were not mine
assertion and meaning. For why should I be driven to prove that which I affirm
not, or meant not. Besides these in your whole travail following, ye labor to
improve this (as you say) mine assercion, to wit, that all Spiritual
jurisdiction depends upon the positive Law of Princes: If this be mine
assercion, as ye affirm it is, and therefore bend all your force to improoue
it, ye witness with me against your self, that I declared her Majesty's
meaning, was to take neither more nor less authority, and iurrsdiction, unto
her self, than king Henry and king Edward had, for they had no more than
all. And if her Majesty take any less, she has not al. Touching therefore
these false, feined, and sclaunderous resolucions, as they are by you most
untruly forged: even so, whether this be likely, that in a years space
welnigh, I would not in all our daily conference, make one reason or argument,
out of the Scriptures or other authority, in the maintenance of mine
assercion: and to resolve you in the same, I refer to the judgment of all
the Papists in the Realm, that know both me and you. Again, though ye do
deny that I so did, and therefore do report none, there be many both
worshipful and of good credit, yea, and some of your own deer friends also,
that are witnesses of our talk, and can tell what reasons I have made unto
you, both out of the Scriptures, and other authorities and proofs out of the
Church histories, such as ye could not avoid, but were forced to yield
unto. And whether I should so do or not, I might refer me unto the
testimony of your own mouth, both than and sithen spoken to diverse, that
can witness ye same, that ye affirmed this (although untruly) that you never
found any, that so much ouerpressed you, as I did, which your saying,
although most untrue, yet it shows, that somewhat I said to confirm mine
assertion and to confute yours.


M. Fekenham. Hereunto I did make this objection following. These word of the
first part of the oath, I. A. B. do utterly testify and declare (in my
conscience) that the Q. highness, is the only supreme governor of this Realm,
as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal*
(Besides the particulers expressed in your L. interpretation made thereof) they
do by express words of the act give unto the Queens highness, all manner of
iurisdictio^s, privileges, and prehemine^ces in any wise touching and
concerning any concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiasticali jurisdiction within
the Realm, with an express debar, and flat denial made of al Spiritual
jurisdiction unto the Bishops thereof, to be exercised over their flocks and
cures, without her highness Special commission to be granted thereunto: They
having by the express word of God, commission of Spiritual government over
them, commission to lose and bind their sins. Commission to shut and opon the
gates of heaven Act. 20. Joan. 20. Math. 16. Act. 8.
to them. Commission to give unto them the holy ghost by the impositio^ of
their hands. And they having by the express word of God such a dangerous
cure and charge over their souls, that God has threatened to require the blood
of such as shall perish at their hands. Notvvithstanding, these and many
Heb. 13. Ezech.
such other like commissions granted unto them for the more better discharge
of their cures, and that by the mouth of God, they may not exercise any
jurisdiction over them, they may not visit them, they may not reform them,
they may not order nor correct them, without a further commission from the Q.
highness. Surely my good L. these things are so strange unto me, and so
contrary to all that I have read, that I am not hable to satisfy my conscience
therein. Your L. answer was, that for as much as all Spiritual
jurisdiction, and authority to make Laws, and to judge the people in courts
Ecclesiastical, to visit them, to reform them, to order and correct them,
does depend only upon the positive Laws of Kings and Princes, and not
upon the Law of God. Therefore neither did the Apostles of Christ, neither
the Bishops and their successors may, exercise any jurisdiction upon the
people of God, judge the^, visit them, refourme order and correct them
without authority and commission of the King and Prince.


The B. of Wynchester. It is very true, that after ye had quarelled much in
sundry things touching words and terms expressed in the Act of Parliament,
and in the interpretation of the Oath: Ye did nevertheless finally agree in
the whole matter thereof, finding only doubt in one point of mine assertion,
namely touching jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, all which you
affirmedcon, trary to mine assertion, to be committed by Christ to Bishops and
priests, as proprely apperteyning to their office and calling without further
commission or authority from Princes or any other power. The distinction that
I made of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, I will first repete, and than put mine
answer Joan. Antonius Delph. lib. 2.
to your arguments. Spiritual Jurisdiction is divided into two sorts, the
one is called Cohibityue, the other not Cohibityue, That which is called not
Cohibityue, is that jurisdiction or power that is exercised and woorketh in the
inward and secret court of conscience: that is the preachinge of the
Gospel, mynistration of the Sacraments, and the absoluinge and reteininge of
sins by the word of God in the public mynistery. This therefore they call
not Cohibityue, because in the Court of conscience, no man is bound or lowsed
unwillingly or against his will. To exercise this kind of Jurisdiction,
neither kings nor civil Magistrates, neither any other person may challendge
or take upon him, unless he be lawfully called thereunto. Jurisdiction
Cohibitiue has two parts, the one consists in the exercise of
excommunication, and circumstaunces thereunto required by Christ's institution:
the which power or Jurisdiction belongs to the Church only, and not to the
Prince, Bishop or Priest: for noman has authority to excommunicate but
only the Church, and those who receive authority there unto by commission
from the Church. The other kind of Cohibitiue Jurisdiction is a power or
authority, that consists and is exercised, in foro causarum, in the court
of causes, and apperteineth ad externum and publicum forum, to the external
and public Court, and is defined to be, says Antonius, an authority or
power to declare the Law, give sentence and to judge in all controversies
(pertayninge to the Court) what is every man's right, and in sum, to do
those things, that justice does require according to the Laws. Ioannes
Quintinus defines Jurisdiction, to the same effect, but opens the nature
thereof more plainly, saying: Jurisdiction is an office and authority, to
declare the Law, that is, to admynister justice and equity^ and to govern the
people with right and Laws. When I name an office, (says he) I mean that
jurisdiction has in it self a necessity to declare the Law: for office is
that which every man is bound to do: to declare the law, is, to exercise
judgments, whereupon comes jurisdiction (he means that jurisdiction has
the name and is so called of exercisinge judgments) judgments are exercised
only of them that have jurisdiction, that is, power to judge. Jurisdiction
consists only in the contentions or debatinge of matters in Court or
judgments. This authority to judge does discende now from the Prince
alone, in whom only is all power. By virtue of this jurisdiction, (says
Antonius) the Church mynisters according to their offices rightly enjoined
unto them, may lawfully visit, enquire of men's manners, punish the faulty,
send forth apparitours or sommoners, cite the sturdy and stubborn, repress
their malepartnes, call and sommon meet persons to the Synod provincial or
general, confirm the matters decreed in the Synod or Council, pardon
faults, change or mytigate the penance enjoined for confessed faults,
condemn Heretics and their writings, examine all men's writings who so
ever, before they be set forth or published, and after due examination, judge
whether they conteyne sound or pestilent doctrine, ordeine Decrees, Laws,
caeremonies and rytes, constitute Bisshoppes and other Church mynisters, also
depose, degrade, make them irreguler and unable to have holy orders, determine
illegitimation in persons for marriage, bestow Ecclesiastical benefices, and
exact tithes and annates. These and many other things may be lawfully done by
those that have the power of this Cohibytiue Jurisdiction, which is not
(says he) properly signified by the name of the keys: for although it may be
named (in some respect) a Church keye: yet it differs very much from the
keys of the first Court, that is, of the Court of Conscience. For the use
of those keys, that are occupied in the Court of conscience, belongs only
to the Evangelical Priests. But this Jurisdiction may lawfully be exercised
of those that are not mynisters of the word and Sacraments, and are not
Priests. As the two former parts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction have their
virtue, power, and institution of Christ immediately, even so this third part,
which is said to consiste in foro causarum, with those things which may be
used or exercised by virtue thereof, does depend upon the positive Laws of
Christian Magistrates, or where such wants upon the positive rules and
orders of that Church, where such orders must be practiced, and not
immediately upon the Law of God. You took upon you to prove, that this
second kind of Cohibityue Jurisdiction with the appurtenances thereof: as I
have rehearsed, was appointed by the express word of God immediately to
Bishops and Priests, without further commission of Princes or other power,
which I denied.

Now let us consider the force of your proufes, and see how they conclude your
cause. First ye say, that the words of the first part of the Oath, do by
express words of the Act, give unto the Q. highness all manner of
jurisdictions, privileges and preheminences in any wise touching and
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the realm,
with an express debar and flat denial made of al spiritual jurisdiction
unto the Bisshoppes thereof to be exercised over their flocks and cures
without her highness special commission, to be granted thereunto: they having
by the express word of God, commission of spiritual government over them.
Your evil dealing with the words of the Act and the Oath, expresses an
unkindly meaning to the Prince and the state: for that either the Acts or the
Oath debarreth or denies expressly or covertly ye Bishopes of this realm to
exercise over their flocks and cures, without her highness special commission
granted thereto, any spiritual jurisdiction assigned to a Bishop by the word
of God, is altogether untrue. The Statute gives or rather restores to the
Prince Jurisdiction and authority to enquire after what sort, the
Ecclesiastical state and persons behave them selves in their cures and
chardges, to refourme and correct the disorders, negligencies, and enormities
risinge amongst them to the hinderaunce of their office in their cures and
chardges: and in sum to order and provide, that they do execute their office
according to their calling in their cures and chardges. This is not to
debar or deny them the exercise of their office without a special license.
Neither do the express words of the Statute give to the Prince all manner
of jurisdictions in such absolute wise as you report, in any wise, and any
spiritual jurisdiction within the realm. For these terms, all manner, in any
wise, and any spiritual jurisdiction, which you enforce so much are not
found in the gift or restitucion of spiritual jurisdiction made by the act
unto the Prince: But in that part where the act gives afterward power and
authority to the Prince to execute the Jurisdiction, now united and annexed to
the Crown, by meet delegates, to be assigned, named, and authorized by
commission or letters patentes under the great Seal of England. If ye will
hereof infer that because the Princes have by virtue of the act, full power
and authority to name, assign, and authorize any person whom they shall
think meet to exercise, use, occupy, and exequute under them, all manner of
jurisdictions, privileges and preheminences in any wise, touching or
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction with in their
dominions or countreies: Therefore all manner jurisdiction is in the Prince to
be exercised, used, occupied, and exequuted by them: for otherwise you will
say, the Princes cannot give and commit to others, that which they have not
received and is not in them selves. Your argument is easily answered in few
words: it is a foul Sophistication, a secundum quid ad simpliciter. These
words of the Act, all manner, in any wise, are restrained and bounded,
within the limits of the gift: where you of purpose, to beguile the simple
with all, do let them run at lardge, and set them forth as mere and
simple vniuersalles without any limits at all. The Act gives or restores to
the Prince jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities, and preheminencies
spiritual and Ecclesiastical, but it adds this Limitacion such as by any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore been, or may
lawfully be exercised or used. And for that these words (as by any Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully
be exercised and used) may be maliciously stretched by a wranglinge Papist,
and might seem to some, that have good meaning also, to give over large a
scope, the matter or object wherein, or where about, these Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities, and preheminences,
are exercised used and do consiste, is limited and added in these express
words (for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical state and persons, and for
reformation, order and correction of the same, and of all manner errors,
heresies, Schisms, abuses, offenses, contemptes, and enormities) which
words of limitation in ye gift, as they give not to the Prince, the exercise
of that jurisdiction that consists and woorketh in the inward and secret
Court of conscience, by the preaching of the word and mynstration of the
Sacraments, which belongs only and alone to the Bishops, neither do
they authorize the Prince to use that jurisdiction that belongs properly to
the whole Church: even so do they give rightly unto the Prince to exercise all
manner jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities, and preheminences in any wise
touching, and concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
contained under the second kind of Cohibitiue jurisdiction: for that may the
Prince lawfully exercise and use, and does not belong unto the Bishops,
otherwise than by commission and authority of Positive laws. This limitation
of jurisdiction set forth by express words in ye Act, you know right well: ye
were also at sundry times put in mind thereof, and you were well assured, that
your alleging ye words of the Act so darkely, confusedly and untruly, could
not further your cause amongst the wise: and yet would you needs publishe
them in this sort to the people, whereby at the least, to make both Prince and
the Law odious unto the simple subjects. The Bishops have by the express
word of God, commission of Spiritual government over their flock, that is, to
feed the flock of Christ, committed to their charge, with Gods holy word, as
I have declared before. They have commission to absolve the faithfully
penitent, and to retain or bind the impenitent: that is, to declare and
assure both the one and the other by the word of the Gospel of Gods judgment
toward them. What will ye infer hereof? will ye conclude therefore, they have
all manner of spiritual government or jurisdiction over them? Young Logicians
know, this is an evil consequent, that concludes upon one or diverse
particulers affirmatively an universal. Thus ye argue, Bishops by the
express word of God, have commission to preach to their cures, to remitte or
retain sins. Ergo, they have commission by the express word of God, to
Sommon councels, or Synodes general or provincial, to visit: that is,
iudicially sitting in judgment, to enquire of men's manners, and forinsically
to punish or correct, and to decide the controversies amongst the people:
touching contractes of matrimony, whoordome, tyethes, sclaunders etc. and to
ordeine decrees, Laws, ceremonies, rites, etc. If this conclusion follow
consequently upon your antecede^t, than does it overthrow the doctrine of your
Romish divinity, which grants not to the Bishops immediately from God
this power, without a special commission from the Pope, in whom only, as the
Papists say, is fulness of jurisdiction and power. But if this conclusion
follow not consequently upon the antecedent, as a man more than half blind,
may plainly see, it does not: than have ye concluded nothing at all by
Christ's divinity, that may further the matter ye have taken in hand to
prove. You falsely report the Scriptures, in this that you say: the Bishops
have commission by the express word of God, to give unto their flocks and
cures, the holy ghost by the imposicion of their hands. For the place which
ye quote for that purpose, expresses Act. 8.
no such commission, neither any other place of the holy Scriptures. The
Bishops have so dangerous a cure and chardge over the souls committed unto
them, that God will require the blood of those that perish (thorough their
negligence) at their hands: and therefore has given them sufficient commission
for the dischardge of their cures. It were therefore an horrible absurdity, if
they might not exercise any Jurisdiction over the^: if they might not visit,
refourme, order and correct them, by that commission without a further
commissi^n from the Q. highness. But do ye not perceive, which the most simple
may see, whereof also ye often were admonished by me, your warblinge slaight,
and Sophistical quarellinge in equivocation of words and terms? As there
are two sorts of Jurisdiction, whereof the one not Cohibityue, properly
belongs to the Bishop which he may and ought to exercise over his flock,
without any other commission than of Christ: so to visit, refourme, order and
correct, are of two sorts: the one a Scripturely visitacion, reformation and
correction by the only word of God, which the Bishops may and ought to
exercise in time, and out of time, with all possible watchefulnes and diligence
without any further commission. The other kind of visitacion, reformation and
correction, is Forinsecall or courtly, which I comprehend under the second
kind of Cohibitiue Jurisdiction, and this the Bishop may not exercise
without a further commission from the Prince. Wherefore it is over foul an
absurdity in you to infer, that the Bishops may not exercise any
Jurisdiction, visitacion, reformacion or correction, because they may not use
this Forinsecall, or courtly without the Princes commission.


M. Fekenham. Whereunto I do adioyne this objection follovving. First for the
time of the old law, which as Paul said was a very figure of the nevve,
Moses, Aaron, Eleazarus, being Priests, Exodus 24. Exodus 29. Number. 27.
they had by the express word of God, this jurisdiction over the people of
God, as to sit in judgment upon them, and that not only in Ecclesiastical,
but also in* Politic and civil matters and causes: they did visit them, they
did refourme them, they did order, correct, and punish them, so often as cause
required, and without all commission of any cyuill Magistrate, governor, King
or Prince. Besides that for the whole time, of the old Law, there was an
express law made, whereby all Cyuill magistrates and judges were
commanded in all doubtful matters, to repair to the Bishops and Priests,
and to stay upon their determinacions and judgments, without declinyng on
the right hand, or the left. And if that any man should disobeye the
determinacion once given of the Priest, morietur homo ille, like as appears.
Deuteronomy. 17.


The B. of Wynchester. This adiunct will not serve your turn, for it is not
possible to stretche it without burstinge, to join with that you must
conclude. You begin to join your work together with a saying of S. Paul,
which he never said, you should have noted the place where S. Paul says,
that the old Law was a very figure of the new. There is no such saying: S.
Paul says to the Hebrews: that Hebr. 10.
the Law has the shadow of good things to come etc. where he speaks not
generally of the whole Law, but of the ceremonial part and sacrifices,
which were shadows of Christ and his sacrifice, and not of the Bishops
Jurisdiction after Christ, under the Law of the Gospel. Thus aptly also do
your allegations out of the old Testament serve your purpose: for one of the
three, to wit, 29. of Exodus has no word of this Jurisdiction: only it
shows the manner of consecratinge the Priest, and the ceremonies thereabout.
In the. 24. of Exodus it is said, that when Moses went up into the Mount, he
said unto the Elders: Tarry us here until we return unto you. Behold Aaron
and Hur, are here with you: if any man have ought to do, let him come to them,
that is if any Lyra.
matter of controversy arise in mine absence, let Aaron and Hur, have the
hearing and decidinge of it, as I should have, if I were present. By this
place Aaron had no authority given unto him but for a time in the absence of
Moses, by commission from Moses, the chief ruler and governor of Gods
people, and that not alone, but having Hur one of the Elders, an ancient and
a wise man joined in commission with him. This allegation makes directly
against your conclusion: for it shows yt Aaron had this authority but by
commission from Moses the Prince of the people. In the third place Number. 27.
where God showed unto Moses, that Iosue should govern the people after him,
it is said: that Iosue should stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall
ask Council for him by the judgment of Vrim before the Lord, and at his
word they shall go out and in, both he and the people of Israel: that is,
when Iosue stands in doubt what to do for the better government of the
people, either in the time of peace or war, he shall understand Gods will
therein by the high Priest, to whom the Lord will miraculously declare his
will and pleasure by the light or shininge of the Vrim and Thumin, and
according to Gods will showed in the Vrim to the high Priest, and by him to
Iosue, he must direct and order his gooyng in and out: Ergo, say you. The
Bishops and Priests now in the time of the Gospel, have Jurisdiction by
the express word of God, to keep Courts, to call Councels, to make Laws,
and forinsecally to visit, refourme, order, and correct their flocks and
cures. The most simple can judge of this sequel. After like sort it is written
Deuteronomy. 17. That when hard and doubtful cases come before the judges or
inferior Magistrates, which cannot easily be tried or found out by them:
than the inferior Magistrates shall goo to the high Priest, and to the chief
judge at Jerusalem for the time being, who shall show what is to be done:
whose sentence and judgment must not be disobeyed, under the pain of death.
Do you not aptly conclude, think you, that the Bishops in the time of the
Gospel ought to have this Courtly jurisdiction, because the high Priest, and
the Temporal judge, did determine doubtful cases in ye time of the old
Testament? for the Priest alone did not determine all causes, as you seem to
allege the text.


M. Fekenham. Second, in the Nevve Testament: like as our Savior Act. 20.
Christ, did commit and leave the whole Spiritual gouernmente, of his
people and Church, unto his Apostles, and to the Bishops and Priests, and
the successors of them. So they did practice all Spiritual government over
them, they did execute and give judgment in the Church of Christ: they did
refourme, order, and correct all disorder therein, and that without all
commission, aid, or authority of any Temporal Magistrate, King, or Prince,
for the space of three hundredth years in the prymatiue Church of Christ,
unto the time of Constantine, he being the first Christian King and
Emperor, which did join his svvoorde to the mayntenaunce of Gods word.
Lib. 1. Hist. Trip. ca. 9.



The B. of Wynchester. Like as the Apostles had in commission power from
Christ our Savior, to whom al power was given both in heaven and in earth: so
faithfully they executed the authority and charge committed unto them, not
seeking their own honor by usurpation, but the glory of Christ by the abasing
them seles even unto the death. Their commission regestred by S. Matthew
appears in these words. Go and teach all the nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, teaching the^ to
keep all things, which I have commanded you. How faithfully they exercised
this authority according to the commission, S Luke shows in his Chronicle,
called the Acts of the Apostles, and sets forth one notable example
hereof, in Paul's oration, made to the Elders of Ephesus, called to Miletum: He
takes them to witness, that he kept nothing back from them, that might be
for their profit, but showed them all the council of God. It is much maruaill
that Paul showed al Gods council unto them, and yet made no mention of any
Forinsecall jurisdiction as given them by the commission of Gods word. The
godly Bishops that succeeded the Apostles for many years after, followed the
doctrine and examples of the Apostles, yet never exercising jurisdiction
Forinsecal, neither judging, reforming, ordering, or correctinge, otherwise
than by preaching, publicly or privately, without especial consent and
commission of their Churches, during the time, they had no Christian Prince or
Magistrate. Constantinus, as I have said, was not the first Christian king:
But he was the very first Emperor, as your own writers do witness, that
gave Bishops authority to Nicep. li. 7 cap. 46.
judge and exercise jurisdiction, over their Clergy, and that gave to the
Bishop of Rome power and authority over other Bishops, as Judges have the
king over them, and that gave to him power and jurisdiction over all other
Churches, if that Donacon be not forged which Gratian cites. And Petrus
Bertrandus a Bishop, a Cardinal, and one Did. 86.
of your best learned in the Canon and Civil laws, in his treatise De origin
iurisdictionum, affirms, that Theodosius and Carolus Magnus, did grant unto
the Church all judgments. For the proof whereof, he avouches diverse
decrees, and adds, That such grau^tes were afterward abrogated.


M. Fekenham. At the first council holden at Jerusalem, for the reformation of
the controversy that was than at Antioche, touching Circumcision, and the
observation of Moses Law, decree was made there by the Apostles and
Priests, unto the beleuers at Antioche, that they should abstain from these
four chief Act. 15.
and necessary things, viz, ab immolatis simulachrorum, a sanguine and
suffocato a fornicatione, a quib. custodientes vos, been agetis. The which
first council was there assembled by the Apostles of Christ. The Decrees and
Laws, were made there by them: The controversy at Antioche, was by them
reformed, ordered, and corrected without all commission of any temporal
Magistrate King, or Prince.


The B. of Wynchester. God be thanked, that S. Luke makes to us a sufficient
report of this council, who makes no mention of any Priest there present, as
you untruly report, onles ye will think he meant the order of Priests, when
he named the faction of the Pharisees. Whether the Apostles called this
council or not: or that the Congregation being assembled together in their
ordinary sort, for prayer, preaching, and breaking of bread, Paulus and
Barnabas, with the others, sent to Jerusalem, did declare the cause of their
message before the whole Church, which is more likely, I will not determine,
because S. Luke makes no mention thereof. But if it be true that ye affirm
that the Apostles called or assembled this Council. Then was it not the
authority or Act of one Apostle alone. Besides this, if the Apostles called
this council, they called they Layte so well as the Clergy to the council:
yea, as may seem probable, mo of the Laytie than of the Clergy. The decrees
were not made by the Apostles alone, as you falsely feyne. For S. Luke says,
the decree was made by the Apostles, Elders, and the whole Congregation. The
Apostles, I grant, as was most convenient with the Elders had the debating,
arguing and discussing of the question in controversy. They declared out of
the holy Scriptures what was the truth: And I doubt not but they declared to
the Church, what they thought most convenient to be determined: But the
determination and decree, was by the common consent, both of the Apostles,
Elders, and people. Therefore this controversy was reformed, ordered, and
corrected, not by the authority of the Apostles alone, without the Elders,
neither they togeaher did it without the assent of the Church, and so this
allegation makes no deal for your purpose, but rather clean against it.


M. Fekenham. The Apostles also hearing at Jerusalem, that Samaria Act. 8.
had reciued the word of God, they did send Peter and John, to visit them
to confirm them in faith, and that they might receive the holy ghost by the
imposition of their hands. Paul and Barnabas did agree betwixt them selves,
to visit al those Cities and brethren, which they had converted to the
faith. The words of the Scripture are these: Dixit ad Barnabam Paulus,
reuertentes, visitemus fratres per vniuersas Civitates, Act. 15.
in quibus praedicauimus verbum Domini, quomodo se habeant. In the which
visitation, the Apostle Paul: Electo Sila per ambulabat Siriam and Cil^^iam,
confirmans Ecclesias, praecipiens custodire praecepta Apostolorum and seniorum.
By the which words it right well appears, how the Apostles and
Priests at Jerusalem, over and besides the Gospel which they taught, they
did make certain Decrees, Laws, and ordinances, the which the Apostle
Paul in his visitation, gave commandment to the Syrians, and Silicians, to
observe and keep. What Laws and orders did the Apostle make and appoint 1.
Cor. 11.
unto the Corinthia^s, that men should neither pray nor preach in the Church
with their heads covered? What reformation and order did he make and appoint
unto them, for the more honorable receiving of the Sacrament, and that partly
by vvriting, and partly by word of mouth, saying: Caetera cum Venero
disponam, and in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, he says, Fratres
state and tenete traditiones quas didicistis. sieve per fermonem, sieve per
Epistolam nostram. What orders and Decrees 1. Cor. 13.
did the Apostle Paul make, touching praiyng and preaching unto the people in
tongues unknown, and that al women should keep silence in the Church and
Congregation? These and many such other like Laws, orders, and Decrees,
were made for the reformation of the people in the Church of Christ, by
Christ's Apostles, by Bishops and priests, as the successors of them, and
that without all commission of any Temporal Magistrate, Emperor, King, or
Prince, Constantinus being the first Christian Emperor, like as I have said.


The B. of Wynchester. Your whole drifte in this part is, to prove that
Bishops and Priests may visit, give the holy Ghost, by the imposition of
their hands: and make laws, orders, and decrees to their flocks and cures.
Your proof consists in the example of the Apostles, and this is your
argument: The Apostles visited, gave the holy Ghost, and made Laws, orders,
and decrees, unto their flocks and cures, Ergo, Bishops and Priests, have
authority and may make Laws, visit and give the holy ghost to their flocks
and cures. The insufficiency of this consequent, does easily appear, to those
that do consider the state and condition of the Apostleship, and compare
therewith the office of a Bishop or Priest. The Apostles did, might, and could
do, many things that Bishops and Priests, neither may, nor can do. The
matter is more plain than that needs any proof. But as the sequel fails
in form, so let us consider the matter, whereupon ye ground the sequel, that
your friends may see what foul shifts ye are driven to make, for the
maintenance of an unjust claim. That the Apostles did visit their cures and
flocks, you prove by two places of the Acts: in the first place, ye feine the
Scriptures to say, that it says not: for in the eight of the Acts, there is
no mention made of any visitation: the other place speaks only of a
Scripturely visitation, and nothing at al of your Forinsecall or Canon Law
visitation. The Canon Laws visitatio^, is to be exercised by a great number of
such persons, as the Scripture knows not. And ye matter wherabout that
visitation is occupied for the most part, is directly against the Scriptures.
The persons that may lawfully visit in your Canon Law visitation, are Popes,
Legates from the side: Legates sent and borne, Legates and messengers of the
Apostolic sea, Patriarchs, Archebishoppes, Bishops, Archdecons, Mar. Soci.
Deanes, Archepriestes, Abbottes, and other inferior persons having
jurisdiction. All Archbishoppes which are Legates borne, have authority to
visit their provinces by double right, to wit, by right Legatiue, and by right
Metropolitan, and so they may visit twyse in the year. All these visitours
must begin their visitation with a solemn Mass of the holy ghost. The
Bishop and every ordinary visitour, must begin his visitation at his
Cathedral church and Chapter. He must come into the Church where he visits,
and first kneel down and pray devoutly, chiefly directinge his eyes and mind
to the place wherein the honorable sacrament of Christ's Body is hidden and
kept. The matters of the Canon Law visitation are in part these. The
visitour ought to view diligently whether the place where the Sacrament is
kept, be clean, well garnished and close, for the Eucharist, and the holy
Chrysme ought to be kept shut under lock and keye. He must see that there be
great lights of wax to give light in that place, Then must he visit the place
of the holy relics, and of Baptism. And search diligently what manner of
place it is and whether it be kept shut. Besides this he must visit the
Aultares and little Chappelles, and must with his eyes view he whole Church
whether it be cleanly and clean. Then he must visit the vessels and Church
vestymentes whether they be clean, and kept in a clean place, as they ought
to be, and whether the vestymentes be ouermuche worn and broken, and in case
the visitour shall find such vestimentes unclean, rent, and consumed with
occupyinge, he must burn them in the fire, and cause the ashes to be buried
in some place, whereby there is no passage. But in any wise let him not suffer
(says Socius) purses or such like things to worldly use to be made of the
coopes or tunicles. Last of all, let him survey the houses and possessions
belonging to the Church. The Bishop does visit also, to Bishop enfantes, and
to consecrate or hallow Churches. The visitour also shall enquire and examine,
whether any man know or believe, or that the fame is, that the Sexten, the
Treasurer, or the Vesture keeper, has well and saufly kept, the vessels,
vestymentes, and other things or ornaments of the Church, as Mass books,
Grayles, Antiphoners, Legendes, and other things appointed to divine Service,
and whether any thing moveable, or immovable be diminished, and by whom,
wherefore, when, and after what sort, whyther they be diligently present at
the Dirigees for the dead. And whether the vesture keeper or Sexten, keep
warely and cleanely the Church, the Eucharist, the Relics, the Founte, the
Churchyardes, and such other things. And he shall examine the Priests in the
country Mar. Soci.
in saying of their Masses. But let every visitour understand (says mine
author) that same the greatest quaestion or controversy, which was betwixt
three Rural persons or Priests: whereof two of the^ strove about the
words of Consecration, the one affirminge that the words are to be
pronounced thus: Hoc est corpus meus: the other Hoc est corpus (I think he
should have said corpu^) meum. These two chose a third Priest, who was taken
to be better learned to be arbytour, and to decide this high quaestio^* whose
answer was, that he himself stood ever doubtful in this question: and
therefore insteede of these words of consecration, did always use to say,
one Pater noster. Furthermore the visitour must enquire whither the Layty make
their confession once in the year, and receive the Eucharist at Easter. And
whether they be slow, or deny to pay their tithes and fruits. The
Archbisshop must in visiting any of his suffraganes, exactly enquire and
examine the Canons, and Clerks of the Cath. Church, whether they know,
believe, or that the fame is, that the Bishop has covered and borne with some
men's faults for money, or other te^porall commodity. Can you find in ye
Scriptures any one of these Visitours, or any one of these weighty matters
enquired of, by Peter, John, Paul, Sylas, Barnabas, or by any of the Apostles
in their Visitacions, which were Scripturely Visitacions? No surely, it is not
possible: For these Idolatrous vanities, are manifestly repugnante to the Holy
Scriptures. Amongst all the rabble of these Canon Law Visitours, ye can not
find in the Scriptures, not so much as the bare Title of one of them,
onelesse it be of a Bishop: which name applied to the man, as the
scriptures describes the man, that is called to that office, can no more agree
with a Cannon Law Bishop, then with ye Civil law Bishop, whose office was,
as it is set forth in ye Digestes, to have the rule and oversight of al manner
Li. 50. Tit. 4. De muner. and honor.
of victualles in the Cities, as it were the chief clerk of the markets. As
the matter of the Apostles visitacions stands directly against the greatest
part of the matter whereabout your Popish or Canon law visitacion is
exercised: Even so the holy Scripture that you avouch, for ye geuinge of ye
holy Ghost, makes nothing at all to prove your purpose. For S. Luke in ye
place speaks not of an Act. ^.
ordinary power, that should remain in the ministers of y^ churchfor ever, but
of a special gift to work Myratles, and to give that power to others, which
should continue but for the time whiles Christ's Church was to be erected, and
the word to be sounded thorough the world: And therefore Chrysostom says:
That this gift perteyned only to the Apostles. For (says he) the Conuertes
in Samaria had received before Peter and John came, the spirit of Remission of
Sins: But the spirit of Miracles, that is the gift of tounges, healinge,
propheciyng, and such like, which are the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore are called the Holy Ghost, they had not as yet received. There were
many that by the power of Gods spirit could work Miracles, but to give
this power to others, none could do but the Apostles. For that was propre,
and only in them. Mark now the sequel of your allegation for proof of your
purpose: Thus you argue: The Apostles gave by the impositio^ of their hands,
to the Samaritans, the gifts, of Healinge, Propheciynge, of Tongues, etc.
Therefore every Bishop and priest has power to give the same gifts, to their
flocks and cures. There was never none so blind, or ignorantly brought up in
your cures, belonging to the Abbay of Westminster, but that did well perceive,
that neither your Bishops, Abbottes, or Priests, had, or could do any such
seat. They, like Apes, imitated the outward sign, or ceremony, but the
inward grace they wanted. Touching the third part of your proof, whereby
ye conclude, that Bishops and Priests may make Laws, orders, and decrees, to
their flocks and cures, because the Apostles so did, as you say: Although I
need make none other answer, then to deny your argument, which you can by
no art maineteyne, the insufficiency whereof is manifest, to those that have
but a little skyll, either in Logike or Divinity: Yet I will briefly consider
the places, whereupon you ground this misshapen sequel, that the unskillful
may see, how little they make for your purpose. After that S. Paul had founded
the Church of Corinthe, and had brought them to Christ through ye preachinge
of the Gospel, there sprange up amongst them in his absence many vices and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine he had taught, and the Godly admonitions,
that he had given unto them: wherefore being advertised thereof, he wrote his
Epistle unto that Church, wherein he reproves their faults, partly in
general, and partly in special: And in the end of the tenth Chapter,
concludes with this general admonition, that All things be done without
offense, and to the Glory of God. In the. xi. Chapter, he reproves certain
faults in special, committed by them in their public assemblies, and
Church meetinges, contrary to this general admonition, and contrary to that
he had taught them in special, touching their honest and comely behavior in
their public prayer, preaching, and communicating in Christ's Sacraments,
which of al other things ought chiefly to be so done, as thereby God may be
glorified, and al offenses eschued. To this end S. Paul had taught the
Corinthes, that in these public and holy exercises, it is most seemly that
men prophery and pray bare headed: Contrariwise women, not without their heads
covered. Many observed this comeliness in prayer and propheciynge, as Paul
had taught them: Others contentiousely did withstand and gainesay the same, as
an order that Paul had devised, and brought in of his own devise, besides
Gods word, as you also ymagine that Paul made this order besides the
Gospel, of his own authority, wherewith to bind the Corinthes. To answer
both the contentious Philosophers, than amongst the Corinthes, and the
superstitious Papists, now in like forte molestinge the Christians, S. Paul
proves, that this comlynes is grounded upon Gods ordinance, and not a Law
newly devised of his own authority besides the Gospel. This is his proof,
the man by Gods ordinance has the superiority, and the woman must be in
subjection. God has appointed for them both, signs and tokens of this
dominion and subjection. He has ordained that man in token of superiority,
should have his head uncovered: as contrariwyse the woman, in token of
subjection, to have her head covered.

Therefore, if man lay away that sign and token of dominion which God has
ordained for him to use, and takes upon him the sign and badge of subjection,
he dishonors God his head, and breaks his ordinance. And so the woman, if
she leave of the couerture of her head which God has given to her, to be
worn as a token and badge of her subjection, and takes upon her the sign of
superiority, she dishonors her head, and breketh Gods ordinance. S. Paul
adds an other reason, wereby he proves that, this this was no Law made by
him to the Corinthes. Nature, says he, has taught you this comely order. If
this were a Law and Decree of nature, it was not S. Paul's devise besides Gods
word. S. Ambrose upon this place says, that S. Paul spoke these words,
according to Gods Law, which forbids, (says he) the man to wear his
hear. Chrysostom affirms this to be an ordinance of nature. But says he,
when I speak of nature, I mean of God, who is the author of nature. So that
it is manifest by S. Paul's own proufes in defense of that he had taught, and
by the witness of S. Ambrose and Chrysostom, that the man to be bareheaded,
and the woman covered, was not a Law, order and decree, made by S. Paul to
the Corinthes, as you untruly fable: but Gods ordinance, made plain, set
forth, and taught by him, that all things might be done in the Church in
comely order, to Gods glory. Of like sort was the reformation and order,
whereof you speak about the more worthy receiuinge the Lords Supper. The
Apostle makes thereaboute no new Law, order, or decree, besides the Ghospel,
but reproves the Corinthians, for that they did not, about the receipte
thereof, observe the law of the Gospel: He blames them in general, that
their Church assemblies were not to the increase, but rather to the decrease
of virtue in them selves: He reproves them that in stead of brotherly love,
unity, and concord, there was Contempt, Schism, and Dissension amongst
them: He rebukes them, for that they made that Supper Pryuate, which the
Lord him self had made, and instituted to be Common: He reprehendeth them for
Drunkenness, and that with the contempt of the poor: And he sharply shakes
them up, for that they abuse the Church, contemninge the right use thereof. Is
not this Christ's Law, that the people should increase in virtue? Is not this
Christ's commandment, that ye Christians should live in brotherly love,
unity, and concord? Is not this Christ's Institution, that his Supper should
be Common, and not Pryuate? Does not Christ's law condemn Drunkerdes, and
contempt of the poor? And is not this Gods decree, that his house should
not be profaned or abused? If these be Gods ordinances, as you can not deny
them to be, than are they not Paul's laws, orders, or decrees, neither by
writynge or word of mouth: otherwise than that Paul was Gods mouth and
scribe, to utter, not his own laws besides the Gospel, but Gods
ordinances comprehended within his Gospel. So that whether being present,
he taught them by word, or being absente by writing, he neither wryite nor
spoke, other then he had received of the Lord. He promised, say you, to
dispose other things at his coming. It is true, but not other wise then he
did these above mentioned. He exhorts, say you, the Thessalonians, to abide
in the traditions, which they had learned by word or by writing. Ye say
truth: but he does not thereby bind them to this, as to a law, order, or
decree, made by him besides the Gospel: but he monisheth them, as S. Ambrose
expounds his meaning, To stand fast, continue, and perse^ere in the
tradition of the Gospel. So that the traditions he speaks of, are not other
then the Doctrine of the Gospel.

I marvel not, that ye misreporte S. Paul, saiynge, that he made orders and
decrees, touching prayinge and preachinge unto the people in tongues unknown,
and that all women should keep silence in the church and congregation, for it
may seem, ye never readde the place, but took it, as you heard it reported.
If you had readde the place, ye might have seen with your own eyes, that S.
Paul speaks no whitte of that matter in the. 13. as ye untruly auouche:
and in the. 14. ye should have perceived, that he in plain speech proves
you a Liar: For that he denies that these were his orders or decrees,
affirminge them to be the Lords commandments, and so does Theophilact.
Gloss. ordinar. and Lyra witness also with Paul, testifiynge that these were
his words and meaning. These places thus rightly considered; it may easily
appear unto the most unskillful, how little your purpose is helped by them,
and that these grounds do fail you: So that your whole shifte being sifted,
is found naught, both in matter and form.


M. Fekenham. The which noble Emperor Constantinus, for the repres^^on of the
Arians errors and heresies, he did at the request of Syluester then Bishop of
Rome, call the first council at Nice: where he had, to the Bishops there
assembled these vv^ordes: Cum vos Deus sacerdotes constiturit potestatem
tradidit iudicandi de Li 10. Hist. Eccl. ca. 2.
nobis. Et ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur. Vos autem, cum nobis a Deo,
di^datisitis, ab hominibus iudicari non potestis. etc. Valen tianus Imperator
cum ille rogatus esset ab Episcopis Hellespo^ti Bythiniae, Lib. 7. Hist-Trip.
ca. 12.
vt interesset, consilio, respondit: Mihi quidem cum vnus de populo sim, fas
non est talia perscrutari, verum sacerdo^es quibus haec cura est, apud
s^metipsos congregentur, vbi voluerint. Theodosio Imperatori, Ambrosius Theod.
lib. hist. 5. Eccl. cap. 18.
ingressu intra cancellos templi inte^dixit, inquieps: In teriora o Imperator
sacerdotibus solis patent. etc. Cui egi^ ob id gratias Imperator, asserens se
didicisse discrimen inter Imperatorem and sacerdotem.


The B. of Wynchester. It is manifest that Constantine called the first Nicene
council, but very vnli^^ly that he did it at the request of Syluester, because
this Council was not in the time of Syluester, but whiles Julius was Bishop of
Rome, who by reason of his great age could not be there present in his own
Nicep. li. 8. cap. 14. Soz. lib. 1. cap. 17. Li. 2. to. 2. her. 68. Lib. 1. ca.
1.
person, and therefore sent in his steed Vitus and Vincentius* as the
Ecclesiastical histories report, and Epiphanius affirms that Constantine
called this Council at the earnest su^e of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria,
whereto Ruffinus adds, many other of the Clergy also. But if it be true as
ye say, that the Emperor called the Council at the request of the Pope, than
both those P^pistes are L^ars, which affirm that the Pope called this
council, and your cause by your own confession is much hindered: for if the
Emperor called the Council, and that at the request of Syluester the Pope, as
y^e say, or at the earnest suite of Alexander, and other godly Bishops, as
Epiphaniu^ and (...) affirm: It appears plainly, that both the Pope and the
other catholic Bishops, did thereby acknowledge the supreme power and
authority, to sommon and call councels, which is a principal part of your
purpose, and of ye Ecclesiastical jurisdiction cohibitiue, to be in the
Emperor and not in them selves: for otherwise they might, and would have done
it, by virtue of their own office, without any suite made to the Emperor, to
execute that which belonged unto them selves. The Emperor refused to judge
the quarreling accusations of the Bishops assembled at the Nicen council, one
quarreling and accusing an other, and referred the judgment of them to Christ.
This was his modesty, Policy, and prudent foresighte, least by sifting those
private quarelles, he might have hindered the common cause, as I have said
before, and is plainly to be gathered of Ruffinus and Nicephorus, and not Lib.
1. ca. 2. Lib. 8. ca. 16
for that he thought his authority might not stretche so far, as to judge
the Priests and their matters, as ye would have it to seem: for as he him
self protests, this Eusebius. li. 3. De vit. Con.
above all other things, to be the chief scope and end of his Imperial
authority, namely that the catholic Church be praeserued in unity of
faith, sincerity of love, concord in godly Religion, and that the diseases
therein* as Schisms, Heresies, etc. might be healed by his mynistery: even so
forsook he no occasion or mean, whereby to work forth this effect of his
ministry and office, whether it were at some time by rele^ting and remittinge
some what of his authority, or by exercising the same to the utmost, in all
matters, and over all persons. He thought it the best for this time by
relentinge to bear with the weakness of those fathes, thereby the better to
encourage them to standefast, and jointly against the common enemy, for the
furtheraunce of the truth. But afterward, when the council or Synod was
assembled at Tire by his commandment, and that Athanasius had made complaint
unto him of the unjust dealing of that counsel to deface the truth, the
Emperor did exercise the full authority of his ministry, and called al ye
Bishops unto him, to this end, ye he by his supreme authority, might examine
their doings, and judge of the whole council whether they had judged uprightly,
Soz. li. 1 c. 4
and dealt sincerely or not. This he did at the suite of the most godly Bishop
Athanasius, who would not have attributed this authority to the Emperor, if
it had not apperteined to his jurisdiction to have judged the Bishops and their
doings: neither would the catholic fathers of that time, have suffered this
and many other such like doings of this most Christian Emperor, to have
passed without some admonition or misliking, if they had not acknowledged the
authority in him to be lawful. He commanded the Bishops every where to
assemble at his appointment, where, and when he would. He sharply reproved
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and Arius, for the contention stirred up by
them. He judged Caecilianus. Bishop of Carthage, to be lawfully consecrated,
and ordered, and condemned the Donatistes. And these Bishops assembled at the
Nicen council by his commandment, of whom ye speak, acknowledged the
Emperor to have authority to judge them and their causes, or else they had
done folishly, to offer their bills of complaint unto him, whom they thought
had no authority or might not judge and determine them. But in case it were
true, that the Prince might not judge the Priests nor their causes, what
conclude you thereof? You can not conclude your purpose, for this is no more a
good consequent: Constantinus would nor could lawfully judge the Priests
assembled at Nicen council: Ergo, Bishops and Priests may call councelles,
make Laws, orders, and decrees, to their flock and cures, and exercise all
manner iurisoiccio^ cohibitiue: Then this, York stands but. iij. miles from
Pocklington, Ergo, your pocket is full of plummes: of the like form also are
the consequentes, that ye make upon the histories of the Emperors Valentinian
and Theodosius. And as you can not fasten your purpose by any good sequel upon
these histories, so that history that ye allege of Valentinian, makes much
again your purpose. First it is uncertain and may be doubted, whether this
answer that ye affirm to be Valentinians, were his, or Valens the Lib. 6.
ca. 7.
Emperors words, for as Sozomenus one of ye Tripartite Ecclesiastical
historians, affirms this suite to be made Lib. 4. ca. 2.
by catholic Bishops of Hellespo^tus and Bithinia, unto Valentinia^, and that
this was his answer to their peticion. Even so Socrates an other of the same
tripartite historia^s affirms that this suite was made by the Macedonians,
unto Valens the Emperor, who granted them their petition, the rather
supposing, that the matter should have been determined in that council, after the
minds of Eudoxius and Acatius. And it is not from the purpose to note which of
these Emperors caused this council to be called, for the one of the^,
Valentinia^ was a catholic Emperor, the other Valens an Arian. Secondly you
do falsely report the story, for the Bishops of Hellespontus and Bithinia, did
not make suite unto The Emperor Valentinian, that he would be praesent in the
council: but by their messenger, did humbly beseech him, that he would
command all the Bisshops, as Nicephorus reports it, or yt he would suffer and
give leave unto the Bishops to have a Synod or council, which they held after
license obtained at Lampsacum, as Socrates and Sozomenus, the Tripertite
Historians, make relation. Thirdly, the Emperor does not simply refuse or
deny the search and diligent enquyrie of these matters as things nothing
apperteining to his office, or not lawful for him to enquire of: as ye would
have it seem, but excuses himself by his earnest business and want of
leisure, saying, It is not lawful: (meaning that his leisure, from the weighty
matters of the common weal, and just opportunity, would not easily now
suffer him) to travail in those causes, and therefore refers the exact
sifting of those things to them, whose offices and charge, was properly to be
occupied in those matters. That this is the true purporte of his words in his
right sense and meaning, appears plainly by the due circumstances set forth
in the story, and also by Nicephorus an Ecclesiastical historia^, who rightly
understood his meaning, Lib. 11. ca. 3.
and reports it in these words: Mihi negotijs occupato, and reip. curis
distento res eiusmodi inquirere, no^ facile est. It is no light or easy matter
for me, that am now occupied with businesses, and filled so full as I may be,
with the cares of the common weal, to enquire or search such matters. Last
of al, whether the catholic Bishops of Helespontus and Bithynia, required the
Emperors presence in the council, as ye affirm, or they required therewith
his labor and travail in the debating or searchinge the truth of matter,
which may seem at the first by the bare words of his answer: or they
desiered only license of him and permission to assemble together in Synod or
council, to defermine and decree with the truth, against the Arianismes,
which the most and best part of the Historians agree unto. Their suit and
humble peticion, makes plainly against your presumpteous assertion, in that
they acknoweledged thereby the jurisdiction to call councelles, to be in the
Emperor, and not in Bishops or Priests, without special leave, license,
and commission from the Prince. For if the power and jurisdiction to call
councels, had been in them selves without the Emperors commission, what neaded
them to have craved license of the Emperor? And if it had not been lawful
for the Emperor to have been present in the Council, and to have dealte in
the diligent search and debating of matters in Religion, then these Catholic
Bishops did wickedly, who as you say moved him thereunto. Although ye
untruly report the story of Theodosius the Emperor, and Ambrose the Bishop of
Myllaine, yet can you not by any means wraste it, to serve your purpose any
whit at all. For if it were true, that Ambrose forbadde Theodosius the Emperor
the entrance into the Chauncell: or that the Emperor had said to him, that he
had learned the difference betwixt an Emperor and a Priest, yet can you not
conclude thereof: therefore Bishops and Priests have power and authority to
make laws, orders and decrees to their flocks and cures, and to exercise the
second kind of Cohibytiue Jurisdiction over them. Theodosius, as the author
writes, came into the Theod. li. 5* cap. 1^.
Chauncell to offer his oblacion, whereat S. Ambrose found no fault: But when
he stayed there still to receive there the holy Mysteries, S. Ambrose sent him
word to goo forth and abide with the other of the Church, for that place was
only for the Priests: For which monicion the Emperor was returned to
Constantinople, and came on a time into the inward place or Chauncell to offer
his oblation, and went forth again so soon as he had offered, Nectarius the
Bishop demanded of him, wherefore he tarried not still within, meaning to
receive the holy mysteries: To whom the Emperor makes answer, saying: I
have scarcely learned the difference betwixt an Emperor and a Priest.


Fekenham. M. John Caluyne, intreatinge of the Histories betvvixte Call. Inst*
cap. ^*
these Emperors Valentianus, Theodosius and S. Ambrose, after alonge process
wherein he makes good proof, that all Spiritual jurisdiction does
apperteine unto the Church, and not unto the Empire, he has these words
follovvinge: Qui vt magistratum ornent, Ecclesiam spoliant hac potestate, non
modo falsa interpretatione Christi sententia^ corrumpunt sed sanctos omnes
Episcopos, qui ^am multi a tempore Apostolorum extiterunt, non leuiter damnant.
Quod honorem officiumque Magistratus falso praetextu fibi vsurpauerint. How
they do spoil the Church of that authority, thereby to adorn temporal
Magistrates, not only by corruptinge Christ his appointment and meaning
therein: But also they lightly condemn and set at naught all those holy
Bishops, which in so great number have continued from the time of the Apostles
hitherto, which honor and office of Spiritual government they have (says
John Calvin) usurped and taken upon them by a false pretext and title made
thereof. And again John Calvin says, Qui in initio tantopere extulerunt
Henricum regem Angliae, certe fuerunt homines inconsiderati. Call. in 7. cap.
Amos proph.
Dederunt illi summam omnium potestatem. Et hoc me semper grauiter vulnerauit,
erant enim blasphemi cum vocarent ipsum summum caput Ecclesiae sub Christo.
They which in the beginning did so much extol Henry king of England, and
which did give unto him the highest authority in the Church, they were men
which lacked circumspection, and of small confideration: which thing (says
John Calvin) did at all times offend me very much, for they did commit
blasphemy, and were blasphemets, when they did call him the Supreme head of the
Church.


The B. of Wynchester. The collectour of your common places did beguile you,
which you would have perceived, if you had read M. Calvin with your own eyes.
He entreats not in that place of the Histories betwixt the Emperors
Valentinianus, Theodosius, and S. Ambrose. He confuteth the opinion of such, as
think the Jurisdiction that Christ gave unto his church, to be but for a time,
whilst the Magistrates were as yet unfaithful, and proves that the
Jurisdiction of the Church was given of Christ to remain till his second
coming, and belongs only to the Church, and not to the Prince, Bishop
or Priest, without special commission from the Church. The which
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, I comprehended under the first kind of
Cohibytiue Jurisdiction. You do M. Calvin not double, but quadruple, ye much
more wrong about the citinge of his sentence, for as ye have untruly
reported the circumstaunce of his sentence, so have you hackte from the
beginning thereof one material word, part of it you have obscurely
translated, the other part falsely, and by altering his words and sense, ye
have belied him, slaundered the ancient Bishops, and have avouched M. Calvin
(if those were his words and meaning, which you in your translation father
upon him) directly against your self: which you meant not, for ye thought
(as I suppose) you had so cunningly handeled him, yt he should have served your
turn. If this your evil dealing with M. Calvin, proceeded of ignorance, for
y^ his Latin was to fine for your gross understanding, ye are somewhat to be
borne withal: but if you have thus dealt of purpose, than your malice is over
great, and ye show your self shameless to deal so unhonestly, and that in
the sight of all men. After yt M. Calvin has proved, that our savior Christ
gave the discipline of excommunication unto the Church, to be exercised
continually by ye same: to ye censure whereof al estates ought to submit them
selves, for if he be an Emperor, he is within, or under, and not above the
Church. He concludes with this sentence: Quare illi, qui vt Magistratu^ ornent
etc. Wherefore they which to adorn the Magistrate, do spoil the Church of
this power (to exercise ye discipline of exco^municatio^) do not only corrupt
Christ's sentence with a false interpretation: but do also, not lightly
condemn all the holy Bishops, which were so many from the Apostles time:
for so much as they (all the holy Bishops) have usurped to them selves the
honor and office of the (civil) Magistrate under a false pretense or
coullour. The first word of the sentence which knitteth the same, as a
conclusion to that that goes before, ye have left out. How darkely ye have
translated the first part of the periode, may appear by conference of your
translation with the Authors words. The last part ye have falsely
translated, tourninge the Conjunction into a Pronoume relative, and
translatinge this word Magistratus (whereby Calvin means the civil
Magistrate) by these words spiritual government, and so have clean altered
both the words and sense of M. Calvin, and yet shame not to belie him,
saying (John Calvin says) which he says not. But it is M. Feckenham that
says, and so belieth Calvin, and slaundereth the ancient Bishops, as though
they (for to them this, they, has relacion) had taken upon them the office of
the Magistrate: as they had done in deed, if all manner correction and
judgment had belonged to the Magistrate, and none at al to the Church, by
whose commission they exercised this jurisdiction. If this were M. Caluines
saying, as ye translate him, that they (all the holy Bishops from the
Apostles time) have usurped and taken upon them the honor and office of
Spiritual government, by a false pretext and title made thereof, than have
you alleged M. Calvin against your self, for this sentence, if it were true,
overthrows your purpose nothing more. And again John Calvin writing upon
Amos the Prophet, is by you alleged to as little purpose: For be it that they
which attributed to King Henry of famous memory, so much authority (which
grieved Calvin) were men not well advised in so dooinge, and that they were
blasphemours, that called him the supreme head of the Church, (ye know who
they were that first gave to him that title and authority) yet your conclusion
follows not hereof. Therefore Bishops and Priests have authority to make
Laws, orders, and decrees, etc. to their flocks and cures, no more than of
his former saying. Christ gave to his Church this authority to excommunicate,
to bind and to lowse. Therefore Bishops and Priests may make Laws, orders, and
decrees, to their flocks and cures.


M. Fekenham. Hosius Episcopus Cordubensis, qui Synodo Nicence primae interfuit
A thanas. in Epist, ad solitar. vit. agentes.
Sic habet, sicut testatur D. Athanasius aduersus Constantium Imp. Si istud est
iudicium Episcoporum, quid commune cum eo habet Imperator? Sin contra, ista
minis Caesaris conflantur, quid opus est hominibus titulo Episcopis? Quando a
condito aeuo auditum? quando iudicium Ecclesiae authoritatem suam ab Imperatore
accepit? aut quando vnqua^ pro iudicio agnitum? Plurimae ante hac Synodi
fuerunt, multa iudicia Ecclesiae habita sunt: Sed neque patres istiusmod^res
principi persuadere conati sunt, nec princeps se in rebus Ecclesiasticis
curiosum praebuitnune autem nouum quoddam spectaculum ab Ariana heresi editur,
co^uenerunt enim Haeretici and Constantius Imperator, vt ille quidem sub
praetextu Episcoporum, sua potestate aduersos cos quos vult vtatur.


The B. of Wynchester. As it is very true, that Hosius Bishop of Corduba in
Spain, was in the first council of Nice, so is it as untrue that these be his
words, which you have cited in his name, for they be the sayings of
Athanasius, and not of Hosius. Wherein ye have done Athanasius threefolde
wrong, first to attribute his writings to an other, then also to cause him
therein to bear false witness against him self, and thirdly, in that ye have
left out the first word of his sentence, which is a material word, and
brings in this his saying, as a reason of that which goes before.
Athanasius ^^ndeth him self grieved, that both he and many other Godly Bishops
for the truth it self, suffered much cruelty, and were wrongfully condemned,
not according to the order of the Ecclesiastical judgment, but by the cruel
threathes of the Emperor Constantius being an Arian and a fierce mainteinour
of the Arianisme. Who notwithstanding subtly covered his ungodly dealinge
under the pretense of a judgment or sentence past by Bishops in Synod or
convocation, which he called Episcopale iudicium, a Bisshoply judgment. But
says Athanasius, Constantius can not so hide him self, seeing that there is
at hand that can plainly bewray his wilines, for if this be the judgment of
Bisshoppes, what has the Emperor to do therewith. But if on the contrary
side these things be brought to pass through Caesar's threats, what neadeth
men, that have but the name of Bisshoppes, etc. There are two things
necessarily to be considered, for to understand rightly the true meaning of
Athanasius in this place by you alleged: first what was required to that
which he calls the judgment belonging to Bishops, or the Bishoply
judgment. Than what was the dooinges of Constantius, pretending a judgment of
Bishops. Liberius the Bishop of Rome, as Athanasius reports in this same
Epistle require in a Synod Ecclesiastical, that it be free from fear, far
from the palaice, where neither the Emperor is present, neither the Earl or
Captain thrusts in him self, nor yeat the Judge does threaten. He means
that it be free from fear, threathes, and without this, that the Emperor or
Rulers, do lymitte or prescribe to the Bishops what they should judge. This
appears more plainly by S. Ambrose, who also speaks of the like matter,
yea under the same Prince, saiynge: Constantinus set forth no Ad Valent.
Epist. 32.
Laws before hand, but gave free judgment to the Priests. The self same
also did Constantius, (in the beginning of his reign) but that which he well
beg^nne, was otherwise ended. For the Bishops at the first had written the
sincere faith, but when as certain men will judge of the faith within the
Palaice; he means after the opinion of the Courtiers and prescription of the
Prince, otherwise it was not unlawful to judge of matters, concerning faith
within the Princes Palaice, the Prince also being present, for the first Nicen
council was holden within the Emperors Palayce, and he him self was present
amongst them: They brought this to pass, that those judgments of the
Bisshoppes were changed by Circumscriptions. Then is required in a Synod
(says he) that (...)
the only fear of God, and the institutions of the Apostles, do suffice to
all things. Next, that the right faith be approved, and Heresies, with the
mainteiners thereof, be cast out of the council, and than to judge of the
persons that are accused of any fault. So that the Bishoply session or
judgment, must have freedom, must judge by the only word of God, must
have the Bishops that do judge to be of the right faith, and must first
examine the Religion and faith of the party accused, and then his faith.
Constantius, who notwithstanding that he did pretend a Bishoply judgment,
used none of these obseruauntes, but the clean contrary. For as Athanasius
complayneth in this Epistle, the Emperor wrought all together with threats,
menassinge the Bishops other to subscribe against Athanasius, or to depart
from their Churches: Who so gaynsaide the subscription, received to reward,
either death or exile. He without any persuasion with reasons, compels all
men by force and violence, in so much as many Bishops afterward excused
themselves, that they did not subscribe of their own voluntary, but were
compelled by force. Where as, (says he) the faith is not to be set forth
with swoordes or darts, or by warrelike force, but by counsailing and
persuadinge. He in the stead of Gods word, used his own will, appointinge and
prescribing what should be determined, answering ye godly bishops, who objected
against his unorderly doings, y^ ecclesiastical Cano^: at quod ego volo pro
Canone sit. Let my will stand for the Canon. Pretending a judgment of
Bishops, he does what so ever likes himself. Where as Hosius says, cytod by
Athanasius in this Epistle: The Emperor ought to learn these things of the
Bisshoppes, and not to command or teach them what to judge in this kind of
judgment, for the Prince should not show him self so busy or curious in
Ecclesiastical things, that his will and pleasure should rule or guide them,
in stead of Gods word, and the godly Canons of the fathers. Constantius
would have no other Bishops but Arians, which were no Bishops in deed, as
Athanasius says, and much less apt to judge of the matter, touching a
principal article of our faith, or of the faithful Bishop Athanasius: and
taking his heresy as an undoubted truth, that might not be called into
question, he sought by all means, to have Athanasius condemned, and al Bishops
to refuse his communion, and to communicate with the Arians. These disorderly
dealinges of the Emperor, Athanasius condemns, as directly against the order
of Ecclesiastical session or Synod, how so ever he pretended under the color
of the Bishoply judgment, to abuse his own power and authority after his
own lust against whom he would. You would have it seem to the ignorant,
that Athanasius mind in this place were to deny, that Princes should meddle or
deal in Ecclesiastical things or causes, which is far from his meaning: for
he him self with many other godly bishops, as I have showed before, did
acknowledge the Princes authority herein, and in this same epistle he him
self confesses this Emperors authority to call councils, and cites Hosius
also, who enclineth to that purpose, both of the^ confessing, y^ Constans and
Constantius The^perours, did call all the Bishops to ye counsel, which he calls
Sardice^se consiliu^: about the accusatio^s and crimes laid in against
Athanasius. And Theodoretus affirms. yt this Emperor Co^stantius Lib. 2. ca.
15.
called a Synod at Millaine about such like matter, at whose calling the
faithful Bishops assembled, parents regio edicto, obeying the Kings Summons:
which they would not have done, if it had been unlawful for him to have had
any dooinges about councelles. But when he abused his authority in the counsel,
as though his power had been absolute, without limits or bounds, willinge
them, yea co^pelling them, to do after his will against good conscience, they
would not obey him. Quin etiam palam praesentem regem, coarguebant impij and
iniusti imperij, but did openly reprove the King for his wicked and unjust
rule or commandment: whereby is manifest, that Athanasius, speaks not
against the Princes authority in Ecclesiastical matters, but against his
tyranny, and the abusinge of that authority, which God has given him,
wherewith to mynister unto Gods will, and not to rule after his own lust:
they commend the authority, but they reprove ye disorderly abuse thereof. Now
let us see how this saying of Athanasius helps your ^ause. Constantius the
Emperor dealt unorderly and after his own lust against Athanasius and
others, pretendinge nevertheless the judgment of Bishops, which Athanasius
misliketh, as is plain in this place avouched: Ergo, Bishops and Priests may
make laws, decrees, orders, and exercise the second kind of Cohibitiue
Jurisdiction over their flocks and cures, without commission from the Prince
or other authority: I doubt not but ye see such fault in this sequel that
ye are, or at least ye ought, to be ashamed thereof.


M. Fekenham. Almighty God says by his Prophet Hieremy, which was both a
Prophet and a Priest. Ecce dedi verba mea in ore tuo. Ecce Hier. 1.
constitui^te hodie super gentes and super regna, vt euellas and destruas and
disperd^s, and dissipes, and aedifices, and plants, Gregorius Nazianzenu^
Greg. Nazian. de Hier. dict. oratione. 18 ad subditos timore per culsos and
Imperatore^ irascentem. Ezech. 34.
sermon de dictis Hieremiae ad Iulia^um Imperatorem: Pu^as no patimini vt
verum vobiscum agam, suscipitis ne liberratem verbi and libenter accipitis quod
lex Christi sacerdotali vos nostrae subijsset potestati, atque justice
tribunalibus subdit? Dedit enim nobis potestatem, dedit principatum multo
perfectiorem principatibus vestris, aut nunquid iustum videtur si cedat
spiritus carni, si a terrenis caelestia superentur, si diuinis praeferantur
humana? Sed patienter quaeso accipite libertatem nostram. Scio te ouem esse
gregis mei, scio te intra sacra altaria cum veneratione subijci manibus
sacerdotis, etc.

And by this Prophet Ezechiel almighty God says: Ve pastoribus Israel, quod
infirmum fuit non consolidastis, quod aegrotum non sanastis, quod confractum
non alligastis quod abiectum non reduxistis, quod perierat non quaesistis. Into
the which maledictions and curses, the Bishops and Priests must needs
encurre if they have no Jurisdiction over their flock, if they may not visit
them, if they may not refourme them, if they may not order and correct them at
all times as they shall see cause.

Chrysostomus Homil. 5. de verbis Esaiae, vbi sacerdotem ast^uit esse Chrysostom.
hom. 5. de verb. Esa.
medium inter Deum and Hominem, nullumque honorem in terris illius honori posse
conferri.

And therefore here to conclude this my objection unto your L. aunsvveare, I
shall here finishe the same, saying with the blessed martyr Ignatius, S. John
the Evangelists disciple. Quod nemo praeter Episcopum aliquid agat eorum quae
ad Ecclesiam Ign. Epist. 7. ad Smyrnens.
pertinent. And so to adioyne hereunto the saying of S. Augustine, who in
speaking, Contra Iulianu^, ait de doctoribus Ecclesiae: quod credunt, credo:
quod tenent, teneo: quod docent, doceo: quod praedicant, praedico: istis cede,
and mihi cedes. etc.


The B. of Wynchester. In all this part there is not one sentence, that can be
drawn by any force to help your cause. It suffised you to heap up a sort of
testimonies together, to make a show although nothing to the purpose. Yea the
words spoken to the Prophet Hieremy makes plainly against you. For they
show that the mynisters in Gods Church, have authority to pluck up by the
roots, and to destroy euilles and the kingedome of Satan, to plant good
things, and to edify the Church, as the gloss enterlined has it, or all
manner wicked and false doctrine, and what so ever the heavenly Father has not
planted, as the gloss ordinary expounds it. But the means whereby this
jurisdiction and authority is exercised, is limited and appointed in these
words: Behold I have put my words in thy mouth, says God to Hieremy. So
that other jurisdiction over people and kingdoms, than the preachinge of
Gods word Hieremy had not. Hieremyes mouth is touched, says y^ gloss
ordinary, and the Lords words are given (to him) that he should receive
boldenes to preach. Of this holdenes to preach the word of God, speaks
Gregory Nazianz. in the place by you alleged. After he had comforted his
hearers, he tourneth his speech to the Princes, and such as were in
authority, must we spare you (says he) because of your power, as though we
feared, or were ashamed of the liberty given us of Christ? Christ's law has
made you subject to my power, and to my judgment seat. He speaks of a
spiritual subjection by faith, and obedience to the mynister, exhortinge,
comfortinge, and edifiyng to eternal life by the word of God. And he adds
more expressedly what manner of rule or empire he challendgeth, namely such as
brings the fleashe to be subject to the spyrite, such as makes earthly
things subject to Heavenly. And the subjection he requires is none other,
than such as the spiritual sheep owes to the spiritual pastor, whose rule
and subjection Christ utters in this sentence: My sheep hear my voice and
follow me. I know says Nazianzene to the Joan. 10.
Emperor, that thou art a sheep of my flock, and thereupon he concludes
that he must boldly preach the word to the Emperor, and that he on the
other side is subject thereto and ought to obey. And this is the propre
Jurisdiction that belongs to the Bishops and Priests, the which if they
exercise with all possible diligence and faithfulness, they shall escape the
curses that the Prophet Ezechiel menasseth: As co^trarywise if they use never
so princely, your popish, or rather pompous Canon Law jurisdiction, which
consists in Courtly consistories, and Forinsecall judgments, far
disagreynge from the right jurisdiction of true and Christianlike Prelates,
they shall not in ye end escape the deserved maledictions, and curses threatened
to such by the Prophet Ezechiel. Chrysostom in the homily by you cited
condemning the presumptuousnes of the king Ozias, in enterprising to offer
incense, which belonged by Gods commandment only to the Priest, does
compare the object or matter of both their Mynisteries together, affirminge,
that the Priestly dignity respectinge the matter whereabout it is exercised,
which is heavenly and spiritual, does far exceed the other, for yt the
matter thereof is but earthly and outward. His words makes his meaning
plain: The kingly throne (says he) has the administration of earthly
things, and has not beyo^de this power, any further authority. But the throne
of the Priest is placed in heaven, and he has authority to pronounce of
heavenly businesses, who says these things? the king of heaven him self:
what so ever ye bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven also: and what so
ever ye lowse on earth, shall be lowsed in heaven also, what may be compared with
this honor? Heaven takes of the earth principal authority to judge. For the
judge sits in the earth: the Lord (Christ) follows the servant, and
what so ever this (servant) judges in the inferior (parts) that same he
(Christ) approves in Heaven. Therefore the Priest stands a mean or
mediator betwixt God and man's nature, bringyng unto us the benefits that
comme from thense (from Heaven) etc. These words of Chrysostom if they have
not an indifferent interpretour, that will make his words by just
circumstaunce to serve his meaning, and not to bind his meaning to his bare
words, will make Heaven to receive authority of the Earth: will prove
Christ to be inferior to the Priest, and the Priest to have the mediation
betwixt God and man, by means whereof we may receive the Graces that cummeth
from Heaven, which mediation belongs only to Christ.

Now since in all these objections hitherto, ye have brought forth nothing at
all, that either made not against your self, or that makes any whitte for
you, it is more then time ye draw to Conclusion, and because no good
Conclusion, can follow of evil premises, ye were driven to conclude, and
finishe up your objection with the like patchinge, wrestinge and falsifiynge
your Authors, as ye did before: and therefore in the Conclusion, like to him,
that having no right to any, claymed all, to obtain somewhat at the least:
Even so you, to prove that your Bishops, and priests have al jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, allege a piece of a sentence out of Ignatius, which barely by
it self recited, geeueth not only all that unto the Bishop but al things
belonginge to the Church besides, and that no man may do any thing, not so
much as toll a bell to service, or sweep the Church, but only the Bishop
must do all alone. Which conclusion some of your accomplices would so little
allow, as those whom ye would ouerburden, and ye your self might go play
you, as one that had naught to do, in any thing perteining to the Church.
But to help the matter, and to make Ignatius words plain without
absurdity, you must take with you the residue of the sentence that follows,
which ye leave out, of The Sacrament of Thankesgeuinge, and Celebratinge the
Divine Service, and then it shall easily appear, that Ignatius talks of
such dooinges of a Bishop, as in deed declare his function and office, and
yet furthereth no whit the Conclusion of your objection. So that your
Conclusion being yet as insufficient as the rest, you are feign to adioyne an
other piece thereunto: Wherein although ye show how evil a ioygner you be,
to adioygne those two pieces of sentences together in one Conclusion, that are
of clean sundry matters, yet in one point ye have made them both agree,
that as ye wrested the one, so ye not only wrest, but flatly falsify the
other, and yet neither of them both stand you in any stead, to help your
objection, much less to conclude the same. For first, how does this follow:
S. Augustine says (say you) of the Doctors of the Church: That they believe,
I believe: that they hold, I hold: that they teach, I teach: that they
preach, I preach: yield to them, and thou shalt yield to me. Ergo,
Bishops and Priests have power and authority to make laws, orders, and
Decrees, and to use all cohibitiue jurisdiction over their flocks and cures.
Now if your friends that have believed hitherto as you believe, have held as
you hold, taught as you teach, preach as you preach, and beleeuinge the
upright dealinge and conscience, that you pretend, have yielded unto you
herein, do but a little examine your false dealing with those Fathers, whom you
would seem so wholly to follow, I think they would no longer believe you,
hold with you, nor yield unto you, but suspecte you as a deep dissembler, or
rather abhor you, as an open sclaunderer and belyer, not only of me, but of
the ancient Fathers them selves. For first I would learn of you, where S.
Augustine has those words, in all his six books against Julian, Istis cede
and mihi cedes, if he have them, show where: if he have them not, then how
do ye follow S. Augustine? How dare you impudently say, ye preach and
teach that he did, when ye manifestly mangle, alter, pervert, and corrupt the
saiynge that he did teach. In deed for fashions sake ye cite a piece of S.
Augustines sentence, that they believe I believe, etc. but for that which
follows istis cede and me non caedes: yield to them and thou shall not strike
or whippe me: you have put in these words, istis cede and mihi cedes, yield
to them and thou shall yield to me: and yet this corrupting of the sentence
makes it serve no whit the more for your purpose, but utters your falsehood:
that belike will not spare to corrupt that which makes flat against you, that
thus use to corrupt this, which makes neither to nor fro with you, nor against
me. But as S. Augustine writing in ye same matter against Julian, a Disciple
of Pelagius, an English Monk, dealing with S. Augustine, as ye have done with
me, said to Julian: so say I to you. Ye feine me Lib. 3.
to say that I say not, to conclude that I conclude not, to grant that I
grant not, and you conclude to your self that which I deny, etc. In deed
you have labored more to find out those reasons which ye Lib. 5.
might better utter against your self than against me. But in such a cause ye
should not need to take such peines, if you had any shame in you. S.
Augustine in these books against Julian, as in his other against the
Donatistes, (as I have declared before) did attribute unto the Emperors and
Princes, the Bishops and Priests, such Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as I
have done. Of the same mind that he was herein, were also these fathers,
that he cyteth. Wherefore you will now I trust, according to your promise,
yield and relente: If not to me for stubborn heart: yeat according to your
conclusion to S. Augustine, and the ancient Fathers, to believe herein that
they believe, to hold that they hold, to teach that they teach, to Preach
that they preach, and no moare to wrynge, mayhem, slander and belie them. And
than both I and all other faithful Christians will both better believe you, and
give God thanks for you.


M. Fekenham. After long expectation, and many promises, his L. final
answer to the said objections, was as hereafter follows. For as much as
I do perceive, that you are not to be resolved in this matter, I shall here
stay and proceed no further with you in the same: and like as you have been,
so you shall be unto me most heartily vvelcome: You shall lack nothing that is
in my house to pleasure you: And from henceforth I shall leave to have any
further talk or conference with you in these controversies of Religion. And
for all such talk and vvrytinge as has passed already bitvveene us, I shall
perform this my promise, both first and last made unto you, that you shall be
well assured, not to suffer any hurt or damage thereby.


The B. of Wynchester. You delivered this objection unto me in writing,
betwixt Easter and Whitsontide, about the end of April: within two days
folowinge, when I had read the same, I told you, that in the collection of
your common places, you were much abused, for that you had mistaken them, and
observed no just circumstances of the authorities, whereby to have known the
authors meaning: And so we continued in debatinge and reasoninge, from time
to time, about this matter of Jurisdiction, and others, until the beginning of
September folowinge, before which time, your obstinacy grew so much, that I
was forced, through your unorderly behavior, to restreigne you of your
licentious talk, and sequester you from conference with any, having so much
before abused your self, and especially in mine absence, and I was the rather
moved so to do, for that I perceived all that I did, was but in vain: as at
diverse times and often, I repeated that unto you, obstinately bente to the
contrary, meaning by such stoutness to recover your credit, which through
your inconstancy was so empaired amongst your friends. I said, at your
first coming, and many times after, you being sent by the Honorable
Council, that you were welcome, which by good proof, although utterly
without any your good deserte, ye found true. I did say, that I would leave
to have any further talk or conference with you, touching matters of
Religion, or any other: but you should have showed the time and place, where,
and when these words were spoken: I spoke them the Sunday at after diner,
when in your gallory, I did reprove you of your disorders, and therefore
restreigned you of such liberty, as before ye had enjoyed. The promise made
unto you, not to utter that which ye should say by way of reasoninge, in
preiudize of the Q. Maisties Laws, I have hitherto, and yet do firmly keep
to you, as you can not justly chardge me with the contrary, in any particular
point, and so you have sustained no hurt or damage thereby.


M. Fekenham. The perfourminge of his promise was as hereafter follows.
First there was a rumor sperced abroad very shortly after by his servants,
that I had subscribed to certain Articles, t^nne in number.

Second, there was by his servants a further rumor raised, of my
recantation, time and place appointed thereof to be at the Parish Church of
Waltham, where his L. did then manure and abide.

Thirdely, his L. did at his open table, and in the praesence of many, chardge
me with the change of my Religion nine times, and being put in further
remembrance by one M. Denny who was a Sogener with him, his L. said, that I
had altered and changed my Religion, not only nine times, but nineteen times,
and that I was of no Religion.

Fourth, his L. did permit the said M. Denny at his open table toto much to
abuse me. Where the said M. Denny did openly and before many, chardge me
with these three crimes follovvyng, First with incontinency of life, thus
saying: That if I had not as many children as he, he did know that I had
deserved to have so many. Second with Gluttony, affirminge that I was an
Epicure. Third and last with Hipocrysie, and that I was a great dissembler
and an Ipocrite. The said M. Denny being a man to me wholy unknown. His L.
did shevve him self openly to be so well pleased with these his slaunderours
words, that he mynistred just occasion for me to think that his L. had
procured the said M. Denny thereunto.

Fifth, by so much the more, I had good cause to think so, for that his L.
did immediately thereuppon, viz. within one hour after, in fortifiynge the
said talk command me to close imprisonment.

Sixth, and last after that he had kept me six weeks in close
imprisonment, by his L. complainte I am now at this present prisoner in the
Tovver, much contrary to his promise before made.

The premises being true (like as they are all most true) being to openly
committed and before to many vvitnesses to be denied. Your honor may easily
judge with what vvisdome, discrecion, and charity I have been used, I being
a poor man, the Q. Majesty's prisonner and to his L. committed (I dare boldly
affirm) to be well used. It was very strange to me to see such behavior
openly shevved at the table of such a man. Surely for mine own part, I was
never so used, neither openly or privately at any man's table before in my
whole life. My humble suit therefore unto your honor is, that proof and
trial may be had of my truth herein, and what my deseruinges has been for
the whole time of my abode there. In due search and examinacion hereof I doubt
not but there shall fall out matter betvvixte us, either of much simplicity
and truth, or else of great craft and falsehoode, either of honest, virtuous,
and godly, or else dishonest, vicious, and ungodly usage, and either of much
light, learning, and knowledge, or else of very gross ignorance, and
palpable darkness, let it fall and light on the which side it shall hap,
upon the trial and examination made, I doubt not by Gods help, but that
your honor shall have a full shevve and a sufficient proof made of every
thing that has passed betvveene us. There may be denial made for a shifte
and some short time, but for any long time it may not possible endure, every
thing being so openly committed and done, so diverse and many being of
knowledge and witness thereof.


The B. of Wynchester. To this challendge of promise breach, in these six
points: Truly I know not of any rumor spredde of you, by any of my
servants, or otherwise that ye subscribed to any Articles, ne, yet ever
herd any thing hereof, before I saw the same report in your book published:
And if any such rumor were spredde by any my servants or other, you should
have named him, that he might receive condign punishment therefore.

Second, as to the further rumor of your Recantation, I say likewise I
understood nothing but by your own report in your book, and therefore
referringe the Author to be punished accordingly, I think the punishment
ought to light upon your self.

Thirdly, as to my chardge of your changynge in Religion. ix. times, ye. xix.
times, I said so and that truly upon proof of your unconstant affirminge and
denying, not so few times, as I had good experience often in you, and can have
witness in the same.

Fourthly, touching your abusing by M. Denny, ye misreporte the Gentleman, as
to any thing that ever was spoken before me. But if any such were, it was as
I herd say at my return home (for I was abroad in preaching when such
scoffinge talk was betwixt you) by occasion of some talk mynistred on your
part to M. Denny, partly by way of merry talk betwixt you twain, and
partly sturred up by your unseemly woord^, and yet none of all these in my
hearing. But in the last date, when I restraigned your liberty, you did so
much before me at my table provoke the said gentleman by calling him Epicure,
for that he fasted not as ye said, that I, fearing least M. Denny like a
young man should give some evil words again, willed him to say nothing, for
that I my self would answer the matter for him: Mine answer was, that I
meruailed why you would call him Epicure: for if you so thought, because he
did eat fleashe, and never fyshe, I said, he might so well fast with fleashe,
as with fish: but if it were for that he used not abstinency, I said in that
M. Denny did more then you: for where you had every day in the week your
three meals, frydaie and other, the gentleman was contented three days in a
week, with one meal a day, and never did eat above two. And as it is
untrue, yt either M. Denny was a man to you utterly unknown, being conversant
together in one house a quarter of a year before, and in familiar company,
yea sought many times by you to play at the bowls, to walk in the park, and
to be merry together: so is it also untrue, that I heard you so abused as I
could or did like therein, and so untruly do you surmise, that I should
procure M. Denny, by any means to abuse you, as ye malitiousely conceive of
me.

Fiftely, as to the restrainte of your liberty, which you call close
impriso^ment, to have been for these talks betwixt M. Denny and you, within
one hour after: You know right well, that your restrainte was not upon that
occasion, but upon your seemly behavior about other matters, whereof ye make
no mention, least you should have proved your self a Liar. After I had in
few words calmed the storm that seemed would arise betwixt M. Denny and
you. I entered into talk with you in matters of Religion, as I was wont to do
daily before. The talk was of venial and mortal sin: you have not
forgotten the occasion, I am sure: for if you have in your remembrance the
Monkish Iebusites, you call them Iesuytes, you may remember that a cross that
came from them, gave the occasion of the talk in that matter. I proved that no
sin is so venial as it could be remitted by any ceremony: yea, there is no
sin but the same of it self is mortal, and yet venyall, to be purged by the
merits of Christ only: and that all sins, were they never so mortal, were
nevertheless venyal, saving al only the sin against the holy Ghost, which
is irremissible. For this my saying, and other points which I condemned, ye
fell into such a rage, that ye not only rayled against the Bishop of
Sarisbury, saiynge: he was utterly unlearned, and that he should never be hable
to answer M. Hardinges book, but also openly called me almost in plain
terms Heretic, and said, my doctrine which I preached (yet ye would never
hear me) was erroneous, filihy, and blasphemous: so filthely your blasphemous
mouth, could rail against Gods truth. Whereupon, I, to state you, said
alonely that those were unmannerly words to be spoken at mine own table: and
therefore would as than say no more openly unto you there, but told you that
after dynner I would show you more of my mind, betwixt you and me. And so
shortly after dinner, I came up to you, and there calling you into the Gallorie
of my house, adjoining to your chamber, I put you in remembrance of that which
I had before oftentimes admonished you, of your outrageous talk in mine
absence, used oftentimes openly at my table, whereof I had sundry times given
you warninge, for that the same might breed peril to your self, blame to me,
and offense to others. And because I found still the continuance of that your
misorder: yea, to be much more vehement many times in mine absence than in my
presence: Therefore I willed you thenceforth to abstain from conferring with
any man in any wise at all, adding that you should have to your chamber, all
things necessary, and what meat you would competently appointe for your own
diet, which ye had accordingly. And although I did restrain you from coming
to my table, or to go so much at large as you had done: yet had you no other
keeper than you had before, which was your own man: you had a fair Gallory
adjoining to your chamber, openinge to my park, your servant a chamber by him
self, next to yours, ye had Leads fair and large, on the which ye might
walk, and have prospect both over the Parkes, Gardens, and Orchardes. And
therewith thrice in the weak at the least, whiles I lay at Waltham, with one
by me appointed, you walked abroad into the Parkes, Garden, and Orchard: and
this you call your close empriprisonment. Sixthly, touching my complaint to the
most honorable of you, whereby you were remitted prisoner again to the Tower,
what the same was, their honors can well declare, if their pleasure so be:
being suer that I have not broken promise with you hitherto, in uttering your
opinion against the Laws of the Realm, as I have before said, which ye
showed at any time in the private conference. And so ye have not any cause to
challenge me in that behalf.

To conclude, by the premises it may appear to the honorable as by a taste,
what sincerity there is in you. Again, that this your quarreling and beliynge
me by spreadyng this book, was and is chiefly, to recover your credit with
those of your faction: who as I have said, had conceived some doubt of your
revolt, and to confirm them in their grounded error, and herewith to bring me
and other such as I am, into obloquy and hatred. And lastly, to impugn and
bark against the Q. Majesty's Lawful and due authority, which you and your
accomplices daily labor to subvert: which matter I refer to be further
considered, by the grave wisdom of the most honorable.


FINIS.

