A Sermon preached before the Kings Majesty, by I. Hopkins, one of his
Highness Chaplains.

EZLA. 7.26, 27. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy Gods and the Kings
Law, let him have judgment without delay, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which so has put in the Kings heart,
to beautify the house the Lord that is in Jerusalem.

Imprinted at London by W.W. for Thomas Manne. 1604.

Ezra. 7.26.27. The edict of the King. The offenders. against God. against the
King.
their punishment. set down in general. the thing itself. the circumstances
of the persons. of the time

distributed into particulers. greater Death. banishment
smaller in goodos. in liberty.



The thanksgiving of Ezra. the thing. person to whom attribute
the cause. the root. the fruit. action. subject.





A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KINGS Majesty, by I. Hopkins, one of his
Highness Chaplains.
EZRA. 7.26. 27. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Kings
law, let him have judgment without delay, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, which so has put in the Kings heart,
to beautify the house of the Lord that is in Jerusalem.


A Special duty required in a Minister of the Gospel, is to apply himself
in his teaching to the present time and occasion, in handling such points of
doctrine, as may be fittest for the hearers: from which ground I have made
choice of this Scripture, consisting of these two parts.

1 The foot or conclusion of a Commission granted by Artashashte the Persian
Monarch to Ezra the Priest, for the stablishing of Religion, and punishing of
offenders.

2 A thanks giving of Ezra for this great benefit, that God had so moved the
heart of the King to have such care of his Church.

The words of the text are so plain, they need no farther interpretation; I
will therefore endeavor to collect and gather such profitable instructions, as
will directly arise out of the same, for our edification.

It appears by all this Edict, that this Heathen King had a special regard
and care for the service of the great God of heaven: which care of his (though
he were a heathen man) came not of a heathen spirit, but by the spetiall
direction of the spirit of God; and no doubt recorded by the holy Ghost, to be
an example and moving president to all Christian Princes, to look unto this
point as a principal duty required at their hands of the Lord, by whom they
reign, and of who^ they hold their crowns: namely to advance the glory of God
in setting up and maintayning his worship and service, and to correct and
punish the contomners and transgressors of the same. And as their love unto God
has drawn godly and good Princes to this care, so hereunto are all the
promises of happiness tied. Iosu. 1.8.
Joshua being commanded to observe and do according to all written in Gods law,
was promised thereby to have his way prosperous, and thereby to have good
success.

When the Lord promised the Kingdom of Israel to Jeroboam, 1. Kin. 11 38.
the Prophet speaks thus to him from the Lord. If thou hearken to all that I
command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do right in my sight, to keep
my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; then will I be with
thee, and will build thee a sure house, as I did to David, and will give Israel
to thee. So as all this prosperity to him and to his seed, was ptomised under
this condition, of practicing the Statutes and Commandments of God. 2. Chr.
26 2. Chr. 27
The story reports of Vzziah that he sought God in the days of Zachariah
the Priest, who understood the visions of God: and when he sought God, God made
him to prosper. Iotham also became mighty, because he directed his ways before
the Lord: whereto agrees the saying of our Savior: If any man serve me, Ioh.
12.
him will my father honor. Now, as al these blessings were thus promised, and
performed; so the falling from this course, has bin the overthrow of many
great Princes, with their houses: as appears in the examples of Saul,
Jeroboam, Ioas, with many other. Seeing therefore this duty is both commanded
of almighty God, graced and blessed with promises of happiness; and the neglect
thereof has been so fearfully punished, these can not be but strong and
powerful motives to persuade every one, to the true care and practice thereof:
But it is commonly granted of all that have any spark of true religion, that
Gods honor in the establishing of his worship, is to be sought and put in
practice; but in the performance thereof, what slouthfulnes there is, every
place yields too many examples; yea those that have otherwise good graces,
and largely tasted of the heavenly light, herein are too slack, finding
excuses, as did the people in Hagges time; H^g 1.2.
who denied not to build the Lords house, but laid it was not yet time to do
it. They have their excuses with the Spouse, who though she knew it was her
beloved that knocked, yet makes this answer: I have put off my coat, how
shall I put it on? Cant. 5.3.
I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Exodus 4.
Like Moses, who though he knew well he ought to obey God, yet makes many
excuses and delays: as appears in the 4. of Exodus. But if we observe the
order of our text, we shall find that this, being set in the first place,
teaches us that it should be the first care and practice of all worthy and
Christian Princes, as the true groundwork and foundation of all future
happiness: yea the first care and practice of every one of what calling or
condition soever. And this order Almighty God has observed in giving us his
Law; placing the duties of his service in the first table, as first and
principally to be respected and obeyed. The like order our Savior has given
us in our Prayers, teaching us to pray for the sanctifying of his Name, glory
of Kingdom, and obedience to his Will, before all or any earthly or spiritual
benefit to our selves. Unto this also agrees that commandment of our
savior Christ Mat. 6. First seek the kingdom of God. etc. This therefore
being Gods order and commandment, must of necessity be our practice; whereto
also we are provoked, specially Kings and Princes, that are Gods Leiutenants
upon earth, by many famous and memorable examples recorded in the holy
Scripture.

Gideon being appointed of the Lord the deliverer of his people from the
Midianites, Iud. 6 27.
the first Commandment he received, which he also first put in practice, was
to destroy the Alter of Baal. 1. Chr. 29.3.
Hezechia the first year and first month of his reign, ope^ed the Temple
doors. 2 Chr. 34.3.
Iosia being but a child of sixteen years old, began then to seek the Lord
God of his fathers. Yea, Cyrus in the first year of his kingdom at Babel,
having as Josephus records in his eleventh Book and first Chapter of his
Antiquities: Read the prophecy of Esaias made almost 200. year before of him,
that he should be the restorer of the Jews; in that first year performed that
famous work of sending those Captives home, one giving order for the building
of the Temple. But the famous and memorable example of our late Sovereign, of
all other cannot be forgotten, but will ever be as sweet perfume in the house
of God, who ^ing at the entrance into her kingdom, the Church defaced, the
whole form of Gods worship corrupted idolatry practiced, the true preaching
of Gods word banished, groves and hill-alters in all places erected and
maintained, the Priest and Sons of Aaron, yet left alive from the cruelty of
that time remaining in banishment: Her Majesty in the very entrance into her
reign, against the liking of all her neighbor Princes, some of them
threatening her with sharp War for the same; and also contrary to the will of
most of her counsel (being at that time otherwise affected) cleansed the
Temples, called home her banished, restored true Religion, and established the
Church in that state and condition, that the flourishing thereof has bin famous
through the world, holding with a most constant resolution (above the wonted
custom of that sex) the continuance thereof against all contrary
persuasions, to her last end: Which work of her Majesty, how the Lord has
blessed, the length and peace of her reign, and the flourishing of the Church
with so many worthy and excellent men, gives manifest demonstration.

Let us then every one look unto this duty, as the first stone and maine
groundworke of all our happiness; which being not laid, all carthly glory
will be but as a house built on the sand: 2. Chr. 20.37.
yea like Iehosaphats ships built at Ezion Gabar, that brake in pieces when
there was greatest expectation of their uses. Genesis 11.
Like the Tower of Babel, that began in pride, and ended in confusion. The Lord
herein bless and sanctific the heart of our Sovereign, that as his Majesty
has known the Scriptures of a child, and bin brought up (as Samuel) in the
Temple of the Lord; so his royal arm may still be strengthened in this
glorious work: and that he may be like the morning light, which is cleerer and
cleerer, till it be perfect day.

Now if it be objected, that these points are needless to be handled, saying
as did Korah, the Lords people are holy enough, there is no need of these
admonitions: The words of the text will clear this point: Whosoever will not
do the law of thy God. etc. So that it is not enough that the laws of God be
established, or that they be professed, but that they be religiously obeyed and
practiced. And the looking to this point is a special duty of a christian
Prince: Soloculus mundi, Princeps regni; and very famous to this purpose is the
example of good Iosia, who made a covenant with the Lord, both for himself in
his own practice, and for his people, whom he caused to stand to the covenant;
and compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their God. And
the present example of this Heathen Monarch also, being recorded by the holy
Ghost for us, upon whom the ends of the world are come, should be no small
provocation to all persons professing christian religion, to further the true
practice of obedience to Gods law, by all good means whatsoever. What need
there is of this care, and how behoouefull it is for us to be stirred up
thereto, both by exhortations and examples, the great profaneness of this
evil and late age of the world, proves too planely. For although religion
(as was before remembered) is happily established, the Church having both
reverend Bishops and worthy Teachers, yet touching christian conversation in
the practice of Religion, we may complain as does the Prophet Jeremy in the 8.
Ier. 8.
Chapter. I harkened and heard, but none spoke aright; no man repented him of
his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turns to his race, as
the Horse rusheth into the battle: yea that which the Prophet Hose speaks in
his 4. Chapter, By swearing, and lying, and stealing, and killing, and whoring,
they break out, and blood touches blood. The complaints may be alike, for the
^^mes are alike: sound doctrine, sick manners; good religion, evil practice:
in our profession we say we will go work in the Vineyard, but in our practice
never come there: like the Figtree which Christ cursed, full of leaves, but no
fruit: like the Church of Sardis, Apo. 3.
have a name that we live, but are dead. Athismne has prevailed mightily, the
diuill laboring, not as heretofore only to trouble the quiet of the Church,
he does now iugulum petere, seek to cut the throat of all Religion, by
bringing in a profane scorn and contempt both of the ground and practice of
all godliness; and would to God the truth of this were not so manifest that
it should need trial. For profaning the sacred name of God by horrible
oaths, is most common; yea in that fearful manner, as if they would crucify
the Son of God a fresh. Sacraments not regarded, Sabaothes not sanctified,
Prayer only made a cerimonie: and for intemperate and unclean life, we may
again complain with the Prophet Hosea, Hose 4. Exodus 8.
Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine, take away the heart: yea, all these so common,
and so many, that they are as the Frogs of Egypt, that came into the Kings
Chamber. Besides all this, ignorance in the common and meaner sort; yea gross
ignorance, so that it may truly be said with the Apostle in the fifth to the
Hebrews: Whereas concerning the time, ye might have been teachers, you have
yet need to be taught the principles of Religion, and as babes to be fed with
Milk.

A great cause of these mischieues is in the laborers, for there is want of
laborers, and want in laborers; many cannot labor, many will not labor, no
though they have large allowance of the Church: being worse then the Prophets
in Ieremies time, for they prophesied for money, these have money, and
prophecy not; nay which is worse, appoint none to prophecy for them: so as,
many great Congregations have only a blind Guide to watch over them. Other
like the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses Chair, say and do not, like
unto Boate-men lookeing one way, and rowing another.

Hereby it comes to pass that religion has been so little regarded,
Seminaries and Schismatikes have so prevailed: for they have mined, and we have
not countermined; but my Lord the King is wise as the Angel of God, he will
both find out, and reform these abuses in due time.

It folowes in the text, and the Kings law. Next unto God, Princes are to be
obeyed as Gods Vicegerentes and Liuetenantes on earth; to whose Majesty they
owe their allegiance, and to no earthly creature: to whom the Lord has given
an authority immediate from himself, whose authority who so resists,
resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13.
as says the Apostle. This duty Christ practiced and his Apostles, even when
as evil and tirannous Princes ruled, Tiberius. Nero.
as ever commanded on earth. From the breach of this the primative Church ever
freed themselves in all their practices, and apologes; and the contempt of
Magistracy has the Lord severely punished, as may appear in Absalom, Zimri,
and most famous in the example of Zedechia for his rebellion against the king
of Babel, as does appear in the history, and particularly in the 17. of the
Prophet Ezechiel, where the breaking of this oath, though made to a heathen
prince, is so often urged against him.

But in these words, the Rings law, there is a farther thing to be considered;
for by this Law here mentioned, is especially meant the edict for the
finishing of the Temple, and setting up the service of the Lord, heing in deed
the decree of God himself, which the King calls also his law, because he
has ratified it by his authority. So as here is an example for all Christian
Princes, to make Gods law their law, Gods cause their cause, Gods wrong their
wrong, Gods honor their honor, and Gods enemies their enemies. Such holy
zeal has often been seen in religious Princes, who have so highly esteemed
of Gods honor, that they have made their dignity to stand or fall with it: and
this is a special end of the aduauncements of Princes, by Almighty God into
his throane; to reign as Kings in his stead (as the Queen of Saba speaks to
Solomon) to cause obedience to be given to him, 2. Chro. 9
and to see that his law be not contemned here on earth. And how needful this
is, our daily experience teaches us. For be the word never so faithfully
preached, if good laws want, there is still disorder and rebellion against God.

Hitherto we have heard of the offenders, who they are; now follows the
judgment that should be executed upon them: in which the action to be done is
generlly set down, and afterward distributed into particulars: with the
general there are two circumstances annexed, of the persons and of the time:
the persons, whosoever; the time, without delay.

This execution of Judgment, is the bond of all; the life and edge of the Law,
without which it is a dead letter: For laws (though never so good) without due
execution, are like Jupiters Block thrown among the Frogs, at the first,
feared for his greatness, and afterward despised for his stillness: like Shot
without Bullet, like a Scar-crow, or like the Sword of Goliath wrapped in a cloth,
and laid behind the Ephod. The want of execution of justice, gives
encouragement to the evil doers. This the first argument, the wicked use to
persuade others to join with them, we will do it, say they, freely or without
punishment: and as it is in the fifty Psalm, I held my peace, and thou
thoughtest I was like unto thee. Impunitas magna est pecandi illecebra. No such
tentation to evil, as impunitie, the best are drawn to virtue by love, but
the most must be compelled by fear; Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. The
two chief bands to keep men in, is either fear of God, or fear of Law: but
where conscience is not, nor law executed, of all such it may be said as
Abraham said of the house of Abimilech, Genesis 20.
The fear of God is not in this place, and they may kill me for my wives sake.

If the Magistrate punish not, he bears his Sword in vain. The Magistrates
Sword is defensive to the good, and offensive to the ill; and it is just that
they that will offend the Law, should be offended by the Law. The doing
execution upon the wicked, does establish the Princes throane, as Solomon
says, Take away the wicked from the King; his Throane shall be established in
justice: and therefore a wise King scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel
to turn over them. Doing of justice on the wicked, puts the rest in fear
that they dare not offend, as it is in the 17. of Deuteronomy. They shall hear, and
fear, and do no more presumptuously. And this execution o^ justice is not
cruelty, as wicked licentious persons affirm, no more then in a Surgion to
dissect and cut off an incurable member, which being let alone, would endanger
the life of the whole body; or the killing of noisome and hurtful beasts,
cutting off unprofitable branches, or plucking up weeds that would choke and
destroy the good corn. Exodus 32.
Moses the mildest man that ever was on earth, yet did Moses command the
Levites to do execution on their brethren that had committed Idolatry. 1. Sam.
15. 2. Sam 12.
Samuel a good man, yet did he heaw Agag in pieces. David a good King, yet did
he put the enemies of God under Sawes, and under iron Harrowes, and under Axes
of iron. Nay, it is cruelty to the innocent, when their oppressors be
suffered unpunished, and it is therefore called crudelis miserecordia; and
contrariwise God is said to be merciful in doing execution on his enemies:
Psalm.
He slew mighty Kings; for his mercy endures for ever: for there is
misericordia puniens, et crudelitas parcens, punishing mercy, and sparing
cruelty. Neither do I think it less worthy commendation in Solomon to put
Schimei to death, though he was the first of all the house of Iemini that met
his Father; then for David to show kindness to the house of Berselay the
Gileadite, that relieved him in his extremity. For as want of recompense does
many times loose a friend: so want of punishment encourages an enemy: yea
doing justice upon evil persons, procures oftentimes as much love, as the
aduauncing those that are good; the regard whereof who so neglects, will
neither be loved of his friends, nor feared of his enemies. Nay, which is
greater, the wrath of God is many times kindled for not doing justice, as in
the examples of Saul and Ahab did appear, and pacified by the execution
thereof, as the putting to death of Achan, hanging up of Saules sons, and
throwing Jonah into the Sea, does confirm. I grant this extremity of doing
justice, is not always to be used, Micha. 6.
and that loving of mercy is as needful and behoouefull as the doing of
justice, and that Summum ius, is, summa iniuria: difference therefore is to be
made in the offenders, and as it is else where worthily said, The former and
bypast behavior of the party is especially to be considered. For some offend
of weakness, as did Aaron, in making the golden Calfe; some of ignorance, as
did Jonathan, when he tasted the Honey contrary to his fathers rash vow; some by
too much cleaving to those they love, as did Amasa in the action of Absolon,
and yet none of these capitally punished. The prayer of David herein is an
excellent rule. Psalm. 39.
Be not merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness: with which
also agree the words of the text, He that will not do the law of God, etc.
implying wilful contempt, and not ignorance or weakness. And thus much for
the execution of justice in general.

Next to be considered, are the two circumstaunces hereto annexed, observed in
the method of the text, of the persons, and of the time: The persons whosoever,
that none by their greatness, should be privileged in the matters of Gods
Law: For as it is a like given to all, so, should it be alike obeyed of al; and
this is a principal duty of the Magistrate, to do even Justice; equal justice
pleases the good, and terrifies the ill: for Laws should not be like Spiders
webbes, to catch the Flies only, and the Swallow should bear them away on her
wings: Dat veniam coruis vexat censura columbas. And therefore they were wont
to paint Justice blind, intending that no respect of persons, should be had in
judgment; neither does this impugn that which was before spoken: For it is to
be understood of such as are a like guilty, where the zeal of Gods glory
should take away all partiality. 2. Chr. ^^.


This is that for which Asa is commended, in deposing Maacha his mother from
her regencie, because she had made an Idol-groue; and on the contrary, the
destruction of Eli and his house came, by reason of this partiality toward
his Sons in such high offenses against the Lord.

The next circumstaunce is of the time, without delay: not that rashness is any
way tolerable in great executions, for Princes should proceed to them as
Chirurgians to their cauteries and dissections; last, when all other remedies
have been firsh tried, considering it more honor to a Prince to gain one,
then to execute many; for many executions to Princes, are as funerals to
Physicians, medicorum maculae: and if in common business reshnesse is so
hurtful as Solomon says, Prou. 29.
See thou a man hasty in his matters? there is more hope of a fool then of
him: much more in matters of Justice, upon the due execution whereof stands
oftentimes the good of the state; and sudden and rash executions, have been
hurtful to Princes, both in too late repentance, and loss of their subjects
affections. But the intent of this point, is that Princes should not be zealous
in punishing their own wrongs, and careless in wrongs done to God: and
least by sl^cknesse of punishing, the wicked should be encouraged, according to
that in the 8. of Eccles. Because the sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in
them to do wickedly. And lastly, least for slacknesse of punishing offenses
done against God, the Lord be provoked to take the cause into his own hand to
punish both the evil doers for their offense, and the Magistrates for their
slacknesse, which also it seemed this Monarke feared, as appears before in the
23. verse, For why should he be angry with the realm of the King and his
children?

The next point in the text, is the distribution of the punishment into
particularities, differing in degree according to the quality of the fault.
For as all sins are not alike; so neither ought all punishments to be alike,
but the compensation of punishment in the balance of Justice, should ever hold
proportion with the weight of the fault. Of these, the first is capital, which
being for wilful disobedience against the law of God, the question might well
be touched of punishing obstinate and wilful Heretics, professed Athistes,
upon blasphemers, Idolaters, and such like with death; which is both commanded
in the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.
Exodus 22.20. and exemplified to us in the practice of Moses, Exodus 32: Asa, 2.
Chr. 15.13. Iosia, 2. Kings. 23. with many other in the Scripture. And whereas
some do object, Faith is the gift of God; and men ought not to be punished for
wanting that which is not in their power: By the same reason no malefactor
should be punished, for grace to do well is the gift of God, as well as faith,
and as far out of any man's power as faith is. Yet the Magistrate does not
punish want of faith, but either public contempt, or lewd practice. Moreover
christian Princes being keepers of both tables, ought to be as zealous against
the breakers of the first as of the second: and so much more, because the first
concerns more nearly the glory of God, which ought to be of higher account
then their own lives. As for the argument here against out of the parable of
the tares, it is not worth the answering, seeing by the tares is not meant
Heretics only, but all the ungodly: as Christ himself does expound it.

In the rest of the punishments that descend from the highest to the lowest, I
only observe, that contempt against the smallest point of Gods law should not
be unpunished: for, Qui contemnit minima paulatim ruit in grauiora. And thus
much for the first part of this Scripture, containing the decree of the King
for the good of the Church: Now follows the thankfulness of Ezra for so
great and unlooked for ablssing. And as in the former part all christian
Princes have an example given them to seek and further the advancement of Gods
glory: so in this we all may see a pattern of our duty, when we enjoy such
great mercies from the Lord. For as the best Sacrifice a subject can offer to
his Sovereign, is obedience; so the best Sacrifice both Sovereign and subject
can offer to God, is thankfulness: He that offers praise, he honors me,
says the Lord in the 50. Psalm. But this age grows like the Heathen, who
when they knew God, did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful. Romans 1.
Like the nine Leapers that being cleansed, never turned back to give thanks:
and yet few ages or people have had greater cause then we of this age and
nations, to be thankful to God, whose mercies have bin and are so infinite
toward us. What greater benefit then the enjoying of true religion? For had
we all the world, and being ignorant of the true God, should loose our
souls, we were most miserable: yet has not the Lord only given and continued
this unto us, but even when we most feared both the loss of it and our peace
together, the Lord bestowed such a blessing upon us, as had an Angel from
heaven foretold it before it came to pass, he should scarce have been
believed. For it was contrary to our merit, above our hope, and beyond all
calculation of humane reason. True it is, the blessings are the same we enjoyed
in our late Sovereigns time, but then seasoned with the bitter pill of Fear
to loose them: now our hopes do promise the future happiness of them to our
posterity: which, if our sins do not hinder good things from us, shall no
doubt be accomplished. For now the two pieces of wood so long disioyned,
mentioned in the 37. of Ezech. we also may say, are made one in the hand of
our Sovereign: Now is that made one in government, which Nature had made one
in situation: now the two brethren Ioab and Abishai may help one another: Nay,
which is more, we are that threefold gable which being well twisted, will not
easily be broken; and these are great causes of thankfulness. Further, in the
person of our Sovereign, we have as great cause to praise the Lord, in that
not only his Majesty endued with excellent moral virtues, but a zealous
embracer and professor of the truth and sincerity of the Gospel; from which
neither hopes, fears, or persuasions, could ever remove him: but as God had
ordained him to be so, we doubt not but he ever will be a true and worthy
defender of the Christian faith. And now lastly (for the time will not serve me
to repeat all causes of thankfulness) this goodness of God, in the midst of
so great judgment to remember mercy, and to stay the hand of his striking
Angel, that so lately has executed the sentence of death upon so many of our
brethren, both in the head City of this kingdom, and in many other parts of
this land: they were all by Nature as good as we; bought with the same price,
and we have no less offended God then they. The staying then of this judgment
should move us all to thankfulness, that our lives, and the lives of our
brethren that remain, are yet precious in the eyes of the Lord: neither can we
yet be secure, considering the fire of Gods displeasure is not so quenched, but
that we may fear a kindling again of the same a fresh: for the wrath of the
Lord is not wholly turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, because
the people returns not to him that smites them, neither do they seek the
Lord: so that we may justly fear, least for our unthankfulness the second
judgment be greater then the former. And herein the example of Ezechia would
not be forgotten, who having received great favor from God, did not render to
the Lord again according to the benefit, so that wrath came upon him, 2.
Chron. 32.25. The Lord sanctify our hearts, that these things may be better
remembered and regarded then they have been, and this longer time of repentance
that the Lord has given us, may be thankfully acknowledged, and laid hold on
to eternal life.

This thanksgiving may be distributed into two parts: To whom it is given,
and for what. In the first we see what has ever been the practice of the
godly, who when they have received any great benefit, have neither their eyes
(like children) always fixed on the gift; nor like carnal men, on the means
by which it was given them, but their faith rayseth their considerations
higher: namely, to the Lord, from whom all good things do come. Wherein they
consider of Gods love toward them, which stirs up in them love to him
again: his hearing their prayers, which does animate them to pray, Psalm.
116.1. and his truth in his promises for the strengthening and increasing of
their faith. And hereof is it that Ezra calls the Lord the God of our
Fathers, in regard of his covenant made with them. So as by this manner of
speaking, it appears he looks to the promise the Lord made with the Fathers
for their return from captivity, and the setting up again of his worship
amongst them; which in this edict of the King he saw so fully per^ited and
accomplished. And surely the consideration hereof is much worth, and of holy
edifying in our meditations of heavenly things, to confirm our assurance of
Gods promises hereafter to be accomplished to us, by the experience of his
faythfulnesse and goodness past: as of preservation in affliction, strength
for perseverance, the resurrection of our bodies, and whatsouer promises
remain yet accomplyshed. But these things are so plain, they need no
further enlarging.

It follows in the Text, which has so put in the Kings heart. Here is the
root whence this benefit came, next follows the benefit it self. Pro. 21.1.
The Kings heart (says Solomon) is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of
water: he turns it whither soever it pleases him. For if we can not think
one good thought without the motion of Gods spirit, much more are purposes of
such great and wonderful consequence, as the beautifying of Gods house, and
furthering of his worship and service, the special work of God himself. In
which point I would note a double use; one for our selves, that we knowing how
many tentations Princes are subject to, by reason of these two great faculties
of sin, wealth, and authority, should make it our continual practice to
pray for our Sovereign, Psalm. 72 1 Psalm 20.1
that the Lord will give him his judgment and righteousness, that the Lord
will put in his Majesty's heart all good motions, purposes and resolutions, for
the advancement of his glory, and good of his people; and that his heart may
never be corrupted, either with pleasures or flatterers (the bane of many
Princes) to choke those good seeds before they can come to ripeness of
perfection. Neither should the great hopes we have in good and virtuous
Princes, make us careless herein. For Solomon had many excellent virtues, yet
wealth and pleasure had welny wholly extinguished them. Ioas being always
trained up in religion, had a heart well disposed, till he was drawn away by
the Princes of Judah, as appears in the 2. of Chro. 24.17. The second is, that
Princes themselves should consider what purposes they have had heretofore for
the good of the Church of God, and to take heed they suffer not such motions
of Gods spirit to be quenched in them. For if in their lower estate, (with
David) they have made vows and promises, which no doubt the Lord did put in
their hearts, he will now look at their hands for the payment of them: For
when God has granted the suite, he looks for the performance of the promise.
I might enlarge this point; but to the wise a word is sufficient.

The next point in our text, is the benefit for which Ezra is thankful,
namely, the beautifying of Gods house: an unspeakable speakeable comfort which
the Church of God received by this Monarke: In which we may observe, ere we
come to the maine point, that Ezra is first thankful for the good of the
Church, before he mention the favor and preferment done to himself: An
argument undoubtedly of zeal and love to the Church of God, as esteeming more
the Churches good, then his own. This affectionate zeal was in Moses, who
rather then the Lord should cast off the Jews, desired to be blotted out of
the Book of life: And in the Apostle Paul, that wished himself separated from
Christ, if that might have gained the conuertion of the Jews his brethren. But
surely this care for the Church is now so rare, that we may justly complain
with the Apostle, Phil. 2.21
All men seek their own, no man that which is Jesus Christ's.

How many are there that could well be content that Churches were turned to
rubbish, so as out of them they might build them selves glorious houses? that
they might fat the bodies of their posterity, though with the staruing of
thousand of souls? But the time will not suffer me to dwell upon this point.

The beauty of the Church generally considered is twofold: the first is
inward, and that is perfect beauty, of which Saint Paul speaks in the first
Chapter to the Ephesians, Christ has sanctified, and cleansed it by the washing
of water through the word, that he might make it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spotte or blemish. etc. Of this beauty mention is made in
the 45. Psalm. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. And this is the
beauty spoken of in the 16. of Ezechiel, Thou wast perfect through my beauty,
that I had put upon thee. Also the Church says Cant. 1. though (externally)
she seem many times like the tents of Kedar, she is in deed (meaning
inwardly) like Salomons Tapistrie. The other beauty of the Church is
external, and this was figured by the glory of the Tabernacle first, and of
the Temple afterward: where all those Ceremonial ordinances were set out to
the eye in most glorious show: the Mercie-seate, the Arc, the Table with
Shewbread, the Candlestickes with lights, the Lauer, the silver Trumpets, the
Alters for Incense, and Sacrifices themselves, the glorious garments of Aaron,
and such like: by which things were then represented in figure, that which
afterward was really performed, as the sacrifice, righteousness, and mediation
of Christ; the perpetual use of the ministry in the Church, for the
preservation of sound droctrine and administration of the Sacraments, the
daily use of public prayer; with a perpetual conservation of these orders by
a godly and religious government.

This external beauty among other places, is most excellently set out in the
4. Chap. of Salomons song, where the eyes of the Church, signifying her
knowledge in heavenly things, are compared to Doves eyes: fair for their
excellency, chaste for their purity, being not corrupted with uncleanness of
men's traditions: her hair like a flock of Goats on mount Gilead; signifying
the populous assemblies of the faithful to the worship of God. Her teeth like
a flock of Sheep in good order, coming from the washing, every one bringing
twins; meaning the Ministers and Pastors of the church likened to the teeth,
because they break the bread of life to the Church orderly in the course of
their ministry, washed in godliness of conversation, and fruitful in winning
souls unto Christ. Her lips like a thread of Scarlet, meaning thereby the
public profession of religion by the Church, when the mouth confesses unto
salvation, speaking such things as may minister grace to the hearers. Her neeke
as the Tower of David, a thousand Shildes hanging in it; meaning the government
of the Church, by which those excellent things of the ministry and
profession are supported and preserved in purity. And lastly, her two breasts;
meaning thereby the sound doctrine of truth gathered out of the two
Testamentes, the old and the new.

But what shall we need to seek further then this decree of Artashashte? unto
which this thanksgiving has relation, to understand what is the adorning and
beautifying of the Church. Wherein is first contained liberty for Gods people
to profess true religion in his Church: next, governors stablished for the
Church: thirdly, maintenance for the Church: fourthly, the sacrifices according
to the law: Then all ornaments for the ceremonial worship, and whatsoever by
the commandment of God ought to be established. Freedom of taxation for the
Priests and Levites. A special commandment for the teaching and instruction
of the people. So that nothing can be desired for the beautifying of the
Church, but is here either generally comprehended, or particularly expressed.
And this is that, that makes the Church beautiful as Tirza, fair as the
Moon, clear as the Sun, and tirrible as an Army with Banners, when these
holy orders are thus established. This is that holy beauty of the public
assemblies mentioned in the 110. Psalm. This is that beauty which David
calls the beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27. where he says, One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to
visit the Temple. For it was not the outward ornaments of the Tabernacle that
drew his affection, but those things that were by them represented and figured.
So that the beauty of the Church is then most clear and glorious, when the
reverend Bishops govern carefully, and preach faithfully, who are therefore
worthy of double honor: the Pastors vigilant to watch over their flock,
teaching in season and out of season, Acts. 20.
public et per singulas domos, openly and through every house: When the
Saboathes are sanctified with the morning and evening sacrifyce of prayer and
preaching: where the whole congregations as one man assemble to worship the
Lord: where the Sacraments are duly ministered, and the people prepared to
them by Catechizing and exhortations, so that holy things are not given to
dogs: and where a careful government keeps all these in good order.

Unto all which the example of Christain Princes being added, is as a rich
jewel in the attire of Christ's spouse, when like David they think it no
disgrace themselves to entertain the Lord's Ark, to keep his Sabaoths, and
frequent holy assemblies: as to our great comfort, we see at this day, who in
deed as they have received most of God, should be most forward to do him
service. This gives honor to God, comfort to his children, encouragement to
his ministers, and just disgrace to all contemners. There are many otherwise
affected touching this point of beautifying the Church, as if these things
before mentioned, were not sufficient to adorn the same. For the Schismatic
separation of the Brownists is so far from being content heerewith, that
they account all christian congregations profane Synagogues, because they be
not framed by the model of their fancies.

Another sort under pretense of reformation, would have the dignities in the
Church taken away, spoiling her of all such endowmentes and patrimonies as have
been bestowed upon her by devout progenitors, that they might sacriligiously
divide amongst them her spoils, as the Soldiers did the garments of Christ.

A third sort (pretending the fair color of quiet and contentment) affirm
that it would add much to the beauty of the Church, if a tolleration of a
false worship of God were allowed: then which nothing could more pollute the
Sanctuary of the Lord. Of all which, I only thus conclude, Blessed be the Lord
God of our fathers, who has so put in the Kings heart, to publish and hold a
constant resolution against them.

One point in this work of beautifying the Church is further to be observed,
namely, that it be according to the commandment of God: which may be gathered
out of these words, which is at Jerusalem. For had the King bin so liberal in
beautifying an other Temple, or in building any other then that which God had
appointed, as afterward Sanballat did upon mount Gerizim, it had bin
abomination before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12.
because the Lord had commanded, Not in every place. etc. We must therefore in
this work keep close to that which is before expressed in the edict,
Whatsoever is by the commandment of the God of heaven: For whatsoever in Gods
worship is not from that foundation, (seem it never so glorious with man) is
abomination before the Lord. There are many ways seem right in the eyes of
man which the Lord never approves of.

Gidion meant well to make an Ephod, the matter a memorial of his victory,
being the Eareringes of the Ismaelites, and spoils of the Midianites, and for
the form, an Ephod; to show that his victory came of God, and therefore
consecrated to him: but this was so far off from being accepted of God, that
it turned to the destruction of his house. Micha thought God would surely
bless him, when he had gotten a Leuite to be his Priest. Saul thought he had
done well when he offered sacrifice. Vzza had a care to save the Arc, when he
put forth his hand to stay it: but none of these were approved of God, because
they were not commanded of God. To beautify the Church therefore with good
intentes, is like the Altar of Ahaz, which was so far off from beautifying
the Temple, that it polluted it: like the paynting of the face, which is so
far from procuring the love of the wise beholder, that it rather breeds a
suspicion of those that use it, that they have pudicitiam venalem. In this
work therefore of beautifying the Church we must look to two things, the
action, and the end: the action, that it be commanded of God, for in his
service he hates all men's inventions. The end, that it be done to Gods glory,
least we be like those that help to make the Arc of Noah, and were drowned
them selves in the flood.

This point of beautifying the Church, makes me call to mind the miserable
state of that poor Kingdom of Ireland, of whom we may say as it is in
Salomons song, Cant. 8.
We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our
Sister, when shall she be spaken for? Ezekiel, 23.3
Nay we may say as the Prophet Ezec. speaks, compressa sunt vbera eius ab
Aegiptijs, the Aegiptians bruised the breasts of her virginity: For not only
is their wealth wasted with the sin of their own rebellion, but (which is
more grievous) their souls poisoned with Idolatry and error. The seducing
Jesuits and Seminaries have in a manner wholly prevailed, and have made so
large a harvest as (the open profession and public setting up of Idolatry
excepted) it is not more in the midst of Spain. This has come to pass, for
the most part, through the negligence and unfaithfulness of the Watchmen, who
(as it is in the parable of the sower) when they should have kept the Field,
slept, and the envious man's servants have been more diligent to sow Tares, then
they were to preserve the Corn. These watchmen have neither bin faithful nor
paineful; but as a snare on Mispa, and as a net spread upon Tabor: not the net
of Peter to catch souls, but the net of profit to get gain: the net whereof
Habacuck speaks, They catch it into their net, and gather it into their
barn. Diverse hold reverend places in that Church, that are unworthy of the
meanest rooms, blind guides, that were never acquainted with the things of
God: others like Isachar, a strong Ass cowching down between two burdens,
finding rest good, and the land pleasant. So that the fountains of living
water (that should have run continually) being dried up, the poor wretches
have dug to themselves broken pittes that can hold no water. How many
Churches in that kingdom without either prayer or reading the Scripture? How
many heaps of rubbish where Churches stood? So that those places which devout
Ancestors built for the service of God, a profane posterity has turned into
ruins. And this Church situate in a fertile country, consisting of a witty
and valiant people, descended (many of them) out of the loins of our own
progenitors that might for beauty have bin like Salomons tapistry, is black
as the tents of Kedar, and filthy as those that have lain among the pots.

Now if unto this happy peace, to which at last that Kingdom is so well
reduced and settled, there could be joined a recovering of their souls, to the
true knowledge and worship of God, O how acceptable it would be to the Lord,
and memorable to all posterities! And shall it be thought impossible? no
surely. Do the Iesuittes boast of the converting of Indians and Americans, and
shall we neglect the converting of our brethren? Was it possible to convert
their progenitors from Paganism, and shall it be holden impossible to reduce
these to the embracing of the truth? Could seducers pervert them, and cannot
we convert them? Negligence lost them, why should not diligence recover them?

Were careful Bishops and faithful teachers planted, seducers removed, and
compulsion to hear established, no doubt in short time a happy effect would
follow, Sed hoc opus, hic labor est, and yet what is so hard, but diligent
labor may overcome? And what (in this kind) is impossible for a mighty Prince
to bring to pass? If the two first were put in practice, the third would not
be difficult. It is recorded of Edgar, one of the Kings of England before the
Conquest, that fynding the Country much annoyed with Woolues, he caused
Ludwallus Prince of Wales, to pay him a yearly trybute of 300. Woolues: which
was so long performed, till not a Woolfe was left in England. Would to God our
Sovereign, of the Jesuitical Woolues that spoil Christ's sheep in any of
his highness Kingdoms, had such a trybute, till they were left so few that a
child might tell them. These are those Foxes of which the Spouse complayneth in
the 2. Chapter of Salomons song, Take for us the Foxes, the little Foxes that
destroy the Vines: These are those Locustes that have hair like women, but
teeth like Lions; faces like men, but tails like Scorpions: and we must take
heed least by much tollerating of these and their like, our whole state become
like the feet of Nabuchadnezars image, part iron and part clay, which ill
agreeing compounde, will never hold any long time. And till these, and their
accomplices be banished, or otherwise removed, we must never look for good
passage to the Gospel, or freedom from complotments of treason. And the
taking away of such spots and blemishes, will be a great furtheraunce to the
beautifying of the Church. To the perfyting of which work, the Lord God of
heaven and earth so direct and bless our Sovereign, that the glory of the
second Temple under his government, may be greater then the glory of the
former; and that this poor Church of Ireland that his Majesty finds of
Brick, may be built of Marble, and this of England that our late Soueraige
left of Marble, may be beautifyed with Gold: to the glory of God, the
comforting of his children, disappoynting of Jesuitical hopes: and that his
Majesty after fullness of days here on earth, may for ever enjoy the
glorious beauty of the heavenly Jerusalem, with the presence of Christ: to
whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory,
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

