A Lesson of the Incarnation of Christ that he took, his humanite in and of
the Blessed Uirgine: made the twentithe day of June by John Hoper. 1549.

Roma. 9. Christ is of the fathers concerning the flesh. A daily prayer to
be said before the Lesson.
OH eternal and most merciful God: whois word is the light unto our stappes,
and the lantern unto our fete. We most humble beseech the, to illuminat our
minds, that we may understand the mysteries conteynyd in thy holy law. And
into the same self thing that we godly understand, we may be vertuouslye
transformyd, so that of no part, we offend thy high majesty, through our
savior Jesus Christ* So be it.

A Preface.
Seeing we be even so appoyntyd by the ordinance of God, to live, and take the
experience and dangere of the last time, in the which (as the scripture says)
iniquite shall abound and the true knoulege of God so obscuryd, that skarse
the son of man when he commythe shall find onye faith upon the earth: it
is the office of all Christianes, and espetiallye of souche as teach the word
of God, not only to remove and take away false and pernicious doctrine, and
then to plant the truythe: But also in time to croppe and cut of the spryngyng.
and towardelye euyles, before they be full ripe, lest they should oppress and
keep under the doctrine of truythe.

Among all other pernitiouse doctrine contrary unto the truythe, there is one
most pestilent and dangerous which denyithe Jesus of Nazareth our savior to
have receauyd his humanite and manhede of the blyssyd and holy virgin Marye
and supposithe either he brought his humanite with him from heaven, or else took
it of some other, the^ of here. For asmouch thefore as this ungodly opinion,
crept not only into the church immediatlye after the Apostelles, but also the
same (being buryd and condemnyd by the scripture) in our miserable, and most
perillouse time is gotten into the hearts of many: for whom Christ in his
humanite shed his preciouse blood, and some it holdithe in troble, and
perplexite of conscience: to confyrme and help the well persuadyd in the
Christian and Catholic faith, and also to call again (if God will) souche as
begone: I purpose to entreat and reason this matter of Christ's incarnation at
large, that the truythe may as right is in this case, take here place.

Nothing else in this preface I demand, but that ye Christian reader tarry
with the truythe, and not to be offendyd though in this time, many erroures
(upon the beginning of the Reformation of true religion in this realm) daily
be brought in, seeing it was so in the Apostelles time by the craufte of the
devil that men by the diversity of opynions troubled ye truth of ye gospel.
Which was and is done to prove the faithful. Now therefore to the matter, in the
which I will observe this order. First I will show, out of the old Testament,
and the new, that Christ took his humanite of the blyssyd virgin: after
wards I will answer to the obiectio^s of the co^traries.

Reasons out of the old Testament.
THe first is the promese of GOD unto Adamme and Eve: Gene. 3. that the sede
of a woman shuide break the Serpenteshed. This promese was spoken of Christ,
for he solye and only brake the Serpe^tes head, that is to say destroyede the
works of the deuylle, satisfied for sin and over came it, and also the
world, hell, and the Deuylle, and set God and manne at one, remouynge the
occasion of Ennimite, and the Ennimite it self in his precious blud. Brekynge
the wrytynges of our condemnation upon the cross, Ephe. 2. and this our
Savior and peace maker is called the sede of a woman. The which word alone
were sufficient to confound the contrary part, that says Christ took not
the substance of his humanite of the blessed Uyrgyne. Where so ever ye find
this word, the sede of a woman in the holy scripture, ye shall see always it
is taken for the child, and birth that has of the substance of his mother:
and not for any thing that passithe through the mother, as the water passithe
through a pype: But that part of the mothers substance doothe concur and
necessarielye is requyryd to the procreation of the child as all Physic
holdithe.

And this way wrought God almightye the humanite of his only son our
Savior Jesus of Nazareth without the knowledge of man, using the blessed
virgin by the operation of the holy Ghost to conceive and bring forth this
blessed sede, which was made of her, and took the original of his humanite of,
and in her, by the operation of the holy Ghost, and neither norished in her
womb, neither brought forth she, the humanite of Christ, as a thing that God
had given Christ from heaven, or else from some other where, but noryshed in
her, and brought forth the blessed sede, that God had made by his holy pour,
of her own substance. Other else were this promise false, the sede of a woman
shall break ye serpents head. It is no sede of a woman nor has anythyng to
do to be called the sede of a woman, that never take thought of a woman. But
God does warraunte that he that shall break the Serpe^tes head shall be the
sede of a woman. If it be true (as it can not be false) that the Serpents
head is broken: who can deny but that it is broken by the sede of a woman.
That is, by him that took his humanite of the womannes substance. Men must be
ware, they be not deceived in this case with allegoryes, and wrong
interpretacion of the word: but plainlye make answer, Christ is the sede of
a woman, and not a thing that passed through here, nor was partetaker of her
nature. For then should she not have brought forth her sone, but such asone
as she know neither father neither mother of.

Othere promises made god unto Abraham and unto Jacob of the same sede. To
Abraham Gene. 22. In thy sede shall they say all the nacyons of the earth to be
bsessed. Unto Jacob, Genesis 26. God says thus: In thy sede shall al ye people of
ye world be blessed. Here again se we Christ called the sede: for none other
purpose doutles, but only to take away all suspycion and dout, that the
world might have of his humanyte. And least the world might have said, as
now a day (the more pytye) many does say, we believe that Christ is of the
sede of the fathers, but he brought that sede with him from heaven, or else
wroughte the same sede, and made it not out of the synneful nature of the
fathers, but some other ways, unknown unto man. The scripture in these
promyses, and in other that shall follow puts expresselye, this pronown,
Thine, Saying, thy Sede. In thy sede, not in the sede that Christ shall bring
from heaven shall be the blessing of all people. How can that be Abrahames, or
Jacobes sede, that never took any of their substance, but came from heaven,
and was made of an other kind of nature, then Abraham and Jacob was of. Who is
able by good auctorite of the scripture to warraunt Christ's humanite, incase
it be unknown of who^ he should take it. As these me^ knows not yt denies
Christ to take the nature of man of the blessed virgin. Unto David God made
the like promise of Christ to be borne of his sede. 2. Samuel. 7. When thy
days be paste, and thou slepeste with thy fathers, I will suscitat thy sede
after the, that shall come out of thy belly. The same have ye. 1. Paral. 17. and
also Psalm. 132. The Lord swore a truth unto David, and will not go fromit. I
will set upon thy sete (one) of the fruit of thy belie. Nothing is more
clear, then these words. Noman douteth but all these places appertain unto
Christ, the son of the holy virgin. Who is called here the sede of David.
Also that it should come out of his own belie, concerning his posterite.
The^ is Christ called the fruit of David belie. God did swear he would this do.
Except he be for sworn he has done it, and in that God be presyde, we be
agryed. Therefore we will not tarry long in the prove thereof, saying it neadeth
no probation. One thing I desire ye Christian Reader of, that he mark well
every word of the promise* where as he callethe him that is promised, now
the sede of David, then the fruit of his womb: if he so do, it shall be easy to
comprehend, how far these men be from the veryte, that Christ should be a
man of the fathers nature, according to the scriptures, and yet never received
his humane nature of none of them all. Look in the scripture, and se what the
fruit of the belie is, and thou shalt find in every where, it is taken for the
child that takes the beginnynge of his humanite not only in his mother, but
also of his mother, and parente. And calls not that the fruit of the belie,
that passes the belly with out the commixtion and participation of the mothers
substance as the water runs, and passethe thoroughe the pype, that mengleth
it self nothing with substance of the led. For a more ample declaration, and
defense of the truth concerning the humanyte of Christ, and the original
thereof, Esaie the prophet has more open propheties, not only assuringe of what
family, and trybe, Christ should be borne but also namethe the condition of his
mother, saying. Behold a virgyne shall conceive, and bare a child, the. 7.
Chapt. S. Matthew says, not only that she had conceived, but also that the
blessed fruit grew in her, so that she was great, Chap. 1.

Esaie in the. 11. Chap. says. There shall come forth of the raze of Jesse a
branch, and a flower of his rote, and so forth, read the place. Now note the
words of the holy Ghost, Conceive, being great, and to bring for the child:
whether ever ye did read in the holy scriptures, or in any other book, yt these
propertes were found, or may be found in any, saving in her, of whose nature
and substance the child is formed, and made. Therefore the virgin, which Esaias
here says shall conceive, and bring forth, must ministre the part of her
substance to her fruit otherwise, how shall it be called her son? The text
amplifyeth this matter so it self: that it neadeth no help of any rethoricall
amplificacion. First, with this word, behold: for this word declares that
it should be wonderful, and above reason that the nature of a virgyne should
ministre matter and substance to any child, never being known of man. Had she
done no more, the^ waxed great with nothing of her self, and brought forth the
thing that was made with out her, it had not be^ a thing to be wondered at, at al,
so much as the Prophet speaks. But it is a greater miracle a virgin of her
own nature to be father unto a child (by Gods operation) and never touched
by man: then to bring forth ye burden that she takes from another, made
without her assistaunce and help.

Then goes forth the Prophet, and discusseth the doubt forther by a
similitude, and me taphore taken from atre, after this sort. There shall says
Esaias come forth of the stock of Jesse a branch. That is to say, the blessed
virgin Mary, note (the process of the text) and from the rote of this
branch shall spring a flower, to say Christ our savior. This is the order
of the text, and the meaning thereof. I make the Christian reader judge. Out of
the which text note those things. First, that Jesus of Nazareth our savior
concerning his humanite has not his beginning from heaven nor else where but
from the sub staunce of the route of Jesse. Mark the words of the prophet.
He says not that Christ shall be a flower grafte or feigned to be annexed to the
route, but he shall be borne of the same route. Consider the symylytude and the
words of the scripture Christ is called the flour of the branch. It is not
unknown unto all men, but that the flour is of the nature and substance of
the tree that bareth the flower. How can they the^ prove (tarry in ye text of
Esaie) seeing our savior Christ is the flour of that sa crate virgin Mary,
should not be of her substance and nature? Show us any flower, that is either of
appel tree, nut, or other yt is not of ye same nature and substance that the
tree is, of who^ it springs. If ye grant the flour to be of the nature and
substance of the stock that bareth ye flour: be no more iniuryouse, and cruel
against Christ the flour and fruit (by Gods ordinances) of the sacrate virgin,
the^ unto the stock, and route of every flower of the field. Show us the flour
of an Orange to spring of an Oak, and the^ we will grant the humanite of
Christ, nor to take his orygynall of man, but from heaven, or else from
somother beginning, as you do feign, ye know not what. And then (it must be
granted) even as of ye nature of no* Orange ca^ come no orange: so of none of
Abrahames nature and stock, ca^ come Abrahames natural kynsman our Sauyoure
Christ Jesus according to the flesh. But ye will not contrary to reason,
grant to us the first, no more can we contrary both to reason and to the holy
scripture, grant you the second. These places and promyses of the old
testament considered: we will bring forth the autoryte of the new Testament,
that shall confirm the same.

Testimonies of the new Testamente.
Out of the old Testament we have heard yt Christ should be born according to
the holy scripturs. Now let us hear how ye effect answers to y^ for more
propheties. In case the new testament should not in effect perform as much as
ye old testament figured by shadows and saw before by prophetye, they both
might be iustlye suspected, and no forse though both of the were denied. And
for a probacyon, let us take the experyence of it in this matter concerning
the humanyte of Christ, and that it took his beginning in and of the holy
virgin, by the operation of the holy Ghost. The Aungel said unto the blessed
vyrgine, Luce the first. Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bare a
son, the which things S. Mathewe expresses thus. Thou shaltbe great, and
bare a son. Mark the whole state of the scripture, and the words here
rehearsed, to conceive and bare a child: and ye shall always find, it is none
othere thing but that the mother shall be a very true and natural parent with
partycypatyon of here own substauuce with her child. Therefore Sayncte Mathewe
in the fryste Chapter to help this dout, among other things touching the
genealogy and stock of Christ, says thus speaking of the blessed virgin
Mary, Of whom is born christ and does not say by whom or through whom Christ
passed. The same word Of, uses S. Paul twysse to the Romans, and ones to
the Galathians, ye which word he would not have used so many times, incase
Christ has taken no substance of his mother, but passed through her without
participation of her nature as ye water through a conduit. To the Romans in
the first chapter he says thus, which was borne of ye sede of David as
touching the flesh. And in the in the. 9. Chapter Christ after the flesh is
of the fathers, and in ye fourth to the Galathia^s he says, when the time was
fulfilled, God send his son borne of a woman. What can be more plainly
said to prove our savior Jesus Christ to have taken of the virgyne the
substance of humane nature. Namelye because the new Testamente, and the
authorytes thereof, does so Godly corresponde and answer to the propheties of
the old law, Gene. 22. 26. In thy sede, says Moses, and not in an other
sede, or in a heavenly sede. The same does S. Paul repet, saying. Christ is
of the fathers as concerning to the flesh. Mark ye word Of, and it shall
destroy, yt fond opinion of them yt say, true it is, we grant ye Christ is of
the sede of David, yet it follows not he should take of the nature, and
substance of the sacrate virgin. Note well ye words, and they shall satisfye
the. Unto this obieccion and other I will answer unto here after, in the end
of the oration. Now to the prove of our proposytion, read the first of Saint
Luke, and mark the gretinge of Elizabeth unto the holy vyrgyne being great:
Blessed said she is the fruit of thy womb. This holy womanne callyth Christ
the fruit, but whereof, and from whens had she this fruit of heaven, or othere
where? no treulye: but it was the fruit of her own belie, then of her own
substance, or else it were a manifest lie to call Christ the fruit of her
belie. Nether I think, there is no man that would call a thing the fruit of a
tree, that never had the nature of a tree. What man was ever so found to say,
that a Pere were the fruit of a Chery tree. Or who is he that can say, that
Jesus of Nazareth taking his humanite from heaven or of some other thing
beside his mother, can truly call him, ye fruit of his mothers womb. The
scripture says: Christ is her son, and she is his mothere, not a faynyd
mother, but a true and very natural mother.

So says saynct Matthew in the first Chapt. She brought forth her son. And
so the virgyne called him Luke the second, Son why haste you done thus unto
us. Belyue the scryptures and pondre accordingly the words and sentences
thereof. Math. 1. Luce. 3. Jo. 2. 19.

One place more there is in S. Paul written in the second to the Ebrew: which
is this, for as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself likewise took part with the^. And in the same place he says:
He took the sede of Abraham, and not of the Angels so that he must be like
unto his brothers in all things. This place apperteining to the natiuite of
Christ, let us consydere dilygently the words of S. Paul's oration, how he
prouyth Christ to have our nature, which he took of his mother. If it be so
says S. Paul that the children, that is to say men be partakers of flesh
and blood: Christ because he might destroy him that has ye dominion of
death, by the death in his own body, was made partaker of ye same, to wit of
flesh and blood. Here he vsythe three words, Likewise, Partaker, Of the same.
Read the text and note the words.

First it is out of doubt, that our flesh is of the nature and substance of
a woman. Now says S. Paul Christ likewise, that is to say after the same
manner took flesh as his brothers. I say not like unto us, for we receive our
nature with sin, and in sin, and by natural coniunccion. Christ received
his humanyte of his mother without sin, by the operacyon of the holy
ghost. But to Saynct Paul's words: like as man takes his nature of his
parents, so likewise took Christ his humane nature of the blessed vyrgyne, or
else S. Paul's symyle proved nothing.

The second word of Saint Paul says, that he was made participant, or
partaker. Now there is no participatyon nor can be, except it be of such
things, as is commune between them that be partakers of one thing. It cannot
be therefore that Christ has taken other flesh then his brothers had, which
was of the sede of man. Forther he adds. Christ took the sede of Abraham, and
not of Angels, that is as much to say Abraham's flesh verily humane, and not
any body or flesh celestial, or made of the air. In this place S. Paul
shows plainly from whens, and of whom Christ took his humanite. In the same
chapter S. Paul says, Christ is made like unto his brothers in all things.

How can this I pray you be true, in case he never took his humane nature of
any of his brothers substance. The which thing if ye take from Christ,
there is nothing can be more unlike, then Christ, and us, that be his
brothers. In the last reason S. Paul says that Christ was tempted, that he
might succor such as were tempted. Now there is no flesh, ca^ be tempted, but
man's flesh. And there is no man's flesh, but has taken his beginning of ye
substance of man, except it were Adam the first man that was made of the
Earth, Genesis 1. Farther how can he help us as S. Paul says being in an other
flesh from us. If he have an other flesh then we have (I except sin, and
now mortalyte) how or wherein is the justice of God satisfied for sin? How
can he be a faithful medyatour between God and man, that never took his
humanite, of ye substance or nature of any man.

These places and autorytes I trust suffycyth every Chrystian heart for the
stablyshement of this Article of our believe, where we confess that Christ
was conceived by the holy ghost, and borne of the vyrgyn Marye. By the which
word Of, we believe that he took his humanite of her substance, and had none
othere beginning as touching his humanyte, then in her, and of her, by the
operatyon of the holy ghost. There now restyth no more to be said of me in
this part, but to answer unto such obieccions, as the contrary part
resystyth this truth wythall.

The first obieccyon.
If Christ took his flesh of a woman, then were he a sinner, and partaker of
the sin, that naturally dwells in every of Adams posteryte, Romano. 5. 11.

We answer.
Incase Christ had been in all things conceived and borne as we be, there
obieccyon were true. But the Angel in the first of Saint Luke declares the
dyuersyte between the conceptyon and birth of Christ and ours. The holy
ghost says he unto the holy vyrgyne shall come upon the, and the might of
the highest, shall shadow the. And incase the almightye had not sanctified and
hallowed the sede of David in the sacrate virgyne, which Christ took in her
womb, it might have mynystred some suspicio^, that Christ being man of
sinful nature, should also ben a sinner him self. But the scripture declares,
not only Christ to be the sede and fruit of the vyrgyne, but also a sede and
fruit without syn. Saying, the thing that shall be borne of the is holy, and
shall be called ye son of God. This testimony of the will of God in the
scripture should suffyce the people of God. Why seek we a knot ina roush, and
put doubt in a manifest veryte, or to fear of ye thing, yt Gods word
playnelye puttyth out of fear, and says, It shall be no synful fruit, nor
vyciated sede that the blessed vyrgyne shall bring forth, but it shall be an
holy fruit. Luc. 1. And in ye same place Elizabeth says, Blessed is ye
fruit of thy belly. The holy woman will admytte no curse or maledyccyon of
sin in this fruit. The Prophet Hier. 23. says, that God promised to
suscytat unto David a ryghtuous branch.

In this Prophet, there is contained, ^wo veriteis of Christ. The ^^rste is,
that he shall be of the sede of Dauyd, as the branch of a tree, is of ye tree it
self. Now it is known, that the tree, and the branch thereof, is partycypant
of one, and of the same nature, of the same sape, and condycyon. So is Christ,
touching his humanyte of the same nature that his mothere was of. That is to
say, of the seed of David. And this proves the Article of our faith, He was
borne of the vyrgyne Marye.

The second part of the Prophesye proves the confutacyon of such as would
infer, and make to follow, if Christ be of the substance and nature of his
mothere, then is he a sinner. Mark the text and it will answer the contrary.
The text says it shall not only be a branch, but a just branch. That is
to say, innocente and without sin before the face and judgment of GOD, as
though the Prophet had said, This branch shall take his being and
orygynall of David posterite and yet want sin. So does the Prophet Esaias
say. cap. 53. speaking of this blessed, and innocent sede. Who did no sin,
nether fraud was found in his mouth. The same writes Saint Peter. 1. Petr. 2.
and Saint Johan 1. Johan. 3. He appeared to take away our sin, and no sin
was found in him. Of these places we humble beseech all Christyan men to
judge, whether the word of God proves not, as well, Christ to take of the
substance of his mother, as to prove the same branch and fruit of here
belie to be void of all sin, the holy ghost workyng the same as it is
written Luc. 1.

The second obieccyon.
S. Math. in his first Chapter says: That which is borne of here, is of the
holy ghost: then it is not of the nature and substance of ye virgin.

We answer.
If the cyrcumstaunce of the place be marked, they shall know, they do injuries
to ye text here, as in othere places. For when the vyrgyn hard, there should
be a child borne of her, and she yet in ye grace and perfeccion of her
vyrgynyte, as of a thing impossible by nature to be done wondreth at the
tydyngs, and requires the Angel of the means, how it may be done. where
unto the Angel makes answer, to satisfy the admyration of the troubled
vyrgyne thus. The holy ghost shall come upon the, and he shall work this
wonderful work in the, although above the consent of thy reason, yet not
without thassystaunce of thy nature which shall be shadowed by the holy ghost.
This interpretatyon of S. Luke admits, S. Matthew in the first Chapter,
where as Joseph was no less troubled to se his affiaunced, and promised wyefe,
to be with child, (thought it had been by some synystre, and forbidden
means,) as well as the pour vyrgyne with reason, thought it could never be
without the knowledge of man. As from heaven her reason was confunded and made
to give place unto faith, and the power of GOD, so was Josephe by night
admonyshed of his over hasty judgment, and light suspycyon, that his promised
wife was not great by any man, but by the holy ghost. Thus myndyth the
Euangeliste, to take out of Joseph the suspycyon yt he had of the Godly
virgin for her being with child, and not to prove, that the child within her,
was not of her own substance and nature. Read the place, and mark the state
and argument thereof, then shall the text interpret at it self. If it be so
(as God forbid, it should) any would wrest and constrayne this word (of the
holy ghost) against ye circumstaunce and meaning of the Euangelyste. We wyshe
and require it to be admitted of all men for the scryptures sake, all the
Prophetyes that says Messyas should be borne of a woman, and not by a woman,
or passing through a woman. If they will not thus be contendyd, but forse the
lettre that says (of the holy ghost) that is to say: Christ was borne of
the substance of the holy ghost, then should they prove ethere Christ to
have no flesh, because the holy* ghost has none, nor never had: or else
the God to be turned into ye nature of man. And so where as God before was and
is ever immortal: should by there reason be made mortal, which were a
blasphemye to grant.

The third objection.
Christ the son of God took not our nature, but by a certain change and
commutatio^, the word that before was God, to be made flesh, according to ye
scriptures, Jo. 1. and the word is made flesh.

We Answer.
This wrong interpretation of the scriptures comineth by the equivocation, or
diverse signifycatio^ of this word (Made) Which has in the scriptures two
sygnifycatio^s. The first, it sygnifyeth a change of one nature into an other
as Jo. 2. the water was made wine. And also Gene. 19. The wief of Loath was made
into a stone of salt.

This word (Made) in ye scripture in many other places sygnifyeth asmouche as
to say receauyd, as S. Paul writes Gala. 3. Christ is made for us the curse
or execration. That is to say receauyd in him the curse and maledictio^ of God
for our sins. And again, 2. cor. 5 He that knew no sin, Made sin for us.
That is to say was the sacrifyce for oursynne. Good Christian reader,
remember to take the meaning of the scripture according to ye circu^staunce
thereof, and then thou shall perceive for the immutabilyte of Gods nature, that
where sayncte Joanne says, and ye word was made flesh, is even asmouche to
say, as the son of God, receauyd flesh, And no other sense nor meaning can
it have then this, except ye would the word that was God before, and
immortal is now chaumged into man, and beco^me mortal, which sentence
repugneth every book of the scripture. Farther it should follow, that he that
was before God, as S. John says, now leueth to be God, and is made man, as
the water that was turned into wine Jo. 2. Left to be wine and become water.
And as the corn of salt was no more the wyefe of Loath, but a corn of salt.

Beside all this, if God be turned into man, how stands there first
interpretacion, that his flesh and true humanite is of the holy Ghost?

Nomaner of way doutles for no substance of flesh is of the substance of ye
holy ghost, nor no substance of the holy Ghost can or may be the substance
of the flesh. Thus therefore with the scriptures we conclude the word
remaining still the word, annexyd unto it the nature of man which he took of
the blessed Uirgine, and truly is called the fruit of here bellye.

The fourth Objection.
Whatso ever is borne of a woman, has a carnal body, but Saint Paul
attrybuteth unto Christ a spiritual body 1. Cor. 15. therefore he was not
conceived nor borne of the womannes nature.

We Answer.
S. Paul in that place speaks not of the incarnation of Christ, whether it
be of the Uirgyne, or from heaven: as it is easelye to be seen by the matter he
entreats of. But he writes of the state and condition of the body after the
resurrection. And answers there to the objection of them that demaundyd in
what body the dead should rise: in the same says he that they lyuyd, but
no more mortal, nor subject unto the pain of mortalite, as Adames body was
after he sinned: but spiritual as Christ's body was after his resuerrection
(spiritual I say, not that it losteth his humanyte, or is turned into the
nature of a spirit. But because it shall lack all mortal qualytes.)

Thus proves S. Paul when he saeyth, it is sown a natural body, it shall
rise a spiritual body. Here saynct Paul speaks of ye body of Christ
after the resurrection, and not of his incarnation. Wherefore there reason
concludes nothing. For they infer a wrong conclusion of an euele understand
principal.

The fyfte Objection.
If Christ should receive his humanite of the nature of man it should be to
the ignominye and contempt of his person* whois holiness will not admit any
conjunction with the vnperfection of man.

We Answer.
It is no ignomyne, or co^te^pt at all, but rather a certain argument of
Gods mercy (which passes all his works) that he would not abhor to be
partaker of our infirm nature.

Other common Objections.
S. Paul, Col. 1. Ephe. 3. Heb. 1. Jo. 3..1. Cor. 15. Jo. 6. Hebr. 13. Ephe.
4. In these places it is plain that Christ is called the first begoten of
creatoures. That he came from heaven. That he is the bread given from heaven.
He is to day, and was yester day also. He ascended, that first descended.
These places say they, prove he took not his original of his mother.

We Answer.
Christ as he is very God, so is he very man and according to his godhed he
has been, is, and ever shall be with out beginning and of this his divine nature
speaks the places before rehearsed, and not of his humanyte. Farther it is ye
manner of the scripture by cause of the union and coniunctio^ of these two
natures in one person, many times to ascribe and put yt unto ye one nature,
which properly is dew unto ye other.

The conclusion.
Saying the scripture has in this point as well stablyshed the truyth that
Christ our savior took his humanite of the blessed Uirgine, as also ansuered
all the objections that can be brought against the truyth: It shall be the dewty
and office of as many as love the Lord in Christ with humblenes rather to
consent unto the truyth: then of affection, to stand at the defense of a lie.
The lyuinge God grant us his holy spirit, that ones we may all know one
thing in Christ Jesu, to our salvation. So be it.

Imprented at London by Edward Whitechurch 1549. Cum Priuilegio ad Im*
primendum solum.


