THE SOVLES EXALTATION.

A TREATISE containing The Souls Union with Christ, on 1 Cor. 6.17. The Souls
Benefit from Union with Christ, on 1 Cor. 1.30. The Souls Justification, on 2
Cor. 5.21.


By T. H.

ROMANS 8.30. And whom he called, them he also Justified; and whom he Justified,
them he also glorified.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at
the black Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1638.

A TABLE OF THE Souls union with CHRIST, out of these words: 1 COR. 6.17. He
that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit.
Doctrine 1. EVery true believer is joined unto Christ. page 3 This knitting of
a believer to Christ, consists in three Particulars. Particular 1. A true
believer does gather up all the faculties of his soul, and does employ them
upon Christ. p. 5 Partic. 2. The believer is satisfied with Christ, and the
riches of his grace. ibid. Partic. 3. Is the: that the believer does bind the
heart to the exercising of both these. p. 6 The manner of this union does
discover it self in three Particulars. Partic. 1. It is a real union, though
spiritual. p. 7 Partic. 2. This union it is a total union. ibid. Partic. 3.
This union it is an unseparable union. p. 8 Use 1. Information to instruct us
of the happy privilege of the poor Saints of God; though despised of the
world, yet they are received into covenant and union with Christ. p. 9 Use 2.
It is an use of terror to all opposites against Christ. p. 10 Use 3. It is an
use of examination and trial, from hence may be known whether the soul does
rightly cleave to Christ, or whether it does only dissemble with Christ. p. 16
Use 4. It is a ground of comfort for the Saints against all contempt, and
disgrace, against all troubles, miseries, and persecutions that the world can
cast upon them. p. 20. Secondly, against all temptations of Satan. p. 22
Doctrine 2. The faithful do enjoy such an union with Christ, that they are
one Spirit with him. p. 25 For the opening of this Doctrine, two particulars
are to be discovered. Partic. 1. The first Particular is the manner how the
soul comes to be one spirit with Christ. p. 25 and this does consist in three
conclusions. p. 26 Conclusion 1. The first conclusion is this, that the Spirit
of God does really accompany the whole Word, but in a more special manner he
does accompany the precious promises of the Gospel. p. 27 Conclusion 2. The
second conclusion is this, that the Spirit of grace does leave a supernatural
dint and power, and a spiritual and overpowring virtue upon the soul, and
thereby does bring it unto Christ. p. 28 Conclusion 3 The third conclusion is
this, that the Spirit of grace in the promise working thus upon the heart, it
causes the heart to close with it in the promise. p. 33 Part. 2. The second
particular is the order of this union, whether the believer is knit to the
humane nature of Christ first, or to the Divine. p. 39 Use 1. Instruction to
inform us, that the sins of the faithful are mavelous heinous in Gods
account, because of their union. p. 45 Use 2. It is an use of trial, whereby a
man may see, what spirit most men of the world are of: as their souls close
with Christ, and receive him, so they are. p. 49 Use 3 It is a word of
exhortation to close with such, as Christ himself does close withal. p. 52
A TABLE OF THE communion that the Soul has with Christ from the union with
him, out of these words: 1 COR. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
Doctrine 1. THe Doctrine from these words is this, that there is a conveyance
of all spiritual grace from Christ, to all those that believe in him. p. 63
The Tenure of this conveyance discovers it self in those particulars.
Partic. 1. The first particular is this, that there is fully enough in the Lord
Jesus Christ for every faithful soul. p. 66 Partic. 2. As there is enough in
Christ to supply all the manes of this Saints, so Christ does supply unto them
whatsoever is ^st fit to the need of every poor Saint. p. 68. Partic. 3. Is
this, as the Lord Christ does communicate what is fit, so he does preserve what
he does bestow and communicate to the believing soul. p. 73 Partic. 4. Is
this: the Lord does not only preserve what grace, he does give, but he
quickens the grace he maintains. p. 76 Partic. 5. Is this: As he quickneth
what he maintains, so he perfects what he quickens. p. 77 Partic. 6. Is this:
the Lord at last does crown all the grace, he has perfected. p. 79 Use 1. It
is a word of lamentation, and terror to every unbeleeving creature under
Heaven; here they may see the misery of their condition. p. 81 Use 2. It is a
ground of comfort to all the Saints of God, that have interest in all the
riches of this goodness. p. 84 Use. 3. It is a word of instruction to teach
every Saint to lie down in the dust, that they all might glory in the Lord. p.
91 Use 4. It is an use of exhortation, or direction, to teach the Saints,
whither to go to fetch succor and supply, of what ever grace they want:
Christ is made all in all; why then away to the Lord Jesus Christ. p. 99
Question. But you will say, what course or means shall we use to get these
things at Christ's hands? Answer. The means are two: First, eye the promise
daily, keep it within view. p. 104 Secondly, you must labor to yield to the
Soul, to the power of the Spirit, and to the virtue of grace which is in
Christ. p. 109 Now this particular conveyance of grace from Christ, it is done
two ways; partly by imputing, partly by imparting. p. 113. and they are both
in the Text: Christ is made righteousness, or justice, that is, he does
justify a sinner by imputation, and Christ is made sanctification, and
redemption; that is, he does redeem and sanctify a sinner by communication.
ibid. Doctrine. God does justify a believing soul, not for what he has or
does, but only for what Christ has done for him. p. 116 In the opening of the
point, two things are to be cleared: First, what it is to justify: Secondly,
what is mean that God does not justify any one, for what he has or does. p.
116 To justify it is a word of judicial proceeding, when in a legal manner,
the judge does pronounce a man free, and does acquit him. p. 116 Secondly, God
does justify a poor sinner, not for any thing he has or does. The meaning is
this, no grace that a man has, no duty that he can perform, for which as the
material and formal cause of our justification, God does pronounce any man to
be righteous. p. 117 Reason 1. That which in no measure is answerable to Gods
justice, and agreeable to the exactness of the Law, and for which a man may be
condemned, that cannot justify a man: but it is so here; therefore they cannot
be justified. p. 119 Use 1. It is a ground of confutation of the Church of
Rome, that holds the formal cause of the justication of a sinner, it is the
frame of holiness wrought in him, not imputed to him. p. 122 Use 2. It is a
word of consolation, and it is a Cordial to cheer up a man's heart, and to
carry him through all troubles whatsoever can betide him, or shall befall him.
ibid. Use 3. It is an use of exhortation: will nothing do the deed, but a
Christ? why then above all, labor for a Christ more than all, labor to prize
a Christ. p. 127
A TABLE OF THE Souls Justification, out of these words: 2 COR. 5.22. For he
has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.
OVt of these words, two things are to be opened: First, the description of
justification: Secondly, opening of the description. p. 132 Justification, it
is an act of God the Father upon the believer, whereby the debt and sins of
the believer are charged upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the merits and
satisfaction of Christ imputed to the believer, he is accounted just, and so
is acquitted before God as righteous. ibid. Doctrine 1. Justification, is an
act of God the Father, upon the believer. p. 133 For the clearing of the
doctrine, 2. particulars are to be opened. Particular 1. The first particular
is this, why is it called an act of God the Father? Answ. First, because the
Father was the party that was properly offended. p. 135. Secondly, because the
Father is the Fountain in the Deity. p. 137 Particular 2. Why it is an act of
God the Father upon the believer? Answer. Because it is a transient action that
passes from God upon the creature, and so does work thereby a change and
alteration upon the creature. p. 139 The charge that is wrought upon the
creatures, is two ways. Particular 1. The Lord is said to pass a work or an
action upon the creature, when he puts some kind of ability upon the
creature, either spiritual, or natural: as when the Lord makes a wicked man,
a good man: an adulterous man, a chaste man: and this we call a natural
change, because there is a gracious frame put into the heart. p. 140 Secondly,
the Lord is said to make a change upon the creature, when he takes off some
relations, and respects, which the creature had, and puts upon it other
respects: and this is called a moral change. p. 140 Use 1. It is a ground of
admirable comfort to bear up the heart of a poor sinner, above all the
accusations of sin, Satan, or the envy of the world. p. 143 Use 2. It is a
word of direction to all the Saints, to appeal to the Judge of the Court in
their judgment. p. 148 Use 3. It is a groung of terror to the wicked, and to
all unbeleevers, that they have no share in this point of justification. p. 154
Doctrine. Christ Jesus never yielded the least improvement of heart to sin,
neither did he ever commit the least sin in his life. p. 159 Reason 1. Look
into the nature of our Savior, and it was pure. p. 159 Reason 2. Look into
the Office of our Savior, and he was without sin. p. 160 Use 1. It is a
word of exhortation to the faithful to conform their hearts and conversations
answerable to Christ. p. 161 Doctrine. God the Father did impute all the sins
of all the world to the charge of our Savior. p. 166 When God the Father does
charge the sins of the faithful upon Christ, it does appear in these three
particular acts. Particular. 1. God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, made
a mutual decree, and purpose, that so many as should believe, should be saved:
and this was left to the care of Christ, that he should make them believe. p.
170 Particular 2. Our Savior having undertaken to keep these, he therefore
put himself into the room, and place of all those lost sheep. p. 173
Particular 3. Our Savior having put himself into the room of a sinner, the
Law now proceeds with full scope against him. p. 175 Reason 1. That which the
Lord Jesus Christ did willingly submit himself to without sin, that God the
Father might justly charge upon him. p. 176 Reason 2. Because the justice of
God requires this at the hands of Jesus Christ, that he should take the guilt
of sinners upon himself. p. 177 Reason 3. Because herein is abundantly
magnified the love and mercy of Christ. p. 179 Use 1. It is a word of
instruction to the Saints: if God the Father has laid thy sins upon Christ,
then do not thou take them from him to thy self. p. 180 How far a believer
may charge himself with his sin, does appear in these four conclusions.
Conclusion 1. Every believer is bound to see and examine the sinful carriage
of his soul, and to judge that it has power to make him guilty, and also to
condemn him. p. 182 Conclusion 2. Every believing soul justified, ought to
acknowledge that it were righteous with the Lord to let out his wrath against
him, though not to condemn him, yet to distract him. p. 185 Conclusion 3.
Every believer accepted, and justified, in and through Christ by the Father,
yet he is thus far bound to charge his sins upon himself, as to maintain in
his own heart a sense of the need that he has of Christ, as well to continue
his respect and acceptance with God, as to bring him at first into the love
and favor of God. p. 187 Conclusion 4. Thus far the Saints of God ought to
go in charging their own souls with their sins, so far to see them, and to
be affected with them, as to bring their hearts to be truly carried with
hatred against them, and with resolution to get power and strength against
them. p. 189 How far a believer may not charge himself with his sin, may be
conceived in these two conclusions. Conclusion 1. A believer should not in his
judgment conceive, nor in his heart be persuaded, that any sin, nor all his
sins shall ever be able to fasten the guilt of sin upon him, so as to
cause revenging justice to proceed against him, to his condemnation. p. 192 Use
2. It is a word of terror to all unbeleevers, they are destitute of all hope
of the pardon of their sins. p. 197 Use 3. It is a word of exhortation to the
Saints: was Christ made sin for thee? then be thou content to be made shame
for him. p. 200 Use 4. It is a word of comfort to all the faithful: learn to
cast all thy sins on the Lord Jesus Christ. Doctrine 4. The Lord Jesus Christ
suffered fully, whatsoever punishments divine justice required, or were
deserved by the sins of the faithful. p. 202 For the opening of the
Doctrine, three questions are to be answered. Question 1. What were the kinds
of punishments which Christ did suffer, and how far did be suffer them?
Answer. First, Christ did suffer death natural, that is, the dissolution of
soul and body. p. 210 How far our Savior did suffer death natural, appears
in three conclusions: Conclusion 1. Whatsoever did appertain to the substance
and essentials of the first death, that Christ did suffer, p. 210 Conclusion 2.
Christ did undertake to die the death of the cross, a most shameful and base
death; only appropriated to the basest malefactors, that he might thereby show
the heinousness of sin, which deserves the worst death of all. p. 211
Conclusion 3. Those dishonorable infirmities which befell men, because of the
infirmity of the flesh, as the having the body to rot in the grave, to be
torn in pieces: our Savior would not undergo these, because he had no need
to suffer these. p. 206 Use 1. It is a sweet cordial to all the Saints of God,
upon their death beds: for the death of Christ has taken away the evil of
death. p. 207 Secondly, Christ did also suffer in his soul, in that there was
a real withdrawing of the mercy and compassion of God. p. 213 Secondly, there
was a real inflicting of the indignation of the Lord; and that fills the soul
of a poor creature. p. 214 Question 2. How far our Savior suffered these
pains? Answer. This is to be known in these five conclusions. Conclusion 1.
It is possile that some pains of hell may be suffered in this life, therefore
the living of our Savior in this life is no hinderance, but that he might
undergo them. p. 215 Conclusion 2. Some pains of Hell were endured by Christ,
and yet the union of the Manhood, with the Godhead, might still be untouched,
p. 216 Conclusion 3. Our Savior suffered pain in his soul, as he was our
Mediator in our room, and in our stead. p. 218 Conclusion 4. Whatsoever
punishment proceeded from the Father, our Savior took it upon himself yet
so, as that he neither had personal sin to deserve it, neither did he sin in
bearing of it, as the wicked do, which are damned. p. 220. Conclusion 5. The
desperation of a damned soul in hell, and the eternity of torments: they are
no essentials of the second death, and therefore they could not, nor ought not
to be suffered by our Savior. p. 227 Use 1. It is a word of information:
labor from hence to see the heinousness of sin, and to hate it, because it
has brought all this evil upon thy Savior, and would have brought the same
upon thee, had not the Lord Jesus stepped in between thee, and the wrath of the
Father. p. 234 Use 2. Did our Savior suffer these pains? then see here the
strictness of Gods justice. p. 241 Question 3. When did our Savior begin
these sufferings? Answer. Our Savior did begin the pains of the natural
death from his cradle, to his grave; he began to die, as soon as he began to
live. p. 245 Secondly, our Savior did suffer these pains in his soul; partly
in the garden, partly upon the cross. p. 247 Question 3. Whether our Savior
did suffer in body alone or in soul alone, or in both. Answer. Christ did
properly and immediately suffer the wrath of God in his soul, as well as he
did the pains of death in his body. p. 249 Use 1. Is it so; was the Lord Jesus
driven to this astonishment, and to all this misery? then let every soul
learn from hence what will be the fruit of sin, and what he may expect from
sin. p. 260 Reason 1. Is taken from the divine justice of God, which required
this by way of satisfaction, as being only suitable, and agreeable, to the
divine justice of God, by reason of sin. p. 283 Reason 2. Is taken from the
office of Christ, because our Savior was our surety, and so he was bound to
it by faithfulness. p. 287 Use 1. It is a word of confutation, and it directly
meets with Popish Purgatory. p. 288 Use 2. It teaches us that all the
troubles, miseries, afflictions, either inward, or outward, they cannot
properly be called punishments inflicted upon the faithful, but
chastisements. p. 289 Use 3. It is a word of comfort to all you that are
believers: you have heard the treasures of mercy, and the death of our Lord
Jesus Christ laid open: view them, and take them all for your comfort. p. 293
FINIS.
Several Treatises of this AUTHOR.
1 THE unbeleevers preparing for Christ, out of Revelations 22.17. 1 Corinthians.
2.14. Ezekiel 11.19. Luke 19.42. Matthew 20.3, 4, 5, 6. John 6.44.
2 The souls preparation for Christ, or a Treatise of Contrition, on Acts
2.37. 3 The Souls humiliation, on Luke 15. verses 15, 16, 17, 18. 4 The Souls
vocation, or effectual calling to Christ, on John 6.45. 5 The Souls union
with Christ, 1 Corin. 6.17. 6 The Souls benefit from union with Christ, on 1
Cor. 1.30. 7 The Souls justification, eleven Sermons on 2 Corin. 5.21. 8
Sermons on Judges 10.23. Sermons on Psalm 119.29. Sermons on Proverbs 1.28,
29. Sermons on 2 Timothy 3.5.

THE SOVLES union with CHRIST.
1 CORIN. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit.


WE told you that the application of the merits of Christ, consists especially
in two things:

First, the preparation of the soul for Christ.

Secondly, the ingrafting or the knitting of the soul to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Of this preparation we have heretofore largely treated: partly in contrition,
where the soul is cut off from sin: partly in humiliation, whereby the soul
is cut off from it self; whereby the Lord rases the foundation of all carnal
confidence, whereby a man rests upon his own privileges and performances, and
makes his services his Savior; either the soul sees no need to depart from
sin, or else it think it can help it self out of sin: when both these
are removed from the soul, then it is fitted to receive the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, the soul comes to be ingrafted into Christ: and that has two parts:

First, the calling of the sinner; or the putting of the soul into Christ.

Secondly, the growing of the soul with Christ: these two take up the nature
of ingrafting a sinner into the stock:

First, it is put into the stock.

Secondly, being put into the stock, it grows together with the stock: these
two things are answerable in the soul. The former of these two we have
largely treated of, and fully finished in the great work of vocation, when the
Lord brings the sinner to himself by the call of mercy, and the voice of the
Gospel: we are now to proceed; and we have made some entrance into the second;
and that is the growing of the soul together with Christ: for though the graft
be in the stock, yet it cannot be fruitful, unless it grow together with the
stock: now this growing together is accomplished by two means:

The first is the union which the soul has with Christ.

The second is a conveyance of sap, or sweetness, or a communion with Christ,
and all the treasures of grace and happiness that is in him: then to make up
the growing together of the graft and the stock; First, the graft is put into
the stock. Secondly, there must be a communicating of the moisture that is in
the stock, to the graft, and so they grow together; otherwise it grows not at
all, but withers away: now we are first to describe the nature of the work in
general, and then we will descend to particulars, and the several parts of
it: now we will define this union so far as it concerns our purpose, not
int^enching into particulars.

It is such a joining of the faithful soul in such a means to Christ, that
it becomes one spirit: these are not by way of collection to be gathered, but
they are plainly expressed in the text: and two points of doctrine I mean to
prosecute: the first point is from the first part of the text.



The second part of the description, is the second point in hand.



First, that a faithful soul is firmly and nearly knit unto Christ.

Secondly, he is so knit that he becomes one spirit.

But first of the first doctrine.

What ever by way of comparison can be alleged, concerning the near
combination of one thing with another, they are all tied to this knitting of
the soul to Christ: look what a friend is to a friend; look what a father is
to a child; what a husband to a wife; look what a graft is to a tree; and
that is nearer than a husband to a wife: nay, go yet farther, Galat. 2.20.
what the soul is to the body; the soul is not only knit to the body, as one
member to another, as the hand is knit to the arm, and the arm to the
shoulder; but the soul does communicate it self universally through the least
part of the body: so the Apostle says, Christ is the very soul of a believer,
I live, yet not I, but the Lord Jesus lives in me; so that look as the body
lives by the soul, the soul closing, and communicating, and quickening of the
same, so Christ is in a Christian, and speaks in a Christian, and enableth a
Christian to the performance of that he does; hence the body of the faithful
is called Christ, 1 Corin. 12.12. but we will open this a little further in two
passages:

First, the carriage of the soul in this closing.

Secondly, the manner how it does close.

The carriage we shall desire to discover in three particulars, which may be
expressed in a graft, when it is put into the stock: and I say, therein observe
three particulars:

First, there is an exercise of the elements that are in the graft upon the
stock, and are so far mingled one with another, and do so far close one
with another, that they become one.

Secondly, the graft joins to the stock, and none other.

Thirdly, they do not only act thus, but are bound one to another: and this
makes them act answerably to these three particulars. There is also an
expression of the knitting of the soul to Christ in three particulars:

First, the soul gathers up it self, and all its spirits, its faculties, that
does exercise in the work thereof upon Christ, and that makes the soul to
grow unto the Lord: when the soul turns the promise into good blood, it does
not only chew the meat, but digest it, and it becomes good blood: a true
believer gathers up all the faculties of his soul, and imployes them upon
Christ: hope expects Christ, and desire longs for Christ, and love and joy
embrace Christ, and the will closes Christ; thus the soul settles it self
upon Christ, hoping, expecting, longing, desiring, loving, embracing: look as
it is with a woman that kneads dowgh, if there be two parts of it, the moulding
and the kneading knits them together, and makes them one lump: so there is the
moulding of the soul to the promise, hoping, and desiring, and longing, and
choosing; faith kneads all these together, and knits them unto God, and draws
the soul to him.

Secondly, the soul is satisfied with Christ, and the riches of his grace; the
believer does repose his confidence wholly thereupon: Prove. 5.19. that which
makes the love of a husband increase toward his wife, is this, He is
satisfied with her breasts at all times, and then he comes to be ravished
with her love: if a husband has a loose heart, and will not content himself
with the wife of his youth, but has his back doors, and his goings out; this
makes a breach in matrimonial affection; but when he is satisfied with her
breasts, he is ravished with her love: so hope has an expectation of mercy, and
is satisfied therewith; desire longs for mercy, and is satisfied therewith; the
will closes Christ, and it is fully satisfied with him; and if it were to
choose again, it would choose none but Christ: thus suck thou up the
consolations in the promise, and be satisfied therewith, and then thou will
grow there upon; but if you will be resting here, and staying upon the
contentments of the world, this is weak confidence, and draws the soul from
God.

Thirdly, the last thing is the binding of the heart upon both these, viz. the
keeping of the heart to the exercise of the promise, and to be satisfied with
the promise; 1 Coloss. 23. If ye continue in the faith; being grounded and
settled, so that a man does stake down his heart to the promise, and holds
hope, and desire, and love, and joy, and the will unto it: it receives all
Christ, and none but Christ, and stays here, and continues here for ever: this
same covenant that binds the soul to Christ, is that which makes the union
between Christ and the soul: thus we see how the soul carries it self in
this union.

The second thing considerable, is the manner how it is done, and the quality
of this union: and this we will discover in three particulars;

First, it is a real union, but it is spiritual, you must not conceive it
grossly, as if my body were joined to Christ; but there is a real union which
is spiritual: there is a union between the nature of Christ, God and man, and
a true believer: that which I desire to declare is upon this ground, to
difference this union from that which Divines are deceived in; viz. that it is
an union more than it bare notion and apprehension of the mind; for what ever
a man conceives, his understanding closes with it; as whatever I apprehend, I
close with that; there is a conveyance of the thing into my mind, and I close
with it: now the union of a believers soul with Christ is more than this: it
is not a bare apprehension, a wicked man will go far in the apprehension of
Christ; but this union is somewhat more, and I call it a real union, because
there is a knitting and a closing, not only of the apprehension with a
Savior, but a closing of a soul with a Savior.

Secondly, I say this is a total union, the whole nature of a Savior, and the
whole nature of a believer are knit together: first, that it is a real union,
all the places of Scripture do intimate as much: what the branch is to the
vine, the soul is to Christ: now they are more than imagination; so what the
husband is to the wife, the soul is to Christ. Now they are more than in
understanding; for a man may conceive of another woman, as well as of his wife;
but this is another union, whereby the person of the one is knit unto another:
the bond of matrimony knits these two together. This is the frame and guise of
knitting the soul to Christ, it is no bare apprehension but we feed upon
Christ, and grow upon Christ, and are married to Christ: Hosea 2.20. I have
married thee to my self, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

Secondly, I say it is total in so much that Christ is the head, and a
believer, a member; in both these regards they are joined: Christ is the head
of the Church, not only according as he is God, but as he is God and man; and
a believer is a member not only according to his body, but according to his
body and soul: now whole Christ being the head, and the whole believer being a
member, therefore a whole Christ, and a whole believer must be joined together.

The third is this, this union is inseparable: Jeremy 32.40. The Lord
promises to make an everlasting covenant with the house of Israel, and I will
never part away from them to do them good: so Psalm 89.33.34. It is spoken
there concerning Solomon as I conceive the Psalmist says, If he sin against
me, I will scourge him, and I will visit him with stripes; nevertheless, my
loving kindness I will not take away from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail my covenant; I will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my mouth: mark that the Lord out of faithfulness does establish thee to him
in vocation, the Lord has made a covenant with the soul in vocation, the hand
of the Lord lays hold upon the soul, and brings it home; now though the Lord
correct the soul sharply, yet will be not leave it totally and finally; it is
inseparably knit to Christ; what can it be, what shall it be, that can separate
a poor sinner from Christ? if Satan could have hindered him from coming to a
Savior, he would have then hindered him from coming to a Christ, when he had
his greatest dominion over him: if sin could have let him when a man had
nothing else but sin, he would not have forsaken that and have been brought
home to Christ. If the world could have prevailed, Christ should never have
plucked him from it; but when Satan had his greatest power over him, when a man
was nothing else but sin by nature, when the world most prevailed, yet then
God by his good Spirit plucked thy heart from sin and self: that soul is
mine, says Christ, Satan must give way, and shall not hinder it: that soul is
mine, says Christ, sin shall not let it from coming to me: that soul is
mine, says Christ, and the world shall not stop the work of a Savior; and if
Satan in the height of his malice, and the world in the top of its force, could
not prevail to keep the soul from Christ; then much less shall these be
able to pluck us from a Savior: the point then is undeniable, that the soul
is really, totally and inseparably knit to the Lord Jesus Christ.

the hearts of poor Christians; ye are now in the very gate of Heaven, nay
let me say as the Apostle speaks; and I see no reason why a man may not say
that he is in Heaven in truth, though not in that measure and largeness of
glory he shall be afterward. 1 Thessalonians. 1.17. The happiness that a Christian
shall have in Heaven, is this, He shall be ever with the Lord Jesus; Heaven
were not Heaven, unless a man might be with Christ there: the place does not
make a man happy, but the union with a Savior that makes him happy, and to be
joined to Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that makes him happy, and the believer
is now knit to them, and therefore must needs be happy; Deuteronomy. 33. the last
verse, as he said of the people of Israel, so may I say of all faithful
souls, Happy are thou, oh Israel, says the text, who is like unto thee, saved
by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy excellency; so may I
say, Happy are ye, oh believing souls, who is like unto you? ye are saved by
God, and are married to the Lord Jesus Christ, and are the spouses of the
Savior of the world; and he that is the Judge of the world, is your Husband,
your beloved, and you are his: let nothing therefore dismay your hearts.

thinks not so of it, yet they shall be sure one day to find: I know men
think not then, because happily the law of man provides not in this case to
punish those that oppose the Lord Jesus Christ, and the power of his grace,
because happily the Magistrate does not, or happily cannot smite those that set
themselves against those that fear God and trample upon them: therefore wicked
men make the Saints of God the mark of their malice, and the aim of their
rage, and all these indignation is bent that way, they glory in what they have
done, and threaten what they will do; they will hang and draw, and quarter
within themselves: this is that which the proud spirits of the world make their
maine prize, and they think thereby to procure praise unto themselves, and
great preferment in their own eyes this way: let me speak a little to these,
you that are guilty of this sin, see the compass of it, take notice of the
reach how far this rebellion goes: I would wish these men that persecute the
Saints, I would have them underst and the compass of their course, how far
their wicked practice extends, it is not against a despised Christian; no,
let them know it, their rage and malice ascends up to Heaven, and offers
violence to the Lord Jesus Christ, and the labor what they can to pluck
Christ from the right hand of his Father, and they endeavor what in them lies
to shed his blood, and take away his life: let all know that have been
professed opposers and dead haters of the Saints of God, let them know they are
melted of light treason, and that in a most heinous manner against the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, against the Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world: I
would that these men would not cozen themselves, for God will not be mocked:
they profess they love Christ with all their hearts, and they will do any
thing for him, but those nice fellows, those spruce fellows, it is those that
they hate to the death: do you so indeed? thou have said enough then, for thou
hate Christ in hating them, and thou persecutest Christ in persecuting them:
Esaias 37.23.28. Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed, says the text, and
against whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high?
even against the Holy one of Israel: and in the 28. verse, I know thy abode,
and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me; so that how
ever Senacherib aimed at Hezekia only, and those that profess the truth, yet
the Lord takes it at done to himself: he that knew their hearts and their
malice, he says, I know thy rage against me, it was against the holy One of
Israel that they rayled. Wicked men persecute the lives of believers; now
Christ lives in them, and thou hate the life of Christ, and persecutest the
life of Christ: Acts 9. Paul had gotten letters from the Synagogue, and he
would have haled to prison all the Saints of God that professed the Name of
Christ; now if a man had come to Paul, and asked him, Paul why do you
persecute Christ; he would have been in great indignation; what, reverenced
Paul, learned Paul, zealous Paul; what, he persecute the Lord of life? why,
Christ proclaims it, he does so, and he puts it to an upshot, and ends the
controversy, and puts the question out of doubt, I am Jesus, says he, whom
thou persecutest: as if he had said, Poor fool; thou know not, and I
perceive thou think it not, but I receive the wound; the foot is pricked, and
the head complains. I would have a man make the case his own, and be his own
Judge: If any man should pretend friendship to you, and profess he loves you,
and tells you he tenders your person, but yet he will torment your body; and
he loves your head, but yet he will cut off your arm: there is no man so
weak, but he would loath such cursed kind of dissimulation: a man cannot love
the head and hate the member; love the person and torment the body: just so
these men deal with the Lord Jesus Christ; Gods faithful believing servants
are his eyes: Zachary 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine
eye; they are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: thou that pretendest to
love Christ, and to tender the head, and in the mean time loathest his members,
and his poor Saints; know that thou do not persecute the Saints so much, but
thou persecutest Christ much more: but happily thou will say; I am no drunkard,
nor no whore-monger; I tell thee this sin is worse than drunkenness, or
whoredom: the text says, Luke 13.
that Herod was an incestuous person, and married his brother Philips wife; but
he added this sin above all the rest, he put John in prison; therefore all
that hear the Word of God: if a man did see an incestuous wretch in the
congregation, whom humanity, and reason, and nature does loath, we would
abhor and detest him, nay every man knows that it deserves death. Look upon
thy own soul, and lay thy hand upon thy heart, thou that persecutest the
Saints: thy sin is greater, and thy condemnation shall be far sorer than
such a man's: hence it is that God threatens such men with the heaviest
judgments: Psalm 82.5. it is spoken there concerning Doeg; we may see the
story: 1 Samuel 22. When Abimelech gave David shewbread and Goliahs sword,
Doeg saw it and told Saul, and afterward slew eighty five persons of the
Priests; now this Psalmist made this Psalm against this man: and he says, Thy
tongue devises mischief lik a sharp razor working deceitfully, and God shall
likewise destroy thee for ever; He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of
thy dwelling place, and out of the land of the living; because he did oppose
himself against Abimelech; therefore the Lord would not let him go without a
punishment: nay as God threatens the sorest punishment against such person; so
the Saints of God by their prayers set themselves most against them: Psalm
129.5. Let them all he confounded and turned back that have ill will at Sion,
neither do they that go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: the
poorest man that lives, that is in the meanest place, if he walks in an honest
calling, the Saints wish a blessing to him; but they that oppose the Saints of
God, the Saints curse them in the name of the Lord: it is true, I confess, we
must be wary and wise, but being wise and wary, it is a thing we may and
should do; David by way of Revelation knew who were implacable and obdurate;
though we know not this, yet aiming at none in particular, but only in the
general, at those who be incorragible; the Saints of God curse them, and that
bitterly in all their desires that they put up to God; nay the greatest
indirement at the day of judgment proceeds against sinners because of the
persecution of his Saints, because in them they persecute Christ himself; they
tear out the very eyes of Christ, and rend his heart in pieces: Iud. 14. The
Lord comes with thousands of his Angels to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly amongst them of all their ungodly deeds which
they have committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him: Matthew 25. the latter end, Depart from me, ye cursed, I
know ye not; I was in prison, and ye visited me not; I was naked, and ye
clothed me not: why, Jesus Christ is gone to Heaven, and happily they never saw
him: b^^ faith he, in that you did it not to one of these, ye did it not to
me. Now Divines reason thus, that all the doom that shall pass upon the
wicked at the day of judgment, shall go in this tenure: because ye have not
done this and that; and if those shall be condemned that did not visit the
Saints when they were in prison: if those shall be damned that did not cover
the naked, what shall become of those that (...) hearts, and rend the (...) of
(...) the Lord has not only torments for them here, but he has devils in hell
to torment them for evermore: Therefore let me speak a word of advice to those
that are guilty of this great sin of persecuting the Lord of life; go aside
and reason with your souls, and parley with your hearts, and think with your
selves, Oh poor fool that I was, it was not any poor Christian, any poor
Saint that I hated, but it was the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of life, and of
glory, that I persecuted, that I would have plucked out of his Throne; I would
have tore his flesh off his body, and rent his members asunder; and alas, I
never knew it; it was not the Saints I opposed, but the Lord Jesus Christ. I
speak not this to countenance faction, my aim is at those that persecute
religion and sanctity of life.

as it is sometimes with a mighty branch of a tree, ^r with the arm of a man's
body, however the bough of the tree may be rent sometimes, and haled aside by
the violence of the tempest, or by the pulling of a man's hand, yet it will hold
by the body, and when the hand is gone, it will go up again: so it is with a
faithful soul, he so cleaves to Christ, that he will never be parted from
him, he will never be separated, what ever provocation or opposition comes to
the contrary: the believing soul is sometimes rent and strained by the weight
of persecution and temptation, and with the violence of corruptions; but as
soon as the temptation and the weight is gone, it clings to Christ again; and
as the bough, take away the hand, and it will rise up again: so whatsoever
temptations come, or corruptions come, or oppositions betide, yet it will not
be plucked off from the Lord, and though it may be swayed aside, yet it grows
to the Lord: therefore the first of Samuel 10.26. it is said, The hearts that
God touched did cleave unto Saul; so it is with a believer, those that are
famous in the eyes of the world, and have professed great kindness to him, in
the time of persecution they will fly off; but those whose hearts God has
fully touched, they will follow Christ, notwithstanding all opposition; as it
is with the needle of a dial, it may be stirred and moved, but it will never
r^^ till it come to the right place again: so it is with the soul that is
^uit to Christ by faith, though he may be (...) ^ering and doubting, yet he
will never be (...) till he come to be fastened the right way to Christ; but
others there are that cleave fainedly to Christ, and herein it will appear;
either they will off when occasion serves, or else wither in the very work of
the profession of the Gospel, though they continue therein: some there be that
fall away wholly from their profession; of this sort are thousands of your
common protestants, that are only knit unto Christ by peace and prosperity:
there are millions, if the day of trouble should come, and fire and sword
should come, and make them make profession of their faith, they would fly off
from their profession, and they would leave the Lord, and the Gospel, and all
in the lurch, because they are not knit unto Christ by saving faith. In the
second place there are others, who though they do not fall away totally, yet
notwithstanding they wither, and die, and come to nothing: and these are your
cunning and close hearted hypocrites, those that are knit to Christ, and grow
to him by some help, and succor, and assistance, which they have from him, by
which they flourish, grow green in the profession of the Lord: there is a
generation of cunning dissemblers, and close false dealers with the Gospel,
that grow to Christ by some help they receive from him, and that makes them
make a glorious show in the profession of the Gospel; but yet if God take away
his assistance, they wither, and die, and fade, and vanish: look as it is with
the hairs of a man's head, or with the leaves of a tree, the leaves grow to the
tree, and the hairs to the head, but they grow not so much upon the substance
of the body, nor the leaves upon the substance of the tree, as the arm and the
branch does, but they grow only by the moisture that comes from the body, and
the moisture that comes from the root: or look as it is with a wen in a man's
body, it is no part of the body, but it grows out of the superabundant humors
of the body, and that feeds the wen, and increases it; but if the body grow
weak and feeble, and that humor be taken away, it withers and comes to a dry
skin: just so it is with these cursed close hearted hypocrites, as the hairs
and leaves grow, so they grow to the Lord Jesus, namely, the Lord vouchsafes
some sap and moisture, and some assistance to the performance of some services,
but they never grow to the substance of a Savior, they never grew to the
holiness of Christ, they never had the Spirit of Christ powerfully prevailing
with them: as it is with the wen, so it is with these glorious hypocrites, that
can vent themselves very gloriously, they are wens in the profession of the
Gospel, they look full bigly, and stare every man in the face, and to the
appearance of the world, are men of great account* but if once the Lord take
away his assistance from heaven, they are like leaves upon the tree, if they
fall not, yet they wither away: I have oserved sometimes, you shall have dry
leaves stay upon an oak tree, till new ones come again: so these haughty
hearted hypocrites, they will take up a kind of a dying course of profession
in the way of life and salvation, but they never come to be opposers and
resisters of God and his grace, till there comes some to be wiser and stricter
in a Christian course than they, and then he falls away.



First, it is a ground of great comfort and consolation to carry up the soul,
and lift up the heart against all the contempt and disgrace, against all the
troubles, and miseries, and persecutions, that can betide or befall you, or can
be cast upon you, in this wandering pilgrimage of yours: when a Christian begins
to turn his face heavenward, and go home to the Lord, then all his friends
fly away, and depart from him: David complains, that his honors stood afar
off, and he was a mocking to the enemy, and a contempt to those that were
before near unto him; so it will be with you, nay, it is so with most that
live in the bosom of the Church: how often can many of you speak of it, when
the Lord has given you a heart to walk with him, and depend upon him? how
often are you made the offscouring of the world? your carnal friends detest
your persons, and scorn your societies; why? raise up your hearts with the
consideration of the former truth; ye that do endure it, or may fear it,
comfort your selves: does man cast you off? does man cast you out? Christ will
receive you, why then are you discouraged? what though the servant frown, if
the Master welcome? what though we be not with the wicked, if we be with
Christ, and Christ with us; why are we then discontented? it is that which
comforts a party that matcheth against her parents mind, when her parents
frown, this comforts her heart, though she has not their love and society,
yet she has the love and company of her husband, and that contents her: so it
is with every believing soul, you have matched against the mind of your
carnal friends, they would not have you take that course; Oh then they tell
you, Woe and beggerie will befall you; well, though you have matched contrary
to the minds of your carnal friends, or master, or husband, yet comfort thy
self, though thou have the ill will of an earthly husband, yet now God will be
a husband in heaven, thou may sing care away, and be for ever comforted and
refreshed: it was that which God himself gave for a cordial to cheer up
Jacob, in that long and tedious journey of his, when he was going into a far
country, Genes. 28.14, 15. when he was going from his own country, and had
no friends to succor him, the Lord met him, and said, I will go with thee,
and keep thee in all places whither thou go, and I will bring thee back
into this land, and I will never leave thee, until I have done that, which I
spoke unto thee of; this was that which lifted and bare up the heart of the
good man, though he could not but expect hard dealing; why yet says the Lord,
I will go with thee, and never leave thee; think of it, and consider of it
seriously, what a ground of consolation may it be, when we shall wander up and
down, and go into caves, and holes, and dens of the earth; when we shall go
into prison or banishment, and friends may not, nor will not go with us, yet
Christ will go; Esaias 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee; a man cannot save his wife sometimes in the water, though she be ready
to be drowned; a man cannot go into the fire to help her, though she be ready
to be burnt; but Christ will be with thee in the water, and in the fire, that
is, in the heaviest trials and forest troubles: what can come to us, if Christ
be with us? if misery, and sorrow, and trouble be with us, if Christ our
husband be with us, what matter? he is the husband of his spouse, and the
Savior of his people, why should we then be discouraged or disquieted?

Secondly, as it is a ground of comfort against all opposition and troubles of
the world, so it is a ground of comfort to stay our souls against the
fierceness of all temptations, whereby Satan labors to pluck us from the
Lord Jesus Christ; and our hearts sink within us, and we shall (we say) one
day perish by the hands of Saul, by the hand of the enemy attempting, and
corruptions prevailing; clear your hearts and know, though temptations may
outbid your weaknesses, and corruptions may outbid your abilities, and when you
would do good, evil is present with you, and sin cleaves and sticks close
to you: why cheer your hearts with this consideration, that you have Christ
that sticks closer to you than your sins; and this should cheer up weak and
feeble ones: I know what troubles you, were I as strong as such a christian,
had I such parts, and such strength of faith; and shall such a poor little one
as I am, bear the brunt of persecution, and endure in the time of perplexity:
Why consider though thou can not help thy self, yet Christ can: and know
this that Christ will not lose the least member, he is a perfect Savior: the
Lord will not suffer Satan to take thee away from him, nor suffer his love to
be taken from thee: Romans 8. the two last verses, it was the triumph of the
holy Apostle Paul; I am persuaded (says he) that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come;
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which it in Christ Jesus our Lord: when health is
separated from thy body, and light from thy eyes, and strength from thy feeble
nature, yet remember, that when thy body is separated from thy soul, the Lord
will not separated his love from thee, neither from thy body in the grave, nor
from thy (...) it is departed out of thy body, he will love thy body in the
grave, he loves the dust of his Saints, and he will take thy soul up into
heaven; therefore cheer up thy heart, and comfort thy soul in the
consideration of Gods goodness.

Walk worthy of the calling whereunto the Lord has called you; are ye the
members of Christ? why then behave your selves as the members of Christ; are
you joined thou nearly to Christ? then carry your selves as beseemes you; let
the dog return to his vomit, and the sow to the wallowing in the mire; but let
the Saints that are knit unto a Savior, walk worthy of that mercy, and
union, and prerogative that God has vouchsafed unto them; it is a shame to
see, that servants of Christ's family, and the plants of his vineyard do walk
after the conversation of the world: what manner of persons ought we to be in
all manner of holiness of conversation? we are knit unto Christ, and therefore
ought to be holy, as he is holy; pure, as he is pure: we ought to do nothing,
but that which may beseem and content a Savior; but ye will say, the world
will hold up their hands at us, and their mouths will be open against us; why
God hates the world, and ye are redeemed from the world, ye are called out of
the world, therefore live not as if ye were in the world, but as God has
called you to live with himself in heaven, your conversation should be such,
as if ye were in heaven: I would not have a Saint of God tamper with the least
distemper, or be addicted to any base course, but walk exactly before the Lord.

Thus we see a faithful soul is knit unto Christ: now that which follows is
this; it is so knit, that it is made one Spirit.

The point we named before, it is this:



The point is difficult, and the mystery great, and beyond the reach and room
of that little light I enjoy, only we shall be desirous with sobriety and
modesty to communicate what shall be most suitable to the mind of God; not
being unwilling, but desirous to hear any advice from another concerning the
same: the doctrine then is; a believer is so knit to Christ, that he becomes
one Spirit: for the opening whereof, because it is a deep mystery, suffer me
to deal plainly and punctually, and that I may express my thoughts, and
communicate what I conceive, suffer me to discover two particulars:

First, the manner how the soul comes to be one Spirit with Christ.

Secondly, the order thereof.

These two we will labor to clear so far as we are able:

First for the former: the manner how the soule^ com(...) be one Spirit with
Christ, it is an undeniable principle, and confessed by Divines on all parts,
that the soul comes to be one Spirit, by the power of the Spirit on Gods part,
and by the power of faith on the believers part; they confess that the Spirit
of God works upon a believer, and the believer goes out again to God by
faith: but we have now only the terms in the general, if we come to the
particular examining of these and ask a weak soul how the soul comes to be
one Spirt, by the Spirit on Gods part, and by faith on our part, we are as far
to seek as we were before, and most of the congregation can understand little
of it. This is our misery, we content our selves with terms in the general,
and never crack the shell that we may see the kernel: we never dive into
the truth, that we may see the intent of the Spirit therein; therefore for the
opening of the point, viz. the manner how the soul coms so to be knit to
Christ, as to be made one Spirit: (not denying any thing of the former truth,
but holding thereto) we will open it so far as our light serves us.





general) but he does more specially accompany the precious promises of the
Gospel: the Spirit of the Lord is in these in a more special manner, though
he be a God every where in regard of his providence, yet he is in a more
special manner going with, and accompanying of his Word; and in a more
special and particular fort he is in the promises, the soul comes to be one
with Christ, and to be knit unto him principally by the promise; the law
prepares the soul, and the promise that calls the soul, and knits it unto
Christ; God has appointed his Word, and specially the promise for the
converting of a sinner; and therefore the Spirit of God goes therewith, and
works thereby, and gives a blessing thereunto, according as he in his
wisdom thinks fit: for he is a voluntary agent, and therefore may use the
word as he will, and when he will; the Spirit does always work in the word,
but not always after the same manner. You make nothing of the Gospel, and of
the Scripture; I tell you the Spirit of the Lord God, blessed for ever, is
there after an extraordinary manner, and hardens the hearts of the reprobates,
and humbles, and converts and comforts the souls of his servants: and when?
not when I will, or you will, but when the Spirit of the Lord will. This is
that I take to be the best expression of it; look as it was with the brazen
Serpent set up in the wilderness, there was an healing virtue inseperably
accompanying of that brazen Serpent; and it was as possible that hardness should
be separated from the brass, as his healing virtue: for whosoever looked upon
it, healing virtue did undoubtedly and inseparably go with it, because God had
appointed this; therefore he did bless this, and undoubtedly work by this:
Just so it is with the good Word of the Lord; the Spirit of the Lord, though he
be God every where, yet he does bless this Word especially, and goes with it,
and has appointed it for the salvation of his servants: therefore when the
sound comes to the ear, and the sense to the mind, the Spirit goes with the
Word when thou hear it, either to convert thee, or to confound thee:
therefore the text says, ye stiff necked and hard hearted, ye have resisted
the Spirit of the Lord: they would have plucked Christ out of Heaven, and the
Spirit and all. Now that this is a case undeniable, I prove it thus: that word
which is able to discover the thoughts of the heart, and to raise the dead to
life, and can comfort a distressed soul, and persuade the soul of Gods
everlasting favor, that word must needs have a supernatural power go with
it, for no created power can do the former things: the Word tells the deep
things of God, the Word says, I am sanctified, therefore I am justified,
therefore called, therefore elected: the Word reveals these deep things of
God, therefore the spirit must needs go inseparably with it: this is an
undoubted conclusion.

with and accompanying of the promise of grace and salvation; it does therein
and thereby leave a supernatural dint and power, and a spiritual and
overpowring virtue upon the soul, and thereby carries it, and brings it unto
Christ, and there lies a great weight, and observe it: The principal and
efficient cause in the work of the soul, to bring it to believing, it is not
so much any thing in the soul, as a spiritual assisting, and moving, and
working upon the soul; by virtue of which working and motion it is moved and
carried to the Lord Jesus Christ, as thus: the spirit let in a power to stir
hope, and it is stirred and moved; it lets in a power to quicken desire, and it
goes; it lets in a power to kindle love, and it flames; it lets in a power to
persuade the will, and it takes and chooses: the Spirit moves upon these
faculties, and by virtue thereof they are moved, and carried to the Lord:
therefore I conceive the maine principal cause of faith is rather an assisting
power working upon, than any inward principal put into the soul to work of
it self, but the work is upon the soul: the soul by that power and
assistance is conveyed and carried home to Christ: observe it, I will express
it in several passages, because here lies the difficulty of the point.

Then know that the Spirit of God does in the first stroke of faith, as the
Spirit of God did upon the waters: Genesis 1.2. the text says, there (...)
confused lump, and the Spirit moved upon the (...) and set upon that confused
lump, fas^^^ (...) the creature out thereof: so it is with the Siprit, (and
when I speak of the Spirit, I intend the promise too) the Spirit in the
promise meeting with an humbled soul now abased, and staggering and
quarrelling with himself, he is in a confused estate, he knows not what to
make of himself, nor of his confused condition: now the good Spirit of the
Lord moves upon the soul, and leaves a spiritual dint and supernatural work
upon it; and the soul by virtue thereof is carried, and fitted, and fashioned
to go to Christ: this I take to be the meaning of that place, Acts 26, 18.
Saint Paul was sent to turn men from darkness to light: Now it is a
confession amongst all Protestant Divines, that the first stroke of the Spirit
is upon the soul: there is nothing in the soul that can drive sin from the
soul, and pluck the soul from sin; but the Spirit works this, and the
soul takes this blow, and by virtue of that Spirit, the soul is pulled from
corruption, and turned from sin: this is a confessed truth, that the first
stroke in conversion is not from any thing within the soul, but it is from the
Spirit; nay the same stroke does two things; it turns from darkness to light:
the same hand, and the same stroke does both these; as for example, when you
tear one thing from another, as you rear it from the other, you pull it to
your self: he that pulls a bough from a tree, as he pulls it from the tree, he
pluckes it to himself: so the same Spirit that works upon the soul in
calling it from sin, it does work upon the soul in drawing it to Christ: it
pulls off hope from the world, and makes it expect a Christ; it pulls off
desire from the world, and makes it long for Christ; it pulls off love from the
world, and makes it entertain a Christ; it pulls off the will from the world,
and makes it choose a Christ; so that one stroke does both, and it is plain,
therefore the work of the Spirit upon the soul must bring it unto Christ. The
like phrase we have, John 15.19. I have called you out of the world, therefore
the world hates you: so that it is there the same voice, the same spirit that
calls a man from sin; as that is not the way, thou poor sinner, the way of
pride and idleness, etc. that is not the way to Heaven. Now that call as it
pulls the soul from sin, so that motion and moving, and supernatural work
that it leaves upon the soul, the soul thereby being moved and drawn, it is
coming to the Lord: the soul has not so much the work of the Spirit of
grane in him, as the work of the spirit of grace working upon him, to draw him
from evil, and to turn him to the Lord; and by virtue of the same work he
is drawn from the one, and brought to the other: this I conceive to be the
great difference between the union that Adam had with God, and that which the
faithful have. Adam had a stock in his own hand, God made him wise, and
holy, and righteous; this was his stock, he had a principle within himself,
either to hang upon God, and so to be sustained, or to slide and withdraw
himself from God: he had power either to hold, or to let go: he had the
staff in his own hand, he might turn unto God, and close with the command if
he would, or he might depart from God, and withdraw himself from the
assistance which he lent him as he did: but now here is a maine difference in
the bringing of the heart home to Christ in this union, because the first
stroke that draws the soul, and brings the soul to Christ, is not from any
thing within, so much as from the spirit without: the hand of Christ it lays
hold upon the heart, and works upon the heart, and brings him home to
himself; this first stroke is from without, we do believe being framed
thereunto, and drawn by the Spirit of the Father; the everlasting arm of the
Lord that appears in the Gospel, he lets it down, and works upon the
soul, and brings the heart to himself, and so the heart is brought to Christ,
not from any Principle first in it self, but by the Spirit that works upon
it: when the Word of God comes to the soul, the Spirit of God accompanies that
Word, and pulls the earthly mind from earthlinesse, and the unclean heart from
his lusts, and says, Come out, thou poor soul, this is the way to a Christ
that will pardon thee, this is the way to a Christ that will purge thee; so
that my soul moves, but it is because it is moved; my will closes, but it is
because it is persuaded: so that the first stroke of this union is not from my
self, but it comes from Christ; the hand of the Spirit lays hold on me, and
draws me to him: hence in the third place, the union draws somewhat nearer;
so that we see, first there is a holy Ghost in the promise, and secondly, we
see that the Holy Ghost leaves a supernatural work upon the soul, and brings
it home to Christ.

Philippians 3.12. Paul says, that he was apprehended of Christ, as if he
should say, I was not so much apprehending, as apprehended: not so much that he
did it, but Christ in him, and upon him, and by him; for I told you the work
of the Lord in the work of conversion, is upon us, by us, to bring us to
himself. The Spirit of the Lord is in heaven, and it is in the promise, and
that Spirit in the promise comes to the soul of a believer, and leaves a
spiritual work upon the soul of a believer, and the soul is moved by virtue
of that Spirit, to close with that promise, and with that Spirit that is in the
promise: I would express my self by these two comparisons; look as it is
with the moon, the natural Philosopher observes, that the ebbing and flowing
of the sea, is by virtue of the moon, she flings her beams into the sea, and
not being able to exhale as the sun does, she leaves them there, and goes
away, and that draws them, and when they grow wet, they return back again;
now the sea ebs and flows not from any principle in it self, but by virtue of
the moon, being moved, it goes, being drawn, it comes; the moon casting her
beams upon the waters, it moves the sea, and so draws it self unto it self,
and the sea with it: so the heart of a poor creature, is like the water,
unable to move toward heaven, but the Spirit of the Lord does bring in its
beams, and leaves a supernatural virtue by them upon the soul, and thereby
draws it to it self: or look as it is with a claspe and a keeper; take a
great claspe, put it through the keeper, and being brought through, it closes
with it self: so it is with an humble broken heart, it is like this keeper,
the good Spirit of the Lord is like this claspe, the Spirit works upon the
soul, and leaves a supernatural virtue upon the soul, and goes with that
virtue, and pulls the soul by the power of it self, and knits it to its self,
it works upon the heart in this manner, and clasps the humbled sinner, and
brings him home, and holds him to the promise, and to it self in the promise.

Now I would contract these three conclusions, in the former sermons, into
three questions, to make them so familiar, that weak ones, which have any
spiritual grace, may be able to come to aprehend and understand them:







To as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God,
1 John 12. the words are but only as the conduit to convey the water of life,
and the Spirit of grace, but they lay hold upon Christ there, and that it is
so, I prove it thus, did not you find your hearts comforted at such a time? Oh
yes, says the soul, me thinks I see the Ministers face still, and when he
came to such a point and such a passage, good Lord, me thought I was in
heaven; could words, and reasons, and sentences have done it? No surely, the
Spirit of grace was there, and my heart did close with the same: the stomach
receives not meat, as the dish or vessel does, but the stomach does receive
it, and is fastened to it, and has the sweetness of it, and is made one with
it: John 6.63. The words that I speak, they are Spirit and life; and this is
the excellency of the Word, when all the learned Doctors and Schoolemasters
shall have the tongues, but shall never humble one soul, nor purge nor convert
one heart, yet the Word and the Spirit in it, will do that which is useful
and helpful for thee in this kind; the Words that I speak, they are Spirit,
and they are life, says our Savior; so then you see, you that are ignorant
and weak, you say to your self, how shall I come to be knit to the Lord Jesus
Christ, seeing he is in heaven, and I am on earth? Oh but quiet thy self in
this, he is in a most special manner in the preaching of the Word, and if thou
cleavest to the Word aright, then thou cleavest to the Spirit of Christ.



or is nature, or your wits, or parts able to do this for you? No, the good
Spirit of the Lord wrought upon, and fitted, and framed the hear^ hereunto, and
put this temper upon it, as the workman gives a temper to the knife, and
another makes iron draw iron; and he does it thus, he draws the magnet or
lodestone over the iron, and the virtue thereof makes it able to draw iron to
it self; so the soul says, Alas, I do it not, it was the Lord that wrought
this heart in me, I have seen the day, when I could have been as well
content to hear the Minister preach plainly, as to have a knife run to my
heart, but the Lord wrought my heart to it, therefore the Spirit puts that
magnet stone of the mercy and grace of Christ upon my heart, he puts this
temper upon my heart, and makes it able to close with it self in the promise:
in 2 Corin. 5.5. when Paul there had disputed of his desire to lay down his
life for the Gospel, and to put his body upon suffering for the Gospels sake,
he was even weary of the world, and would feign have been gone, how gat he
this temper? why? the text says, Now he that has wrought us for the same
thing if God, who also has given us the earnest of his Spirit; it is a great
while before we can be brought to this temper, when all the Ministers tongues
are even worn to the stumps, and the wicked will be wicked still, yet the
Lord does work it: so then you see, that the Spirit of God by the promise
works upon the soul, and leaves a dint upon the heart, and so brings the soul
by the Spirit to close with it self in the promise, and hence you may collect
two things for your information in this kind:

John 1.3. These things have I written unto you, that you may have fellowship
with us; holy John was a spiritual father unto them, and he writes to them,
that thereby they might have fellowship with the Saints, and he says, Truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; why does he
not say, our fellowship is with the Father, as well, as to say, our fellowship
is with the Father and the Son? because it is presumed before hand, that a
man must have fellowship with the Spirit, before he can have fellowship with
the Father and the Son; because it is the Spirit that has fitted the heart,
and framed it, to close with both.

the members thereof, as the foot is knit to the leg, and the leg to the thigh,
and the thigh to the body, and so to the head, this is the (meaning of that
phrase, John 6.56. our Savior presses this hard upon the Disciples, and
says, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, he that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and in him; then they begun to
wonder at it, and to say, How can this be? and yet Christ says, what if you
see the the Son of man carrying the body of his flesh into heaven, you will
think it more hard to eat my flesh then, yet you must eat my flesh then too;
how? it is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words
that I speak, they are Spirit and life; as if he had said, my good Spirit is in
the word and promise, close you with my Spirit, and then you draw my Spirit, my
flesh and my blood down into your whole natures; the words that I speak, they
are Spirit and Life; that is, my Spirit is in the Word of the promise, though
my body be gone up into heaven; therefore close you with my Spirit in the
promise, and then you close with my flesh spiritually. Thus much for the manner
of the union.

Now for the order of this union how this is done, and there the question will
be this.

Whether the believer is knit first to the humane nature of Christ, or to the
Divine nature. Quest. 2
I am not greatly willing to meddle with this point in this popular
congregation, because there are many wise and orthodox Divines, and godly too,
which are of contrary opinion; they confess both, but they differ about the
order: but that I may bring no prejudice to the judgment of any, I will
shortly show you the sum of those arguments, Answ.
which either side hold, and will show to which I do incline, and so leave the
point to the judgment of those that hear it, to incline to which side they
think best, and thus I shall wrong none at all.

First, some Divines, wise, holy, and orthodox, and many too, do go that way;
all of them have it from that root: they that hold that the soul is knit to
the humane nature of Christ first, have two reasons for it.

The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, and such like: therefore
the understanding first closes with this, and the heart first receives it: the
second reason why they hold this is thus much.

says, He died for our sins, and triumphed over sin, and hell, and death:
therefore, say they, it is fit that the soul should first close with the
humane nature of Christ; and this is the life and pith of all their arguments.

Again, other Divines, and they are wise and orthodox, they hold this; and
though all hold the maine substantial truths of eternal life, yet they differ
in this, they say the believer is first knit to the Deity, and they have also
two arguments, and the first is this:

Esaias 50.10. Who so is wise amongst you, that fears the Lord, that obeys
the voice of his servant; he that walks in darkness and has no light, let
him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God; all the
phrase of Scripture runs thus: Trust, and hope, and rely upon the Lord. So John
14.1, 2. verse. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe
also in me: mark this Now did a man believe upon the Father, as Father only,
then he did not believe upon the Son; or did he believe only upon the
Son, as Son, then he did not believe upon the Father, but in that he
believes upon the Father and the Son: It is therefore plain that he falls
first upon the Godhead; and seeing it is so that we must believe upon the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; therefore we are not to believe upon one of them
only, but upon the whole Deity and the divine nature, and all the three Persons
in the divine nature: for as the Schoolmen say, that which does appertain to
this, as this, belongs to this and to none other. Now we believe in all the
whole Trinity, and therefore we close with all three, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: and hence it is that these Divines observe, that when we are said
to believe in the Scriptures, and in the promise (not that any do it properly)
but so far as the promise that God in Christ, revealing, and promising, and
communicating himself: so far we believe in the promise, that is, in his
faithfulness, truth and mercy, revealed in the promise.

nature, and gives power to the humane nature, and makes it able to suffer and
to satisfy, faith sees that he has offended an infinite God, and deserved
punishment of an infinite value; therefore he must repair to him that can
only repair in mercy to his soul: therefore says the Prophet David, Psalm
130.7. verse, Hope in the Lord for ever, for with the Lord is plenteous
redemption: and in Esaias 26.4. Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah, is everlasting strength; we have everlasting miseries, and troubles,
and distempers, but with the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, therefore
trust in him for ever: nay hence it is that our Savior says, John 17.3. This
is life eternal, that they know thee to be the very God, and whom thou have
sent even Iesou Christ.

mention him often as man, yet it is as true they reveal him to be God, and
mention his Godhead, not mentioning at all his humanity; but whenever they
do mention his humanity, firstly, it is for good reason, partly by way of
prophecy to foretell of Christ, what he should be, and partly by way of story
and relation to relate of Christ what he was; yet this reason inferres not that
faith must therefore firstly lay hold upon the humanity before the deity; but
when the Lord is pleased to reveal Jesus Christ to the soul in the way of
conversion, then we must apprehend Christ, as God and Man in the point of
conversion, and then let the question be this: whither the soul shall go for
that which it wants? Now I see no reason why the soul should firstly go to
the humanity for what it wants and seeks: hence it is that when the Scripture
comes to speak in the way of conversion, the Godhead is set first: as in the 2
Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself; as God in
Christ reconciles the world unto himself; so God reveals himself to his
faithful Ministers, and so they reveal him to the people; it was the Godhead
that was offended, and must first of all be pleased, and unto that God we must
first go for what we want; so Jeremy 33.16. In those days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall be saved, and this is the Name whereby they shall call
him the Lord our righteousness: so said the Angel, they shall call his Name
Emanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us: this is to the first reason;
now to the second argument I answer thus; If it be good in reason that we
must first go to the humane nature for these reasons propounded, and if this
be sufficient to call my faith that way; because all the great works are
wrought that way; then much more seeing the humane nature was enabled to the
work by the divine nature; therefore my faith must first look that way,
because the weight of the work lies upon the Deity; the humane nature cannot
assume to take to it self this glory, not be any way available to satisfy
divine justice, but that the Deity enabled it, and therefore faith must first
of all look unto that. Thus it is confessed that the soul of a believer is
advanced to a mavelous high privilege; now the use of it is referred to these
three heads.

should entertain a friend into his family, or the King into his house, or a
woman to entertain a loving husband in matrimony with her, all base dealing by
any of these a man can hardly brook it; It was one of my own subjects, says
the King; it was my wife, says the husband, and it was my friend, as David
says, that did eat at my table; but now to entertain a professed enemy, or a
traitor into the bedchamber with the King, and to lodge them both in one bed,
this were abominable; and so the wife not only to entertain a whoremonger
into the house, but also to lodge him in the same bed, this were not to be
endured: Oh how his blood would rise against it, as the King said of Haman,
Hester 7.8. What, will he force the Queen before my face? Now therefore,
brethren, go home to your own souls and behaviors in particular: do thou
through Gods grace and mercy receive this favor at the hands of God, that thou
art become one Spirit with the Lord Jesus Christ, and will thou then receive a
company of base lusts, and that in the very face and sight of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and lodge an unclean spirit, with the clean Spirit of the Lord? the
holy God cannot endure this, nay, he will not bear it at the hands of those
that belong to the election of grace: 1 Samuel 2.17. The sons of Ely were great
sinners before the Lord, says the text, and why? because they waited upon the
Lord, to do the work of the Sanctuary; for where the ordinances of the Lord
are, there is God himself: therefore Cain in the apprehension hereof, said, I
am cast out from the presence of the Lord, that is, from the powerful beauty
of the Lord in his ordinances. Now because they were the Priests and Leaders,
and they were greater sinners, they would outbrave the Lord with their sins,
and commit them in the sight of God, therefore their sin was the greater: as in
Ezechiel 8.3. The Lord brought the Prophet to behold the abominations of the
Elders of Israel, he brought him into a secret place, and showed him the image
of jealousy, which provoked to jealousy, they did it in the sight of the Sun
to provoke him to anger, therefore it is called the image of jealousy; as if
he had said, Let your idols go to the land of Vrre, but will you dare to set
up idols in the sight of God, to provoke him to jealousy. I beseech you apply
this to your selves; are not we Priests, and the very Spouse of Christ, and
not only the outward Sanctuary, but the Temple of the Lord it self is with
us; as the Apostle says, Ye are the temples of the living God: Now will thou
set up an idol lust, and an idolatrous self seeking heart, and set it up by
the Lord Jesus Christ ^ this is a horrible crying sin, and it provokes the Lord
mavelous fiercely: it was the collection which the Apostle made a little
before the text, in 1 Cor. ^. where he says, speaking concerning adultery and
fornication, he comes with a glr^ and a gall to the hearts of believers,
saying, What, shall I take the members of Christ and make them the members of
an harlot? God forbid, that's careful: Do you not know that he which coupleth
himself to an harlot, is one body; shall I do thus? no, the Lord forbid; I am
near to Christ, let the members of Satan be made the members of a harlot, if
they will, but you that are the members of Christ, will you do so? Consider
it, will thou take the head of Christ, and contrive wickedness with it? and
will thou take the heart of Christ, and make it a cage of unclean lusts? and
will thou take the tongue of Christ, and make it speak wickedly? and will thou
take the foot of Christ, and make it run to all wickedness? what a fearful
thing is this? shall the unclean spirit be put to the clean spirit? shall the
motions of the Devil be here, and the motions of the good Spirit of the Lord
too? the Lord in mercy keep you off from this: Ephesians. 4.29. Let no filthy
communication come out of your mouth, why, what if there do? If there were no
greater sins than these, I hope I should do well enough: What says the
Apostle; A Christian, and a lier; a Christian, and a swearer; a Christian, and
a base vile wretch; Oh grieve not the good Spirit of God: why? because by it
ye are sealed up unto the day of redemption: the good Spirit of the Lord has
sealed you up unto redemption, and knit you unto him, and will you rend your
selves from him, and grieve him? if you were not sealed up, and if you had none
of the Spirit of Christ, it were no great matter: but now, Oh grieve not the
holy Spirit, if you do, you have no salvation by it; away to hell if you will
grieve the good Spirit of the Lord; if the Lord do bestow his Spirit upon
thee, will thou then grieve his good Spirit? how can thou, or how dare thou
do thus, and dishonor the Name of God, look that place, Matthew 12.44. When
the unclean spirit returns again to his rest, he finds it empty, swept
and garnished; then he takes to himself seven other spirits worse than
himself, and they enter in and dwell there; the end of that man is worse than
the beginning. It is well observed by one, that pride and idleness sweeps the
house for the devil; a proud heart which stays it self up upon its own
abilities, and so grows idle, and lazy, and secure; if it be a Minister, or
Magistrate, this makes clean work for the Devil, you cannot do this, but
you will grieve the good Spirit of the Lord: Now look to this, when a man
stays himself upon his parts, and gifts, he does little good: you sweep the
house for the Devil, whereas a watchful painful heart does wonderfully
please God; it is a good, and a pure, meek, and holy Spirit, which God accepts
of, therefore be thou so too: now you that are Christians, do not go away,
and think that you have warrant to be idle, and careless, take heed of such
cursed distempers of heart; if thou art a Christian, thou dare not do or
say, as others dare, for the sin of a Christian is abominable in the eyes of
God, because he is so nearly united to his blessed Spirit: this is the first
use of the point.

You know not of what Spirit you are, says Christ; look how the soul closes
with, and receives those that are most exact in a Christian course: if thy
heart be estranged from such as do walk exactly before God, either because he
has given them parts and gifts, or because he has made them humble and
faithful: if the Spirit of the Lord be in the Saints, then the Spirit of
malice and of the Devil is in thee; Gods Spirit closes with all the faithful
ones, but thy Spirit cannot close with them; when they are made one Spirit with
Christ, will thou be of two Spirits with them? then either Christ is to be
blamed, or else thou art to be condemned for this baseness of thine; either
Christ knows not how to choose a good Spirit, or else thou art a base vilde
spirit; this is the great sin of this last age of the world, men are lovers
of themselves, and not lovers of God, nor his grace nor Spirit: it is admirable
to see how every one that is wicked, finds favors in the world, but only
those that are holy, and gracious, and one spirit with Christ: a drunkard is no
man's enemy but his own; and with adulterers you can make matches, and if they
were murderers or thieves, we have a kind of lamentation for them; but when
it comes to a sincere soul, their hearts rise up against him, with a desperate
spleen, and they say, these are the holy brethren, why what are they? Oh,
says the Father, he is quite spoild, I had a son which I had some hopes of,
but now he is gone down the wind, and he will never be good for any thing;
and then says the drunkard, he was as good a companion as ever lived, and had
^s brave jests to make us merry withal, but now he is quite spoild, then thy
meaning is, that when he had an unclean spirit, thou did love him, but now
because he is come to have a near union with the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore
thou art estranged from him; then cursed be thy wrath, for it is fierce, and
thy rage, for it is cruel; if the Spirit of God be holy and good, to which he
is united, then thou art a vilde unholy wretch: I hope now you may know what
will become of such and such in the towns and places where you live, such I
mean as are holy and gracious, and yet are hated and despised; even those
poor creatures are glued to the Lord Christ, nay, they are holy spirited men,
which the Spirit of God delights in, therefore thy spirit is of Satan, that
thou do thus malice him; I confess a godly heart will have his sits and
excursions now and then, like an unruly colt, and may run wildly into sin;
this may befall a godly gracious heart, but all this while this is poison, and
the soul of a godly man sees this, and is weary of it, and is marvellously
burdened with it, and says, Oh vilde wretch that I am, what would I have? and
what is he that I cannot love him? is it because the good Spirit of the Lord is
there ^ shall I resist the good Spirit of the Lord? and so commit the sin
against the holy Ghost? away thou vilde wretched heart, I will love him; thus
the soul labors and strives for that exactness, and would feign have that
goodness which he sees in other: it is in this thing, as it is in a man's
meat, he that has an unwholesome stomach, and sees that the meat is good, and
known not but that he may eat it, he will not blame the meat, if he be ill
after it, but his stomach; but there are some that love to be cating lome
walls, and such trash as is naught for them, for the stomach is vilde within,
and would have as bad as himself: so out of the pride of nature and
self-confidence these distempers will be rising in us, but a gracious soul is
even sick at the heart, and weary of his life, and he is never well, until he
has gotten a purge; but he that has the disease, and is sick of hatred and
malice, look how his heart is, so is his tongue, and as his heart is, so is
his carriage: Oh poor wretched creature, what God may do for him, I know not,
but for the present he has the spirit of the Devil in him; he is no man but a
toad that can live of poison, and make a meal of it, and yet his heart never
be affected with it.

are; but would you have a man of a good nature indeed? for as one says, he
that has no more than restraining grace, is no more than a tame Devil, but
would you have a friend of a good nature indeed? for this is the maine of all,
then choose such as are one with Christ, and remember that place, in 2 Peter
1.4. We are partakers of the divine nature; he that is one Spirit with Christ,
he is partaker of the divine nature, even the nature of God himself, the
Spirit of God, and the Spirit of meekness, and self-denial is in him;
therefore let thy heart be enlarged toward him, and join thou side with him
which is joined so nearly to the Lord: it was the old practice of those in
Zach. 8.22. when God shall honor the Jews, and make them glorious in
sanctification and holiness, and they shall go to market, and buy and do all
things holily, then shall ten men take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,
and shall say, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you;
would you not go with the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ? Yes, Oh then get
you to the Saints of God, and get them to your houses, and lay hold upon
gracious Christians, and say, I will live and converse with you, for the Spirit
of Christ is with you.

THE SOVLES BENEFIT FROM UNION WITH CHRIST.

By T. H.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
Black Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

THE SOVLES BENEFIT from Union with CHRIST.
1 CORIN. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.


HOw the soul of a sinner should be prepared for our Savior, and how also it
should be implanted into him, being called by the Spirit of God in vocation,
we have heretofore fully and largely discussed and concluded that point: then
we came to the second thing, which is the second part of this implanting or
ingrafting a sinner into the Lord Jesus Christ, and it is the growing to of a
sinner with our Savior, and that is accomplished and fully brought about by
two works: there are two parts of it, for it is not enough for the graft to be
put into the stock, but it must grow together with it, if ever there be any
conveyance of any sap, or any help and strength, which it may receive from the
same: so it is with the believing soul, faith does not only bring us unto
Christ, but it makes us grow together with Christ: and this growing is
discovered in two particulars;

The first is a spiritual union of the soul with our Savior, when the soul
comes to be united to, and made one with the Lord of life; that we have also
handled and concluded in the two last lectures.

Again, the second part that accomplisheth and makes up this growing together
with Christ, it is that heavenly communion that the soul does get with our
Savior, when the stock of the merits of our Savior, and the virtue of his
grace is communicated to the soul; for this we must remember, that these two
things make up the growing of the stock and the graft together:

First, there must be an union of the graft with the stock.

Secondly, there must be an intercourse or a communication of the sap in the
stock to the graft: so it is with Christ, what ever he has, he has for his
Church and people, and what ever he does, he does for his Church and servants;
so that there is a kind of conveyance of the virtue of his merits, and power
of his grace, unto the souls of those that believe in him, and are knit unto
him by a true and a lively faith: we have done with the (...) that the soul
has with Christ: we are now to speak of the heavenly and spiritual
communion, the intercourse between the Lord and the soul, when the soul is
married unto him; and this is that we aim at, this is that we look at at
this time; and this I must tell you by the way, that our purpose is not to
meddle with the particulars at this time, but only with the general nature of
the communion of the soul with Christ: now for the discovery of this work,
we have chosen the words of the text now read unto you, and the scope of the
words it is mainly this; to discover unto us the dowry and feofment of all
that spiritual grace that is conveyed and made sure to the believing soul,
being made one with the Lord Jesus: that look as it is with a man that has a
fair estate to himself, it is only his own, but when the wife is wooed, and
brought home, and married, he gives over the right of himself unto her, and if
he make over his estate unto her, she has title thereunto: this now is the
dowry of a Christian, the Lord Jesus Christ is no bad match, you must not
think you could have done better; it is a wonder, that ever our Savior would
take us to himself, or show favor to us, but the case is clear, if a
believer be called, and brought home to Christ, Christ is made to us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; Christ has all, and
whatsoever Christ has, it is all yours, you have title thereunto, and shall
receive sap and benefit therefrom, if you have hearts to take that good God
offers, and you may receive: we will not now meddle with the severals in the
verse, but these two things must be specially attended to in the words, that we
may make way for our selves in the point we have to trade withal;

First, take notice of the compass of that happiness and spiritual grace
which God vouchsafes unto his, and it is ranged into four heads: the text
says, Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption; all that Christ has or can communicate, all that the believing
soul can desire or want, may be referred to these four:

First, Wisdom, that is, the declaration of the way of God, and eternal
happiness, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, which all the policy of all
cunning men, and all subtle pates in the world could never pry into, that
wisdom which revealed the secret things, and the deep things of God; the Lord
Jesus is made that wisdom to the believing soul.

Secondly, Christ is made unto us righteousness, that is, whatsoever guilt
lies upon us, whatsoever sin has been committed by us, what ever
punishment we have deserved, Christ is made unto us righteousness, to acquit
us of all.

Thirdly, Christ is made unto us sanctification; the soul of a poor sinner is
defiled with many corruptions, and polluted with many distempers, now Christ is
made unto him sanctification, to purge and purify him from all those sins
and distempers.

Lastly, because while we wander up and down this vale of tears, and in this
pilgrimage of ours, we shall be oppressed with many evils, that will lie upon
us, and death it self, which is the last enemy, will seize upon us, and
captivate our bodies in the grave, therefore Christ is made unto us redemption,
he will take away all trouble, and wipe all tears from our eyes, nay, he will
break open the grave, and deliver his Saints from thence. The Heathen to make
the Saints of God sure in time of persecution, they first slew them, and then
they burnt their bodies to ashes, and then threw them into the water, and then
they said, Let us now see how they will rise again; alas, poor creatures,
why, the Lord loves the very dust, the very ashes of his Saints in the grave,
and the Lord will redeem our bodies from the grave, and our names from
dishonor, and our lives from trouble, and our souls from sin, and will set
us free from all miseries and inconveniences at the great day of account; these
are the four things, wherein the dowry and feofment of a believing soul
consists: I will not now trade in the particulars, but only in the general,
and show how that every believing soul, that rests upon Christ by faith, has
an interest in these.

The second thing considerable is this, to whom all these things belong, and
the text tells us, Christ is made all this to us; and the truth is, it is made
over to all believers, there is not one man exempted, not one man excluded,
every believing creature has a part and portion herein: however the holy
Apostle crowds in for a share, and if we look into the 26, 27, 28. verses,
we shall see to whom this belongs, Ye know your calling, brethren, how that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called,
but God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and
God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are
mighty; why then to you fools, why then to you weak things, Christ is made
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; to you poor
ones, to you weak ones Christ is made all this; nay, look into the 28. verse,
God has chosen the base things of the world, and the things that are despised;
nay, and the things that are not, to bring to naught the things that are; that
is to say, the offscouring of the world, the scrapings, as I may so say: look
as a man flings away the scrapings of things as nothing worth, why so the
parings of the world, you that are nothing in the esteem of the world, a
company of poor base simplicians; Christ is made wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption to them; in a word then be it known to
every believing creature, though he have not a strong faith, yet if he have but
a true faith, to you Christ is made all that mercy and grace, that the word
discovers, and the Lord has purchased, and you need.

Now add the last thing, the text says, Christ is made all this; the meaning
is, Christ is appointed, and set apart, and fitted by God the Father to this
purpose, to be wisdom and righteousness, and to the poor, and the base, and
despised, and to the things that are not, God has set him apart to this
purpose; as for the wise, and honorable, and mighty, they must shift for
themselves, and trust to their own strength and sufficiency; but you that are
poor and base, you that believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, he is made unto
you, all that the soul can want, or the heart desire; so that now then we have
done with the meaning of the words, and the opening thereof, so far as
serves our purpose, intending only to trade in the general, concerning the
communion of the graft with the stock; we have showed you, how the soul is
made one with the Lord Jesus, and how the soul is contracted to Christ; and
now we shall come to show the feofment that God has promised, and we shall
receive at his Majesty's hand.

we will add somewhat also by way of explication, to unfold the nature
thereof, that we may see what these invaluable treasures are: for the proof
of the point, one or two places will be sufficient to cast the case; Ephesians.
1.3. there Paul blesses God in Jesus Christ, that has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ; so that there are blessings
of three sorts, all blessings, all spiritual blessings, all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places, and all given freely, but it is in Christ, he is
the conduit that conveyeth this, and wherein the streams of life and grace
flow amain, to make glad the city of God, to make glad the Saints of God, and
the souls of those that believe in him; hence (it is remarkable Jude 2.) it is
called, Common salvation by Christ; and so Christ is said to be a common
Savior consequently, not common to all the world, that every beast may brouse
upon him, and sin, and have a Savior to save him, but he is common to all
the faithful, common to all believers: that look as it is in a common or
forest, every dweller, and every inhabitant upon the common has a share
therein, no man can challenge any part of the common peculiar to himself, and
say, This part is mine, and no man shall put any cattle here but I, but the
common is every man's that dwells thereupon, and the poorest man may put on his
cattle without control, and drive his cattle whither he list, on to the best
part thereof, and improve it to his best benefit, without contradiction: so
Christ is a common Savior, and the richest mercies, and the preciousest
promises, and the greatest grace and salvation that is in Christ Jesus, every
poor believing soul, thou art a commoner, and a borderer, and it is a common
salvation, there is a fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in,
thou may take any, and receive benefit from the greatest and preciousest
promises that the word reveals, or thou stand in need of; 1 Pet. 1.3. he
then says, that God through his divine power has given unto us all things
belonging to life and godliness, through the acknowledgement of him that has
called us to glory and virtue, what ever it is a man would have or can need,
belonging to life or godliness, he has given unto us all things through the
acknowledgement of him that has called us to glory and virtue; if thou can
rest upon Christ in believing, then God will give unto thee all things through
Christ, belonging to life and godliness; so then we have the proof of the
point, by the joint consent of several Scriptures: now we will add a word or
two by way of explication, that we may see the value of this dowry, that God
has promised, and will bestow upon those that love and fear his name: now for
the explication of the point, we will do these two things;

First, we will show you the tenure of this covenant, and how Christ conveyeth
these spiritual graces unto us.

Secondly, the reason why Christ is made so unto us, and why he will
communicate thus unto us.

We will first begin with the former, wherein lies the marrow and pith of the
point: we have said, that all blessings belonging to life and godliness, the
common salvation of Christ, belongs to all believers, but how shall we
perceive this? how is this conveyed to those that believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ? now the tenure of this conveyance discovers it self in several
particulars, there are five or six of them in number:

The first is this, there is fully enough in the Lord Jesus for every faithful
soul, that whatever grace, or whatever mercy he shall stand in need of or
want, there is no scarcity, there is no kind of scantnesse in the Lord Christ
this way; in all other graces in this world, in all temporal things, when any
estate is to be imparted, it is but in some particulars, either money must be
paid such a day, or land must be possessed when such a party dies, but there
was never any man could make such tenure, as if a man should make a feofment to
his wife, of long life, and peace, and grace, and salvation, it is in no man's
power to do this; some men have a great deal of good things in this world,
and many have little besides; and again, all men have not an all-sufficiencie
to supply and succor a man according to all his necessities; but here is the
excellency of this dowry, that whatever it is the soul wants or stands in
need of, the Lord has it in himself, and will communicate it to the soul for
his good; Colos. 2.3. this is that the Apostle implies, In whom, says he, are
all the treasures of wisdom and holiness; and mark the value and worth of
the phrase; he does not say, great su^mes of holiness, and wisdom, and
mercy, and the like, but the treasures, and not some treasures, but all: the
richest men in the world, that have the greatest estates and treasures, one
man's estate lies in lands, another man's lies in goods, another man's lies in
money, but no man has all treasures, but in Christ are all the treasures of
all mercy, and all compassion, of all grace and salvation, whatever is needful
for us, and may be beneficial to those that believe in him, and rest upon him
by a true and a lively faith; and however the soul may think this treasure
may be spent, and this fountain of mercy, and compassion drawn dry, and can
my sins be pardoned? and my corruptions subdued? Christ does prevent this
also; we may spend what we will, there is still enough to spend upon; Ephesians.
3.8. There are insearchable riches in Christ; as who should say, Thou know
no end, thou find no bottom of the vileness of thy heart, that does
pollute thee and defile thee, why there is no end of the riches of Christ, no
bottom of the Ocean sea of Gods mercy, that may comfort thee and releeve thee
upon all occasions; John 3.34. the text says, Christ received the Spirit above
measure, as if Christ would prevent the cavils of a poor creature, and pluck
up a discouraged heart; when the sinner thinks, my sins are out of measure
sinful, and my heart is out of measure hard; why think and remember, that in
Christ there is mercy out of measure merciful, and grace out of measure
powerful, there thou shall see bloody Manasses, idolatrous Manasses,
abominable Manasses, in the Lord Jesus he has received the pardon of all his
sins, and yet there is pardon enough for thee too: there thou shall see Paul
a persecutor, and the bloody jailer; there is that power in the Lord Jesus,
that crushed the pride of the heart of Paul, and that brake the heart of the
bloody jailer, that stood it out a long time, the earth shook, and the prison
shook, and the doors flew open, he stood still all this while, at last the
Lord made him shake and all, as well as the earth; why, and yet there is power
enough for thee too; in Christ there is fullness without measure, take you may
what you will, there is enough still for all; Ephesians. 1 last verse, the text
says, that Christ is the head of all his church, and the church is his body,
and what follows? even The fullness of him that fills all in all things,
that is, he fills all his servants with all that grace, and mercy, and
compassion they need, so that there is a fullness in the Lord Jesus, and there
is enough to supply all the wants of a believing creature, and to releeve him
in regard of all those necessities, that lie upon him; that is the first.

Secondly, as there is enough in Christ to supply all the wants of his Saints,
so in the second place Christ does supply unto them whatever is fitting for
them, there is enough for every Saint of God, and the Lord does supply whatever
is most fit for every man, whatever is most proportionable to the need of a
poor soul, and to the place and condition wherein God has set him; this is
the limits of Gods bounty, whatever may supply my need or fit my place, that
God has see me in and called me to, that God supplies and gives sufficient
grace and mercy, ans^erable thereunto; I will open the point at large, because
it is somewhat difficult; look as it is with a wise father that has a fair
estate, and has enough for his children, and those that depend upon him, and
is willing also to bestow abundantly upon them according to their occasions;
this is the wisdom of a wise father, he will stock his child according to the
calling wherein he is; so many hundreds will do no more than serve one man in
that place whereunto he is called, whereas so many scores happily will serve
another man; if one man has less, he cannot trade; if another man has more,
he cannot use it, he has more stock than he can employ; the merchant that
ventures far, has great employments, many thousands will scarce furnish him:
but a poor man, as a weaver, or a shoemaker, or the like, many thousands are
more than he can use in his trade: again, the wise father considers, if the
child be a spend-thrift and in debt, there is more required to set up him,
than him that is but now going into the world, or happily aforehand: so Christ as
a wise father deals with his faithful servants, there are many of Gods
faithful servants, which are advanced, some to greater places in the Church,
some in the commonwealth, some godly Magistrates, and religious Ministers; now
there is a great deal of wisdom required for a Magistrate that stands in the
face of the world, and in the mouth of the canon, to accomplish great things
for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; so a Minister, a little grace
which is sufficient to save a man's soul, is not enough for him to trade
withal; some again are leaders and commanders, as masters of families; some
again are able Christians, which are fit to be helpful unto others; again,
some are cast behind hand in a Christian course, who, before God opened their
eyes, and discovered their sins, and brought them home, they lived a riotous
course, those old arrerages of pride and loosnesse many years together, a man
is wonderful in debt in this manner; now to bring home such a sinner, and to
pardon such a sinner, and to sanctify such a soul, there is a great deal of
mercy required, and a great deal of grace required, there are many
proud-hearted, and many stout-hearted, as Beelzebub himself, that take up
arms against God himself, and stand in defiance against the Lord of hosts:
now answerable to their conditions and corruptions, answerable to their debts
and base courses, when God will bring such a creature home unto himself, he
has answerably strange blows for him; as it is said of Nebuchadnezer, the
Lord humbled him mightily; so when the Lord comes to meet with an old loose
adulterer, and an old base drunkard, and a sturdy persecutor as Paul was, an
ordinary stroke will not do the work, therefore as he had a great deal of
mercy for Paul, so he had a great deal to do before he could humble Paul,
he flung him off his horse, as he was posting to Damascus, and might have
broken his neck: again, men sometimes are driven to great trials and
straights, as when God calls men to great trials and sufferings; now God does
apply to every man, according to his estate and condition; he that God has set
as a commander in his Church, as a Minister to teach, and a Magistrate to rule,
and a master of a family, Gods fits graces unto them, according to their
estates, the Lord takes measure of a man's estate as it were, and suits him
proportionably with all graces necessary for his condition: again, they that
are meaner and poorer, they shall have wisdom, and sanctification, and
redemption, but answerable to their conditions; that is observable, Ephesians.
4.16. Paul there calling our Savior Christ the head of the Church, and his
faithful servants the members of this head, he says, By whom all the members
being knit together, according to their effectual working in their measure
they receive increase; as for example, in the body so much life and spirit, as
belongs to the finger is in the finger, but there is more in the arm than in
the finger, and more in the bulk of the body than in the arm, that which suits
with such a part, it has it, and that which suits with such a part, nature
bestows it, there is not so much in the finger, as in the hand, nor so much in
the hand, as in the arm, nor so much in the arm, as in the body, because it
is not suitable and proportionable; nature will not do it, God will not suffer
it: so some Christians are arms in the body of the Church, some fingers, some
legs; some are strong Christians, that bear up a great weight in profession,
stout, and strong, and resolute, and the like: now the Lord communicates all
grace and mercy suitable for every man's place and condition; thou that art a
finger, shall have so much grace as befits a finger; and thou that art an hand,
thou shall have so much grace as shall save thee, and is fit for thy place; but
another is an arm, and he shall have more, but all shall have that which is
fitting; therefore the text says, Christ is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; that look as a man that makes
a garment, he takes measure of the man for whom he makes it, and fits every
part according to the part of the body, the arm of the doublet is suitable to
the arm of the body, and so Christ is made righteousness and sanctification
to all poor believing creatures; thou art an arm in the body of Christ, he
is made so much wisdom and sanctification to thee, as will serve thy turn;
thou have had a great many sins, and have been a rioter and a roister before
God opened thine eyes, and brought thee home to himself: why, there is great
mercy in Christ suitable to thy sins, there is mercy in Christ to justify
thee, if thou have never so few sins, and there is mercy enough in Christ to
justify the greatest sinner, if he can but believe in the Lord Jesus Christ;
and this is the second passage in this article of agreement, in the tenure of
the conveyance of grace from Christ to the soul: the Lord has enough for all,
and he does communicate what is fit and proportionable to every man's estate and
condition.

The third thing is this, as the Lord does communicate what is fit, so he does
preserve what he does bestow and communicate, and give to the believing soul;
he does not give grace to the believing soul, and there leave him, and let
him manage his estate, but when he has wrought grace in the soul, he
preserves it, and nourishes his own work; Psalm. 16.5. there the Prophet
David says, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and he maintains my
lot; he does not only give him his lot, but he maintains his lot: it is a
comparison taken from the children of Israel, when they came into the land of
Canaan, it was divided to every tribe by lot; now God did not only bring them
into the land, and give them their lot, but he maintained that lot, he defended
them, and releeved them from the fury and rage of their adversaries, that went
about to take away that which God had bestowed upon them; now the Psalmist
says, The Lord is my portion, and he maintains my lot; every believing
soul has a lot and portion in Christ, so much grace, and holiness, and so
much assurance; now the Lord does not only give this, but when you are weak
and feeble, the Lord keeps your grace, and preserves your grace which he has
bestowed upon you; therefore Christ is said to be the preserver of his Church,
Jude 1. To you that are called, and sanctified, preserved by Jesus Christ;
Christ is not only the giver of grace, but he is the preserver of his Church,
and that is the meaning of that phrase, when our Savior had implanted grace in
the heart of Peter, he did not only plant it by his Spirit, but he watered it
by his prayers, that it might not wither away, I have prayed, that thy faith
fail not, he did not only give him faith, that was not enough, but he watered
his faith by his prayers, that it might not wither, and dye, and decay; 1 Pet.
1.4. hence it is said, that he preserves us by the power of God through faith
unto salvation; and faith keeps the soul, and Christ keeps faith, faith is the
hand that lays hold upon Christ, and Christ lays hold upon faith, and we
have a kingdom preserved for us, and he preserves us for it, and this is the
pith of that phrase, Psalm. 1. the text says, The righteous man is like the
tree planted by the rivers side, that brings forth fruit in due season, whose
leaf shall not fade; he does not say, his sap shall not wither, but his leaf
shall not wither, not only that gracious disposition of heart which is wrought
shall never decay in the Saints of God, but a zealous profession shall never
decay in conclusion; how ever a tree be nipt with the cold and frost, yet in
conclusion it will bud forth again: so the sap of grace that Christ works in
us, and conveyeth to us, being planted by the fountain of the Lord Jesus in
the midst of persecution and fiery trial, they shall grow humble, and meek,
and holy in despite of what can befall them, for a Christian is not conquered
when he loses his life, but when he loses his grace; as take a man that is
led into captivity, into Turkey, into Algeir, or the like, the aim of him
that takes him, is not to take away his life, but to make him deny his colors
and commander, and if he can make him do this, then he conquers him, but if
he dye under the hand of the tyrant, if he be more able to stand for his
commander and country, than he is to drive him from it, if he can bear misery
better than he can inflict it, then he is not conquered, but conquers; so it
is here, a Saint of God is never mastered, before his patience be mastered,
and his holiness crushed; but when a man is more able to bear misery, than
the enemy to lay misery upon him, if his patience hold, and his courage hold,
and his uprightness hold, he is not conquered in this case, but he is a
conqueror: therefore the place is excellent, Esaias 58.8. see how the Lord
preserves his people, he is said to be the whole army of his servants,
(however there be many storms, yet the rivers of water make glad the people of
God) the text says, Thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of
the Lord shall be thy rearward; (when a man does walk uprightly and sincerly,
we must presume, that a man is in a combat, for why does he speak of the
rearward else) there are two parts in a battle; first, the vant-gard, which is
the former part of the battle; Secondly, the rear- ward, which is the hinder
part of the battle; now Christ is both these, you shall have enemies before
you in the vant-gard, and you shall have enemies behind you to smite you in
the rear-ward, now righteousness shall go before thee, that is the vant-gard;
and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rear-ward, that is, God is all about his
servants, the vant-gard before them to succor them, and the rear-ward behind
them to releeve them; so that he does not only give grace, but he maintains
and preserves that grace he gives to the souls of his servants.

The fourth part of the tenure and conveyance of grace to the faithful soul
is this (and I speak but only in the general) the Lord does not only
preserve what grace he gives, but he quickens that grace he maintains, he
draws forth that ability he bestows, he puts life unto that strength and
succor which he vouchsafes to work in the hearts of his children; hence all
those places are mavelous pregnant, God gives the will and the deed, so that
it is not only the having, but the doing, that we have need of from God; and
Paul professes, that he has not only grace from Christ, but he lives not,
but Christ lives in him, if Christ did all in him, and this is that we shall
observe, Luke 1.74. That he would grant us, says the text, that being
redeemed from the hand of our enemies, we might serve him without fear; take
notice of two things here, First, that the Saints of God are redeemed and
justified by Christ, and now one would think a man that is justified, and has
Christ, ^ght trade for himself, no, but that he would grant us, that being
redeemed from the hand of our enemies, we might serve him without fear, it is
one grant to be redeemed, and it is a new grant to serve him without fear; as
it is a mercy for God to bestow ability before we have it, so it is a mercy
to quicken that ability which he vouchsafes, that we may honor him by it,
and he may honor himself by us; therefore it is a most pregnant place, Colos.
1. last verse, when Paul was there laboring what he could, yet as though he
had nothing, as though he did nothing, he gives all to God; for mark the
manner of the sense of the words, Whereunto, says he, I also labor and
strive; (the word in the original signifies, I sweat at it, and take great
pains) according to his working, which works in me mightily; Paul labored
and strived; but how comes this about? his striving is by the working of
Christ, and by his working he works; as who should say, It is grace I have any
grace, it is he assisting, it is he cooperating, it is he accompanying, (I
know not what to say) it is his work works, and he works mightily in them
that work and strive to advance the glory of God: so then we have those four
particulars, that in reason almost might satisfy any man; what you want,
Christ has; what is fit, Christ will bestow; if you cannot keep it, he will
preserve it for you; if you be sluggish, he will quicken it in you; what
would you have more? one would think this were enough, but that nothing might
be wanting, take a passage or two more.

Fifthly, therefore as he quickens what he maintains, so he perfects what he
quickens, he does not only enable us to do what we should, but he makes us
make work of it, and he brings to perfection what he bestows, Heb. 12.23.
there the text speaks of the spirits of just and perfect men, he begins the
work, and never leaves, till he makes the work perfect; it is Christ that
puts a man's weapons into his hands, it is Christ that teaches him to fight
with those weapons, and it is Christ that gives him the victory in that fight;
1 Corin. 15.55. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but blessed be
God, that has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; the weapons are
Christ's, and the fight is Christ's, and the victory is Christ's; he will not
only bring you into the field, and put weapons into your hands, but give you
the victory and all: you Saints of God that sink under the fierceness of
temptations without, and corruptions within, he will give you grace, he will
give you weapons, and you shall triumph over all your enemies; therefore Ephesians.
4.13. it is said, He will bring his body to a perfect stature; all the Saints
of God are compared to members, now look as it is in the body, every member
does increase, according to its measure, till it come to its full bigness; so
it is in the body of Christ, all the members thereof shall increase, till they
come to be perfect: has God given thee a heart to look toward Zion? and have
thou any intimation of his love? then though the word and means may fail, he
will provide help and means, he will never leave thee, till thou art a perfect
man and woman, till thou have attained to be a perfect member in the body of
the Lord Jesus Christ: there is no withered bow in this stock of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but as he gives grace, so he will bring it to perfection in its
measure, God will never leave thee till he has brought thee to that
perfection he has appointed: now a man would think here were enough, but yet a
little further, and then I am as far as I can go, my thoughts can reach no
higher.

Sixthly, then when the Lord has perfected that grace he has bestowed upon
us, then when a man comes to the end of his days, he crowns all the grace he
has perfected; it were enough, and a childs portion to give us grace, and
vouchsafe us mercy, but when we come in heaven, when he has given us weapons,
and taught us to fight, and made us conquerors, then he will crown us, and is
not this enough? but so it is, 2 Timothy 4.6. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of glory, and
not for me only, but for all those that love the appearing of his coming; he
makes us work, and he rewards us for what he has wrought in us; he inables
us to do the service, and he pays us our wages: in the second commandment,
the text says, I will show mercy to thousands of generations, in them that
love me; one would think now, that they which loved God deserved mercy, no, I
will show mercy, what you do, it is all from Gods mercy, if you love God, it
is mercy, and if God crown that mercy, it is love also; so Paul says, The
Lord show mercy to Onesiphorus, for he releeved me; one would think that
this would have merited everlasting life; no, the Lord show mercy, he has
refreshed me in my trouble, and done service of love to me, and glory to God,
now the Lord show mercy to him; so that the Lord gives us grace, and he crowns
that grace he gives, he makes us work, and he rewards the work, he gives
us the victory, and he makes us triumph, and be more than conquerors; thus then
we have the tenure of this conveyance: and now I may read your feofment to you,
you poor Saints of God, you live beggarly and basely here, yet this is the
best match that ever you made in the world, you are made for ever, if you have
a Savior, it is that which will maintain you, not only Christianly, but
triumphantly; you shall have enough here, and too much hereafter, if too much
can be conceived or received; what you want Christ has, you need not go a
begging to other men's doors; Secondly, you need not think he is churlish and
unkind, but whatsoever you need, and is fit for you, he will give you, but you
must not be malepart and saucy with the Lord Jesus, and say, Why have not I
this as well as others? no, you shall have what is fitting; Thirdly, he will
maintain what he gives; and fourthly, he will quicken what he maintains; and
fifthly, he will perfect what he quickens; and lastly, he will crown that he
perfects, he will give you an immortal crown of glory. We have read now the
feofment of a faithful soul, and you see what you shall have from the hand of
the Lord Jesus, we should now come to the reasons of the point, but that time
will prevent us, and we have had the pith of the point already, in opening the
tenure of the conveyance of grace to the believing soul, we will therefore
pass on to the use of the point.

to us, says the text, to us; who are those? I pray, inquire of it; look into
the 26. verse, You know your calling, that is, those that are called, those
that believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; to us, those are the people mentioned,
those are the persons intended; therefore in the first place it is a matter of
lamentation and complaint, which we shall in a word intimate, to those to whom
it belongs, if all this good be appointed for all the servants of God, and only
the servants of God, for the called, and none but the called, then it is a
thunderbolt, able to break the heart, and sink the soul of every unbeleeving
creature under heaven, and make him shake at the misery of his condition, and
the evil that shall betide him: you that are in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity, that have stood it out with Christ, and he could
never prevail with you, but you would take up your own courses, and he has
come, and called, and knocked, will that proud heart never come? will that
drunken wretch never be reformed? you that are such, whatever you be, I say,
know this, and know it to your sorrow, and trouble, and vexation of spirit, you
are shut out from sharing in, you are cut off from partaking of the riches of
the grace, and the plentiful redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ to this day,
you that are unbeleevers, I say, to this day you are in darkness, your minds
were never enlightened, to this day the guilt and curse of sin lies upon your
consciences, and the pollution of sin lies upon your souls and defiles them,
to this day condemnation hangs over your heads, John 3.18. He that believes
not, is condemned already, and he shall never see light, but the wrath of God
abides on him; I beseech you observe it, this is that which one would think,
should cut a man's conscience, and be a corasive to his soul, whatsoever he
does, wheresoever he is, we think this should crush all his delight, he that
believes not, shall never see light; he may see his gold and the profits of
the world, and he may see his friends, and the comforts of this life, and then
he has his portion; all you drunken unbeleeving wretches, all you stubborn,
profane, malicious creatures, you have your portion, much good do you with
your sops, you have your part, but there is no meddling for you with the
consolation and redemption that is in the Lord Jesus Christ: the text says, He
is made to us; you poor Saints of God, do not suffer them to scramble, and
take the meat off the table, he was made to us, take you your portion, and God
refresh your hearts therewith, but you that are unbeleevers, have no part nor
portion at all in this rich revenues and precious dowry that God vouchsafes
to his Saints; I know what they will be ready to say, but they cousen
themselves; we are happily naught, and our courses are vile, but yet I hope there
is mercy, and sanctification, and redemption in the Lord Jesus Christ: aye, it
is true, there is enough, there is rich mercy, that is more, and there is
plentiful redemption, I tell you that too; but this is thy misery, thou poor
creature, thou have no part nor share therein, when a man that is hungry shall
see all dainties prepared, when a man that is almost starved, shall see
abundance of provision, wardrobs of clothes to cover him, and abundance of meat
to refresh him, and yet one starves, and the other famisheth; this is the
greatest misery of all, to see meat and not to eat it, to see clothes and not
to put them on; now the Lord open your eyes, and prevail with your hearts,
there are many unbeleevers, there are a world of unbeleevers, but now take
notice of it, this will be thy misery, because thou shall see whole treasures
of mercy counted out before, mercy for Manasses, and mercy for Paul, and
mercy for the bloody jaylour, and mercy for such a rebellious sinner, that
humbled himself before God, and no mercy for thee, there is plentiful, rich,
abundant redemption in the Lord Jesus Christ, but thou shall never partake
thereof; when thou shall see Abraham, and Isaak, and Iakob, and a company of
poor creatures go into heaven at the day of the resurrection, when thou shall
see a company of poor creatures go up to Christ, and receive mercy, and
great redemption, and thou shall go without, this will be gall and wormwood
to thy soul, and strike thy soul into everlasting despair, therefore the
Lord open thine eyes, that thou may come in, and receive mercy at his
Majesty's hand: now you have your share, now stand by, and let us set the bread
before the children, that they may take their part also, and be chea^ed and
comforted: then you that are believers in the Lord, you that are called attend
to your share, and sit down and eat, and be refreshed, O my well-beloved
receive what comes, and be happy in receiving it.

and many are the troubles that lie upon you: will the redemption of a Christ
now satisfy you? if this will do it, it is all yours; his wisdom is yours,
his righteousness is yours, his sanctification is yours, his redemption is
yours, all that he has is yours, and I think this is sufficient, if you know
when you are well: therefore go away cheared, go away comforted, Christ is
yours, therefore be fully contented. I would not have the Children of God
drooping and dismayed, because happily of the policy of the world, their parts are
great, and they reach deep, and in the mean time your parts are small, and
your ignorance great, and your memories feeble: 1 Pet. 11. Be not thou
troubled, be not thou discontented, because of that which they have thou
want: for know, thy portion is better than theirs; the wisdom of Christ,
is better than all the policy of the world; the sanctification of a Christ, is
better than all the reformation, and all the tricks of all cunning Hypocrites
under Heaven; the redemption of a Christ, is better than all the hope and
safety the world can afford: this is thy part and portion, therefore be thou
satisfied therewith: the wisdom, says James, that is malicious and envious,
and the like, it is earthly, carnal, sensual, and devilish; but the wisdom
that is from above, it is first pure, then meek, then abundant in good works:
one drop of this wisdom of a Christ, is better than all the wisdom in the
world: art thou a poor creature, and know Christ to be thy Savior, and
have an intimation of the love of God to be thy Father, and the Spirit thy
Comforter? thy knowledge is more worth, than all the knowledge of all the great
Cardinals, and mighty Popes, and learned Clearks, upon the face of the earth;
a dram of gold is better than a cart-load of earth, it is little, but it is
precious; so it is here, a dram of spiritual wisdom, it is golden wisdom, it
is heavenly wisdom, it is able to make thee wise unto salvation; a dram of
that wisdom, though it be little, is worth a thousand cart-loads of that
dunghill, carnal wisdom, that all the machivilian Politicians in the world
can have or improve; therefore quiet thy self, and content thy soul, that it
is sufficient, that what thou want, Christ will supply unto thee, do thou
want wisdom? Christ will be thy wisdom; do thou want memory? Christ will be
thy remembrance; have thou a dead heart? Christ will enlarge thee; whatever is
awanting on thy part, there is nothing awanting on Christ's part, but he will do
whatsoever is fitting for thee; therefore let nothing hinder thee from that
comfort that may bear up thy heart in the greatest trial: but I know what
troubles you; the poor soul will say, Is Christ wisdom to me? that is a like
matter, did I but think that, were my judgment convinced, and my heart
persuaded of that, I were satisfied; What I? what such a base creature as I am?
let not that baseness that hangs upon thee, nor the means of thy condition
that troubles thee, discourage thy heart, for that cannot withdraw Gods favor
from thee, nor abridge thee of that favor and mercy, that is tendered unto
thee in the Lord Jesus Christ, all the baseness of the place wherein thou art,
and the means of thy condition cannot hinder thee of this favor; look upon
the text, to whom is this promise made? to whom does the Apostle speak? He is
made to us; to us base ones, to us foolish ones; thou art ignorant and foolish,
be it so; thou art base and weak, grant that; despised in the world and made
nothing of, confess that, and all: nay, thou art not in thine own account,
nor in the account of the world, there is no regard had of thee, no value put
upon thee in this nature; why? mark what the text says, God has chosen the
foolish things, the weak things, the base things, the despised things, nay,
the things that are not; to whom is Christ made wisdom? to you fools; to whom
is Christ made strength? to you weak ones; to whom is Christ made honor? to
you base; to whom is Christ made sanctification and redemption? to you that are
not in the world: thou have nothing, thou can do nothing, it skils not, God
the Father has appointed it unto thee, and Christ has brought it; therefore
be cheared herein, though thou be a fool, Christ is able to inform thee;
though thou be base, and weak, and miserable, Christ is able to succor and
releeve thee, and sanctify that soul of thine, therefore be fully contented,
and fully settled with strong consolation for ever: but you will confess, it is
not my baseness that hinders me, but my corruptions that oppose the work of
grace in my soul, and that will be my bane, I know that God is able to do
what is needful, and Christ is willing to do what he is able, to those that
believe in him, and rest upon him, but this proud heart opposes the work of
his grace, and the operation of his Spirit, my mind is so blind, that nothing
in the world takes place, my heart is still polluted, and my distempers still
hang upon me, nay, sometimes my soul is weary of the good word of the Lord,
that would pluck them from me, insomuch that I could almost be content to
pluck out my heart, and will the Lord show mercy to me, that oppose mercy?
and will the Lord make me partaker of his redemption, that resists the work
of his redemption? I answer, God has appointed Christ for this purpose, and
Christ has undertook this work; therefore if God has appointed it, and
Christ will work it, who can hinder it? thy ignorance cannot hinder the Lord
Jesus Christ; if he will teach thee, he will inlighten thy blind mind, and
convince that stubborn heart of thine; nay, all the corruptions under heaven
cannot oppose this work of God; he has appointed it, and he has power to
pull down a stout stomach, and be has power to sanctify a polluted heart;
corruptions are many and temptations fierce but if he will redeem, who can
destroy? if he sanctify, who can pollute? if he justify, who can condemn?
this is the work of a Savior, if Christ will do it, none can hinder it; if
God has appointed it, nothing can let it; but it is the work of a Christ, and
God has appointed it, therefore cheer up thy heart in the consideration
hereof: you that are the Saints of God, cast off all those cavils and pretenses
against the power of Christ and his grace, and go out of your selves, and see
the privileges that God vouchsafes unto you, and reason thus with your selves;
It is true, Lord, my heart is naught, and I have no power, my mind is blind,
and I have no wisdom, but I know that Christ is made wisdom to me, and thou
have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ to be made wisdom and sanctification to
the soul of thy servant: though sin pollute me, yet Christ can sanctify me;
though the guilt be great, yet the pardon of a Christ is greater than the
guilt, and where sin abounds, grace abounds much more: therefore lift up your
selves, and cheer up your hearts, and go away comfortably, what is awanting
God will give, what he gives he will maintain, what he maintains he will
quicken, what he quickens he will perfect, and he will crown you, and your
grace, and all in the kingdom of heaven for ever; what would you have in this
kind? nay, let me speak one thing more, He is the redeemer of his servants,
what is that? why, the Scripture says, the last enemy of all is death, and
that is the aim of all the wicked, that is the worst they can do; now in
Saint Matthew Christ says, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; the gates of hell,
what is that? it was the fashion among the Jews, as our sessions and assizes are
kept in the market place, so their place of meeting was at the gates, so that
when he says, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it; his meaning is
this, when Beelzebub, and all the Devils in hell shall join together to
destroy the Church, all the policy of all the Devils in hell shall not
prevail, the worst they can do, is to bring them unto death, but Christ will
be redemption unto them; art thou in captivity? he will free thee; art thou in
persecution? he will deliver thee^ nay, when thy body shall lie down in the
grave (though the Heathen said, when they had burnt the bodies of Gods Saints,
and thrown them into the water, Let us now see how they will rise again; they
were deceived) thou must be contented, for Christ will redeem that dust, and
say to the earth, Give up, and to the sea, Give up thy dead, deliver up the
bodies of my servants, let their sinews and bones come together, and body and
soul shall come together, and enjoy happiness in heaven together for
evermore: if then neither the guilt of sin can condemn us, nor the filth of
sin pollute us, if neither misery nor persecution can hurt us, then go away,
not only comfortably, but triumphantly into persecution and prison, into holes
and caves, and dens of the earth; Christ will be all in all unto you in grace
here, and in glory hereafter, therefore let this comfort you.

him? then it is a word of instruction to teach us all to lie down in the
dust; let no man glory in man, but let him that glories glory in the Lord,
this is the maine collection the Apostle inferres, God has chosen the foolish
and base things of the world, that no man might glory in flesh; as who should
say, it is not my parts, but Christ; it is not my abilities, but mercy; it is
not what I can do, but what Christ will perform: therefore if Christ then be
Author of all we have or can do, let him receive all the honor and praise of
all we have or do; does the Lord work all our works in us and for us? then
let him receive the tribute due to his Name, and take nothing to your selves:
away with that proud heart that bars God of his honor and praise, and of the
due which indeed belongs unto him, and ought to be performed by all his
servants: do thou think the Lord will bestow all his favor upon thee, and
work all for thee, and thou in the mean time pranke up thy self, and lift up
thy crest? no, I charge you, you Saints of God, as to know your own privileges
to be thankful for them, so to know your own unworthiness, and to lie down
in the dust, and be abased for ever, and to give God the honor due unto his
Name: Revel. 4.8. The four and twenty Elders fell down, and laid down their
crowns at the Lambs feet, and said, Thou only art worthy to receive all
honor, and glory, and praise; If we had a thousand crowns, never so much
honor, and riches, and credit, and abilities, fling away all at the foot of
Christ, let him have all the praise, thou art worthy Lord, we are unworthy thy
assistance, we have received thy comfort thou have continued, and thou art
worthy of all the honor, in that thou have been pleased to work any work in
us, and by us, to the praise of thy Name. The Apostle was mavelous tender to
meddle with any thing belonging to the Lord; as Joseph said to his mistress in
another case, when she tempted him to folly; My master has given me all he
has in his house, save thee his wife; how then shall I commit this
wickedness? This was that which wrought upon the heart of Joseph, and
prevailed with the spirit of Joseph, being his master was mavelous kind, all
that he had in his house was his, save only his wife, and that was requisite
and reasonable^ so it is with the soul of a Christian, all is yours; you shall
have wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, but let
God have the glory of it, that only he reserves for himself: My glory I will
not give to another; my grace and mercy I will give to another, but my glory I
will not give to another; why, give it him then, and say, Not unto us Lord, not
unto us, but to thy Name be the praise: When your hearts begin to think of
some credit, and aim at some base ends, (as it was with Herod when the people
cried out, The voice of God, and not of man, he took it to himself, whereas
he should have rebounded it to God) has God vouchsafed mercifully, and
graciously to humble your souls, and make you seek him? has he given you
any ability of prayer and conference? remember when your souls begin to take
any honor and credit to themselves, away with it, do not take it; Not to us
Lord, not to us, but to thy Name be the glory: thou workest all, thou
preservest all, thou art the Author of all, therefore thou shall have the
praise of all; beat it back again, and rebound it to the Lord, from whence
all help and assistance came; therefore Saint Paul was mavelous shie and
tender in this kind, Has the Lord given me all but his glory? nay, I have
Christ, and grace, and heaven, and happiness, all but his glory; will nothing
but that content me? what haughty high minded Devils are we? will nothing
serve us but the crown on Gods own head? if you can seek God, and have
ability to perform duty, you must justle God out of his throne, and set his
crown upon your head; what monstrous pride is this? deal wisely therefore as
Joseph did, and as Saint Paul did, Gal. 6.14. Now God forbid, what is that? that
I should glory in any thing, save in the cross of Christ, whereby the world
is crucified unto me, and I to the world; let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, let not the strong man glory in his strength, let not the Minister
glory in his preaching, nor the people in their hearing, God forbid we should
glory in any thing but in Christ; as who should say, the Lord keep us from it,
and preserve us from it, Christ only reserves the Crown to himself, he will
do any thing for us, work any thing in us, and by us, and this is all the
glory a Christian has, that Christ will use him, and do any service by him;
all the glory of the Lantern, is the candle: so let us glory in nothing but
Christ, and walk so humbly, that a man may see nothing but Christ; let your
actions manifest it, and let your speeches declare it, and hold out Christ and
mercy; grace has done this, and mercy has done this; that men may see not us,
but Christ in us, and glorify him for that which is done by us: It was a
mavelous sweet disposition of spirit, which the holy man David had, when the
Lord had enlarged him, and the people to give liberally toward the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. it is a fine passage, he lifts up God, and lies down himself;
as when a man lifts another over a wall, he that is lifted up is seen, but
he that lifts him does not appear: So David lies down upon his honors, and
kingdoms, and parts, and abilities, he appeared not, but the Lord appeared:
mark what the Text says, Thine is honor, and power, and praise for ever:
when the Lord enlarged his heart, and the hearts of his people, to come freely,
and give liberally, he gives God the praise; But who am I, Lord, and what is
this people, that thou should give us hearts to offer so freely? as who
should say, thou art a blessed God, and I a poor worm; thou art a glorious
God, and we are base creatures; all is thine, and all is from thee; as who
should say, the gift is thine, and the action thine, the ability thine, and the
work thine, and what are we that thou should work by us, and honor thy
self in us, and give us hearts to do thee service?

The heart is thine, and the work is thine, and all is thine; when therefore
thy heart finds any succor from God, any assistance in the performance of
duty, if it begins to lift up it self and say, aye this is somewhat, then
check thy soul with that of the Apostle, what have thou, which thou have not
received? what, brag of a borrowed suit? who did this? let him that did it
receive all the praise: do thou do any thing? Christ inables thee; do thou
increase in any holy service? Christ inlargeth thee: thou have all from free
mercy, thou have nothing, but that thou have received: therefore I conclude
with that of the Prophet Zachary 4 8, 9. speaking there of the building of the
Temple, the Text says, the same hand of Zorobabel that laid the first stone,
shall lay the last stone: he laid the first stone and began it, and he laid
the last stone and perfected it, and all the people cried grace; not Zorobabel,
but grace: so it ought to be with us, as it was in the material Temple; so in
the Spiritual Temple, as in the outward: so in the inward building of the
soul, from the beginning of humiliation, to the end of salvation; from the
beginning of conversion, to the end of glorification; from the lowest stone of
the one, to the top stone of the other: the same hand that lays the first
stone, lays the last stone, it is all from Christ; therefore when Christ
gives what is wanting, and maintains what he gives, and quickens what he
maintains, and perfects what he quickens, let all say, Not I, not man, not
means, but Christ has done all this; he that is the Author of all, let him
have the praise of all: in Christ, from Christ, through Christ, and by Christ,
is the phrase of the Apostle: Romans 11.30. To him be praise for evermore: in
Christ, he is the fountain; from Christ, he is the Author; through Christ,
he is the means, and by Christ, he is the assister; it is all from Christ:
therefore let us give all to him, that we may be no more in our selves, but
that he may be all in all in us, and do all by us, that he may do all in
all unto us, when we shall be no more.

1 COR. 1.30. Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.




The first is this, there is a fullness of all grace in Christ, whereby he is
able to supply whatsoever is needful to all those that belong unto him; it is
not with Christ as it was with Isaac; when he had blessed Jacob, Esau came and
said, have thou but one blessing my father, bless me, even me also my
father: no, there is enough in Christ for all believers: that mercy which
pardoned Manasses, stubborn Manasses, idolatrous Manasses, that mercy is still
with Christ; that mercy that broke the heart of the bloody Jailor, that stood
it out to the last; the earth shook, and the boults brake in sunder, and the
prison doors flew open, and yet the heart of the bloody Jaylour stood still,
was not moved one jot; at last the Lord made him tremble too, and his heart
shook as well as the earth shook; why the same mercy is still in Christ to
pardon thy sins, as well as Manasses sins, the same Spirit can humble thy
soul, as well as it did break the heart of the cruel Jaylour.













not many wise, not many noble, but God has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise thereof.

Let him that glories, glory in the Lord; I labored, says Saint Paul, not I,
it was through the might of Jesus Christ that strengthened me, through the
grace of Christ that enabled me to it.

what ever grace they want, and perfection and increase of what they have
already, Christ is made all in all to his servants; why then away to the Lord
Jesus, if you will have any thing; he calls and invites, Revelation 3. I
counsel thee to buy of me eye salve, if thou be an accursed man, buy of
Christ justification; if thou be a polluted creature, buy of Christ
sanctification: I counsel thee to buy of me eye salve: there it is only to
be had in that shop, therefore go thither for it. It was the resolution of
the Prophet David, Psalm 31. With thee is the wellspring of life, and in thy
light shall we only see light: it is not here to be had in your hearts, nor
in your heads, nor in your performances, nor in the means themselves, but with
thee is the Well of life: yea, it is there, it is not here in our selves, it is
only in a Christ to be found, only from a Christ to be fetched and
received; improve all means, we should do so; use all helps, we ought to do
so; but seek to a Christ in the use of all, with him is the Well of life; but
you will say, if Christ be made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, why have not the Saints of God that grace they
stand in need of, and those inlargements, in prayer, and holy services, which
they crave and desire? they seek and have not, they pray and obtain not; why
the truth is, we do not go to Christ for it, we seek for the living among
the dead, we never came where it grew, where it was made, your hand is in a
wrong box, you are come to a wrong place, grace was never made here. If a man
should come out of France, to buy silks or velvets here in England, every man
would tell him you are come to a wrong place for these commodities, they are not
made here; if you would have broad cloth, and says, here you may have; but as
for silks and velvets, they are not made here: so you would have grace out of
the means of grace, why grace never grew there. The Sacrament says, grace is
not in me; Prayer says, grace is not in me; hearing says, grace is not in
me: we indeed convey grace, but it is not originally in us; Christ is the
fountain of grace, Christ is made unto us righteousness, Christ is made unto
us sanctification and redemption, these tell you we have heard of the notice
of grace, we have heard such a rumor, such a report, that there is wisdom,
and there is grace, and there is mercy, and sanctification, and redemption; but
the truth of it is, it is not in us, it is in Christ only to be had, he is
indeed made unto you righteousness, and sanctification; go then to him for
it, and there you may receive it, this is the reason why that after the use of
all means, after the improvement of all helps and opportunities, our minds
are still blind, our hearts still stupid, and the means prevail not with us,
work not upon us for our good; we come to the Word, and return as bad as
ever, proud before, and proud still; covetous before, and we are as covetous
still, polluted and dead hearted before, we remain so still, and continue so
still: why alas, grace originally was never made here, away to Christ, he is
the shop from whence all grace is to be had, wisdom, and righteousness, and
all is in him, there you must have it: but you will say, will Christ be made
wisdom to me that am so ignorant, to me that am so base? will Christ be made
sanctification to me that am so vile and so filthy? to me that am so defiled
and polluted? why, let this encourage you, he is wisdom to such as are
polluted, he has chosen the base things of the world, and the things that are
not; he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; he came
not to call the wise, but the foolish to inlighten them; all that thou have to
do, is to take it, wisdom is made for thee, and sanctification is made for
thee, and redemption is made for thee; if thou will but receive it, it is thine
own, it was made and sit of purpose for thee: Look as it is with a father,
he sends his child to the tailors shop, tells him the cloth is bought, the
money paid, the suit made for him, only bids him go fetch it, and put it on:
this is our folly, and it is our misery also, we either think to purchase or
to coin grace out of our own abilities; I tell you no, you must go to the
shop, it is bought and made already, only put on wisdom, and put on
sanctification, and it is yours.

Ah, but you will say, what is the reason if Christ have so much grace, that
his servants have so little, if this be so, why is it thus? As she spoke in
another case, If the Lord be made wisdom to the souls of his servants, if
the Lord Jesus be made sanctification to the soul of a poor sinner; why are
we then such fools notwithstanding all the wisdom of Christ: why are we
such polluted wretches after all the means of sanctification vouchsafed to us:
If Christ be so rich, then what is the reason we go so tattered, and are such
beggarly bancrouts in our Christian course; such beggarly prayers, such
beggarly duties, such beggarly performances.

I answer, it is not because Christ will not vouchsafe abundance of grace to
us, he offers it freely: Oh, every man that will, let him come and take freely
of the water of the Well of life; not a spoonefull, but a whole bucket full,
and that freely too, nay God has bound himself by an immutable oath, Heb. 6.
that we might have strong consolation; nay the Lord commands, in joins his
servants, to abound yet more in wisdom, yet more and more in patience, yet
more and more in holiness.

Secondly, again I say, the fault is not in Christ, where is the fault then?

I answer, it is in thine own selfe-wild pride, and sturdinesse of heart, and
haughtiness of spirit; you think you are never well, but when you are
complaining of your sins, and quarrelling with your own souls, your minds
are blind, and your hearts are hard, and dead, and untoward, and therefore you
fling away the promise, and cast Gods kindness into his face again. I tell
you it is horrible pride, because we cannot have what we would in our own
power, we will not go to Christ for a supply of what we want; you complain
you want such grace, and you are pestered with such corruptions, why thank
your proud venomous heart for it; if you have it not, if you want it still, the
fault is your own, you will not repair thither, whereunto you may have
succor and receive supply upon all occasions; Christ would give it, but you
will not bestow the fetching of it; no matter therefore if you never obtain it.

But you will say what course shall we take, what means shall we use to get
these things at Christ's hands?

First, eye the promise daily, and keep it within view, within the ken of the
soul (as we use to call it) be sure the promise of grace never go out of
sight of the soul. Look as it is with a child that travels to a Fair with
his father, or goes into a crowd, his eye is always upon his father: he bids
him do not gaze about and lose me, the child is careful to keep his father
within sight and view, and then if he be weak and weary, his father can take
him by the hand, and lead him, or take him into his arms and carry him; or if
there be any thing he wants, or would have, his father can buy it for him,
bestow it upon him; but if the child be careless and gazeth about this thing
and that thing, and never looks after his father; he is gone one way, and his
father another, he cannot tell where to find him: whose fault is it now? it is
not because his father would not be within his sight, or because he could not
keep within the view of him, but because he out of carelessness lost the
sight of his father: therefore he sure always to eye the promise; you know,
as long as the game is within sight, the hounds run amain; so I would have the
soul make a prey of the promise: for so the phrase is in the original, that
we should seek the Lord, and hunt after Christ, and seek the game it self,
the promise it self, from day to day. It is the advice of the Prophet Esaias 50.
Look up unto me, all ye ends of the earth, look up to me, and your sins
shall be pardoned; look up to me, and your souls shall be saved; look up to
me, and you shall be sanctified: It is not enough for a man to have a conduit
full of water, and to have the streams run abundantly, continually, but he
must put his vessel under the spout, and then he shall be sure to receive
abundance of water: so it is with the promise, it is not enough to say, Christ
is wisdom, and Christ is righteousness, but it is not thus with my soul:
why, put thy vessel under the spout then, and look up unto Christ in the
promise. This is that the Prophet David resolves of, I will lift up mine eyes
to the mountains, from whence comes my help: what is meant by mountains
there? you know the Temple upon the mount of Moriah; now in the Temple in Gods
ordinance is Gods presence: therefore says the Prophet David, I will lift up
mine eyes to those mountains of mercy, those everlasting mercies; I will look
up to God in his Ordinances, from whence comes all my help; as who should say
grace comes not from a man's parts, grace comes not from a man's abilities, but
look up to God from whence it comes, look to those mountains of mercy that
will succor you, look up to a Lord Jesus that will supply all your wants, that
will furnish you with all grace, look only to him for all, for he only is
the Author and giver of all; look as I have observed it, there is a foolish
conceit that has been bred by some curious nice brains, that they have
persuaded themselves they can make the Philosophers stone, the nature of which
is to turn all metal into gold, which is utterly impossible; for the Mines of
gold are in the earth, and God continues them by an ordinary course of his
providence; but all the men upon earth can never make gold by any Art or means
in the world. To turn the nature of one metal into the nature of another, it
is a kind of creation, therefore beyond the reach of any man to do it; they
may try and try, and spend their heart blood and all, but it is all but lost
labor: So it is with our foolish blind deluded hearts, and distracted
spirits; we think to make gold, and to coin grace out of our own powers, and
parts, and abilities, I tell you, you can never do it while the world stands;
no, no, you do but lose your labor: go to the Mine of gold, the Mine of
grace, go to the God of all mercy, away to the Lord Jesus Christ, I say, he is
made unto us wisdom, and he will inform us; he is made unto us
righteousness, and he will acquit us; he is made unto us grace: go to him
therefore, and he will communicate all grace unto our souls. Look as Jacob
said to his sons, when the famine was sore in the Land of Canaan, he sent
his sons into Egypt to buy corn, that they and their little ones might not
famish; and mark how he calls upon them, Why stand you here gazing one upon
another? I doubt not but then they were laying their heads together, and
plotting and conferring, saying, the famine is great, and the times dangerous,
and we are miserable now; but oh, what will become of us afterward, if these
times last? now the Lord help us, now the Lord be merciful to us and deliver
us, what means shall we use? what course were we best to take? In the mean
time Jacob calls upon them, Why stand you here gazing one upon another? away,
get you down to Egypt presently, and buy us food; you will never get provision
to sustain us, by plotting and talking one with another; you will never get
any come to sustain you, by looking and gazing one upon another; no, no, down
to Egypt with all speed, there corn is to be had, that we and those that
belong unto us may live and not die; so it is with the souls of Gods children,
the poor distressed heart partly through the Devils cunning and subtlety
partly also through our own ignorance and folly, we stand gazing at our
corruptions, and it begin to think and wonder what will become of us; no means
prevail, no mercies melt, no judgments humble, no reproofs awe us, the famine
grows strong, my corruptions fierce, and my case heavy, that I know not
almost what course to take; why stand you thus gazing after this fashion? what,
do you think to get grace upon these terms, by discouragements and
disquieting your selves, and vexing your own hearts thus? No, no, away to
Egypt, to the promise of life, to the Lord Jesus for help and assistance, and
then you shall have mercy and grace abundantly bestowed upon you, and that
freely with your money in the mouth of your sacks again, you shall have grace
that you need, and sufficiently bestowed upon you: Look as it is with Eliah,
when he was to depart from Elisha, and be taken up into Heaven, Elisha craves
one thing of him, and that was this, 1 Kings 2.9. That the Spirit of Elias
might he doubled upon Elisha; now mark how Eliah answered; Thou have asked a
hard thing, says he, nevertheless, if thou can see me when I am taken
from thee, it shall be granted to thee.

Now some Interpreters have observed, and that very wisely, that it was not so
much the sight of Elias, as the sight of God taking up of Elias that should do
this; as if he had said, would thou have a double portion of Gods Spirit
vouchsafed unto thee, because many miseries are like to come in upon thee;
great and heavy troubles, and sore persecution is approaching; what course then
is to be taken why, see God taking up of Elias; that God that took up Elias,
and that God that wrought grace in the heart of Elias, see that God, and be
within the view of that God, and thy request shall be granted to thee; the
collection is fair: so I say here, if thou would have a double portion of
grace, do not go to prayer only, do not go to hearing only, do not go
to the Sacraments only and barely; but oh see a Christ, and look upon a
promise, and then thou shall have a double portion of wisdom to inform thee,
a double portion of sanctification to cleanse thee, a double portion of grace,
and power, and strength, against thy corruptions, from Christ conveyed and
communicated to thy soul: and this is the first rule.

Cor. 3.18. The holy Apostle, disputing there how men should be transformed
into the glorious Image of God; or as the word is, metamorphosed from one
degree of glorious grace unto another; more holy, and more meek, and more
patient, and more heavenly minded: He that was cold before, should now become
more zealous; he that was faint hearted before, should now become more
courageous how is this done? even as by the Spirit of the Lord, says the Text,
as if he had said, it is not by your spirits that this must or can be done, do
not think that you can master your own corruptions, or that you can pull
down the distempers of your own hearts, and get what grace you list; no, no,
it is not your spirits can do this, it must be the Spirit of Christ, as by
the Spirit of the Lord, so the Apostle. The phrase of the Prophet David is
sweet in his kind, Teach me the way unto thee; thy Spirit is good; as who
should say, O Lord, my spirit is a naughty spirit; my spirit is a proud
spirit; my spirit is a profane spirit; my spirit is a weak spirit; my spirit
is an ignorant and a blind spirit; but oh, thy Spirit is a good Spirit, thy
Spirit is a blessed Spirit: by the virtue of that Spirit, Lord, teach me the
way to thee, and let it lead me into the land of uprightness. We know, a child
that has his hand to write, if he will not be ruled by him that teaches him,
but will take the pen into his own hand and write after his own scauching
fashion, he will never write well, nor make a letter handsomely as he should do;
but let his hand write by the man's hand, and that will guide him, and that will
teach him quickly to write well in a short time: so, would thou have thy
heart framed aright? why then keep thy soul under the hand of the Spirit, and
thou shall be guided by the virtue of that Spirit of God, and moved and
enabled to accomplish the good pleasure of the Lord, and receive what ever
grace thou stand in need of. I have observed it sometimes upon the Sea;
look as it is with the mariner that is going down the stream, if the wind
be fair, will any man pull down his sail and set it up again? why no, for
he does but trouble himself, and turmoyle and wearieth himself, and troubles
the boat too with keeping such a pudder, and misseth the gale of wind and all;
therefore a wise mariner, he will set up his sail, and hold out his sail, that
it may take the gale of wind fully, and so go on speedily; all that he has
to do is to keep his sail spread, and to catch the wind: your only course is
to set up the sail, and attend the gale of the Spirit to comfort you, attend
the gale of the Spirit to assist you; hold thy heart, and spread to the Spirit,
that it may catch the gale of grace, that it may blow upon thy soul, and by
the virtue and power thereof thou shall be transported comfortably, and
carried on cheerfully to walk in that way which God chalks out before thee: as
for examples sake; Imagine thy heart begins to be pestered with vain thoughts,
or with a proud haughty spirit, or some base lusts and privy haunts of heart,
how would you be rid of these? why you must not set up and pull down, and set
up and pull down, quarrel and contend, and be discouraged: no, but eye the
promise, and hold fast thereupon and say, Lord, thou have promised all grace
unto thy servants; why therefore take this heart, and take this mind, and take
these affections, and let thy Spirit frame them aright according to thine own
good will; by that Spirit of wisdom, Lord inform me; by that Spirit of
sanctification, Lord cleanse me from all my corruptions; by that Spirit of
grace, Lord quicken and enable me to the discharge of every holy service, thus
carry thy self and convey thy soul by the power of the Spirit of the Lord,
and thou shall find thy heart strengthened and succored by the virtue thereof
upon all occasions: Romans 8.26. the Text says, The Law of the Spirit of life
has freed me from the law of sin and death: the meaning is this, you must
know that sin is a tyrant; now a tyrant when he wins a city, he swears all
to his laws: so sin will swear thy soul to his laws; pride says, I will
have thee proud; I will have thy heart unchaste, says uncleanness; I will
have thee intemperate, says drunkenness: now by the Law of the Spirit of life
God will free us from the law of sin: the Spirit of Christ in the promise, it
takes away the power of the law of sin; the Law of the Spirit of meekness,
takes away the law of the spirit of pride; the Law of the Spirit of purity,
takes away the law of the spirit of uncleanness; the Law of the Spirit of
holiness, takes away the law of the spirit of profaneness; and so in all
other distempers of this nature, this only shows us how to run over all.
Gather up now, and so conclude this passage: Eye the promise daily, yield thy
soul to the Spirit of the Lord in the promise, let that have his full sway,
resist not those good motions the holy Spirit puts into thee, and that is the
way to have all grace, and help and assistance communicated unto thee: and thus
much may suffice to have been spoken in the general touching this conveiance
of grace into the heart: we come now to the scanning of the particulars.

This conveyance it is of two kinds, both in the Text: Christ conveyes his
grace two ways; partly by imputing, partly by imparting: they are the terms
of Divines, and I know not how to express my self better; but thus if you
will, partly by imputation, partly by communication: This is that I would have
you to take notice of in the general; they are both real, but one is
habitual; both these, both imputation and communication express a real work
of God upon the soul, but the last only leaves a frame and a spiritual
ability and quality in the soul; the conveyance by imputation does not, it
leaves a thing moral (as we use to term it.) These two, imputation,
communication, are both in the Text; Christ is made righteousness, or justice,
that is, he does justify a sinner by imputation, and he does sanctify and
redeem a sinner by communication; he conveyes and works some Spiritual
ability, and leaves a Physical change; when the Apostle says, Christ is made
Justice, that is, he does justify a sinner by imputation, when he says,
Christ is made Sanctification, and Redemption, that is, by way of
communication; he delivers the soul from the pollution of sin, that is,
sanctification; he delivers the soul from the power and dominion of sin,
that is, redemption; This communication it is a Spiritual habit, or a
spiritual power, or a spiritual quality or ability; (take which you will)
left upon the soul. We will begin with the former, touching the imputation of
Christ's righteousness to a soul, whereby the sinner comes to be justified:
this is a point then, which I take it, none more necessary, and yet none less
understood, none less studied, none more mistaken than these two great works
of justification, and sanctification. I speak it by experience, Christians
aged and experienced, yet here they fail in the very catecheticall points, and
it drives many of our best Divines to a stand; we will open it a little: this
justification we term a conveyance of the merits of Christ, by way of
imputation: but what is the meaning of this word, by way of imputation? Thus
you must conceive it, this is the main thing I would have you look unto;
Imputation is this, when that which another has, that which another does, is
accounted mine, is set upon my score as though I had it, as though I had done
it, this is Imputation. I have it not, I do it not, another has it, another
does it, and it is accounted mine, and reckoned mine in course of justice. Now
in the point of communication it is otherwise: because I have something,
something is wrought in me, some qualities and habits; for it is not a moral
thing, but a physical alteration by the power of grace implanted in me, which
I have, so that imputation discovers two things. First, that I have no help in
my self in what I have, or what I do. Secondly, it implies that something
which another has and does, it is in conclusion made mine, and I have the
benefit thereof, as well as if I had it, as well as if I had done it. It is an
old comparison that Divines use, and there cannot be a better to express the
full nature and the meaning of the point now in hand. Take a debtor now
arrested, imprisoned, and he cannot pay the debt; another man comes, and will
be his surety: now mark this, another man pays the money, another man
satisfies the creditor in the behalf of the debtor; the creditor acquits this
man, cancels all his bonds, lets him out of prison, confesses he has nothing
to say to him, nothing to charge him withal, he is fully satisfied, he has
given him full content: why the debtor paid no money to the creditor himself,
but because the surety paid it, therefore the payment is counted his, as if
the debtor had paid it: this is the very nature of imputation. This I take to
be the meaning of the first part of the Text, in which now a little I mean to
trade: the Text says, He is made unto is righteousness; that is, God in
Christ does justify a beleeleever by way of imputation, though he has
nothing in himself, though he does nothing of himself whereby to be justified
in Gods account, yet God will justify him through the Justice of Christ
imputed to him, and counted upon his score: so that imputation implies two
things. First, that a man has nothing, can do nothing. Secondly, that he is
justified by something, Christ has, and has done for him, the point then is
clear, and that is this.

he has, not for what he does but only for what Christ has, and has done
for him: I say Christ is made unto us Justice, God the Father does justify a
believer, only in and through the merits of Christ.

For the opening of the point, we must first enquire what it is to justify.
Secondly, what do we mean when as we say he is made justice for nothing a
man has or does. To justify, in the phrase of Scripture, it does imply two
things: First to justify, is to make a man just, and this is very seldom used
in Scripture: I mean thus to put some holiness, or some gracious disposition,
and some spiritual faculty and ability into the soul, and to make a man
just: as when an ignorant man, is made a wise man; when a profane man, is made
a pure man; when an unclean man, is made a righteous man, and so really
changed: this I take to be the meaning of that place; Revelation 22.11. He
that is just, let him be just still; and he that is unjust, let him be unjust
still: as who should say, when God has bestowed all means upon him, and
vouchsafed all mercies and encouragements to him, if yet for all this he will
be unjust, let him be unjust still, let him be for ever unjust: There is no
hope of him, but he that is holy, let him be more holy, let him increase in
grace, but we do not take it so now in this Doctrine.

Secondly, to justify, it is a word of judicial proceeding, when in a legal
manner the Judge does pronounce a man free, and acquit him, and proclaim it as
if he were, and says the law has nothing to do with him, he does pronounce
he has not offended the Law: now this is opposite and contrary to
condemnation, and this I take to be the meaning of that place, and it is a
pregnant one; but this gives us great light and insight into the place: he that
justifies the wicked and condemns the just, they are both an abomination to
the Lord: to justify in the former sense, is to make a wicked man a good man;
and is he an abomination to the Lord? this were a gross folly: no, but the
meaning is this: he that acquits any man as guiltless that is guilty, this is
an abomination to the Lord. Thus we see the first word opened, so that when we
say God does justify you, our meaning is not this, that God sends grace or
holiness into you, for this is the work of sanctification; but God does
justify you, that is, he does pronounce before his Tribunal, that his
Justice and Law is fully satisfied, that he will lay nothing upon your score,
require no satisfaction at your hands, but he will fully and freely discharge
you of all your sins which you have committed.

Secondly, again, God does justify a poor sinner not for any thing he has
not for any thing he does: mark that, the meaning is this; no privilege that a
man does enjoy, no part of wit, understanding or memory, or any thing that way:
nay, I say more, there is no grace that a man has, no duty that he can
perform, for which as the material and formal cause of our justification,
God does pronounce any man to be righteous. If a man could weep out his eyes
in sorrow, if a man could hunger and thirst for Christ, more than for his daily
bread, God would not justify a sinner for all these things; how does God then
justify a man? why he justifies a sinner, for what Christ has done for him,
the surety has paid it, and he accounts it ours: a man is justified by
imputation only, not by any action: those are necessary concomitants, not
real causes of our justification.

But you will say, is not a man justified by faith, and is not faith a grace,
and has not a man that ability wrought in him by God.

I answer, true the Lord does justify a man by his faith, but he does not
justify him for his faith; that is, faith is the hand that lays hold upon the
obedience and merits of Christ, and it is for his merits, not for our faith,
though by our faith we are justified: a man lives by faith, not that faith
nourishes him.

As we use to say, a man lives by his hands, not that his hands nourish him,
but his hands labor, and his labor procures money, and his money provides
meat, and by his meat he lives: but because his hands are the means to get it,
his hands are the means to obtain it, therefore we say he lives by his hands:
Just so it is here, a man is justified by faith in Christ, not that faith will
acquit any man under Heaven, but because Christ's merits are through faith
received and applied to us, and so through Christ we are justified: so then we
hear the meaning of the point: Phil. 3.9. mark the Apostles two phrases, That
I may be found in him not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is of the righteousness of faith in Christ, which is of God by
faith: there is but these two righteousnesses in the world. First, a man's own
righteousness which he has wrought, and God has given him, and the duties
which he performs and this is the righteousness of the Law; now Paul does
profess that he is not justified by this, but only by the righteousness of
God, that righteousness which is in Christ, that righteousness which is
imputed to him from Christ, he labors to be found in that righteousness, for
by that he shall be justified.

The ground and reason of the point is this, that which in no measure is
answerable to Gods Justice, and agreeable to the exactness of the Law and for
which a man may be condemned, that cannot justify a man; but what ever a man
has or does, all the graces of God wrought in him, and all the performances
done by him, there is that imperfection or blemish even in them, for which God
may justly condemn him: therefore a man cannot be justified thereby: this is
an undenied rule of the Apostle, what ever condemns a man, cannot justify a
man, but the Law condemns a man for what he has or can do: therefore it
cannot justify a man. There is no grace in a man, no duty to be performed by
a man, but if God will look into it according to the strictness and
exactness of the Law, he may justly condemn him for it: that I prove, Gal.
5.17. every Saint of God has these two things, the Spirit lusting against the
flesh, and the flesh lusting against the Spirit; and these two are contrary: In
the best of Gods servants there is flesh, and a lust of the flesh to hinder
them from holy duties: so there are two laws, the law of the mind, and the
law of the members; the Law of God requires that a man should be perfectly
holy without any stain of sin, perfect in the performance of duty without
any blemish or stain therein, but every gracious man has a stain of
pollution in his soul, that is one thing; and a stain in his performances,
that is another thing; therefore no man's duty, no man's ability, or
sufficiency cannot justify him before God. It is that the Apostle Paul cries
out of, Romans 7.13. A law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind;
so that the case is clear, if it were thus with holy Paul, as he professes
of himself, then much more of the best Saints now, for that they have not more
grace than Paul had: therefore they cannot be justified for what they have or
do. Take a lame limme, as the lamenesse of the leg will make every motion of
the leg lame, a man cannot but go lamely: so it is with the soul of a poor
sinner, when a man has a lame heart, a corrupt sinful heart, all his actions
will be lame, his thoughts lame, and his services lame; so that neither heart,
nor life, nor actions, are in a right frame, all are impure and weak: I
appeal to your own consciences in this case, would you be willing to appear
before Gods Tribunal with those prayers, and those performances of thine, and
justify thy self by them, and say, Lord thou can not lay any thing to my
charge, the Law of God can bring inditements enough against thee, to confound
thee; nay, we condemn our selves in this case: these dead hearts, and these
blind minds, and this want of faith, shall the Lord then acquit any man for
that which he condemns himself? If then the best and most gracious Saint has
sin in the frame of his heart, and sin in the best of his services, then
neither soul nor service can be answerable to the Law of God, and he cannot
be justified thereby: but the best of Gods servants not only before grace, but
after grace, in the best heart a man has, the best action he does, there is
weakness in the action: therefore they cannot justify a man, therefore we
must be justified only through the merits and obedience of Christ: thou can
not do, Christ has done for thee; thou can not suffer, Christ has suffered
for thee; in him thou art justified, through him thou shall be saved. So that
when the soul of a poor sinner, shall appear before the Tribunal of the
Lord, and justice comes to put in a plea against him, Christ shall step in and
say, Lord, for this poor soul that believes in me I have died: for this poor
soul I took the nature of man upon me; therefore let thy justice be fully
satisfied with what I have done for him: well then says justice, go thy way,
I have nothing to say to thee: the Lord makes a proclamation, Be it known to
all men and angels, I acquit this soul; there is no imputation of sin he has
committed, no failing in any duty shall condemn him, this is the way of
justification.

The first use of the point is this, we have here a ground of confutation of
the Church of Rome: I will not accuse them wrongfully, but lay the charge upon
them according to their own words, and it shall appear how they have wholly
perverted the wisdom of the Lord, in this great point of justification, look
into the 6. Session, and the 7. Chapter of the Council of Trent; you that are
wise and have read it, observe it; you that never did read it, I will read it
to you: the words of the Council are these, which is a confirmed doctrine, and
unto which they are all bound generally to subscribe, and is taken for the
doctrine of the church of Rome: the words run thus, That the alone formal
cause for which a sinner is justified in the sight of God, it is justice
implanted, ^ a new quality of grace and holiness wrought in the soul, and not
the merits and obedience of Christ imputed to the soul. Imputation argues
that I have and do nothing, but another has, and another does for me, and
imputes it to me^ the Church of Rome profesly holds the contrary, and
punctually point blanke in the force of contradiction: they are the very words
of the Council, the alone formal cause, and that which gives life and being
to the justification of a sinner; it is the change and frame of holiness
wrought in him, not impured to him, this is profes^y contrary.

seems to me to be like Noah's Arc, when all the world was to be drowned: God
taught Noah to make an arc, and to pitch it about, that no water, nor winds,
nor storms could break through, and so it bore up Noah above the waters, and
kept him safe against wind and weather* when one was on the top of a mountain
crying; Oh save me, another clambring upon the trees, all floting, and crying,
and dying there; there was no saving, but for those only that were gotten into
the arc: Oh so it will be, you poor foolish believers, the world is like this
sea, wherein are many floods of water, many troubles, much persecution: Oh get
you into the arc the Lord Jesus, and when one is roaring and yelling, Oh the
devil, the devil; another is ready to hang himself, or to cut his own
throat; another sends for a Minister, and he cries, Oh there is no mercy for
me, I have opposed it; get you into Christ, I say, and you shall be safe
enough, I will warrant you, your souls shall be transported with consolation
to the end of your hopes.

This was that which comforted Saint Paul, and made him bid defiance to all the
world: Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? as who
should say, shall all the angels in Heaven, shall all the devils in Hell, shall
all the men upon the earth, shall sin within, shall actions without? it is
God only that justifies, not for anything we have or do, but for Christ's
sake: This is that I conclude withal, this one doctrine affords supply in all
wants, and courage in all trials: I know what troubles you, will this blind
mind never be enlightened? I think I shall never be able to conceive of the
truths of God aright, how can the Lord accept of me, when I condemn my self?
how can the Lord show any favor to me, when I fall out with my self, and
wonder that I am not in the bottomless pit? such a base heart I carry about
with me, and such a polluted conversation, and yet live, and not in hell: I
have thought sometimes God cannot be Just, if he do not condemn me; why I say
art thou burdened with thy sins, and do thou go out of thy self for the
pardon of them? why go away comforted, the Lord will justify thee, not for
thy works, but for Christ's merits: thou have committed all iniquity, Christ
has performed all righteousness; thou have nothing of thy self, Christ has
enough for thee; and thou art not justified for what thou have or do, but for
the Lord Jesus sake: look up to him therefore, and bring him to Gods tribunal
to answer for thee, that when Satan shall bring in his bills of indictment
against thee, and say, what do you hope to go to Heaven? do you not consider
the sins which you have committed? do you not remember the base courses
which heretofore you have taken up and practiced? do you not know that every
sinner must die? why answer Satan again, all this is true: Ay, but remember the
Lord Jesus, it is true I can do nothing, but Christ has done all for me; what
can thou say to the Lord Jesus? though I have offended, he has never
offended; though I have sinned, yet Christ has fully satisfied; I have
deserved the wrath of God, why Christ has bore the wrath of God: My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? He was once forsaken of God, that I might be
for ever accepted of God: go thy ways therefore comforted and refreshed: the
place is admirable, Isaiah 43.25. Thou have made me serve with thy sins, and
wearied me with thy rebellions, but I, even I, am he that blotteth out all
thine iniquities, and will remember thy transgressions no more: The Lord takes
notice of this; are there any wicked? they are as bad; are there any vile? they
are as sinful; they tired God with their wickedness: All you poor
drunkards, you try God with your drunkenness; you prophaners of the Lords
day, you tire God with your prophanations; and you swearers, you try Christ
Jesus with your oaths and hidious blasphemies that you belch forth against him
upon all occasions: you would wonder that God should save such as you, and
truly so you may well enough; for it is a wonder, it is a miracle indeed; but
if you can go out of your selves, and sins, and go unto Christ and rest
upon him, the Lord says, I will blot out all those abominations of yours: and
Ezekiel 33.32. compare both those places together, I will forget all your
sins, even for mine own names sake: as who should say, it is not for your
sakes; no, no, be it known to those stout hearts of yours, it is not for your
parts, or gifts, or graces, no nor it is not for all the services we can
discharge, but it is only for mine own Names sake that I will pardon you, and
remember your sins no more, remember thy pride and stubbornness no more,
remember thy profaneness no more, remember thy vanity and looseness no
more; remember thou to be humbled, and the Lord will never remember thy sins
any more: Satan it may be will come in and accuse thee, here is a
Sabbath-breaker, Lord condemn him: no more of that, Satan, says God, Christ
has suffered and satisfied for him; no more therefore of that, let me hear
no more of those things, I have forgotten them, says God, this will cheer a
man's heart at that great day.

This also is a ground of encouragement to us, against all the trials that can
befall us in the course of the world: we see that innocence goes to the walls,
no man can stand against envy, and hatred, and backbiting: why though you
find hard dealing here at the hands of wicked men, though you be accused here
with false surmises, and false accusations, and slanderous speeches, yet set
one against the other, you shall never be condemned hereafter: There is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ; there may be persecutions, there may
be accusations, there may be oppositions here upon earth raised against thee;
why yet go on cheerily, there is no condemnation in Heaven: if God acquit, let
men condemn; if God approve, let men disallow: nay lastly, here is consolation
even in death also; what though your bodies be deprived of your souls, and
you leave all, when you return again it is but only thus, Come ye blessed of
my Father, you that are believers, you shall be for ever blessed.

labor for a Christ, for there is no other way under heaven: get a broken
heart, get a believing heart, but oh above all, get a Christ to justify thee,
get a Christ in all to save thee. If I could pray like an angel, could I hear
and remember all the Sermon; could I confer as yet never man spoke, what is
that to me if I have not a Christ? I may go down to hell for all that I have
or do, look into your souls, and observe your lives and conversations: when
a man has prayed, and he finds his mind dull, his heart awke and untoward,
his thoughts wandering and roving; why, think with your selves, do we
condemn our selves for the duties we do perform, and judge our selves for
the services we have discharged, and yet do we think to be acquitted by the
Law of God: Oh, therefore above all entreat the Lord to give thee a Christ,
that he may justify thee here, and save thee everlastingly hereafter: Phil.
3.8. I count all things dross and dung in comparison of a Christ: Paul was a
proud Pharisee, learned Paul, reverend Paul, a man of admirable parts; yet
says the Apostle, That I thought to be gain, was loss to me, yea dung and
dog smeat in comparison of a Christ; yea doubtless, and I do count all things
loss, that is, not only my parts, and credit, and privileges when I was a
Pharisee, but the best duty that ever I did, the best service that ever I
performed, I account all as dung and dogsmeat in the point of justification, in
respect of the Lord Jesus Christ: grace therefore is good, and duties are good,
seek for all, we should do so; perform all, we ought to do so; but oh, a
Christ, a Christ, a Christ in all, above all, more than all. Thus now I have
showed you the way to the Lord Jesus, I have showed you also how you may come
to be implanted into the Lord Jesus; and now I leave you in the hands of a
Savior, in the bowels of a Redeemer, and I think I cannot leave you better;
the worst is past, now you are come hither: Romans 5.9. If you be justified by
his death, then much more shall you be saved through his righteousness, and
merits.

You whose eyes God has opened, whose hearts God has humbled, and whose
souls God has called home to himself, you are now in the hands of the Lord;
go your way, and when you see hell flaming, and the devils roaring, and the
damned yelling and crying out, look back I say and see this ditch out of
which you are escaped; look upon the pit which you were going over: you may
bless God, and say, we are past that, those days are gone, we are past from
death to life: Acts 20.32. when Saint Paul was to go away from them, and for
ought he knew should never see their faces more, why yet mark what he says
to them: Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his grace, that is
able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among those that are
sanctified: as who should say, God and his Word was the best Commandment he
could put them over to: as who should say, Paul must depart, and Paul must be
imprisoned, and Paul must die; so that now he shall be with you no longer to
teach, to inform, to direct you, but the good Word of the Lord endures to
comfort for ever, to cheer for ever, to assist, refresh for ever those that
are weak and discouraged. I put you over therefore to a good Word, to an
everlasting Word, I commend you to a blessed and a living Savior, who will be
with you for ever, by the immutable assistance of his blessed Spirit: I leave
you in the hands of your Savior, that when the head of your Minister happily
shall lie full low, or death overtake him, why yet remember I have put you over
to a Savior. Oh love this Word, and love this Christ more than all, prize this
Christ above all, and he will preserve you: and this I will wish you, that you
would keep yourselves close to this good Word, that will inform you, and to
this blessed Savior that will support you from day to day.

THE SOVLES Justification.
2 COR. 5.22. For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him.


FOr our more orderly proceeding herein, you may remember that I showed you
before, for what a man is not justified. Now we come to handle for what a man
is, and may be justified; and this I conceive, so far as my light serves
me, to be in the words of the Text; for the Apostle having showed that God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and not imputing their sins:
Now in this Text he shows the reason how this comes to pass, namely God said
their sins to Christ's charge, and made him sin for us, that knew no sin.
Its no wonder then though God did not justify a poor sinner, for what he had
and did, and though he did not expect perfect righteousness at their hands,
for, He has made him to he sin for (...), which knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. For our more orderly
proceeding, I will do two things.











He has made him sin for us, which knew no sin.

That we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

righteousness being applied to us, God the Father acquits us, and pronounces
us righteous by a legal course of proceeding; as in these words, That we might
be made the righteousness of God in him: such a righteousness as God the
Father will work in us, and will accept of us. As when the wife is betrothed
and married to a man, all her old debts are laid upon her husband, and the law
meddles no more with her: and secondly, all his lands, at least the third part
of them are made over to her. What she has in point of debt is put over to
him: so all our sins and debts of corruptions are laid upon Christ, and all
the rich fefments of grace and mercy in Christ, are made over to a believer,
and hence a believer comes to be acquitted and justified before God. From the
first part of this description, the point is this.



It is an act that passes from God the Father, upon the believer. For the
proof of this point there are three verses in the same Chapter, which make it
good, the 18, 19, 20. verses, and so on to the end of the Text; in the 18.
verse, he says, All things are of God, which has reconciled us unto himself
by Jesus Christ; of God, that is, of God the Father, and yet more plainly in
the 19. verse, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their sins to them. Now what is meant by God in these two verses?
the old rule of Divines is this; that wheresoever you find the Name of God put
in opposition to Jesus Christ, it must not be taken essentially, but
personally, for the Father. For it were almost an absurd thing, to say that
Christ were in Christ reconciling the world unto himself: therefore the
Apostle implies thus much; God the Father was in Christ reconciling, and God
the Father by Christ, reconciled the world unto himself: and then in the 20.
and 21. verses, he says, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you through us; we pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled
to God, that is, to God the Father; for he has made him sin for us, which
knew no sin: and another proof is in the 3. of Saint John, 14.15. and so to
the end of the 18. verse: it is an observation of wise Divines, and good
Interpreters, when our Savior comes to trade with Nichodemus about eternal
life, he does not only content himself to speak of himself alone, as he
was Christ the Redeemer of the world, but he sets him yet a little higher in
the 14. verse, he says, As Moses lifted up the brazen Serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have eternal life: A man would have thought that
this had been enough, but he stays not here, but he puts him one pin above
all these, and says, For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son for it, that whosoever believes on him might not perish, but
have everlasting life: as if he had said, there is not only a Christ prepared
and sent, but God the Father also loved the world: here is the highest staire
to stay up the heart, so that the point is plain and sure enough. Now let us
make it clear, and that I shall do by answering two questions:









Adams sin; it is true, the Son and the holy Ghost were offended too, as
being friends with the Father, and having a relation to the Father, and a sweet
fellowship with the Father; but the sin was directly against the Father, and
indirectly against the Son, and the holy Ghost. The ground of the point is
this, it wronged that work of Creation, wherein the manner of the work of the
Father appeared in a special manner, and the manner of the work of the Son
appeared in redemption, and the manner of the work of the holy Ghost appeared
in sanctification: so that God the Father was the first in the work of the
Creation, the Son second in the work of redemption, the holy Ghost third in
the work of sanctification: Now creation being the work wherein the power of
the Father did most show it self, Adam falling away from this, did principally
wrong the Father, for his manner of work appearing herein: therefore Adam did
herein go directly cross to God. Excellent is that phrase, 1 John 2.1. Little
children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; but some may say,
what if we do sin? why says he, we have an Advocate with the Father, even
Jesus Christ the Just. Now no man says, we have an Advocate with an advocate,
no, for that were absurd: for no advocate pleads to another advocate, but he
pleads to the party offended, for the party which has offended: now in that
the Apostle says, We have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ: It
is plain that God the Father was the Person directly offended; the issue then
is thus much; The Father being the Creditor, and the Person directly offended,
the Lord Jesus Christ became our Surety, and the creditor does require the
debt at the hands of our Surety, and acquits the debtor; the creditor requires
this, but the acquittance comes mainly and properly from the Father, because
the debt was due to him: so that God the Father is the Creditor, the Son is
the Surety, the poor sinner is the debtor, the holy Spirit is the messenger,
that brings the acquittance from God the Father, and says, lo the Father has
accepted of thee in his Son, the Surety has paid the debt for thee, and see
here is the acquittance for thee; so that though the holy Ghost does bring the
acquittance, yet the Father must give it: This is the first reason.

yields, and lays down the weapons of deflance, and falls at the footstool
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and rowles it self upon his merits; then the Spirit
comes and says, thy sins are pardoned, thy person is accepted, I bring thee
this news from God the Father; God is now reconciled to thee, in and by the
Lord Jesus Christ: now the Father is the King that grants this pardon, the
Son is he that begs it, and the Spirit is the messenger that brings it. Now
you see how it is an act of God the Father.





are confined within the high Council table of Heaven, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, and these never appeared to the eye of the world.



the heart and soul which overpowers the creature, and all things are become
new; new affections, new desires: but this is not all, for here is the
difficulty.

change in the very nature of this servant; before he was distempered, but now
he is well ordered; before hot, but now finely cool: here is something wrought
in the nature of this man. Just so it is in this change of the soul: there is
a moral change in justification, a man is bound to the Law, and liable to the
penalty of it, and guilty of the breach of it: now God the Father in Jesus
Christ, acquits a man of this guilt, and delivers him from this revenging power
of the Law, and that's not all, but withal he puts holiness into the heart,
and wisdom into the mind, and purity into the affections, and this is
called a natural change, because there are new spiritual abilities put into
the heart; not because of the nature of it, but because of the thing which it
works: as to take the example of Scripture, 1 John 3.14. We are translated
from death to life: As it is with a man taken prisoner in Turkey, or some other
place, happily a Christian of England, he is accounted a Traitor there, and is
condemned as a Traitor: the man being weak of himself, and not able to
deliver himself, he must be dealt by as a Traitor: but now if this man be
rescued, and find some way of escape, and be set upon some other shore,
whereby he may be conveyed into England, then he is here accounted a good
subject, and he is so far from being condemned, that he is wonderfully
advanced and honored by the King: here is a change, in Turkey he was
condemned as a Traitor, but in England he is counted a good subject, and is
received into favor, and honored; here is a moral change: but now here is no
natural change, here is nothing put into this man: If he were ignorant before,
he is ignorant still; if he were wicked before, he is wicked still: but he has
a good relation as a subject, and is pardoned in England: he is in another
room and rank, this is a moral change: But now if a man were ignorant before,
and since he came into England he were framed and made wise and holy, this is a
spiritual change: before he was ignorant, and now he is learned; before
graceless, but now gracious: this is a natural change, or rather a spiritual
change. Just so it is with a faithful soul, the poor sinner as he is landed
here upon the shore of sin and corruption, take him as he is by nature, he is
liable to divine justice, and a Traitor in Gods account, and as he stands
liable to the Law he is a damned man, he is sick of sin. But now when the
Father has brought him home to the Lord Jesus Christ, and landed him upon
another Coast, he is now sure to partake of life, and of salvation in the Lord
Jesus Christ: and he that before was attached of treason, is acquitted of all
in the Lord Jesus Christ, the respects of treason and condemnation are taken
off, and other respects and relations are put on: this is done in
justification, and afterward when he is justified, then the Lord will honor
and adorn the soul; so that though the soul before was ignorant, the Lord
will now make him wise unto salvation; though before he were polluted, yet now
he shall be sanctified. And thus much of the reasons why I call it an act of
God the Father upon the believer.

Cor. 4.2.3. It is required of the dispensers, that every man be found
faithful, but as for me, I pass very little to be judged by man's judgment:
the word in the original is very excellent, I pass not to be judged by man's
day; men have their days of meeting and of judging, and their days of rioting
in the alehouse, and in the brothel-house, and there they can toss the names
of Gods Servants up and down, and they sit upon their names, and lives, and
liberties, and they raise what reports they will; these are the drunkards
days, and the malicious man's days, there they sit and give their doomes what
they will do to such a Christian, and to such a Minister, but mark what Saint
Paul says, I pass not for man's days, it is no more to me than the dust of
the balance, or the drop of the bucket; but he alludes to another day, to the
day of judgment; when the Lord shall judge all the world, when he that is
holy, shall be approved of and acquitted, and he that is vilde and wicked
shall be condemned, I look to that day. Were he not worthy to be begged for a
fool, that should go away troubled and disquieted, because a company of
drunkards had condemned him upon the alebench, when the Judge had cleared him
upon the bench of justice: therefore steel your faces against all the
malicious accusations of the wicked: let them sit and condemn thee upon the
alebench if they will, so long as thou art acquitted in heaven, herein be for
ever cheared through his mercy. It was that which made the holy Prophet so
marvellously confident in Isaiah 50.8.9. and to throw down the gantlet saying,
He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? see whether you can
set your foot to mine, vow for vow, and word for word: who is mine adversary,
let him come near: behold the Lord God will succor me, who will condemn me?
lo they all shall wax old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up, they shall
vanish, and shall not be able to appear at the day of accounts; nay the moth
shall eat them up, nay the wicked shall say in hell as the wise man says, We
fools thought this man's life madness, and we past our judgments upon these
precise fellows that must ever and anon be in a corner to weep for their
sins; but we find now that we are the fools that have neglected grace, and
salvation, and happiness, which now they enjoy for ever. If a man had a case
to be tried in the Chancerie, if the Lord Chancellor were his friend, he
need not fear any thing, for the Lord Chancellor would suffer nothing to come
in against him, but would cast them all out, and hear none of them: so you
that are believers, and have a friend, and a Father that sits in the high Court
of Chancery in Heaven, howsoever there are many which would be meddling with
you, yet your Father is the Judge of the Court, and he will dishonor all those
that seek to dishonor you: It is the ground of that blessed boldness which
the Apostle concludes with himself, not only that the thing should not be
carried against him, as Romans 8.33. but that all should be for him: Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies: Let the
gates of Hell be set open, and Beelzebub and all the Devils come roaring out
against him, and let the wicked come that bear him ill will, and let all his
sins come and his own conscience too, yet he need not fear any thing: the
ground is hence, because it is God that justifies; he does not say, they shall
never prevail against Gods servants, but they shall not plead against them:
and he does not say, they shall not condemn them, but they shall not accuse
them: as he said, Acts 19.38. The Law is open, and there are Deputies, let
them accuse (...) plead one against another; so that here shall not be so much
as pleading against a poor believer, because God the Father has justified
him. Now the ground of this comfort lies in three particulars, or it affords a
threefold consolation.

is the Lord of the manor, it were no offense to steal, but that he has
forbidden it; and it were no offense to be disobedient to Parents, but that he
has said, Honor thy father and mother, etc. The goods of thy neighbor are
the Lords, and the damage that is done is against the Lord: Now if God the
Father do mercifully acquit you, and says he will pardon the breach of all
his Commandments, if God acquit us, what need we fear or care what the
Devil says against us? it may be the Devil will come in and commence a suit
against us, and say, what, you be saved? yes, that's a likely matter, are you
not guilty of this and that? well, brethren, we have done the Devil no wrong,
against thee only have I sinned, says David, it was against the commands of
my good God and his holy Spirit, it was against my Father and my Redeemer, and
they will pardon my sin: God says, I will forgive all that wrong done to me,
then let the Devil go and shake his ears: look as it is with a creditor, if
he has gotten the surety in suit, he will acquit the debtor, and if the
debtor be acquitted, all the bailiffes in the world can do him no hurt, and
he says, I am out of your debt and danger: so it is here, God the Father is
the Creditor, we have wronged God most infinitely, we owe unto God all that
we have, but yet he has blotted out all our iniquities: therefore if the
Devil follow the suit, it matters not, The Lord says, I will remember his
sins no more: therefore the Devil can pursue him no further.

The mercy of the Lord and his sentence endures for ever: you know it was
Saint Paul's plea, when he saw that the Jews were maliciously bent against him
to have his life, he said, No man may deliver me unto them, I appeal unto
Caesar: he saw he should have hard dealing there if he were committed to them,
therefore he appeals unto Caesar: so we, we have had our case tried in Heaven,
we have Cesars judgment seat to go unto, the first person of the Trinity is
our Father, the Creditor has made it good unto us by the witness of the
Spirit, that our iniquities are pardoned, and that he will hear no more of
them: therefore go away for ever cheared and comforted.

you be not judged by them, but repair unto God the Father, and get his
sentence upon them, and whatsoever he speaks, submit unto it, and be
contented to judge your selves and your estates answerable by it. This is the
great misery of many poor creatures, that as many miseries as they have, so
many Judges they have: sometimes their fear sits upon them, and then they are
damped: sometimes their suspicion sits upon them, and then they are
marvellously disquieted; and sometimes hope sits upon them, and then they are a
little comforted* Oh brethren and beloved in the Lord, be wise now for your
souls, and put your case to be tried only by the Lord, and not by every one.
We would count him a mad man, that having a case of weight to be tried,
should commit it to an enemy that hates him, or else to an ignorant man that
has no skill at all in the business, no wise man will do it: but he
appeals to the Judge of the court, and lets him cast the cause: just so it is
here, there are many of you, some there are I am sure, that have a sight of
your sins, and sometimes you think that God will certainly commence the suit
against you: what, so many sins within me, and so many corruptions to follow
me, and oppress me? certainly my heart is naught, are you so ignorant to
commit your cause to be judged by them? your carnal reason is an enemy, and
your own hearts are weak, and not able to understand: therefore go to a
higher court, and say with your selves, I care not what the world says, and
what carnal reason says, I pass not* speak thou, Lord, a word of comfort to
my soul, and if his word be for you, then be for ever comforted and quieted,
and look only to the judgment of the Lord, and to none other; it is in his
hands only to pass sentence, and to condemn, as he sees fit in his
righteous judgment: therefore stand to the sentence of him, whose Word must
stand, and shall stand for ever as mount Zion. If a plaintiff have a case to
be tried in the court of justice, he cares not what the dispute of the lawyers
be: One man thinks thus, and another thinks thus, and another would be
passing sentence, and says, thus it must be; he cares not what they say, he
knows that they are not Judges, but he stays till the Judge comes, and he
quakes and trembles till he hears what the sentence of the Judge will be. Now
therefore be as wise for your spiritual estates, as you are for your temporal
estates: Psalm 85.8. I will hearken what the Lord will say, disputing there of
the miseries and troubles which were like to befall the Church of God, and
himself too: he looks up to Heaven, and says, I will hearken what the Lord
will say, for he speaks peace to his people: look not what sense and
feeling, and fear and suspicion say, for they will speak killing words, and
will tell you that your condition is naught and damnable: what, all this
vildnesse, and baseness, and stubbornness, and yet go to heaven? that cannot
be: Good brethren hearken not to these, for they are not the Judges of the
court, the sentence must come from God, and remember that God will speak peace
and comfort unto his people, he will comfort your distressed consciences: and
therefore let not Satan, nor your own distempered hearts be hearkened unto, for
though they speak never so much terror to your consciences, yet God will
justify you: it is the liberty which the law allows, and every man will take
it to himself, if he know the law, when a man is questioned for his life, he
will not cast himself upon every Jurie, but he will take the benefit of the
law; and if there comes in one that is an ignorant person, or one that is an
enemy of his, he may justly except against them, and put them out, and he will
say, Good my Lord, do not cast away a poor man for no cause at all, I except
against these men of the Jurie, they are mine enemies, they have sought my
blood, many years, and they have informed against me, and seek to take away
my life, and I can prove it, and the rest are ignorant, and cannot understand
the matter* good my Lord, let me have a good Jurie: this the court of justice
allows, and every man will be sure to take it to himself, as occasion
serves: in Acts 28.19. Paul was constrained to appeal into Caesar, and therefore
he says, Chap. 2^.10.11. I stand a^ Cesars judgment seat, where I ought to
be judged. You see, beloved, how wise men are for the good and safety of their
bodies, oh be much more careful for the good of your souls, and hazard not
your souls upon every base Jurie; stand not to the trial of temptation, fear
and suspicion, but appeal to the great God of Heaven, and say, Lord it is an
unjust Jurie, you ^eele not these abilities; and you feel not this assurance of
Gods love, and when corruption begins to stir in the heart; then carnal
reason says, if a man had grace, could he have all these corruptions? if I had
any grace it would not, nor it could not be thus with me: Oh complain to the
Lord that they are an unjust Jurie: look up to the Throne of mercy, and have
your cause heard there, and say, Lord, these have been my professed enemies, the
Devil, and this carnal proud froward heart of mine have been deadly enemies
both to thee, and to thy grace, and to the good of my poor soul: and as for
fear and suspicion, they have betrayed my comforts, and ^ut the throat of
them, and many a time have taken away the hope of eternal life from me: and as
for my weaknesses and infirmities, they are too ignorant, they cannot pass
righteous judgment because they know not what belongs to grace here, or
happiness hereafter: therefore appeal to the Lord, and say, you stand at Gods
mercy seat, let mercy do what it will with you, and mercy will certainly save
you, and let mercy be for ever honored, and be sure to lie down at the
footstool of mercy. If thou art content to go to God, and depend upon mercy,
and let it do what it will with thee, then mercy shall certainly save thee; if
thou will come to believing, thou art sure to be acquitted: let the Devil
come in against thee, and plead, and say, Lord will thou acquit such a man that
has been a despiser of thy grace and mercy; and the world says, to my
knowledge he has closed with me and has forsaken thee; and then says
conscience, I have told him of many sins, but he would never reform them;
therefore Lord give Justice against him: then the Lord makes answer, and says,
It skils not what he has been, If he will come to me, and believe in me, and
repent of his sins, I will freely acquit him of all that he has done amiss:
therefore avoid the court, Satan, take this as an everlasting rule, and you
shall find it by experience. If a man might have all the favor in the world
showed him, and have his own friends to pass sentence against him, and have
his best duties and services to plead for him, if he should commit his case to
them to be tried by them, he would be for ever condemned by them; there is so
much pride on the one side, and deadheartednesse on the other side, and so much
wandering in your prayers, that they would cry to God for wrath and condemnation
upon you: 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified: you must appeal to the Father of mercies, or else you will never be
acquitted by them: therefore stand to that judgment of God, whose judgment
must and shall stand, when the sentence of sin and Satan, and carnal reason
shall be overthrown.

The cause why many poor humbled broken selfe-denying hearts go drooping and
discouraged, it is because they have a bad Jurie goes upon them, and they dead
their own hearts, because they appeal not to that God, who is willing to
acquit them through the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ.



to all that believe not in my Gospel, shall be confusion, says the Apostle:
and the words of Christ are, He that believes not, is condemned already:
therefore look what the word says, and cleave to that for ever.

Simon Magus would have bought the gift of the holy Ghost with money in Acts
8.21. Saint Peter answered him, thy money perish with thee: and furthermore, he
cuts him up to the quick, and says, Thou art still in the gall of bitterness,
thou have no share nor portion in this matter: so you unbeleevers, you have no
share in this point of justification, 1 Peter 4.17. If judgment, that is,
temporal judgment begin at the house of God, that is, at the Saints of God
which believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, then what will the end be of all that
obey not the Gospel of God, and believe not in the Lord Jesus Christ? for it
is all one in the phrase of Scripture: If a believer do come to heaven with
much difficulty and trouble, and perplexity of heart, and the ship is all
broken, and he comes to heaven with much difficulty; then what will the share
of those men be that have no part nor portion in Jesus Christ? they can ruffle
it out with the best for a while, and the men of the world do admire at them,
and acquit them many times, the people of God being deluded with their smooth
carriage, and fair shows, and having a charitable opinion of them, they do
acquit them: but mark the end of it, thou may be admired and acquitted here,
but thou shall be for ever condemned hereafter: the sentence is gone forth,
and it shall never be revoked: Heb. 3.18. To whom swear he that they should
not enter into his rest, but unto them that obeyed not? You must think the
Lord is highly displeased, when he swears that such a man shall never see
his face with comfort, nor come to Heaven; he swears, and when the sentence is
past, it is unchangeable, unalterable: So Hebrews 6.17. God willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenesse of his Council,
bound himself by an oath: When the Lord would establish the heart of Abraham,
he took an oath; as it is among men, an oath puts an end to all controversies:
so if the Lord once swears, it is done in Heaven, never to be altered more,
and therefore ask them this question: What are they, and what may we think
of them that God swears against? certainly they are unbeleevers, God must make
a new Gospel, and must forswear himself, or else none of these unbeleeving
persons shall ever come to Heaven. Hence it is that the Apostle makes the thing
almost impossible, That God cannot save an unbeleever: Romans 11.23. And they
also if they abide not in unbeleefe, shall be grafted in; for God is able to
graft them in again: as if he had said, the poor dispersed unbeleeving Jews
may also be saved, and receive sap and sweet from the grace of Christ, if they
abide not in their unbeleefe: It is as much as to say, if they do abide in
their unbeleefe, God is not able to graft them in; and the Apostle says, God
cannot deny himself, he will not cross the course of his providence, for
never an unbeleeving wretch under Heaven: He has said it, and if there be
ever a Devil in hell, thou shall be one, if thou continuest as thou art:
Therefore you that are convinced in your consciences, that you obey not the
Gospel, nor submit to the grace of God in Christ, consider with your selves
whether it be good continuing in that estate or no: when the wrath of God hangs
over your heads ready to fall upon you: see your misery therefore you poor
souls, and take up that lamentation of Reuben, Genesis 37.29. when his brother
Joseph was sold to the Ishmaelites, the child is not yonder, and I, whither
shall I go? so say thou, my comfort is lost, I am an unbeleever; and therefore
I, whither shall I go? and I poor soul, whither shall I go? If I go to the
Law, that condemns me; and if to the Gospel, that I have abused; if I go to
God the Father of mercies, he will not acquit me: and therefore whither shall I
go? I can go no whither but to hell, if I remain still in my unbeleefe,
therefore be any thing rather than unbeleever, for if thou art so, and
continuest so, the Lord has sworn thy misery and destruction: John 3. the
last verse, He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him: If thou
continuest still in thy unbeleefe, there is nothing to be expected but the
fierceness of Gods wrath and indignation to be powered upon thee: Thus much for
the first Doctrine.

Now before I come to the maine proposition, let me take up one point by the
way, to prevent all false and wicked surmizes: the Text says, He has made him
sin for us, that knew no found: n^w when the Apostle says, He has made him
sin for us, why, may some say, had Jesus Christ any sin? no, says the
Apostle, abhor such thoughts for ever: therefore to prevent all sur^izes that
may prejudice the Holiness, Honor, and Primitie of Christ, let me lay down
a point by the way, and the question shall be this:





to us, and are able to fathom what is offered to our view: and thus Christ did
know sin, and thus to know sin is not evil: The Minister knows sin,
when he preaches against sin; and thus God himself knows sin, and thus
Christ knew sin, and he was able to fathom the vildnesse and loathsomeness of
sin, but that is not here meant.

his infinite wisdom being God, he was able to find out the venom and
^ildnesse of sin: So the point which I observe by the way is this:

the Lamb without blemish: and it was prophesied of him in Esaias 53.9. That he
had done no wickedness, neither was deceit found in his mouth: and his enemy
Pilate said, I find no fault in him at all: and our Savior himself says,
the Prince of this world comes and has naught in me, that is, no sin,
John 14.30. The arguments are briefly these.

for sin, must needs want sin, or else he could not be a sacrifice for
sin: so the point is clear: we come now to the application.

Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but be you
followers of God as dear children: Ephesians. 5.1. Christ had no sin, nor
fellowship with sin; let his course and practice be thy copy: But some will
say, what, would you have us to be Saints here on earth ^ how can it be that
we should know no sin, when we have such a body of death hanging upon us? yes,
we may know no sin, though it do hang about us: the Apostle does not say,
equal God in holiness, but imitate him; and he does not say, follow him
fully, but even as dear children: Now though the child cannot go so fast as
the father, yet he will follow as fast as he can, and when he has done what
he can, then he cries to his father to help him, and carry him to the
journeyes end; and so ought we to do, nay so we will do, if we are true
children and not bastards: the Father is infinitely full of holiness: Follow
God as dear children, do what you can and then ^rie to him to enable you to
do what you cannot do. It was the practice of the Prophet David, Psalm 63.1.
My soul thirsts for thee, and my heart longs after thee: therefore in the
119. Psalm, 4, 5. Thou have commanded to keep thy Commandments diligently,
oh that my heart me^ so directed tha^ I might do it: as if he had said, I
know the Law requires it, and it is my duty to do it: help Lord, and take
Lord, and carry Lord thy poor servant, and lead me into the land of
righteousness; it is an evidence of one that is borne of God: 1 John 5.18.
Whosoever is borne of God sins not, and the evil one touches him not: so
if you are such as have Christ Jesus formed in you, you will labor to keep
your selves that the wicked one touch you not he does not say he will not
entertain it, but he will not keep company with it. A man must do by sin,
as we would do by a man whose company we shun; if we would not have
acquaintance with him, then we carry our selves strangely to him; if he call,
we will not answer; if he knock, we will not open; we keep our selves close,
that we may not change a word with him: so it will be with every one of you
that are borne of God, you will have nothing to do with your old pettish
lusts, and base humors and haunts of spirits, and whomsoever it be that has
had dalliance with you heretofore, you will avoid the place and presence of
them, and say, I know not those distempers, nor the place not occasions of
them, I will meddle with them no more, I will not own them, I have done it too
too much already, if they come I will not yield; and if they follow, I will
flee. I have read an old story of a man that was carried away much by a harlot;
at last the Lord meets him, and opened his eyes, and humbled his soul, and
brought him out of his sinful condition: many a day after the harlot met him
again, and the man would not look on her, and she began to seft kindness
upon him, and said, I am she, you know we have had much sweet dalliance
together: Oh, but says he, blessed be God, I am not I; that is, I am not the
man that I was before: so should we, though we are nothing but sin by
nature, and know nothing but corruption, yet if the old sluggishnesse and
stubbornnes of heart, and haughtiness that we have too too much received; if
they come and say, we are the darlings that have had much sweet fellowship and
communion with you, make them answer and say, I am not the man, I will have no
more to do with you. Let every heart be here encouraged not to regard the base
respects of sin, or of the world, they will say it is not good to be too
holy, and too precise; make answer and say, I cannot be too holy, Jesus Christ
knew no sin; the heart and life of Jesus Christ is that which we ought to
respect and imitate.

Now I come to the main proposition, and that is this; that the debt of the
sinner is charged upon our Savior: so says the description, and so say the
words of the Text: conceive here thus much, that our Savior had the debt of a
sinner charged upon him, partly by imputation, and partly by personal
performance, he did perform the payment personally, the debt was by
imputation, but the payment was by real and personal performance: and as our
sins and debts were made his by imputation, so the payment was his really
laid down, and suffered for us: Two things I must lay down before I can open
the point:











Leviticus 5.15. If a man sin and trespass through ignorance, he shall then
bring unto the Lord for a trespass offering, a ram without blemish: If any
man offer a gift for the sin which he has committed, for so the word is in
the original; if he offer a sacrifice, because of the guilt of sin which is
upon him: and so Genesis 4.7. If thou do not well, sin lies at the door;
that is, punishment lies at the door: now in what sense it is taken here in
this place, it is a point of great difficulty amongst many Divines some that
have had a new way for justification, they have had also a new way for to
interpret this place: but in my judgment it is to be taken in the first
sense, though the second also must be included, and cannot but be collected
from the former, and not only the former, but also latter Divines carry it
this way: the argument here in the Text seems to be clear, and the reasons
out of the Text are three:

God made Christ sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in Christ: that sin is here meant which is opposite to that righteousness
which is here mentioned; but the sacrifice of sin is not opposite to the
righteousness here meant, but the breach of the Law that is opposite to it:
therefore righteousness does imply the professed opposition to sin in this
place, sin being profestly opposite to righteousness.

For as Christ was made righteousness to us; not that righteousness which we
have, but that which he had, and which is made ours by imputation: so Christ
also was made sin for us, not that Christ had sin, but he took our sin
by imputation: so that I reason thus; That sin is here meant, which is so
imputed to Christ, as his righteousness is imputed to us: but not the
sufferings or punishments of sin is imputed, but the guilt and the breach,
Christ did really and personally suffer; and therefore he needed no such
imputation for suffering, but for the breach of the Law which he never did,
that only is imputed to him.

that our Savior was made sin, that is, that the sins of the whole world
were set upon his score.

Gods Justice, Holiness, Christ's purity, etc. God the Father charged all our
sins upon the Lord Jesus Christ by imputation: but if you ask me, why does
the Text say, that he made him sin and not a sinner; the reason is this,
because our Savior did not bear the sins of any one man in particular, but
he bore the sins of all the world: all the evils which they had committed,
were charged upon our Savior, and God the Father follows the suit upon the
surety, and accounted him as the debte^, and as one that was guilty of all
those sins, because he had taken them upon him; so the point of Doctrine
hence is this:



All you that are debtors to the Lord, consider of it; if a man had forfeited
his bond, and had great payments to make, if he knew any friend that would
become a debtor for him and would pay the debt, oh how would he rejoice! Now we
are all debtors and stand bound to God, therefore take notice of the point, God
the Father charged all the sins of all the faithful upon the Lord Jesus
Christ: if you ask me why I say the faithful; because the Text says, He
was made sin for us says the Apostle, for us that believe: he would be sure
to have some of that mercy, as he says in another place, Christ came to save
sinners, whereof I am chief: he, ingrosseth mercy to himself; therefore you
hard hearted and unbeleeving wretches be packing, for Christ was made sin
for us, that is, for us believers: so that none of the faithful are exempted
from the benefit of this Doctrine; Christ was made sin for every believer,
for every believing creature in the world that can but rest upon Christ, and
can touch the hemme of his garment: it is not the greatness of your faith, but
the sincerity of your faith, that helps you to come within compass of this
point. For the proof of this Doctrine consider thus much: this is a truth of
the Scripture undeniable, and that which has from age to age been delivered
to the people of God, all the offerings and sacrifices of the Law do show so
much, and all the types of the Law do testify so much, as in Leviticus 1.4.
compare it with Leviticus 5.5. in Chap. 1.4. he says, The offender shall bring
the burnt offering without blemish, and he shall put his hands upon the head
of the sacrifice, and it shall be accepted of the Lord to be an atonement:
and in Chap. 5.5. When he has sinned in any of these things, then he shall
come and confess that he has sinned therein; this was the legal ceremony:
now what is the substance of it? the sacrifices were types of Christ, he is
the sacrifice without blemish, without sin, and the offering up of the
sacrifice was the believing upon, and the tendering of the Lord Jesus Christ to
God the Father by faith, and this must be done at the door of the Tabernacle:
the meaning is, he is a common Savior to all believers, that as it is in a
common ground, every one has a share in it, and every borderer though never so
poor, may come and put on and feed his cattle as well as the best: so here
every poor believer may come and feed upon the Lord Jesus Christ: therefore
the Apostle in the 3. verse of Jude calls it the common salvation; not common to
all the wicked and unbeleevers, but to all the faithful that border upon the
promises, and do believe in them, it is common to them all; and the man that
offered the sacrifice was to lay his hand upon the head of the sacrifice, and
there to confess all the sins of the children of Israel; this was the
unburthening himself of his sin, and laying it upon the head of the
sacrifice the Lord Jesus Christ; that so what we are not able to bear, he
may bear for us, and answer divine justice for us; and so there was another
ceremony, Leviticus 16.21. Of the escape goat, there were two sacrifices to be
offered, the one was to be a burnt offering, and the other was to escape;
Aaron was to put his hand upon the head of the live goat, and to confess over
him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and their trespasses, putting
them upon the head of the live goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a
man appointed into the wilderness; so the goat shall bear upon him all the
iniquities to a land not inhabited: and the other was to be offered up for a
burnt offering: this was the type; now the intendment of the ceremony was this;
the goat was the Lord Jesus Christ, and when Aaron did put his hands upon the
head of the goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of
Israel, and did put them upon the head of the goat; it was thus much, God the
Father did charge all the sins of all the world upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
even of all, from the beginning of the world to the end of it, and did put them
all upon the Lord Christ; and howsoever he was a sacrifice for sin, yet he
was a escape goat, and has escaped out of the hands of hell and death, and is
now in Heaven, and with him all believers shall escape from hell and death, by
the power of his merits. Further ye see how the Prophet expounds the Law, Esaias
53.4, 5. We thought him afflicted and buffetted for himself, but he was
wounded for our sins, and broken for our iniquities; he was neglected amongst
the wicked, and they judged him as smitten for his own sins, but he was
wounded for our sins imputed to him, that we through him might be eased
thereof; and therefore the Text says, He bore our iniquities: and me thinks
it has reference to the escape goat, and it is that which the Apostle does
peremptorily say, Heb. 7.22. He was made a surety of a better covenant: Now
the surety has not only the payment to make, but he is accounted as the
debtor; the debt is laid to his charge, as well as the payment is required,
thus the point is proved: Now for the better discovery of this Doctrine, let me
do two things:



that it is reasonable, and it does wonderfully magnify the Justice, and mercy
of God.





I will have these children saved, and Christ says, I will take the care of
them: John 10.14, 15, 16. Its strange to see, how our Savior there speaks of
his Office, in the 14. verse, he says, I am the good Shepherd and know mine,
and am known of mine, that is, I know those that are committed to my charge
and knowledge, even as the shepherd knows his sheep: but how does the Lord
Christ know, who God the Father will have to be saved? look verse 15. As the
Father knows me, so know I the Father. and we have agreed amongst our
selves, that so many shall be saved: The Father has said, I will have so many
souls saved, and Christ says, those souls shall be my care and charge: and
in the 16. verse, he says, Other shee^ I have also which are not of this
sold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice: when the Father
has revealed, that so many in such a place, and so many in such a place shall
be saved, then the Lord Christ undertakes the care of them, and he calls at
such a door, and says, I must have that poor drunken creature, and he must
be humbled and broken hearted, and he must believe, and he calls at such a
door, and finds the adulterer in the arms of the harlot, and he says, I
must have that unclean wretch, I must humble him for his sins, and I must
make a separation between him and his sins: A good shepherd will have a
care of his sheep, and will fetch them wheresoever they be; as it was with
David, He did fetch his prey from the mouth of the Lion: so though there were
never so many baits to allure a man, yet if the Lord Christ intend to save him,
he will fetch him out of the mouth of the Lion; and he says, that poor soul
is mine, I have taken the charge of him, and therefore I must have him, and he
must hear my voice, nay he shall hear my voice: Many times you have turned
the deaf ear upon Christ, and he calls and knocks, and yet that will not
serve the turn, until he breaks in upon the soul by horror of heart:
therefore God the Father commits the care of all those wandering souls to the
charge of Christ, and he will have them by one means or other: As it is with a
Husbandman that has a great flock of sheep, and he says to his son, lo,
I commit the care of them to thee, lo here they are, I would have thee to be
careful of them, the number thou know, and the mark thou feast, then the
son concludes with the father, and they enter into agreement, and the son
says, I will feed and keep those sheep: so it is with God the Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ; God the Father gives all the names of all the faithful from
the beginning of the world to the end of it* and says, all these are my
children, there is a poor creature in such a blind corner of the country
which I must have saved, and in another place there is another base drunkard
which I must have saved, that I may make the world to wonder at it; the
foundation of the Lord stands sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who
are his, the Lord has elected and called them, that's his mark; and therefore
our Savior Christ undertakes the care of them, and God the Father looks that
all those that are committed to the care of Christ, should be saved; as in
John 17.12. Of all that thou have given me, have I lost none, but the child of
perdition, that is, he was a wolf, and no sheep, and a lion, and a cunning
fox, and none of my charge, but of all that thou have given me hove I lost
none: all you poor ignorant and weak Christians, little lambs, that cannot
help your selves, Christ will not lose one of you; but though you are never so
mean and poor, the Lord will carry you in his arms, and bring you to
everlasting life: 1 Cor. 15.24. Then shall the end be, when the Lord Jesus has
delivered up the Kingdom to the Father; and shall say, Father, thou have given
me the charge of so many in England, so many in Spain, so many in Asia, so many
in the Palatinate, the Lord Jesus Christ shall deliver up the whole number to
God the Father.

he will be as one that owes the money, and that must pay, and the Law
proceeds as fully against him, as against the debtor: the debtor did personally
owe the money, and lay in prison for it, but the surety is as one that has
forfeited and must pay; he submits himself to the power of Law, and Justice,
that look what the Law requires of a man forfeiting and owing, he is content
that the Law require it of him. Just so it is here, the sinner is this debtor,
and Christ undertakes for him by a mutual consent between the Father and him,
and he yields and submits himself to all the power of Justice, that look how
the Law accounts of a sinner, it should account of him: Now the Law of God
accounts of this man as one that has broken the Law, and deserved eternal
death, and Christ submits himself to these, the Law requires doing and
suffering, and Christ is contented to undergo all these for all that shall
believe: as Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
only Son made of a woman, and made under the Law, that he might redeem them
which were under the Law: the meaning is this, look how we were under the Law,
so was Christ under the Law for us, that so he might redeem those that were
under the Law; the Law laid guilt to our charge, and the Law did condemn us,
and the Lord Christ was content to be under all that commanding, revenging
authority, which the Law had over us, so that now Christ is come into the room
of all the faithful: hence is that speech of Luther, which the Papists so much
cavil at; he says our Savior was the greatest sinner of all the faithful
that ever was upon the face of the earth, not that he had any sin of his own
inherent in him, or committed by him, but because all the sins of all the world
were charged upon him, and Christ put himself into the room of all the world,
that look whatsoever the Law required of any, the same it required of him; and
what the Law accounted of any, it accounted the same of him.

for it; now God the Father says, I must be righteous, I will lay all their
sins upon the Lord Jesus Christ, he became a debtor, and undertook for them,
and therefore I will require it of him, as well as of them. Thus much of the
first part of the discovery of this point, that God the Father charged our
sins upon our Savior, and that Christ charged them upon himself, they both
make a compact, that poor lost man shall be saved, and Christ submits, and is
contented to bear their sins, and to have the Law proceed against him.



the creditor, and free the debtor, it is very equal that the creditor proceed
against him, as against the debtor.



The anger, justice, and severitie of God, were manifested in the fall of man;
for when man back sinned and fallen, then anger and justice began to work, and
now Adam saw God to be an angry and a just God; now the glory of those
attributes appeared, and now all the complaint stands upon mercies side; and
therefore mercy appeals to the great Court in Heaven, and then it says,
wisdom, and power, and goodness, have all been manifested in the Creat^on;
and anger and justice, they have been glorified in the fall of Adam: but I
have not yet been manifested; Oh let some poor souls be comforted and
saved, that they may know there is a merciful God, and then the case is
debated, only justice steps in, and takes it self as wronged: It is true,
says justice, it is fit that mercy should be honored, yet it is not fit that
I should be wronged: must my glory be injured? would you have a company of
sinful rebels pardoned and forgiven, when they have thus abused holiness, and
goodness, and resisted the Will of God? nay, except they be punished, I cannot
have my due: mercy must be honored, but yet justice must not be wronged. Now
God is a just God, and he must give every one their due; glory to whom glory
belongs, and justice to whom justice belongs: justice must not be offended, but
must be appaid, and have its right: this is the controversy, therefore the
Lord Jesus Christ steps in, and makes up all even on both sides; and there is a
way devised whereby justice may be fully satisfied, and yet mercy magnified,
and so much the more is mercy magnified, by how much justice was wronged: Then
Christ comes in and says, that justice shall punish all unbeleevers, and so it
shall be satisfied for all the wrong done to it, and mercy shall be magnified
upon the believing souls, because the believer is not able to bear divine
justice himself: therefore Christ Jesus is contented to be accounted guilty,
that justice may inflict punishment upon him as deserving it; for otherwise, to
punish the innocent, and to acquit the guilty, will not stand with justice:
Now therefore that justice may have his due from him, and yet do him no wrong;
therefore he was content to be accounted guilty; and though he were innocent,
yet he was contented to be accounted noce^. Now if God in justice require
punishment of our Savior, then the same justice must account our Savior as
guilty, otherwise, he should punish the innocent, which he cannot in justice
do: but God the Father did punish Christ Jesus, for justice is satisfied by
the punishment, therefore it is requisite that he should be under the Law:
also God in justice must account him guilty, that in justice he may be
punished: so the issue is this; If God the Father do in justice punish Christ,
then it is required that he^ should be accounted as guilty, and under the
Law; but the Father did do it; therefore he did account him as a sinner, and
as guilty, and did lay their sins unto his charge.



of them lie there, and has Christ taken them, and the guilt of them upon
himself, and the condemnation due unto the same; then do thou not take them
from him to thy self. Therefore what the Jews did with the sacrifice, so do
you with a Savior, Leviticus 16.21. When Aaron came to offer up the scapegoat,
he laid both his hands upon him with all his might, and he put all the sins
of Israel upon the head of the live goat. The Hebrew Writers observe three
things in the words: First, he laid on both his hands with all his might:
Secondly, there was nothing between the hand of the offerer and the sacrifice
which was made: Thirdly, he must confess his sins, and the sins of all the
Israelites over the goat, and say, Lord, I have transgressed, and have
committed this and that iniquity, but now Lord I return to thee, and bring an
offering of atonement, and I beseech thee good Lord to accept it: So let this
be the guise of the heart of every faithful Christian, when he would have
quiet and ease, if ever you would have acceptance with Christ, then carry him
with thee to the Father, and let your souls rest upon him with all your
strength, and unburthen thy self of all thy sins, and the guilt of them, and
put them upon the Lord Christ: commit thy soul to him, and then for ever
expect grace and mercy from him, and resolve of this, that the Lord Jesus
Christ which was made guilty for thee, will make thee guiltless; and he that
was condemned in thy room, he will acquit thee in his mercy and goodness.

it, till I meet at in my dish: therefore to prevent the cavils of the wicked,
that a carnal heart may not presume of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, and
also that the poor sinner may not burden himself with needless ^ea^es, nor
with his sin more than God requires, suffer me to clear the Doctrines by
laying open two things:





For the former:





upon him; as he must see what his sin is, so he must judge that it has the
power to make him guilty, and also to condemn him, should not the Lord by the
power of his grace prevent it. Every sin in his own nature, and power, does
and will procure guilt and condemnation to the soul, by the sin committed,
unless the Lord in mercy do prevent it, and Christ by the power of his merits
stop the power and condemnation of sin, as the Apostle says, Romans 1.31.
which men though they knew the Law of God, how that they which do these things
are worthy of death: that is, that in the least sin which a man commits,
there is a fitness in it to make a man guilty, and it has a power to
condemn him, unless the Lord did mavelous graciously stop the power of
corruption: as the Text says, the repenting Church shall judge themselves
worthy to be condemned: every sinner may say of every sin he commits, that
there is enough in it to damn him, if God should deal with him after his own
deservings; If I should be left to the power of my pride, and malice, and
hatred, and dead heartednes, it were enough to condemn me for ever. The wife
Physician that sees his Patient is in a plurifie, will say, here is enough in
this man to kill him, if I should neglect him but a few days, it would kill
him: but now if the Physician lets him blood, he stops the power of it, that
so the corrupted blood cannot bring death upon him: so every sin that a man
commits, both the distempers of the heart inwardly, and the abuse of the means
of grace and the practice of sin outwardly, there is enough in that plurisie
of sin to take away a man's comfort and happiness, unless the Lord be
pleased to hinder the condemning power of them, that they cannot hurt us:
therefore the sum of all is this, as every believer must examine his own
heart and life, so he must judge the nature of sin, and judge himself
worthy to be condemned: 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged, that is, if we condemn our selves, and judge our selves worthy
to be condemned for them: I say not that a man should say, that the Lord will
condemn him, but that he is worthy to be condemned for them, and he deserves
condemnation. Every fiery Serpent in the wilderness had a killing nature in
it, and if it did not kill, it was not for want of power in it, but because the
virtue and power of the brazen Serpent (which was a Type of Christ) took away
all the killing power of the fiery Serpents: this is the practice of the soul
whom the Lord has truly brought home to himself: as Ezekiel 16.36. after they
were justified in Gods sight, then shall they remember their evil ways, says
the Text, and be ashamed, and never open their mouths more, when I am pacified
toward thee for all that thou have done: Though God has accepted of a poor
believer, yet he must see his sins, and lay his mouth in the dust, and never
pranke up his heart more, but walk humbly before the Lord; and though he is
accepted and pardoned, yet he shall judge himself worthy to be condemned:
This is the first conclusion.

Job makes to be the ground of that bitter complaint of his, and made him sit
down in distractednesse of heart, under the heavy displeasure of the Lords
wrath, that though God would not damn him, yet when the Lord takes away his
loving countenance, and lets in his indignation into his soul, to his
humiliation, terror, and vexation; this sunk him infinitely, and this God
might do to every believer under Heaven, Job 13.24, 26. Why hidest thou away
thy face, and take me for thine enemy? God seemed to be displeased with
him, and to frown upon him, and carried himself to Job as an enemy: and in
the 26. verse, Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to inherit
the sins of my youth: The old lusts, and the old bruses of his youth, whereby
he had dishonored God, though these were pardoned before, yet God renewes
them, and puts in the suit against him the second time, and makes the sins of
his youth to be inherited by him; that look as the land descends to the
heir, so the Lord made the sins and vanities of his soul to be possessed by
him, and brought out all his abominations out of record, Thou writest bitter
things against me, that is, the Lord took all the advantages against him that
might be, and said, Remember the old lusts of thy heart, and the vanities of
thy youth; and this made him like a dry leaf tossed too and fro: as verse 25.
Oh how easy were it for God, if he should but report to a man's conscience any
little sin, that was committed the night before, and set it on, and seal it
to the heart, it would drive the stoutest heart under heaven to despair:
Psalm 88.15. Thy terrors have I suffered from my youth upwards, and I have
been distracted with them; Lord, why castest thou off my soul? I am
afflicted, and ready to die. It is certain, and I have known it, that the
most stoutest heart, and rebellious lion-like disposition, that sets himself
against God and his grace; if God let him but see his sin, and say, this is
thy pride, and thy stubbornness and rebellion, it would drive the stoutest
heart under heaven beyond it self; nay, to utter distraction of mind, Psalm
40.12. Innumerable troubles have taken hold upon me, they have so compassed me
about, that I am not able to look up: Every sin is like a great bandog that
is muzzeld, and if he be once let loose, he will tear all in pieces: so the
Lord sometimes muzzels a man's corruptions, and keeps them under, and if the
Lord do but now and then let them loose, then they pull a man down: and hence
comes all those pale looks, and discouragements of soul, these are they that
will thus worry a man: Thus every believer must acknowledge that it were just
with the Lord to let loose his sin, howsoever not to condemn him, yet to
make him live at little peace or quiet; and hence it is that the Prophet David
prays so against it, Psalm 51.9. when he had committed those two great sins
of adultery and murder, though God after his confession had sealed to his
soul the pardon of them, yet he went with broken bones; and therefore he
says, Hide away thy face from my sins, and put away all mine iniquities; as
if he had said, look not upon my sins as a judge, do not follow the Law
against me, let not my sins, or my person be once brought into the Court, or
be once named, but look upon the Lord Jesus Christ for me, and for his sake
blot out all mine iniquities.

Jeremy, We are holy, we are lords, we will come no more at thee: No it is
necessary, seeing Christ is yet in the work of the mediatourship, that we
should see a daily need of him; this is the reason of that great complaint of
David, Psalm. 51.1.2. a man would think that he would have been comforted,
and gone away cheerfully, having the pardon of his sins: but mark how he
cries, Have mercy upon me oh God, according to the multitude of thy
compassions, wash away all my transgressons: wash me thoroughly from all my
transgressions, and purge me from my sin. He had not only need of Christ
before his conversion to justify him, but he had need of Christ now to
continue the assurance of his justification; it is not a drop, but a bucket
full of mercy; not a little mercy, but a whole ocean: Lord, I have had a great
deal of mercy for the sins of my youth, and I have need of a great deal of
mercy still to wash away the guilt of my sins: this the Law required of every
man that did offer sacrifice, as they were to offer their daily sacrifice, so
we have daily need of Christ, and therefore we must have a daily recourse to
Christ: therefore the sacrificer was to lay his hands upon the head of the
sacrifice: Even so do thou lay thine hands upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and
rest upon him, and thou shall find acceptance with him, this is that which
sometimes chears up the drooping heart, and bears it up in the midst of all the
waves of wickedness, when he sees the vanity of his mind, and the deadness
of his heart, and frothinesse of his speech, and now sin, and then sin, and
in every thing sin, as you cannot but see and confess it: this stands the
poor sinner in stead when he considers this, and says, though I am daily
sinning, yet there is a Savior in Heaven, and mercy and grace in him, that I
may be comforted therein for ever, Hebrews 7.25. He is able to save to the
uttermost, those that come to God by him: It implies these two things, not
only from all sin, but also at all times; not only from the sins of your
youth, but also to the uttermost of your days: the reason is, he lives for
ever to do it; this is the chearing of a poor sinner, and this we should
labor to maintain, and to keep the sight and sense of our sin, though our
sins endure for ever, our living and sinning go together, and we still
continue to be as sinful, and lazy, and idle, as ever; yet see a need of a
Savior that lives for ever, and he is able to save for ever: He has not
only been a Savior in times past, but he is still; you may happily live many
days, and therefore go to Christ which lives for ever, to pardon and to
intercede for the comfort of the soul. The wise man says, Proverbs 28.13. He
that confesses and forsakes shall find mercy: the original runs thus,
confessing and forsaking finds mercy, the best of Gods people have their
sins, their pride, and other distempers: therefore labor to see thy sins,
and to see thy need of Christ, that thou may find pardon for them.

upon thy own soul, that thou may be affected with it, and be carried with
a hatred to it, and a resolution to get more strength and power against it:
Famous is that example of David herein, and this was the cause of his practice;
it is a conceit of the Familists, that if he had once gotten the assurance of
Gods love, he might have gone away cheared, but though the Lord had pardoned
his sin, yet he would not pardon sin in himself: the Lord showed mercy to
his soul, but yet he would not show any pity to his sin, but showed all
the hatred and revenge against it, that possibly he could: As the Apostle said
concerning the incestuous Corinth, Ye should rather have sorrowed, that the
sin might have been removed; had you sorrowed for your sins, then you
would have resisted them; And when he had showed them their transgressions,
and convinced them of their sins, see what fruit it wrought in them, in 2
Cor. 7.10. For this thing that ye have had godly sorrow, what great care it
has wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what indignation;
yea, what fear, what zeal, what revenge, etc? The Familists scornfully and
sinfully inquire and say, why should a believer go drooping, and mourning
under his sins and corruptions, and have his eyes full of tears, and his
heart full of grief, seeing Christ has pardoned all, as though a man did
become a Mediator to himself? their demand is weak, and their scorn is
hellish, and therefore I answer them thus: If there be a daily need that every
believer see a necessity of Christ, then there is a daily need to repent and
sorrow for sin; for if he must be more sanctified, then he must be more
mortified; therefore he must daily see his sins or else he will never see a
need of Christ, nor repent, nor be more sanctified nor mortified: Again, if
every believer must express his love unto God daily, then he must hate every
thing that is evil. I hope you will confess that every believer is bound to
love Jesus Christ, therefore he must hate sin; and if he must hate sin
that he may not commit it, then he must mourn for it when it is committed.
If a man have any good nature, it will work trouble in his heart, to think
that he should sin against so good a God; thus far a Christian ought to
go, and must go in the charging himself with his sin.



conceive, nor in his heart be persuaded that any sin, nor all his sins
shall ever be able to fasten the guilt of sin upon him, so as to cause
revenging justice to proceed against him to his condemnation, if he seriously
repent, and amend, and forsake his old ways: for he must not in his judgment
conceive, nor in his heart think that ever sin repented of shall be able to
fasten guilt upon him so, as to draw out the execution of justice against him:
It is one thing to be worthy of condemnation, and it is another thing to
fasten guilt and condemnation upon him, as many poor creatures will say, I
shall be condemned, and I shall one day perish by the hands of Saul, and these
sins will be my everlasting destruction: take heed what you do; for if you
are believers, true penitents; you sin highly in so doing, and saying, walk
as humbly as thou will, and lay thy mouth in the dust, and speak not a word
more, and say, it is mercy that thou art not in hell; yet know this also, that
all thy sins, and all thy pride shall never be able so to fasten guilt upon
thee, as to draw out Gods justice against thee: sin has a power to make us
guilty, and to condemn us, but it shall never fasten its work upon thy
penitent soul: remember Paul, Acts 5.28. He went and gathered up sticks with
the rest of the company to make a fire, (for he took no great state upon
himself, being but a poor tent-maker) and there came a viper out of the heat,
and leapt on his hand: by and by the Heathens they proclaimed him to be some
notorious malefactor, some murderer, whom though he had escaped the Sea, yet
vengeance has not suffered him to live: but mark what the Text says, He
shook off the viper into the fire, and had no hurt; this viper would have
slain him, being a deadly venomous creature, but Paul had a promise before,
that if he touched any poysonfull thing, it should not hurt him. This is the
admirable happiness of the Saints, and servants of God: oh that they were
persuaded of it. All thy pride, and envy, and malice, and covetousness, all
thy sins are of a poisonous viperous nature, but if thou art a believer, if a
true penitent and convert, thou have the promise, that the sting of the
Serpent, sin, shall not hurt thee, it is taken off from thee, and laid upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore shake off the guilt of all thy
abominations, and go on cheerfully and comfortably to Christ, and yet humbly
too, and praise his Name that he has been pleased to take that guilt of
sin upon him, which thou were never able to bear: therefore, though all thy
pride, thy rebellion and other sins should come in against thee; as the sins
of Manasses, if thou repentest and forsakest them, yet they shall never be able
to fasten any guilt upon thee to condemn thee. Look as it was with the three
children, the fire in its own nature was able to burn them; therefore they
that put them in were consumed by the flame, but the three children had no
hurt: the Lord stopped the power of the flames, that it burnt only their
bonds, but not one hair of their head was sienged, nor there was no smell of
fire upon them; it was not because the fire would not, or could not, but the
Lord stopped the acting of the fire. So every sin is able to fasten guilt upon
thee, and to condemn thee, but upon thy repentance, the Lord hinders it in the
act; and therefore though sin does send the wicked and impenitent down to
hell to fry in torments, yet it shall never send thee down, nor fasten guilt
upon thee: Thus it was likewise with Daniel, Chap. 6.22, 23, 24. when he was
put into the Lions den, the Princes of the king Darius had a spleen against
Daniel, because he was a holy man, and had gotten some interest in the kings
favor, and they could get no hold against him, but in the matter of his God*
now he that loved God better than himself, He opens his window boldly toward
Jerusalem, professing Gods truth when he was called to it, therefore they went
to the king to have him to be cast into the den of Lions, according to the
decree; now he was cast into it, and though the Lions were hungry, yet God
shut the mouth of the Lions, they had power, and were able to hurt him if they
had not been restrained, but God had shut up their mouths that they could not
hurt him; but when the enemies of Daniel were cast into the den, the Lions
did tear them all to pieces, before they came at the bottom of the den they
rent them in pieces suddenly: what is the reason of it? they had as much power
before, and were as able and as hungry before, but the Lord stopped their mouths,
that they could not devour Daniel: Just so it is with the sins of the
penitent, and the sins of the impenitent; the sins of the one, though they
are of a killing, and a Lion-like nature, ( for the wages of every sin is
death, and there is condemnation in it) yet the Lord stops the mouth of the
Lion, he takes off the guilt and condemning power of sin, that though it
has power in it self to condemn yet it cannot do it; but now when it meets
with an impenitent unbeleever, the malice of the malicious shall kill him, and
the pride of the ambitious shall one day rend his heart; but it is not so with
the sins of the penitent believers, their sins have teeth indeed, and power
to make a man worthy of condemnation, but they shall never fasten condemnation
upon him; this is the meaning of that place, Romans 8.3. That which was
impossible to the Law to do, in as much as it was weak, because of the flesh,
God sending his only Son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh: It is an excellent place, and has much weight in
it, and howsoever there are many interpretations of the place, yet I will
follow that interpretation, which I now express, that it was impossible for
the Law to acquit a man of sin, because he cannot keep the Law, and
therefore he cannot be justified by it: but how comes it to pass then, that
the Saints of God are delivered? The text says, Christ took flesh on him, and
it was sinful flesh by similitude or imputation, not actually by commission;
the nature of our Savior had no evil inherent in him nor committed by him,
but he was only a sinner by imputation, and then he condemned sin in the
flesh, what is that? it is a law case, and Master Calvin has it excellently,
he damned sin, as a man will say when he loses the suit, he fell from his
cause, and from his plea which he made, he lost it utterly; so Christ taking
upon him our nature by imputation, he made sin lose its claim which it would
make to the soul in this case, he that breaks the Law of God is guilty,
and shall be condemned by it: but this man has broken the Law of God, and
therefore is guilty of condemnation thereby: Now Christ takes off these, and
says, It is true, he is guilty of sin, and worthy of condemnation, unless
another be contented to be guilty for him, but I have undertaken the guilt for
him, and have paid the debt for him; and therefore this soul is free from
sin, thou have nothing to do with this soul, neither shall thou condemn
him. Observe it, when all your sins shall muster in upon you, and come from
East to West, saying, thou art guilty of pride, guilty of malice, etc. and
shall be condemned for them; make answer and say it is true, Lord, I am so, but
Christ has taken away the guilt and condemnation, and I have repented of my
sins: therefore, sin, thou have nothing to do with this soul of mine,
Christ has taken it and redeemed it, and therefore I leave it with him: This
is the first conclusion.

condemn the penitent and faithful; then what will become of the faithless
and unbeleevers think ye? This truth is like a thunderbolt, and it is able to
shake the hearts of all unbeleevers, and to dash them all in pieces: Hence it
is evident that every obstinate unbeleever is destitute of all hope of succor
and pardon of his sin: consider of this all you that are unbeleevers; you
must pay your own debts, and bear your own burdens. I know your hearts
cannot but testify that the condition of such poor souls is very miserable;
it is that which sometimes comforts a man, that either he has good friends
that will help him, or else he has means of his own by which he is able to
relieve himself; but he that has no relief of himself, nor cannot expect
no^ hope for any, this man sinks down in sorrow, because he knows there is
no way in the world to help him: This is thy condition right, thou that art an
unbeleever; what to be cast out of heaven and earth too, this is miserable, to
be for saken of God and man too, that no means in heaven nor earth will stand
him in steed for his good, whilst he thus continues. Consider of this you
that make nothing of the sin of unbeleefe, though you have some care of other
sins; whither will you go for succor in that great day of accounts? will
you go to the Saint they dare not; will you go to the Creatures? they cannot,
will you go to the Lord Jesus Christ? he will not succor you: If you go to
any of the Saints to see if they will take the guilt of your sins upon them,
they say we have too many inabilities to procure pardon for any one sin, and
never a Saint in the world dares to meddle with the guilt of another sins,
and therefore they dare not meddle with them; but they say as the wise virgins
did to the foolish ones, Matthew. 25.9. When the foolish virgins said, give us of
your oil, for our lamps are gone out; not so, said they, lest there be not
enough for you and us too, but rather go unto them that sell, and buy for your
selves: Even so, if you go to the Saints, and say, I pray you undertake the
pardon of my sins, and rebellions, and bear you the guilt of my sins,
because you are holy and righteous; no, say they, we cannot; so all the
creatures cannot succor you. If all the creatures in heaven and earth should
conspire together to save you from the burden of any one sin, they could not
do it: nay, the creatures become your accusers; the bed whereupon thou have
committed so many abominations, and the alehouse where thou have been drunk,
and have blasphemed, and the habitation where thou dwell, and all the
creatures groan against thee, under the burden of thy abominations: as Romans
8.22. Therefore they will take no more guilt upon them, than what they have
already, they are too weary of the weight of what they feel already; but though
the saints dare not, and the creatures cannot save you, yet there is hope in
heaven, and there is help to be had in Christ; well were it with thee, if thou
had any share in that Christ; but this is that which will sink thy heart,
that there is no hope for thee there: what do thou talk of grace and of
mercy, when thou have opposed the Gospel of grace, and of mercy, and thou
continuest in unbeleefe? this is the height and depth of the misery of all
unbeleevers, that there is no hope for them in heaven: This was that which the
wicked said, when they insulted against David in Psalm ^.2. There is no help
for him in his God: what they said of David falsely, God says it truly of thee,
there is no help for thee in God; there is mercy in Christ, but that's thy
misery, for there is none for thee, being an unbeleever: Psalm 18.41. David
there expresses the misery of the wicked, Because the Lord leaves them in
their troubles, they cried, but there was none to save them; yea, even unto the
Lord, but he answered them not: That's thy estate right, though thou call to
heaven, and to Christ, and to the God of mercy, and to the merits of Christ,
yet they will not help thee: thou have many sins, and thou shall bear them
every one: Now think what your sins have deserved, and how you will be able
to bear them, when all flesh shall appear before God: then the Lord will
charge all thy sins upon thy soul, and thou must bear; and if every sin
deserves condemnation, then how will thou be able to bear all those
condemnations that are due to all thy sins which thou can not number, even
the dregs of vengeance, and the bottom of the cup of the Lords indignation.
Christ in John 17.9. speaking of the faithful, and how he prays to the
Father for them; he says, I pray not for them of the world, but for these,
whom thou have given me out of the world: When a poor unbeleever shall come
to Jesus Christ, and shall entreat him to speak a good word for him, when he
has never regarded his person, not accepted of his gracious offers of mercy,
and shall entreat Christ to pray for him, no, says Christ, I never prayed for
the obstinately wicked: now if Christ will not speak a good word for thee,
do thou think that he will pardon the guilt of thy sins upon him? nay, he
only pardons the guilt of the sins of the faithful; but as for thee, thou
must bear thy sins, and suffer for them for evermore.

Cor. 4.13, We are persecuted, and yet we pray; we are reviled, and yet we
bless; we are accounted as the offscouring of the earth, until this time: So
do you, be content to bear any shame that is unjustly laid upon thee, for
thy Savior which was accounted a sinner for thee; Acts 24.14. S. Paul was
resolute in it, and said, after the way that ye call heresy, worship I the
Lord God of my Fathers; nay, he presses this upon the hearts of Gods
Children; Hebrews 13.12, 13. speaking in the 12. verse, that Christ took our
sins upon him, and went out of the city, and was slain without the gate; he
says in the 13. verse, Let us therefore go out of the Camp to him, bearing
our reproach; be not afraid to be seen in a Christian cause, nor to be
disgraced for it, go out boldly and resolutely, harden your faces, and steel
your hearts against all such things, and let the dogs bark, and the winds
blow, and the waves roar, go you out of the Camp for his honor, bearing his
reproach comfortably; he has borne sin for thee, bear thou shame for him.



Now Christ not only took our sins by imputation, but also the payment of
the debt was really discharged by our Savior; he laid down the payment of the
debt, and suffered the punishment really: though I do not conceive this to be
directly intended, yet it may be inferred from the words of the Text, in the
former point, Christ was charged with the sins of all the faithful; and now
Christ did suffer their pains, and underwent the whole punishments which their
sins required, so the point of Doctrine from hence is this:



I ground this Doctrine out of the Text thus; the text says, Christ was made
sin, that is, he had our sins imputed to him, and therefore he must be
made a sacrifice for sin, and bear the punishment of sin: If Christ became
a debtor for us, then he must also lay down the payment of the debt, only
here remember this; consider the bounds and limits of this mercy of the Lord,
it is limited only to the faithful, they only share therein, and are
partakers of that benefit that comes by the sufferings of Christ.

To prove this Doctrine, look Hebrews 2.17. compare it with Hebrews 4.15. In
chap. 2.17. the text says, Wherefore it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren in all things: and in chap. 4.15. He was tempted in all things like
unto us, sin only excepted; for there were no punishments excepted, as
appears in the former place; therefore in Esaias 53.5, 6, 7, 8. the whole
chapter is a full description of the punishments of our Savior, and you shall
find these three degrees of it in the afornamed verses, He was stricken, and
so stricken that he was wounded, and so wounded that he was bruised for our
transgressions; and then in the 6. verse, it is very pithily laid down, All we
like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of
us all; that is, the punishments of us all; they were laid, that is, God made
all the sorrows, and all the punishments of all the faithful to meet upon our
Savior. It is a term taken from war, when an army is levied out, every
town and county sets out so many men, and they all meet at such a place such
a day: so every faithful soul sets out miseries, and man's out afflictions,
and they all levy out an army of sorrows, and they all meet upon our Savior:
all those sins and miseries of the godly from one end of the world to the
other, from east to west, from north to south, they run amain upon our Savior,
and besiege the soul and body of him, and they lie heavy upon him, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; that is, it overwhelmed him for the
while, and made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Another
proof of this point is, Gal. 3.13. The text says, Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; as it is written, cursed
be every one that hangs on a tree; He that was made such a curse for us as
the Law did require, and such a curse as wherein the Law was satisfied, even he
was made a full curse for us, and bore all the punishment due to us; but he
was made such a curse as the Law prefigured, and wherein the Law was satisfied;
and therefore he must needs bear whatsoever the Law required: and therefore I
may say to the faithful soul, as Paul said to Philemon concerning Onesimus,
If he has hurt thee, or owes thee ought, set that upon my score; so says our
Savior, whatsoever punishments the faithful have deserved by their sins, I
will bear it and answer it: Now for the opening of the Doctrine, give me
leave to open these three questions:











Adam by reason of his sin, therefore Christ needed not to suffer any thing,
but that which was threatened in Genesis. 2.17. The curse threatened was this, In
the day that thou do eat thereof, thou shall die the death: the curse does
not mention many deaths, nor does it punctually set forth any one death; but
whatsoever death it is, it is left indifferently to the choice of our Savior:
this I speak to wipe away a carnal cavil that is cast upon this truth, by
some that would diminish the sufferings of Christ. If Christ did suffer
punishment for all, then why was he not stoned with stones, as Steven was? and
why was he not sawne in pieces, or burnt, or the like? The force of the
argument follows not, our Savior was not bound to suffer many deaths, nay,
the curse does not intimate any one death in particular, but only death in the
general: Now, say they, if our Savior suffered all the punishments of the
faithful, then he suffered so many particular deaths: the argument is false,
for look how Adam being in the root of all mankind, and committed sin;
look what death he deserved, that death our Savior was to suffer, and it was
required of him, and this death our Savior undertook; but when Adam had
committed sin, there were not many deaths denounced; nay, nor any one
particular death, but only death in the general; and therefore death in the
general being only threatened, death in the general our Savior was only
bound to suffer.

it, and Christ undertook it to die the death of the cross, a most shameful,
and base death, only appropriate to the basest malefactors; now Christ did
willingly submit himself to this, and God the Father did lay this upon Christ,
that sin might appear to be most heinous, and that sin might be hated,
and Christ might appear most merciful and gracious, and holy in loathing
sin, as Philippians 2.6, 8. Our Savior being equal with the Father, and
thought it no robbery so to be, yet he humbled himself, and took on him the
form of a servant, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
cross.





Acts 2.27. quoted out of Psalm 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell,
neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption: Now the Saints of
God do see corruption, but this was a dishonorable infirmity; for Christ
though he suffered for us, yet he raised up himself from the vildnesse of the
grave, and saw no corruption, and therefore it was no dishonor to him: John
19.33, 36. When the soldiers found our Savior dead, they brake not his legs,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled which says, not a bone of him shall be
broken: Whatsoever dishonor our Savior Christ did submit himself unto, he
was willing to suffer; but what was not by Law required, and what was not fit
for him to suffer, that Christ would not suffer the Jews to do unto him, for
the Law did not require this in the curse, that his legs should be broken, and
therefore Christ would not undergo it: this is the third conclusion.

of a Saint of God, is like a humble Be that has no sting in it, which a
child may play withal, and not be hurt: and thus Saint Paul played with death,
1 Cor. 15.55. Oh death, where is thy sting? as if he should say, the wicked
fear death, because the sting is in it to them; but that sting is taken away
from me, by the death of the Lord Jesus Christ: when Christ went down into
the grave, he sugered it, and made it sweet, and easy as a bed of Down for
believers to rest upon. There are three privileges which every believer may
challenge upon his deathbed: the first is this:

These. 4.16. The dead in Christ shall rise first; that is the value of the
phrase, in the virtue of the death of Christ we die also; that as he died, and
by his own power rose again: so also we die, that we may rise again. The
Saints of God die that they may be like to Christ, and be raised again, and
so be for ever happy with Christ; this is the particular good that the death
of Christ communicates to the faithful ones, 1 Cor. 15.36. Thou fool, that
which thou somest, it is not quickened, unless it die; it must first be
corrupted, that it may grow again into an ear of corn: the meaning is, a man
therefore dies, that he may rise again, the body must lie down in the dust: 1
Cor. 15.53. This corruption must put on incorruption; and this mortality must
put on immortality: Now corruption cannot put on incorruption, nor mortality
cannot put on immortality, so long as we are here: the body of Adam could not
be made immortal of it self, the frame of it would not afford so much, for
Adams body needed meat, and had it; but immortal bodies need no food, but live
by the power of Gods Spirit: therefore Christ took down the frame of this
nature, that he might make it a more excellent frame. It is therefore said,
that a Christian dies rather in the authority of mercy, than justice; that as
Christ died and rose again, so Christ will have all his servants die, that he
may of a corrupt nature, and a mortal body, make an immortal body; he will
make it immortal, which nature it self, no not in its perfection, could not
do: this is the first privilege.

A second privilege which believers receive is this, the death of the believer
puts an end to all his sins, and miseries, and sorrows; that when the soul
and body shall part in sunder, then sin shall depart from both; and when they
go out of this life, they shall go from all the miseries of this life: we
shall never be more pestered with lusts, and corruptions, we shall never be
drawn from the Lord more, Satan is now busy, but when the Saints of God die,
there is a separation from all sins, from all sorrows, from all temptations,
never to be assaulted more: this is the meaning of that place, 2 Cor. 4.10.
Everywhere we bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the
life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal bodies: the meaning is
this, Christ by his death did subdue sin, and now by the sorrows and
troubles he suffered, and by the power of his death, there is a total
separation made from sin in soul and body: therefore when as in the power of
Christ's death, we can lay down these bodies, then are we separated from sin;
this is to bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus: this is quite
contrary in every unbeleever, for death natural in an unbeleever is but the
very beginning of all their other plagues; they sip of Gods vengeance now, but
they shall have the full cup then: sin in them now is restrained, but then
their sins shall take full possession of them: Satan now does but tempt them,
but then ^e shall take possession of them; as it is said of the rich fool in
the Gospel, This night shall they fetch away thy soul, and then as they shall
be for ever plagued, so they shall be for ever sinful: nothing but sin
shall be in them, they shall be altogether proud and for ever proud, they shall
be altogether malicious, and for ever malicious, and the devils shall drag the
soul of the wicked out of the body down to hell for evermore, and there shall
tyranize over it for ever: but on the contrary it is not so with the Saints,
the end of their life is but the beginning of another; they go from a vale of
tears, to a haven of happiness.

when the Saints of God shall have no more tears in their eyes, nor sin in
their souls, not sorrow in their hearts; when they die, then their sins and
sorrows die too; you shall never be dead hearted more; then you shall have
holine^ in full possession which so long time you have longed for; it is now
only in expectation, and you hope and look for it, when the Lord will put
wisdom into your blind minds, and holiness into your corrupted hearts, but
when death comes it will bring you to the fruition of all that holiness and
happiness, and this is done by the death of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.2.
We are now the sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be, and
we know that when he shall be made manifest, we shall be made like him: that
is, like to him in all holiness, and happiness, as he is altogether holy,
and altogether happy: now you are children, but only in nonage, now you are
only wives betrothed, and you go up and down in your rags of sin, but when
the solemnization of the marriage shall be in the great day of accounts, then
we shall be like him; and he will make us altogether holy, and he will fill
our blind minds with knowledge, and possess our corrupt hearts withal
purity, holiness, and grace, so far as thy soul shall be capable of it, and
shall be needful for thee: what, are you unwilling to go to your husband?
the wife sometimes receives letters from her espoused husband, she welcomes
the messenger, and accepts the tokens kindly, and reads the letter gladly, and
will not part with his tokens above any thing: but oh, how she longs to enjoy
himself in his own person, this is her chiefest desire, to be possessed of
him, and to have his company always: so the Lord Jesus Christ is your husband,
he died that ye might live; he is ascended up into heaven; and has made
passage for you; you have many intimations of his mercy, and many sweet smiles
from heaven, saying, well, go thy way, thy sins are pardoned, and thy soul
shall be saved; these are his tokens, and I hope you will lay them up by you,
and make much of them, but when will the time come that I may enjoy my Savior?
Now I have a little mercy, and a little holiness, and a little pardon of
sin; but oh that I might enjoy my Savior fully: Now it is quite contrary
with the wicked; the death of the wicked is a means to shut them out of all the
hope they had of receiving mercy, for when death parts soul and body, then
there is no more cards and dice, no more lusts; the adulterer shall no more
satisfy himself with his unclean lusts, the drunkard shall not then be
drunk, the blasphemer shall not then blaspheme so as he was wont to do for
nothing, but he shall be and blaspheme God for something, and his soul shall
be full of Gods vengeance; this is the death of the wicked: the death of the
Saints is like a ferriman to convey them over to eternal happiness; but the
death of the wicked is as a hangman to bereave them of life and salvation too:
death to the saints is as a guide to convey them to happiness, but to the
wicked, death is as a Jailor to carry them away to the place of execution. And
thus much briefly of the former part of the answer, namely that our Savior
suffered the death natural.

Now our Savior did not only suffer in his body, but he suffered in his soul
also: you may conceive of it in two particulars:

Psalm 31.22. I said in mine haste, I am cast out of sight: As if he had
said, God has taken away the sweet smiles of his countenance from the heart of
David, and (...) is (...) a part of the second death; yet thou ^he art ^est the
voice of thy prayer David was now in some distress, by reason of the
withdrawing of the favor of God from his soul: this is the first part of the
second death.

Psalm. 43.^. Why have thou cast me off? and Psalm 51.11. Cast me not away out
of thy presence, etc. The Lord seemed to cast him away, and to send him
packing, and he seemed to be cast away in his own apprehension; both these
you shall see concluded on in Job 13.24. Thou r^est bitter things against me,
and hidest thy face away from me, and take me for thy enemy: The Lord not
only went away and hid him, but he made Job a But, that so his arrows might
come against him pell mell, and he let all his displeasure fall upon him with
might and maine: so then there is first a real withdrawing of the sweetness
of the mercy of God from the soul: and secondly, a real inflicting of the
indignation of the Lord, and that fills the soul of a poor creature.



Esaias 30.33. Tophet is prepared of old, the burning thereof is fire and much
wood, and the breath of the Lord as a ri^^r of brimstone does kindle it: so
that wheresoever the stream of the brimstone of Gods wrath seizes, there is
Hell: again, the place is no part of debt, and therefore it is no part of the
payment, but the payment of the money that makes the satisfaction: This is that
which is spoken concerning Adam, Thou shall die the death: he does not say,
thou shall go to Hell: the wicked go to Hell because they cannot pay, as the
debtor goes to prison, because he cannot pay the debt: all that justice
requires is this, to have payment; he does not say thou shall go to Hell, but
because the Golgotha, as in the prison of hell.

Bellarmine, as it was with Job, he was able to grapple with a great deal of
Gods wrath by faith; and therefore he says, Though thou kill me, yet will I
trust in thee; Gods killing anger, and Jobs trusting stood both together in
this in the measure of it: Now if a poor saint of God can do it, and is able
to bear the intimations of Gods wrath, then much more Christ, being God and
Man, might do it, and yet trust in him, and never be separated from him in
regard of the union of the soul of our Savior; for as it is with the death
natural in the body of our Savior, as the body of our Savior died, and in
dying, suffered death natural, as an effect of Gods wrath, God smote him;
howsoever the body died the death natural, yet the Godhead was still united to
the body of our Savior in the grave, and brought soul and body together
again; so that the union with the Godhead is still maintained; so it is here,
the soul of our Savior might be separated from the sense and sweetness of
Gods favor and mercy, and yet the union between the Godhead and the Manhood
be still maintained; as God might leave the body to the death natural, so he
might leave the soul to a kind of supernatural death, and the soul might
want the sense of the sweetness of the favor of God, and yet the union not be
broken off: for why could not our Savior bear this curse, as well as any
other part of it, and not be blemished? this brought punishment upon our
Savior, but it pulled not away any grace which he was possessed withal: observe
these three particulars herein:



Secondly, the Godhead did preserve the manhood from corruption, and did
sustain and support the Manhood.



Bellarmine, and that is this, says he, if the Lord Jesus Christ did suffer
the wrath of God the Father, then the guiltless should have been condemned,
and the innocent punished; and how can God do this? or how can our Savior
suffer this? Is not God the Father unjust to punish the just? and Christ
unwise, to suffer as unjust, being just? I answer, it is a silly weak cavil,
therefore take but these two respects with you, and you shall see it will be
plain, for as Christ was in himself considered, he was guiltless, and
therefore approved of, and beloved of the Father: but as he took our sins,
and our guilt upon him, he was accounted as a sinner, though he was not a
sinner, and he took our sins on him by imputation; and therefore no reason,
but he should suffer them, and the punishment of them, not in regard of any
sin that he had or did; but because it was imputed to him; therefore God the
Father condemned him as guilty: so runs the phrase of Scripture, He suffered
for our sins, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his
stripes we were healed: he suffered not for any sins that he had committed,
but for the condition of all sinful nature imputed to him, and these diverse
respects we do practice, for ordinarily we are bound to love a creature as
God made him, and then to hate him as he makes himself sinful, the Judge
goes to the trial of a Nisi prius, and his son comes before him in the
person of the debtor: now though the Judge love him as a son, yet he will
condemn him as a surety; the Judge loves and pitties him in one regard, but
yet he passes sentence against him in another regard: So it is here with the
Lord Jesus Christ, when God the Father stands upon the tribunal of justice,
and was pleased to follow the suit against the party offending, our Savior
steps into our room, and submits himself to the censure of the Father, and as
we were accounted, so he was content to be accounted; and as we were to
suffer, so he was content to suffer for us: God the Father loved him as he was
God, and holy, and innocent; yet he condemns him, and lets in his wrath upon
him as he was to bear our sins; for God the Father might love Jesus Christ,
and yet give his body to death natural: so God the Father might love the soul
of our Savior, and yet give it over to pain supernatural: all the world
confesses that it was without anger that Christ died, and yet the Father slew
him: this conclusion helps us to the interpretation of that place, Matthew
27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He was a Father to our
Savior: and our Savior a Son to him.

John 18.11. when Peter would have rescued our Savior from the high Priests,
Our Savior said, suffer it to be so, put up thy sword into its place; shall I
not drink of the cup which my Father gives me to drink of? he does not say,
shall I not sip or taste of the cup, but, shall I not drink of it? that is, he
drinks the cup of wrath which was prepared for poor sinners, clean off;
therefore Esaias 63.3. he is said to tread the wine press of the Fathers wrath
alone, he did squeese it all out* observe these explications in this kind, and
know thus much, that the want of the sense and feeling, and operation of Gods
love, and the feeling of the indignation of Gods wrath in it self considered,
it is not a sin, but so far as our sins deserve this wrath of God, and
deserve this separation, and so far as we out of our infidelity dash the
sweetness of Gods love, we sin in this kind; but none of all this befell our
Savior, the bare want of the one, and the sense of the other is not a sin,
but we sin in bearing it. It is a sweet observation of the Schoolmen, that our
Savior cried, my God, my God, even in the loss of the sweetness of Gods
favor; and when Christ complains, and sweat water and blood, yea clods of
blood, so that his heart broke within him under the fierce indignation of the
Lord: this fierce indignation may be attended two ways, or there are two
things in it: I say in the separation of God from the soul, there are these
two things to be attended: First, a want of that grace, and holiness, and
confidence, whereby the soul should close with God, that howsoever God goes
away, yet the soul should follow him, as Jacob did after the Lord, when he
said, I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me: Now it is one thing
when God goes away, and it is another thing when we push him away: therefore
that want of grace, and holiness, and confidence, whereby the soul should
cleave to, and close with God, this is one thing which causes the separation
of God from us: this is on our part.

Job did that would trust in him, though he killed him; yet God may withdraw the
sweet refreshing operation, and the sensible conveyance of his mercy and
compassion from his soul, and he frowns upon him, and plucks away the hold,
and lets in his indignation upon him: the first of these two can never be
without sin, and it is a heinous sin when our souls sit loose from God,
and when we shall separate our selves from the mercy and goodness of God, and
are weary of Gods presence in his ordinances, as many wicked men are, and are
weary of the promises, and say as those in Job did, Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways: this is a cursed sin, and this never
was, nor could not be in our Savior: but now that the Lord may pluck away the
sense of his love and favor, and take away the operation and conveyance of his
mercy; this God may justly do as he sees good: this was not a sin in Job,
that God did take away the sense of his love and mercy, and seemed to be his
enemy, but if Job had gone away from God, as God did from him, then he had
sinned, but he held God still: this was not a sin in Job, that God did thus
forsake him, though happily it was through his sin deserving it: all this did
befall our Savior Christ, and yet he was full of holiness, and hangs upon
God, and said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And God was angry
with him, because he had our sins upon him; but the first of these was not in
Christ, he did not depart from God: the second was inflicted upon our Savior,
and that might be justly; this ads much light to those passages; those two
ardent petitions of those two worthy lights, Moses and Saint Paul, Exodus
32.32. Moses perceiving that the Lord was ready to destroy the Israelites for
their sin, he says, Now if thou pardon this sin, thy mercy shall appear,
but if thou will not, then raze me out of the book of life which thou have
written: and in Romans 9.3. Saint Paul foreseeing the rejection of the Jews, and
that God would throw them away for sixteen hundred years together; the good
man seeing the dishonor that was like to come to God, and the utter
destruction of the people of the Jews, he says, I could even desire to be
separated from Christ, and to be cut off from the Nation of the Jews, that
they might not be forsaken of God: Now should a man pray to be removed out of
Gods presence, and to be separated from God for ever, and to be cut off from
God, and to be separated from Christ Jesus? no, for this were sinful; either
it signifies that Paul should have his heart loosened, and sit loose in his
affections to God, and to Jesus Christ: this Paul did not pray for, for it is a
horrible sin, and it is an argument he hated Christ and himself too. Now so
far as it implies our want of love to God, and our want of depending upon
God, it is a fearful sin, and these holy men did not desire it: but this is
the meaning, they were willing to have suffered the want of the sense and
feeling of Gods love and favor for the present: though they would have loved
and closed with God still, yet they would have been content to want the sense
of Gods love, that Gods glory might have been advanced, and the salvation of
the Jews furthered: so it was here with our Savior Christ, for howsoever
according to his humane nature he did fear the death natural, and the wrath
which he saw coming upon his nature, and therefore he said, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me; he might do it, and God by reason
required it, that a man be sensible of misery, yet according to the holiness
of the will of the Father, he did not pray against these, but prayed for
these, and for the bea^ing of the punishment: for he was sent for this end, and
it was a part of the Mediatourship: this is the meaning of that place, John
12.27. What shall I say, Father save me from this hour? no, but therefore came
I unto this hour; that is, the hour of death; He came into the world for this
end, and therefore, he submits himself: Thus much for the opening of the first
part of this conclusion; that whatsoever wrath should have come forth from the
Father upon the faithful, Christ did bear it all.



suffer punishments in his soul, but not so farre^ they came for his own
sin; the cause from within is sinful and detestable, but the cause from
without is holy and righteous; therefore all that which came from Gods wrath
inflicting punishment, all that Christ did suffer was so; but the wicked have a
cause of sin within them, and that Christ having not, he needed not to
suffer, and because he had no sin in him, he did not suffer all pains of
hell; he suffered the displeasure of Gods wrath, but yet so much of the
punishment as came from sin committed, that our Savior did not suffer.

Adams sin was infinite and provoking because it was against his Godhead, so
the sufferings must be infinite; now the sufferings of Christ were of infinite
value, but Adams sufferings were not of an infinite nature: Christ bore the
wrath of God and wrestled with it, and overcame it, and came out from under the
(...) displeasure of God, and why? because the^ were able to satisfy an
infinite God, who was thus infinitely wronged by the sin of man; therefore
the sufferings must be of an infinite satisfying nature, as you shall conceive
thus: a finite sin of Adam committed against God, was infinitely provoking,
but the sufferings of Christ were infinitely satisfying, and so answerable in
proportion to what divine justice required; this was the meaning of that place
i^ Acts 2.24. Whom God raised up and loosed the sorrows of death, because it
was not possible that he should be holden down of death; and it is the
meaning of that place, 1 Cor. ^5.54. Death is swallowed up in victory, Christ
endures (...) and overcomes it; and John 1^.20. Christ will convince the world
of sin, and of righteousness; why of righteousness? for I go unto the
Father; and why does he go to the Father? because he has paid the debt to
the uttermost: he did satisfy justice to the full, for had he not satisfied
justice, he had been kept in the gra^e till this day, and we had been
condemned; but now he has borne and satisfied all, therefore he must come
forth to immortality and glory. Remember these conclusions, and think thus,
has my Savior done all this for me? well, I will remember it, and think upon
it, and I will lay it by me for ever.



The desperation of a damned soul in hell, and the eternity of torments, they
are no essentials of the second death, and therefore they could not, nor ought
not to be suffered by our Savior: this I say to stop the mouths of all Popish
Jesuits, and especially of Bellarmine, who think to east a great scandal
upon Calvin and others in this kind: let me open both he parts of it; first,
the damned in hell despair, therefore, says Bellarmine, if Christ suffered
the pains of the second death, he did despair, and did suffer the pains of
hell for ^vermore. Oh foolish creature, who will be so wicked as to say thus?
Therefore that you may see this cursed opinion, consider two particulars in
this desperation;





and sanctified; and though now I am a damned creature, yet I may be succored
and delivered. This is that which sometimes bears up the heart, and it is that
also which bears up the hearts of the wicked many times here upon the earth:
when the Lord lets in the horror of heart, and fills the soul with his
indignation, his heart would sink, but that a little lean starved hope
supports him, and he sees than Gods will is not yet fully revealed, but that he
may be saved: and he says, this conscience may be quieted, and this soul may
be saved, and these sins may be pardoned; now despair is the quite contrary,
when the soul has no good in expectation, and that which cuts the heart
strings of a man's consolation, and pluck a man's comforts up by the roots, as
he has nothing for the present, so all means and ways of getting any good
are cut off, and then he casts off hope, and never looks to God more, because
he never looks for mercy from God; and then hope goes out and says, Oh when
will it once be, cannot these sins be pardoned, etc? And at last he sees
there is no way of getting any good, and therefore he never looks for mercy
more, but expects hell and damnation, and cries out, I am damned, I am damned:
This is despair, and this is the nature of it.

upon the soul, this is no part of them; for besides that which Divines will
observe, namely, that all punishments are passions, and they suffer them; but
despair is a work of the creature, and it issues from himself, and the
creature does it, and therefore it cannot properly be a punishment, nor any
part of the second death; but besides all this which they observe, this
desperation so opened, it is so far from being any part of the second death,
as that it is not a consequent which nextly follows from the second death, but
from the weakness and sinfulness of the creature. Desperation is not any
effect flowing immediately from the wrath of God upon the creature, but it
proceeds and comes directly and immediately from the weakness and sinfulnes of
the creature. Imagine that ye saw the Lord Jesus Christ coming in the clouds
with thousand thousands of his holy Angels, and the thrones were set up, and
all flesh appeared; the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the left
hand, and the Lord Jesus Christ passes the doom, and the sentence against
them, saying, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: Now when a poor damned
creature sees that the sentence is gone, and sees the good will of God passed
upon him, and the power of his wrath now to be expressed to the full against
him, and he apprehends the will of God now fulfild never to be crossed more, and
the decree of God is now expressed never to be altered more, and he sees the
gates of hell now sealed upon him, and that the Lord has cast upon him the
tombstone of his wrath, and that he is buried under the power of the second
death, and now he sees the time is gone, and the justice of God can never be
satisfied more, and this power of the Lords wrath can never be removed: Oh the
time was, that I had the word and the power of into quicken me, and to inform
me, and the Spirit of God to strive with me, and then there was some hope; but
now the decree of God is ma^e unrevokable, and this wrath I shall never bear,
nor never remove. There is now to word, no praying, no hearing, no conference,
no mercy, nor salvation to be hoped for, and so the soul looks no more for
any good, because the Lord has so peremptorily set down his do^me; thus the
soul breaks under the wrath of God, and is not able to satisfy, and the wrath
of God can never be removed, the fire will ever burn, and the worm will ever
gnaw, and now the soul casts off all hope; and this is the meaning of those
phrases, 2 Pet. 3.7. and in the 6. verse of the Epistle of Jude, where speaking
of the devils, the text says, They are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness, to the judgment of the great day: the devil is hopeless, he has no
hope of good, nor shall never receive any good: but our Savior Christ that was
able by the power of his Godhead to suffer this wrath of God, and to satisfy
justice, and to support himself under this wrath, and to come out from it, he
has a certain hope to please God the Father, and to have everlasting bliss
and happiness with him; there is hope with our Savior, because he can bear
and satisfy, and come from under this wrath. Take a basin of water, and cast
it upon a few coals of fire, and it will put them clean out, but throw the
same boson full upon a great fire, and though it may damp it a little at first,
yet it cannot quench it, but rather increases the flame, and makes it burn
the faster: what is the reason of this, that it quenched the little fire, and not
the great f^re? it was not firstly and nextly because of the coldness and
crosnesse of the water to the fire, for the same water was as cold upon the
great fire, and as crosse^ the nature of the great fire; but the little fire
was rob weak of it self to bear the coldness of the water, and therefore it
was quenched; but the great fire was able to bear the coldness of the water,
and therefore it was not quenched: so it is here, the wrath of God is like this
water, as David says, All thy waves and billows have passed over me; that is,
the waves of Gods indignation, and the ocean sea of Gods wrath: ^hen this false
upon a poor weak sinful creature that cannot bear this, but breaks under
this wrath, and cannot take off the vengeance of the Lord, but sinkes under it;
this creature despaires of all help, not because of the wrath of the Lord
firstly, but because of the weakness, and the sinfulness of the creature that
could not bear the wrath of the Lord: and hence he despaires, and the soul
says, alas, I am weak, and a poor sin creature, and this wrath of the Lord
is of an infinite vigor, I shall never be able to bear it, nor to get from
under it: therefore I despair and cast away all hope of help; but the Lord
Jesus Christ being perfect God, and perfect man, having a great flame of holy
affections kindled in him by the spirit of the Father, this did assist him
hereby to bear the wrath of God in his soul, and not only was he able to
bear it, but to overcome it; and although he were tossed up and down in the
sea of Gods wrath, yet he was not drowned; and though he sipped of the poison,
yet he was not poisoned: therefore he bore the pains of the second death, and
overcame them, and did not despair; he expected to receive good, because he
knew he should have good: thus our Savior, John 19.30. when he had so deeply
drunk of the cup of affliction, he said, now it is finished; that is, now the
fierce indignation of the Lord is over. Take a little child or infant newborn, and lay it in a little stream, if no man come to succor it, there can
be no hope that it will live, not properly because of the water, but because
the child is weak, and not able to keep it self from being overpowred by
the water: and therefore there is no hope to have relief for it; but let a
strong man come, and he will not be drowned by the stream, for he is of
height and strength either to wade through it, or else to save himself by
swimming: so there is the stream of the indignation of the Lord: Now God will
not help a poor sinful creature, and he cannot help himself, therefore the
stream will destroy him, and there is no hope, for he is never able to free
himself, because God will not, and he himself cannot; but the Lord Jesus
Christ that has skill and power, because he is God, as well as man; therefore
though he bear the wrath of God, yet because he is able to wade through it,
and to bear it: therefore it is that he will deliver himself, and all us with
him. Thus ye see that desperation is a consequent that follows from the
sinfulness and weakness of the creature, and that it is no part of the second
death. The second part of this conclusion follows, and I desire it may be
attended to by all you that are weak ones; for this objection does put many
Divines themselves to a stand, and yet the case is very clear so far as my
light and line serves me.



payment within ten months, or ten days, or ten hours; it is as well if he
do it in ten hours, as if he did it in ten years, nay it is better done: Just
so it is here, the debt is this; In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall die the death: the punishment is death, and every poor creature must die
the first and second death: Now because a poor creature cannot satisfy Gods
justice (...) this life, (for if God should but let in the power of his wrath
in this life into the soul, and fill the soul with his fierce indignation, it
would kill a man even in this life) therefore the Lord by death takes away a
poor creature, and drags him down to hell; he does arrest him by conscience
here, and says, Thou have sinned and deserved wrath, and thou can not bear
my wrath here; therefore thou shall die and be made immortal, that thou may
bear it for evermore; because a man cannot pay it now, therefore he is paying
of it to all eternity, for he is never able to pay and satisfy for the whole
sum: but now the Lord Jesus Christ has cash ready at hand, and is able to
lay down the payment for all the faithful to the full: he lays down the
life natural, and he also suffers the pains of the second death: therefore
he is able to deliver himself, and all those that are his.

First of all, Use 1.
has our Savior thus suffered, and has he stepped in between the wrath of
God the Father and the faithful? Justice says, that foul has sinned, and
must be damned, and anger says, I must break out against that poor soul;
then the Lord Jesus Christ steps in and says, I will bear all, and undertake
the satisfiing of all; I will bear all those punishments due unto them: you
that are believers and have a share in Christ, unto you I speak; labor thou
from hence to see the heinousness of sin, and to hate it, because it has
brought all this evil upon thy Savior, and would have brought the same upon
thee, had not the Lord Jesus Christ stepped in between thee, and the wrath of
the Father. Oh look what thy sin has done unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and see
if you can love it, and take contentment in the commission of it: Let me teach
you how to do it: send your thoughts afar off, and see our Savior in the
garden crying out, and saying, My soul is exceeding heavy unto the death, my
soul is even beset with sorrows; oh watch and pray: And also when he was in
that bitter agony in the garden, And he prayed yet more earnestly, and he
stretched out his prayers, that it broke his heart almost; behold the tears in
his eyes, and the clodded blood that came from him, and his soul was almost
broken within him, under the fierce indignation of the Lord: and he fell upon
the ground, and yet all this would not do the deed: follow him to the cross,
and seeing him attended with the soldiers, and pierced through with a spear;
see then if thou can love thy sins that have done all this; and further,
when you have seen him thus nailed to the cross, and pierced through with a
spear, then if you have any hearts of men, (I do not say of Christians)
listen a while, and here those hideous cries, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Oh brethren it went very heavy with our Savior: Now imagine that
you heard those heart breaking sighs which broke the heavens, and let them
break thy heart too: Oh go your ways home I charge you in the Name of Jesus
Christ, and answer your own hearts, or rather answer the petitions of our
Savior, and say, Lord, why have thou forsaken? Oh Lord, it was for my pride,
and my contempt of thy word, and my despising of holy duties, and for the rest
of my sins, I should have been forsaken, and thou wast contented to be
forsaken for me. Oh can you consider of this and love your sins still, which
have brought all this misery upon a Savior? if you can love your sins now,
do; and if you can harbor that pride and stubbornness in your hearts which
would have plucked the heart out of Christ's body, and his soul from his body,
then do; can it be possible that men should harbor sin in them, if they
did but know what it has done to them, can you see it and not have it. Oh
behold that sin which has caused God the Father to be angry with thy
Savior, and do thou hate it, and let thy soul for ever loath thy sin which
has caused Christ thus to do, to come down from heaven, and to be tortured
by wicked miscreants, and to cry out My God, my God; why have thou forsaken me?
and as sin has caused God the Father to punish thy Savior, so go thou and be
revenged upon thy sin, and say, Oh my pride, and my stubbornness, and my
looseness, and uncleanness, and base drunkenness; these were the nails that
pierced his hands a^^ his feet, they pierced his sacred body, and (...) the
wrath of God the Father upon his soul; therefore let me be for ever revenged
of this proud stubborn and rebellious heart of mine, and let me for ever
loath my sin, because it brought all this sorrow upon my Savior.

To press this use a little more, I charge you brethren, as ever you had any
tender love unto Jesus Christ, or any regard of your own comfort, go your
ways, and be for ever cast down and humbled for those evil ways of yours,
which have brought our Savior to such a gulf of misery, and to be angry with
those sins that have made God the Father angry with the Lord Jesus Christ,
and take thou revenge upon that proud stubborn heart that brought all this
misery upon thy Savior: This is the course of humanity amongst men; if a man
knew of any one which had murdered his father or his friend, whom he highly
regarded and honored, nature shows us thus much, that our hearts would rise
against the man, and you would not be able to brook the sight of him, and you
cannot endure to see him in your companies; and if law and conscience did not
forbid it, you could be contented to give him his deaths wound, and to be his
bane, and you would cry out against him, Oh he has murdered my father, or my
dear friend, and though you would not run upon him and kill him, yet this every
one would do, he would follow the Law to the uttermost, and if all the law in
the land will do it, he will have him hanged; and if he might have it put to
his choice what death he should die, he would choose him a death as bad as he
could devise, and if he might be his Executioner, how would he mangle him, and
say, thou wast the death of my father, and then he would give him one blow for
this, and another blow for that; and say, thou wretch, thou have taken away the
life of my father, and I will have thy life: Now is a man thus enraged, and is
the heart of a man carried with such violence unto him that has murdered his
father, or his friend, and that for the loss of the natural life; Oh then how
should your hearts be transported with infinite indignation, not against the
man, but even against the sin, which is the cause of all this, and which is
wholly opposite against God; and not only because it has taken away the life
of the body of our Savior, but also made him undergo the wrath of an
everlasting father; your sins are they that have thus slain the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of life: Therefore follow thou the law against these sins, and
raise hue and cry after them, and bring them to the Sessions, and set them
before the tribunal of God, and cry justice Lord, justice against these sins
of mine; these slew my Savior, Lord slay them; they have crucified my Savior,
Lord crucify them; let me have life for life, body for body, and soul for
soul: these are the sins that have taken away the life from the body of our
Savior, and took away all comfort from his soul, Lord take away their life:
thus pursue thy sins, and never leave them, until thou see them bleed their
last: never think that thou have power enough against corruption, nor never
think that thou do enough against them, but give thy corruptions one hacke
more, and confess thy sins once more, and say, Lord, his pride, and this
stubbornness Lord, and this looseness of heart Lord, these are they that killed
my Savior, and I will be revenged of them, and herein consider this, when your
hearts are inclining to any corruption, or to any temptation of Satan; and when
thou find thy soul drawn aside to any sin, and when thou find some
temptings unto corruptions and stirrings of cursed lusts, it is good then to
have an actual consideration of what sin has done to the Lord Jesus Christ,
and reason thus with thy self and say, these sins were the death of my
Savior; and shall they be my delight? these sins did pierce his hands, and
wounded his soul, and shall they give contentment to my soul? the Lord
forbid, did these sins pluck tears from his eyes, and blood from his heart,
and shall I make them the delight of my heart? the good Lord in mercy forbid
it: were it so that our hearts were fully and thoroughly persuaded that all the
vanities of our minds, and all the lusts of our hearts, and all the distempers
of our affections were those that stabd the Lord Jesus Christ, and wounded him
to the heart; it could not be that we should so delight in them, and lavish out
our souls and affections thereupon, nay, not only Christianity will do it,
but nature and reason will even compel a man to do the contrary, could he
but reason thus with himself, when corruptions tempt him, and occasions call
him, and say thus with himself; was it not enough, and more than enough, that
the Son of God came down from Heaven, and suffered such grievous pains, but
shall I again crucify the Lord of life, and shall I again pierce those
blessed hands of his, and pierce that blessed side of his, and all goare his
sacred body with my unclean sins, and force him to cry out again, by reason
of my sins which I have committed? this is more than brutish, and more than
savage; I beseech you in the bowels of the Lord to consider well of it: you
know what Christ said when Saul persecuted the poor Saints at Damascus, Saul,
Saul, why persecurest thou me? It pierced the Lord Christ, when any of his
members were pierced, Acts 9.4. but now for such as believe in Christ, and
look for mercy from Christ, consider how nearly it will touch him, and trouble
him; not only to have his members pierced, and persecuted, but also to have
his good Spirit grieved, and himself to be wounded. Imagine you heard the Lord
speaking, as the Church did in Lamentations 1.12. Is it nothing to you all, oh
ye that pass by, is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow? have you no
compassion at all upon a Savior? what, will ye spit in my face? what you? what
and to a Savior too? and will ye pierce my soul by the corruptions of your
hearts, and by the actions of your hands? thus the Lord Jesus Christ persuades
you to see sin, and to abhor and (...) it upon all occasions; and therefore
let us answ^^ the requests of our Savior, and not show our selves desperately
wicked to pierce him again, and to renew his sufferings.

Romans 2.9. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that
sinned, and why? (...) God is no respecter of persons; as verse 11. that the
ground of it; and it is not only expressed but it (...) also proved undeniable,
Romans 11.22. Behold therefore the bounty and severitie of God; toward them
which have fallen, severitie, but toward that bountifulness: remember Gods
just proceeding against the Jews, and therefore it is, that the Apostle cites
all the proceedings of Gods judgments, not only against the heathens that
never knew him, or his enemies that always opposed him, but even to his
friends such as he had showed much favor and mercy to: if they sin, they
shall be destroyed for their sin. But oh the just exactness of the justice
of the Lord, how severely just he is! for this exactness is not only upon the
wicked, and open profane, but upon his own dear children, and they that have
had his ordinances, as in Amos, the Prophet shows what favors they had
received, in regard of the means; but yet feel how severely; the Lord punishes
them: but he hold the miracle of justice in the Lord Jesus Christ his only
Son, in whom his soul delighted: our Savior that had but the shado^s of
sin, had all punishments laid upon him in thick (...). Now answer me whether
God the Father be not a strict God or no, and a just and righteous God that
would thus deal with his only Son. A man would have thought if any thing in
the world could have stopped the hand of Divine justice, that it should not
proceed from God the Father, then Christ he might have done it, for her had all
that ever any one in the world could have: If the excellency of the person of
our Savior could have done it, or the holiness of the soul of our Savior,
then he might have been exempted from punishment, yet all these were not able
to do it, because he was a surety; but yet a man would have thought that
those tears of blood might in some measure moderate the matter: could not
those servent petitions of him, have had so much as some abatement of the
punishment, when he cried out saying, Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me? and then again the second time, Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me; nay the third time; Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me. The Son of God was now upon the rack with it, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me; let me only have a sip and away, and
so let it pass from me. Surely if any thing could have stopped the hand of
divine justice, then Christ might have done it, but God would not, nor did not
abate our Savior one drop of his indignation, but God inflicts it all, and
Christ suffers ^ all: behold therefore if thus be not a just God; hear and
fear all you that hear the good word of the Lord this day, you that think
that Christ is made all of mercy, it is a God of your own imagination, and
your own devising; it is not that God which is the Lord of heaven and earth,
it is not the God of ho^sts, the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ: Oh say poor
ignorant people, he is a very merciful God, and full of compassion; it is
true, he is merciful indeed, but know this also to thy terror, that God is
strict, and precisely righteous: you think to put off God with a few good
words and lazy wishes, and with a Lord have mercy upon us; and if you can have
but an hours time before your death to cry God mercy, oh their you think all
shall be well and God will go away with anything; and because you suffer a
little punishments and afflictions in this life, therefore you think to be
freed from them altogether hereafter: no no, know thou shall not carry it away
so: indeed thou have troubles and afflictions here, but thou shall have
eternity of torments for ever in the life to come: if thou still continuest to
be a sinful wretch, and an unbeleeve, there is no way with thee, but to bear
thy own plagues and miseries hereafter: when thou see the Son of God
himself corrected, do thou think to go free? if God would not bare oils
Savior any thing of it, do thou think he will abate thee any thing? again,
our Savior had our sins only imputed to him; but thy sins thou have committed
them thy self, and can thou think to escape, that are proud, and stubborn,
and malicious, and lie and live be thy sins, and do wallow in them, and
allow of thy self in the commission of them? no, surely God will not spare any
blasphemer, nor unclean wretch, nor profane person under heaven; if he did not
spare his own Son, he will not spare thee, but he will inflict upon thee the
sharpest punishments that can be imagined: therefore now if God be so severe
against sin, then let your affections be answerable thereunto, do you pity
none that are sinful, not only slaves, but in a child, a son, a husband; let
us labor to get a hearefull of hatred against sin in any of these, nay though
she were the wife of thy bosom, or thy child, or thy dear friend, if thou
see sin in them, be sure to punish it; especially you that are in places of
authority, into whose hands God has committed the sword of the Magistracy
for the execution of justice: You that are Gods vicegerents upon earth, do
you as God himself has done, and walk in his way, and so be blessed in
whatsoever you do: I said ye are Gods says David; every Magistrate, every
Justice in the country, and every Master of a family; ye are Gods, that is, ye
have the Image of God put into you, and therefore say thou with thy self in
this manner; would God suffer a swearer, or a blasphemer, or a profane person,
or a drunkard, or an adulterer, to go unpunished? and would God suffer a
prophaner of his Sabbath, and would not reform him? then whatsoever is amiss
in thy own soul, or in thy wife or child, or servant, if it be in thy place
punish, if not, then hate it to the uttermost: If God does hate sin even in his
own dear Son, though assumed only, then let thy heart be also carried with
a hatred for evermore against it: Thus much of the first question, what the
kinds of punishment were which our Savior suffered, and how far he suffered
them.



Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death; so
that Adam began to be a debtor, and must be a sufferer from the very beginning
of his sin; and so all the sons of Adam, they have no sooner an entrance into
life, but they are dying: The meaning is this, as thou eatest thereof thou
shall die; that's the meaning of the text as it is in the original; die, die,
die, even from the beginning of thy life. Now when our Savior became^ debtor,
he must also become a paymaster, and he must keep the (...) of the payment:
justice requires this, and they (...) are faithful do and will keep this:
now (...) Savior was a good paymaster, therefore the day of his humiliation
was the day of his dissolution; he had sorrows and miseries even until his
departure out of this life: nay, not only the curse required it, but also
daily experience makes it good; look upon our Savior as soon as ever he w^^
borne, there was no room to be had for him (...) ^nne, but be was laid in a
manger in the stable; ^d not in a cradle neither, but in a cratch: and Herod;
he fought his life too, and in his riper years, he suffered hunger, and cold,
and backbitings; and all these were but as harbengers to make way for all that
desolation and wrath which came upon him. There is never a child of Adam, but
so soon as he is borne into the world, he falls to crying, and so he
continues in sorrows all the days of his life, and all these are but dyings:
when the tyles begin to fall, and the thatch to moulder from off the house, we
use to say the house will fall shortly: so all the sorrows and the disgraces
that were cast upon our Savior, so soon as he was persecuted, they were all
preparations to his death. Again, look to the end why our Savior came into
the world, as in 1 John 3.8. Christ came to destroy the works of the devil,
that as Satan brought sin into the world by Adam, and so death and
condemnation by sin; so Christ through his sufferings, brought in life and
sanctification; so that the plaster should be applied to the place from whence
the (...) the dis^e came: As Satan brought sin into the world, (...)
punishments by sin, so the plaster must be laid there, that all may be fully
cured,

Again, when did our Savior suffer pains in his soul? To this I answer, our
Savior did suffer these pains, partly in the garden, and partly upon the
cross this will be plain if you compare Matthew 26.37. with John 19.30. in
Saint Matthew he says, that Christ took with him Peter and the two sons of
Zabedeus, and he began it (...) sorrowful, and to be grievously troubled: he
began to be sorrowful, this sorrow and heaviness was the pains of his soul:
here he did begin it; and in John 19.30. when Jesus had received of the
vinegar, he said, now it is finished: what is that? there are many
interpretations upon it, but I will follow that which I conceive to be most
seasonable, as thus; it is finished, that is, the cup is ^ver, the heavy
indignation of the Lord that did pursue we, and lie upon me, is now over; and
remember this blo^d finished, does argue that it had a beginning. There was a
time when our Savior begun to crapple with this wrath of God, and now it is
finished: this is the meaning of it, for it could not be meant of all the
Prophesies that were of Christ all which were not fulfilled, and though some
were fulfilled, yet some were not; and therefore it could not be meant of them,
as namely of this Prophecy: as Jonah was three days and three nights in the
whales belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth: therefore, the text says, that he began to be in an
again in the garden, and when he cried, now it is finished, the^^ was ended:
that is, now the fit is over, and the indignation of the Lord is past: this
shall be made good in the third question wherein it shall appear that he did
suffer grievous pains in his soul: But before I come to the third question,
give me leave to promise some cautions, that so you may see how the way lies;
and the cautions are three





do come properly out of our corruptions, and flow out from thence; and as
heat and fire go together, so sin and misery go together; but there was no
such matter in the Lord Jesus Christ; nay, there was no outward cause in our
Savior, that could compel him to suffer miseries, whether he would or no: but
he did most willingly submit himself to divine justice, her took our place
and became our surety, and promised the payment of the debt freely; yet aside
he had done thus, it was necessary upon condition promised, and he did also
willingly make it necessary, that before he did suffer these punishments, he
should undertake them; and then having thus undertaken, and upon certain
conditions promised, it was very fit and necessary that he should make good
what he had promised, and perform what he had undertaken: these cautions I
thought good to add to stop the mouthed of all cavils that may arise in the
hearts of those that are weak; for the ground of Christ's sufferings was freely
and willingly according to the promise and agreement which was between the
Father and himself.



suffer by communion and consent between the soul and the body; as namely,
therefore the soul is pierced, because the body is pierced, no, but he did
properly and immediately receive and suffer the wrath of God in his soul, as
well as his body did death. The Scripture does express it this way, and the
Prophet foretold this in Esaias 63.10. God shall make his soul an offering for
sin: you know every offering implies a full payment; they did use to confess
their sins over the sacrifice, and then to slay it, intimating that the
sacrifice was to undergo whatsoever punishment was due unto their sins: and
so did Christ do in bearing our sins, nay Christ himself says so: Matthew
26.38. My soul is very heavy and sorrowful, even unto the death: and that
this must needs be the meaning of the text, it shall appear by further
explication, and therefore give me leave to handle all the particulars of the
sufferings of our Savior: and for our proceeding herein, that I may be plain,
and that this doctrine may drop as the dew, and that every spire of grass may
receive some sap and sweetness, and spiritual moisture there from, let me do
two things, wherein I will show you that the sufferings of our Savior were
done partly in the garden; and partly upon the cross; and for his agony in the
garden, let me do two things:

Mark, and in the 26. of Matthew.

were most grievous sufferings, which he suffered in his soul:

when he cries out, Father, if it be possible let this cap pass from me. The
Scripture discovers the pith of all that anguish of soul, and the whole
compass of it, what it was that did thus fill the soul of our Savior, and
that is in these two things, and you shall find them both in Mark 13.33.
where the text says, when our Savior was to enter into the combat, he says
thus; he began to his amazed, and to be very heavy: let me express them
thus: he began to be driven to an astonishment, and to have his soul filled
with the indignation of the Lord. First, our Savior Christ foreseeing the
wrath of God, and the combat of God the Father coming against him, he began
to be amazed: the word in the original is this; That so you may see the depth
of the distres, and the bottom of the cup. The word amazement comes from a
word that signifies to be in a stand, or to be astonished: such a sorrow as
men use to have for the loss of some dear friend; nay the preposition in that
which is added signifies a grief beyond astonishment: whatsoever grief could
befall a creature without sin, that all befell our Savior: this word carries
two things with it:



upon the soul with the admiration of it, as when a sudden and an unwonted and
an intolerable evil begins to seize upon a man, and the stroke of some
terror and fe^^ strikes in and drives the soul to an amaze, and insomuch that
the heart says, good Lord what will this come to? if this befall me, what
shall become of me? this is astonishment. The second part is this, and that
goes further, and our translation expresses it to the full; My soul begins
to be very heavy, that's our translation; but the word goes a degree further,
when this sorrow act only struck and shook the heart of our Savior with the
suddenness of it, but it entered into his soul, and filled it abundantly, and
rackt it to the uttermost of the abilities of nature to bear it: shall I deal
nakedly? this word heavy, carries two things with it. First, that the soul of
our Savior was surcharged and filled, being full: with the indignation of the
Lord, and that heavy vexation that lay upon him: for so the word implies,
abundance of misery which does bear down the heart of a poor creature, but
this was not in the Lord Jesus Christ: though his soul were filled brimme full
of the indignation of the Lord, yet he was not overcharged with it. Secondly,
hence it follows, that all the faculties of the whole nature of the soul of
our Savior, they gathered up themselves, and they drew up all their forces, to
bear up themselves against the wrath of the Lord, which was now coming upon
them; all the powers of his soul, the mind and the memory, and hope and
fear, they were all gathered up: as in time of war, the soldiers come all
forth from their garrisons to close in the maine battle; so the Lord Jesus
foresaw the wrath of the Father coming against him, and he drew forth all his
abilities, and left all other employments wholly, and brought them to fence and
to fortify themselves to bear this wrath of the Lord; as if our Savior had
said, Come ye all hither, and help to bear up my soul against the
unsupportable wrath of God; this is the very skirt and selvedge of the word:
yet observe this by the way, our Savior was not deprived of this work of any
of his abilities, but only they were called off from all other employments, and
they wholly betook themselves to bean the wrath of the Lord, as the maine
work which now did lie upon them: and this may be done, and was done by our
Savior, and yet without sin. As it is with a clock, a man may sto^ the
wheels upon force, and make them stand still, though there be no distemper in
the wheels causing it, but only the hand which stops it: So it was with
Christ, there was no infirmity in the mind or memory of our Savior; but the
hand of God was so heavy upon him, and the wrath of God so seized upon him,
that all other actions ceased, and he attended to no other thing, but to this,
how to bear the wrath of God; the Evangelist in Matthew 26.38. shows the
explication of both these, My soul is exceeding heavy, tarry ye here and
watch with me; my soul is heavy even unto the death: that is, my soul is
besieged and beset, and beleagered with sorrows, in every part, and I would
express it thus: our Savior Christ knowing Gods counsel and the hour
approaching, and the thrones of justice prepared, and God as an angry Judge
sitting thereon, with all the books brought forth, and all the sins of all
the world there laid open, and God the Father as a Judge says, these are the
sins of those, for whom thou have undertaken to die, and if thou answer not
for them they must be damned; and there he saw the sins of Manasses and
David, and Peter and Paul, appear before the Lord, and withal, he saw the
glorious attributes of God all coming out against him; and mercy pleads, I
have been despised; and patience pleads and says, I have been despised; and
justice pleads and says, I have been wronged by these men in the time of
their ignorance: and therefore mercy, and patience, and goodness, and
holiness, and long suffering, and all these that have been wronged, they all
come to the Father for justice, and say, These have been opposers of thy
grace, and spirit, and they have wronged us, if they be saved, Christ must be
punished; and he sees the wrath of the Lord making a breach against him, and
seizing against him, and not only so, but even all the Devils, and all the
Jews and Gentiles; God lets them all in upon our Savior: now see whether he
had good cause to complain; if he looked up to God, there were all his
attributes crying for justice against him, and death before his face, and the
Jews and the Gentiles, Herod and Pilate and all conspired against him to bring
in sorrow upon our Savior: therefore he cries, Oh my soul it heavy even to
the death, my soul is beset with sorrows; the Jews, and the sins of all
the world will have my life; thus he began to be astonished, and was feign to
gather up all his abilities, that he might fortify himself against those
evils. This is the sufferings of Christ in the garden, and yet I speak under
it; and if I had the tongues of men and of Angels, I could not express it; for
these words are never read of any mortal man, but that there is weakness in
the same, only Christ has expressed thus much, that howsoever misery and wrath
was able to overcome a poor creature, yet he bore it, and that without
sins. Let these two cavils of the Jesuits be removed before we go any
further, and the explication before spoken of will answer both.

Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, if this be so, then
say they, our Savior must continue in the agony from the garden, till he came
upon the cross; but that he could not do, for he checks Judas, and reproves
Peter; not as a man astonished, but as a man in his right wits; and he
answered Pilate calmly, and he prayed holily, and commended himself to God
the Father, and he was not as a man astonished in all this: therefore he was
not now in the agony.

Matthew 26.39, 42, 44, in the 39. verse, he prayed and said, Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me; and he went away again the second time,
and prayed saying, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; and
he went again the third time, and prayed yet more earnestly saying, Father,
if it be possible let this cup pass from me: and as it is in Luke ^2.44. He
entered into the agony, that is, into the fit, as we use to say of a sick man;
now the fit is upon him, he prayed once and came again, so one fit was over;
he prayed yet again, so two fits were over; then he prayed yet more earnestly,
so the the third fit was over: here are three bouts which he had, when he
wrestled with the indignation of the Lord. There were three storms in this
tempest, and between every little storm, he had a pleasant gale of ease and
refreshing: This is the answer to the first objection.



You must know that the sorrows and sufferings of our Savior issued only
from these two causes.



or a man may speak if he will, or else if he will, he may keep silence: so
Christ undertook to suffer for us, but provided when he would, and as he
would: Matthew 26.37. He began to wax sorrowful, that is, he did it freely,
he entered into the combat of Gods displeasure, he undertook it when he would,
and as much at once as he would, provided that he did pay and suffer all, for
the curse does not require that Christ should suffer all at once, but only
that he should satisfy the justice of God again: the humane nature of Christ
could not so well bear all the wrath of God at once; therefore he took it at
three times: as when a man cannot well drink a great potion at one draught, he
drinks and breathes, and then drinks again and breathes, and then drinks the
third time: so Christ was resolved to bear all the wrath of God, and because
it was too grievous for the humane nature to drink it all at once, therefore
he drinks and breaths again, and then drinks the second time, and breaths
again; and so drinks the third time, and so our Savior was able to suffer
all, and not to be driven to any distemper or weakness; for all those
distempers of affections, they arise from these three grounds: 1 Either
affections prevent judgment: 2 Or else it will not yield to judgment: 3 Or
thirdly, it disturbs judgment.


Now our Savior took one draught, and then breathed, and then took another
draught, and (...) had again, and so think it at the third time, so that none
of all the sorrows of the agony that he undertook troubled him, because he
undertook it when he would, and yet bore all, and so gave full satisfaction.
Thus you see what our Savior suffered in the garden in his soul, and it was
such a kind of sorrow, that he took only Peter, and James, and John with
him, and no more.

Now in the next place, I come to fasten upon the proof of the point, to wit,
that this sorrow must needs be more than can come from the pains of death,
and I shall make it good by force of argument, that this sorrow cannot come
barely from the natural death; I shall give you grounds from Scripture, and
from reason, and I reason thus:

All the sorrows that came upon our Savior, they came by reason in this cup,
that is, from these sorrows, and miseries that he was to bear, both in the
agony in the garden, and upon the cross: Now that cup which brought
astonishment in upon his soul, and filled it full of anguish, and drove him to
an amaze, and not only to weep bitterly, but to trickle down drops of clodded
blood, that cup must needs be more than the pains of a natural death, but
that cup which caused all this, was that which brought them in, and made him
thus to be astonished, and filled his soul with anguish, and wrested clodded
blood from his body; therefore this was more than natural death: the latter
part of the argument is undeniable, namely that the agony came from this cup;
therefore the cup was the cause of his sorrows, and griefs, and tears; but
to think that natural death should drive our Savior to this astonishment, it
is unreasonable to think it, that the Soldier should bear that which the
Commander cannot bear, and that many a poor Christian that has but a little
grace, should bear the pain of a natural death for a good cause, and that
comfortably; and shall not Christ the Fountain of all grace bear much more? it
is unreasonable for any man to think so: therefore there must be more than the
pains of a natural death, in the sufferings of our Savior. He that gave his
Saints grace to bear these pains of the natural death, he has much more
grace in himself to bear them, and to come forth from under them.

it will do in thee; what he has received from it, do thou look to partake
of the same, if thou continue in sin: He only tasted of it by way of
imputation, and he had only the shadows of sin, as I have formerly showed: he
had only the taste of sin by way of account, and charge, and imputation:
therefore if it made him sick even to death, then know thou shall be sure to
feel the same: it will work upon thee much more that have sin not by way of
imputation, but thou have it by way of commission: and thou can sit at thy
base pleasures, and loose company, and sinful occasions, and drawest on
iniquity as it were with cart-ropes; it will be thy death, if the Lord be not
merciful unto thee to save thee, and the Lord Christ gracious to pardon thee:
therefore let us not judge of our sins according to our conceits; it is that
which cozens and deceives thousands of poor creatures; therefore let us not
value our sins according to the sweetness that our own corrupt heart finds
in them, nor according to the pleasure that we expect from them; they go
down merrily now, but they kill as certainly. It is the great weakness of
poor souls, that we see sin a great way off through many glass windows,
many mediums and covers, there are many profits, and pleasures, and dalliances,
that are between sin and us, and we see sin through all these, and
therefore sin is welcomed and received, because it seems pleasant: but now I
would have you see sin in the nature of it, and therefore look upon sin in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and there see it in its colors, and see what vexation
it brought on our Savior, the same it will bring upon thee, unless the Lord
be the more merciful. Is is with sinners, as it is with children; little
children that know not the nature of a Bear or a Lion, if they lie sleeping,
they will be ready to play with them; but if the Bear begin to shake
himself, and the Lion begin to rore, it makes not only children afraid, but
even the stoutest to fly, we dally with the hole of the Aspe: sin has
devoured thousands at this day, and children that we are, we play with sin,
and with the pride of our own cursed hearts, and our lusts, and our ambition,
and uncleanness, and with the neglect of Gods ordinances, and every other
corruption: The drunkard plays with his drunkenness, and the adulterer with
his dalliances, and the proud man with his ambitious thoughts, and so every
wretch with his wicked practices, and this ambition is now asleep: but if you
could see these roaring upon you, and ready to devour you, then certainly you
that now take delight in them, would fly from them: Proverbs 7.27. It is
observable what sin will do, the adulterous woman meets the poor deluded
creature, and she inticeth him with her base lusts, and he dreams of nothing
but Down beds, and all kind of dalliance, and he knows nothing but goes as
an Ox to the slaughter, until a dart strike through his liver, and he knows
not that it is for his life, he goes and his life goes: Her house is the way
to the grave, which goes down to the chambers of death: the like is in Judas,
he desired to betray Christ, and for what? only to get a little poor
pittance of thirty pence: his covetousness was now asleep, and he had a
murdering heart toward the Lord Jesus Christ, and a covetous heart for
himself: all this while sin was asleep; but when Christ was attached and
condemned, then Judas began to be worried with his corruptions; he comes in
horror of heart and throws down the thirty pence, and comes into the high
Priests hall, and says, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood: Now tell
me, Judas, is it good to be covetous now? when his conscience was awake, and
thus wrath of God began to seize upon it, and that Lion began to rore upon him,
then his heart begun to shake within him, and he departed and went away and
hanged himself, his sin made way for it: and thus it will be with every
wicked man in the world. Howsoever now you have del^ons to cozen others, and
you have your unjust measures, and you can carry it away bravely; your
corruptions are now asleep but that covetousness out of thy shop, and that
adultery out of thy chamber, it will one day rore upon thee: look upon the
hands of Christ, and they will say, there hands were pierced by sins, and it
was sin that has filled this soul with astonishment. Oh all you that see and
hear the good word of the Lord this day, see what sin has done with our
Savior, and expect the like effects from sin, if you still continue in it.

Now we come to the second part, that is, his sufferings upon the cross, where
we shall have much to do with the Jesuits. You see what he suffered in the
garden, now follow him to the cross, for when he was in the garden, he only
tasted of the cup; but when he was upon the cross, he drunk the cup quite
off; in the garden he only sipped the top (...) it, but now he drunk the
dregs of it, and the bottom and all. For the opening of this, look Mat.
27.46. about the ninth hour, that is, about three of the clock in the
afternoon, when he was crucified, he cried out saying, Eli, Eli,
lamusabactani: Now Divines say, and Interpreter conclude and (...) profess it,
and I beseech you attend to it, that in this cry and complaint of our Savior,
was discovered the dregs of the cup of the fierce indignation of the Lord; now
before I come to the (...) and proper sense of the words, consider thus much:
there are two interpretations of it; First, there is one of the Jesuits, which
we must confute and remove. Secondly, there is another interpretation of sound
Divines, which we must receive and yield unto. For the first, Bellarmine and
others make the meaning of the words to be this, that our Savior Christ here
complains that he was left to the hands of the Jews, and that God the Father
would not deliver him from that temporal death which they would put him to;
therefore said they, our Savior in the sense of the death natural, cries out
that God had left him in the hands of those ungodly men; therefore they say the
words run thus, My God, my God, why have thou thus forsaken me, and lost me
thus in the hands of Pilate, and Herod, and the Jews to crucify me: it is a
sinew less and a weak imagination, that I may speak no worse of it, for I
can hardly bear it with patience: and that this sense is false there are a
reasons to bear against it. First, this meaning is taken from a false ground,
and therefore the ground and bottom being brittle and weak, the building must
needs fall. It is a weak thing for a man to say, that sometimes the miseries
and deaths of the Saints of God, argue a forsaking of God: for I say, that
though the Saints of God are sometimes delivered up to death by the wise
providence of God, yet they are not said to be forsaken of God: 2 Cor. 4.9.
We are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not: You know
what the ordinary promises are in this kind; I will be with thee in six
troubles, (...) the seventh I will deliver thee: mark this, the heaviest
afflictions of the Saints of God, nay death it self is so far from being an
argument of Gods forsaking them, that it is an argument of their glorying in
God; as in 2 Cor. 12.10. Therefore I take pleasure in my infirmities and
reproaches, necessities and persecutions: and in anguish for Christ's sake, the
Apostle rejoices in persecutions, and in the midst of all extremities.

A second reason why it is false is this, God is said to leave his servants two
ways, and there are no other ways in Scripture that I know of First when God
takes away his assistance in the time of trouble, and he lends not that
strength and that assistance, whereby with patience they may be^e, and with
courage go through those afflictions, but now and then he lets them not be
soiled, by their own infirmities, and to fall by their weaknesses, that they
may learn to see their own weaknesses, and learn not to trust in themselves,
but in the Lord their God: Now this forsaking cannot, nor did not befall our
Savior in common sense, because he prayed for assistance, and whatsoever he
prayed for, he had; as Hebrews 5.7. He was heard in that which he feared;
and so consequently assisted: nay, he was confident of the issue of it, Luke
23.42.43. when the good thief upon the cross said, Lord, remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom; the Lord answered him, this way shall thou be
with (...) in Paradise: nay, David did prophecy this of Christ, and Christ
himself performs it, Psalm 16.8. I have set the Lord always before mine
eyes, for he is at my right hand, therefore I shall (...) be moved: therefore
God the Father did not leave our Savior, but he did assist him, that he was
above all sorrows, and all miseries.

Psalm 27.9. David says, Hide not thy face away from me, neither cast away
thy servants in displeasure, put not a servant (...) of doors. Here I demand
of any man, but especially of the Jesuits, whether of these two they will
grant? God did not forsake the Lord Jesus Christ the first way; therefore he
must do it this way, or none at all; and if any man grant this, then he grants
the cause: for then there was not only the death natural, but the displeasure
of the Lord seized upon his soul; and unless they do grant this, then this
absurdity must needs follow upon it, that Christ was not at all forsaken of
God: for he that was constantly assisted, and refreshed by the sense of the
love and favor of God, he was no way forsaken: Joseph was in prison, but God
was with him; and Daniel was in the Lions den, but God was with him: and in 2 Chronicles. 15.2. God is with you, while ye are with him: now if Christ had
assistance from God the Father to strengthen him, and the sense of the
sweetness of Gods love to refresh him, then he was no way forsaken, which is
profesly contrary to this truth, and it is to give the good Spirit of God the
lie; therefore away with those imaginations, so that the answer is clear, that
God the Father did take away the sense and feeling of the sweetness of his
love from our Savior; and this made him to cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? thus much to wipe away the cavils of the Jesuits. Now I come
to show the right sense and interpretation of the words which we ought to
receive; and here you may see the great work of Christ, and the love of
Christ, and the comfort of a Christian: the text includes two things, which
contains the very dregs of the cup: First, that God took away the sense and
feeling of his love and favor: Secondly, God the Father laid a curse upon him.
There is a dereliction, and a malediction, in the words forsaking, and the
curse: therefore add to this place but Gal. 3.13. and you shall have the full
sufferings of Christ, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us, because it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on
a tree: so that when he was crucified and hanged on the cross, then he was
made a curse for us, and then he was forsaken. Let me a little open both the
passages to you: First for the forsaking of our Savior, Why have thou forsaken
me? when he cried thus, and rored for the very disquietnesse of his soul,
there was more in it than ordinary: I will discover the substance of this
forsaking of Christ how far it went, and that in three particulars, that you
may know how far to steer your judgments in conceiving the sense of the
Spirit of God in this place: this forsaking of Christ may be conceived of in
three conclusions:



took away the sense of his love, but the Lord Jesus Christ cried after him,
and laid hold upon him, and says, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
the Father went away, but the Lord Jesus Christ went after the Father, and
would not let him go: God the Father might justly forsake our Savior, being
made sin for us by account and imputation: being our surety, God the Father
might justly take away and withdraw the sense of the sweetness of his love and
favor from the Lord Jesus Christ, without any sin; but now the Lord Jesus
Christ could not have forsaken and gone away from the Father without sinning,
so that this forsaking was on the Fathers part, but our Savior held fast, and
would not be carried away, My God, my God, etc. As Job says, Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him: so that Jobs trusting, and Gods killing anger
might stand together: and when the Lord wrestled with Jacob and said, Let me
go, for the day breaks; Jacob said, I will not let thee go, until thou
bless me. God may go away from Jacob, but Jacob may not go away from God for
want of confidence, and affiance: so that this forsaking is to be apprehended
wholly on the Fathers part, for our Savior did not go away from God by
diffidence and distrust.

deprived of the sense of Gods favor, and the feeling operation of his love
and mercy that might comfort him; I say, it was for the while, and this seems
to be the reason of those strong cries, and heartbreaking complaints of his:
You know when a man cries, then there is misery, and trouble upon him; and when
he cries loud, and puts forth all his powers, it implies a mavelous weight,
nay, it gives us to conceive of a kind of admiration, and a kind of wondering
with himself, what the cause of it should be: It seems here that this was
the cause of the sad complaint, because in his agony there were some inklings
of Gods mercy, and now and then a starre-light, and a little flash of lightning
to cheer him: but now all the sense and feeling of Gods love was gone, and not
so much as any little starlight to cheer him up; and that drives him to a
wonderment, saying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Is it possible
that thou can thus forsake thy Son? what is the reason of it? what, and an
only begotten Son; not that the spirit of consolation was ever taken away
from our Savior, nor that the Godhead was taken away from the manhood, and so
left comfortless, and supportlesse; no, no, but howsoever the spirit of
comfort and consolation was there, yet the sweetness of that consolation,
wherein he had refreshed and solaced himself, that was quite taken await.

of Gods love was taken away from him, then how can he say, my God, my God?

my God, my God; though he had no sense of Gods love, the strongest faith may
stand where no sense is; Esaias 50.10. He that walks in darkness, and has no
light, that is, he that is altogether in misery, and sorrow, and anguish, and
sees no light of comfort and consolation, what must he do? must he cast
away all hope? no, let him stay himself by the power of faith upon his God. So
then Christ may have, and had confidence, to say, my God, my God, and yet he
was deprived of the sense of Gods love, and the feeling operation of his mercy
and favor; and: God the Father might take away the sense and sweetness of it,
without any weakness on our Saviors part, because this withdrawing of the
sweetness of: Gods love, brings only a punishment upon the soul, and takes
to grace nor holiness from the soul of our Savior.

Now we are come to the bottom, now our Savior foresaw all the mercy,
goodness, and compassion of God the Father going away from him, and he panted
after it, saying, my God, my God, mercy is gone, and compassion is gone in
regard of the sense of it. Now that you may see the weight of the sufferings of
our Savior, consider thus ^^ich; that the (...) away the self of Gods love,
discovers it self in Scripture after this manner.

The Lord in this work of his, and in this heavy withdrawing himself, he
turns away his face, and looks another way, deprives him of the enjoying of
the sweetness of his fellowship which formerly he had: Jonah 2.4. Jonah was a
good and a gracious man, though he was a strange man, as one observes, yet when
the Lord had dealt something strangely with him, and cast him into the sea, a
whale receives him; and when he was swallowed up of the whale, he was then
swallowed up of a greater grief; for God had taken away the sweetness of his
love from him: therefore says he, I am cast out of thy sight, he would play
the run away with God, and would go to Tarsus; therefore God casts him out
of his sight to his own apprehension: therefore says he I am cast out of thy
presence this was only in regard of the sense and sweetness of Gods love and
favor: this you may see in the example of David, Psalm 31.22. I said in my
haste, I am cast out of thy sight; as no question but Jonah prayed in the
whales belly, and said, Lord pardon my sin, and forgive my transgressions;
no, says the Lord, get you down to Tarsus: so David prayed, and cried
earnestly saying, not smile of thy favor Lord; no, says the Lord, and he
looked another way, yet thou heardest the voice of my prayer: and so Jonah, yet
will I look toward thy holy Temple; he looked to mercy whiles his eyes and
his heart and all faild; so that faith may well stand, even there where there
is no sense at all.

Thus it was here in the case of our Savior, and thus the Scripture speaks
admirable pithily; Psalm 77.9. Has God forgotten to be gracious, and has he
shut up his tender mercies? as if he had said, though I may not have mercy, yet
let me see mercy: has God in anger shut up his mercy? the face of mercy is
sweet, and the presence of mercy is comely: but has God in anger shut up his
tender mercies? he has not only sent him going out of doors, as he did
Jonah, but he shuts himself up that the poor sinner cannot come within fight
of him.

Oh says the son, I would my father would but look out at the window that I
might see him; but when he will not suffer his son to look upon him, this
is heavy: so the Lord says to his servants, no no, you have slighted my
kindness, therefore I will lock it up, that you shall see him no more: In the
second Book of Samuel, the fourteenth chapter, the twenty eighth verse; When
Absalom had dwelt two years in Jerusalem, and saw not the Kings face, at
length he sends for Ioab to send him to the King, and said, either let me see
the Kings face, or else wherefore do I live? It was a great favor that he
might but see the Kings face; though he might not enjoy fellowship with him:
this is a great trouble, when the Lord shuts up his mercy in anger: mercy has
come home to your hearts, and it has besought you to take it; but you have
dealt basely with the Lord, and walked rebelliously against him, well the Lord
will shut you out of his presence, and will shut up his mercy, and then you
shall say that you had mercy offered to you once, and you would not accept it.

Psalm 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he show no
more favor? this translation is reasonable well, but the original runs thus;
will he add no more to be favorable: as if he had said, what will he not
only not entertain me; but is he gone that I cannot tell where to find him;
and in the ^. verse, Is his mercy clean gone for ever? This is the last of
all, and that which contains the pith of all, that our Savior speaks expressly
of himself, that God goes not only out of his presence, but out of his
calling too: the place is excellent, Psalm. 22.1. from whence these words were
taken, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from
helping me, and from the words of my complaint? God is gone beyond call. Now
that you may see the weight of the sorrows that lay upon our Savior, consider
thus much: our Savior was not only cast out of Gods favor, and God did not
only take away the sense of his love, and the feeling operation of his favor,
that so he received not the sweetness that he had done; but Christ took the
place of sinners, and therefore God the Father shut him out amongst sinners,
and drew his mercy out of sight, and out of hearing, and therefore he cried
out, My God, my God, etc. Nay further, why art thou so far from my help? He
cried out that he ^ore his bowels again, and stretched out his throat and
cries, my God, my God, and he follows the mercy of God the Father in this
kind, not that his faith did not prevail, but he had not the sense and
sweetness of Gods love; and so David in all that he spoke, saying, Will he be
favorable no more? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? All this
while God was present with him by supportation, though he held that vision of
mercy off from his soul: now at this time it seems to me, and the text will
bear it, that though Christ before had but three bouts in the garden, yet now
all the sins of all his elect children, and the cloud of sins of all the
faithful did arise to a mighty great fog, and the cloud did overspread all the
whole heavens as I may say, and did darken all the Sunneshine of Gods favor:
as it is with the Sun in the firmament, when a little cloud grows greater and
greater until it cover the whole heaven, then we think it is almost night: so
all the sins of all the faithful did overspread all the whole heavens, that
even the starlight of Gods compassion, and the lightning of Gods love and
favor appeared not.

Now I come to the reasons of our Saviors grievous sufferings in his soul,
and the reasons are these.







Herod, and Pilate, that made him cry out in this manner, but the justice of
God the Father came against him, and the devil entered the combat with the
Lord Jesus Christ upon the cross: Luke 22.53. This is your hour, and the
power of darkness; hell gates were set open, and the devils were all let loose
upon our Savior; and therefore as Divines do wisely and judiciously observe
in Coloss. 2.15. He led captivity captive, and spoiled principalities and
powers, and took the hand writing of ordinances that was against us, and
fastened them to his cross: he was now in the maine combat with all the powers
of sin, hell, and death: These were they that did make the combat with the
Lord of life.

which he underwent; he was to be a Priest, and he was to offer up himself for
a sacrifice, not his body alone, but also his soul; as Hebrews 9.20.24.
Christ offered up himself for a sacrifice.

Paul, Romans 9.3. I could be content to want the sense of the love of Christ,
for the people of the Jews, etc. Now if our Savior had only suffered the
death natural, then Paul could have been content to do more than Christ did:
Thus you see the nature of this forsaking of Christ.

Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, why? because he
was made a curse for us; how does he prove that? because it is written, cursed
is every one that hangs on a tree: He proves the truth by the Type, the curse
lay in this, that Christ did suffer whatsoever was due unto us: So the Apostle
reasons, that whatsoever curse was due unto us, that our Savior did suffer:
the curse was this, the Father did not only withdraw the sense and sweetness
of his love and favor from the Lord Jesus Christ, but he also let in his
heavy indignation, and wrath into his soul, and that seized upon and filled the
soul of our Savior brim full, and this was the curses. The Scripture does
express it in two particulars, or there are two degrees of it.

Esaias 53.4, 5. God smote him, and bruised him, insomuch that there was clodded
blood seen to come dropping from him: these heavy bouts that he had, wounded
him, and went to the very heart of him, but now patience, and forbearance, and
longsuffering, and mercy, and compassion, they all come into rescue our
Savior, and they afford him a little breathing, and refreshing, so that though
the blows were heavy, and the thrusts were sore, yet he did breathe and live;
and it was not the maine stroke of all, and the reason was, because patience,
mercy, and goodness, and bounty, came in to rescue him: but then the second
part was this:

him, then all the sense and sweetness of Gods countenance and favor, they
all left our Savior in the open field; for in the garden he had some
refreshings, and some breathing times, and mercy, and goodness did step in and
say, slay him not, but let him have some refreshings: but now the sense and the
feeling of all these was gone.

able to bear the indignation of the Lord; see here and behold a little, all
you that make nothing of the withdrawing of Gods favor, Psalm 97.4, 5. and
Revelation ^.14, 15, 16, 17. The heavens departed away as a scrowle when it is
rolled, and every mountain and Isle were removed out of their places, and the
kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man, hid
themselves in the dens, and rocks, and in the mountains, and said to the
mountains, fall on us, and to the hills, cover us from the presence of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? If any man could bear up
himself, then it were the great ones of the world: now take a scantling of
your own strength; if any were able to bear the wrath of the Lord, it were
the kings and the mighty men, and the captains, and the rich men of the
world, but faith the text, The day of the Lords wrath is come, and who shall
be able to stand? It is not the soveraigntie of the king nor the skill and
courage of the captain, or the liberty of the freeman, or the slavery of the
bondsman that can deliver them; but they all cry to the rocks, fall on us, and
cover us from the presence of the Lord: nay, that you may yet see the vildnesse
and wretchedness of your hearts, and the miserableness of your condition,
when the presence of the Lord appears, see what the text says, Psalm 114.5,
7. The sea fled, and the earth trembled, the hills melted at the presence of the
Lord, nay, the devils themselves tremble; as in the 6. and 8. verses of the
epistle of Saint Jude, The Angels which kept not their first love, he has
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness to be kept for the judgment of
the last day: they have their portion for the while, but there is a great deal
of wrath to come, and there are many plagues coming, and they know Gods wrath,
and they shake and tremble in the apprehension of it: now when you see this,
go home to your own souls, and let every man that would heretofore (as his
own conscience can tell him) flout God to his face, and make a scorn of hell,
and of judgment, and comdemnation: go home, I say, and lay this to your own
hearts, and say, is it so, that the mountains shak, and the sea shrinks, and
the devils tremble at the wrath of the Lord: good Lord then how shall I be able
to bear it, that am not able to co^ceive of it, nay if any man think that he
is able to undergo the wrath of God, and to bear it off with head and
shoulders, look but here upon the Lord Jesus Christ that was perfect God, and
perfect man, he that created heaven and earth, and bote up the foundation of
heaven and earth, yet when he came to bea^t the wrath of God, it forced tears
from his eyes, and clodded blood from his body, and made him cry out, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Do but now compare your selves with
Christ, and say, did my Savior buckle under the wrath of God? then certainly
it will break you therefore say thou, if he that was the Creator of heaven
and earth could not bear it, then how shall I be able to bear it, when he
comes against me for my si^ and corruption committed by me therefore heart and
fear all you stout hearted of the world, rather now tremble while you may be
comforted, than hereafter when you shall never be eased: think but with your
selves how dreadful that day will be, when all the glorious attributes of God
shall take their leaves of you he that before had a great deal of mercy, and
patience, and the Lord has wooed him saying Oh once at last hear and see the
things that belong to thy peace: there is not one of you all in this
congregation, but that you have been compast about with mercies, and the
justice of God; it would have broken out against you, had not mercy stepped in
to rescue you, how easy were it for the Lord to dash us all into the
bottomless pit every creature of us: therefore thank mercy, and patience, and
forbearance, that still you breathe, and say, blessed be God, that I have to
deal with a gracious, merciful, and compassionate God, that has kept me
from judgment, that I have not ere now perished in it: Now think with your
selves what a day it will be when mercy shall weep over you, and take his leave
of you, and say, remember thou poor creature how I met thee in thy walks, and
kneeled down before thee, and besought thee to take mercy, and to be saved and
pardoned, but thou would not: adem therefore, this is the last time of
asking, I will never see thy face more, and with that patience as it were
buckles under the burden, and says, I have bond with their thus long I have
borne twenty years with some, thirty years with some, forty years with
others, and all this which I have borne with thee in thy pride, and
stubbornness, and looseness, and uncleanness; but now adieu, never more
patience to bear with you, what no more mercy, nor no more goodness, says
the soul, and they all say no; and stake their hands and say, adieu thou
rebellious heart for ever, it will make thy heart shake within thee, and thou will say, I shall sink down suddenly, there is nothing but wrath to be
expected, they are all gone to heaven, and you must be forever packing to hell.
Oh fear, and fear all you whom it does concern this day, if so be Christ
cannot bear it, then you cannot suffer it, but you will sink under the same
for ever.

Now I come to the reasons of the point in general, why our Savior suffered
pains both in body and in soul, then the reasons of it are three, and they
are all of special use.

Adam had entrenched upon the privilege of God the Father: every breach of the
Law of God intrencheth nearly upon God himself, and therefore every sin is
of a provoking nature, because it is committed against an infinite majesty:
therefore that divine justice may not be a loser, there must be a punishment
not only corporal, but also spiritual, for justice abates not any thing of
the satisfaction, God is just, and this is justice to give every one his due;
honor to whom honor belongs, and punishment to whom punishment belongs;
therefore that justice may be preserved, she must inflict these punishments
upon our Savior being in our room: the Jesuits have devised a cavil against
this reason: say they, it needed not that Christ should suffer these, for the
dignity of the person of our Savior may dispense with some part of the
punishment, and if he bear death, it is sufficient, he may be, freed from the
other pains in his soul. Now that this conceit of theirs is a thing
mavelous injurious to the justice of God the Father, and to the wisdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the death of Christ, I prove it thus; for by the
same right that the dignity of the person of our Savior might abate of the
punishment, by the same right the dignity of his person might as well take it
quite away: if one drop of the blood of Christ would save all the world, then
what needed Christ to have suffered the pains of death; for if the dignity of
the person might free him from the one, it might free him from the other also,
but the Law and Justice of God required whatsoever Christ did in his wisdom
suffer and the death of Christ was not superfluous, and besides the dignity of
the person is to far from freeing him from the punishment, that it fits him
to bear the punishment, it exempts him not from the punishment, but it
furnishes him with abilities to bear it: as he must be man, that he may
suffer finitely, so he must be God that must satisfy infinitely: the justice
of God requires two things.

Adam, that is an infinite punishment.



Adam did deserve, should be suffered by the second Adam, which is Christ,
for, say they, God might have pardoned all the sin of Adam without any
satisfaction, or else by his infinite wisdom and power he could have provided
another way, and therefore if Christ suffer but in part, it may suffices

silly curiosity to inquire of Gods absolute power what he might have done,
and what he had power to do, when we see what he has done: For as he will
save the humble mercifully, so he will preserve his justice in the salvation
of man, Esaias 53.10. The will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and Psalm
40.8. I desire to do thy will, oh my God: It is the will of God that Christ
should come and should suffer for our sins; he has revealed what his will
is, and it is folly to inquire what God might do, when we see what he has
done: and besides, this I take to be an everlasting truth, that none of all
the attributes of God can ever enterfeere or cross one another, it cannot be,
for then God should not procure nor maintain his own glory, for when he
should procure the glory of his justice, he should wrong the glory of his
mercy, and when he should procure the glory of his mercy, he should wrong the
glory of his justice; and the glory of his justice must be preserved as well
as the glory of his mercy magnified; the mercy of God cannot wrong justice, nor
the justice of God cannot overpower mercy: therefore hence I infer thus much;
if there were no means in the world whereby the justice of God (which had
received wrong) could be satisfied, but only by the sufferings of him who was
God and man; then it was against the will of God, and against the will of
Christ which was both God and man, and against their glory and dignity to
devise another way or means to pardon sin without the satisfaction of divine
justice, it is against his glory power, and wisdom, to wrong either justice
or mercy, for he should either have wronged mercy in not pardoning, or else
wronged justice in not punishing of Christ; therefore if there should be no way
to do it, but only by the death of him who was both God and man, then there
was no other way of redemption but this way, for an infinite justice being
wronged, there is no way else to satisfy an infinite justice, but by the
suffering of him who was infinite, and that was only the Lord Jesus Christ,
for there was no more infinites in the world.

I will wind it up thus, that punishment which was included in the curse, and
which was deserved by the first Adam, that was suffered by Christ the second
Adam; but the punishment both of soul and body, were the punishments included
in the curse, and deserved by the sin of Adam; therefore it is borne by the
second Adam, as certainly as it was deserved by the first Adam.

the payment also must be discharged by the Lord Jesus Christ, but certainly
all your pride and stubbornness, etc. they were all charged upon our Savior,
and set upon his soore, and laid upon his back: therefore he must suffer for
all, because he was made sin for all: so the issue of the point is this,
unless the Lord Jesus Christ had suffered both in soul and body, justice had
not been so fully satisfied; but the justice of God required both, and the
curse included both, and therefore Christ suffered both, and has fulfilled
whatsoever was, or could be required by divine justice.

Now to come to the use, something must be said to justify the riches of Gods
free grace, the first use shall be this.

Dagon before the Arc, and like clouds dispersed by the Sun; so that sottish
imagination is hence condemned by this doctrine: it is a dream devised to
pick men's purses, and to delude men's consciences, and to fill the Popes
coffers, they think that Christ frees every faithful man from the punishments
of hell, and from all that any sin has devised, but only there are some
venial sins, and the punishments of those, a man must suffer for himself;
and therefore when a man dies, he must go down to Purgatory, and there be
purged and cleansed from the evil of them: this is that which they say, if
they can but persuade men that they shall be in Purgatory, and that the Pope
can pardon them; what will not a man give to be freed from it? this dotage is
clearly confuted with the evidence of the former truth, I will only express
it thus: If Christ suffered all the plagues which divine justice required, then
there is neither the punishments of Hell, nor Purgatory to be suffered by the
faithful; but our Savior suffered whatsoever the justice of God required: and
therefore neither sin, nor hell, nor purgatory, have any thing to lay to the
charge of Gods chosen.

of a cooling nature: Just so it is with the afflictions that are sometimes
inflicted upon the godly, howsoever in themselves they are sharp, and brinish,
and fretting; yet the heaviest afflictions, though never so sharp and bitter,
yet when they pass through the merits and mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ, they
retain only their cooling, cleansing, and refreshing nature.

David says, Psalm 88.15. Thy terrors have I suffered from my youth upwards,
do not these things come alike to all? the same poverty, the same misery, the
same anguish of heart; do not these fall alike to all, as in 1 Chronicles. 21.12;
13, 14. was there not much misery befell David, and do not the same plagues
that befall the one, befall the other? the holiest man, and the prophanest man
partake alike in these; wherein lies the difference then?



come from the hand of a Father, and to the other they come as from a Judge:
there are no judgments are sent upon the wicked, but they come in part of
satisfaction; and divine Justice faith, thou must to hell for all those sins
of thine, and I will have something in part of payment, before thou come there;
but to the godly, the wrath of God is satisfied to the full, and the debt is
fully paid: and therefore God never lays any thing upon the Saints so much to
satisfy divine justice, as to correct and amend them.

Secondly, all the punishments and corrections that come upon the godly, the
Lord so orders, and tempers, and sweetens them by his saving graces, and by the
work of his Spirit, that they all work and turn to their good, the love of
God is so far shed abroad into their hearts by the power of Christ's merits,
and so showed therein, that they procure good and comfort to their souls for
ever; but in the punishments and curses of the wicked, they come from under the
cross more hardened, and more blinded, and more fierce and rebellious against
God and his grace; but the godly come from under the cross more holy, and more
meek, and more patient, and reformed in their lives and conversations: as it
is with the poison that is taken in hand by a skillfull Physician, he knows
the nature of it, and knows how to correct it, and to take away the malignant
quality of it, either of the cold, or of the heat: so afflictions of
themselves are plagues, and judgments, and they are able to harden the heart,
and to blind the mind: this is that Ahaz, says the text, even wicked Ahaz;
this is the punishment and poison of the wicked; and it brings punishment
upon them; it blinds their minds, and hardens their hearts; and therefore,
whenever a wicked man does come forth from under the curse, he is far worse
than he was before, his heart more dead and more fierce, and he walks more
rebelliously against God and his grace; but when they are laid upon the people
of God, the Lord Jesus Christ takes away the malignant quality of them, and
all the poison of punishment and poverty, and takes away all the venom of
sickness and disgrace, and it is now a preservative, and it is good to be
afflicted, as David says, and to have the poison thus corrected, and to humble
him, and to purge him, and to do him good in his latter end; they are the same
in nature, that they are unto the wicked, but the difference is in the quality
of them: therefore the conclusion is thus much; That all afflictions come from
the hand of a loving Father upon the godly, and though they come in anger to
their sins, yet they work for their good and salvation.

Thus much for the point of speculation, and for the information of the
judgment; now let us come home to the affections, and cheer up our hearts a
little in the application of the point.

the treasures of mercy, and the death of our Lord Jesus Christ laid open; view
them and take them all to your selves for your comfort: Are your heart^
persuaded that Jesus Christ suffered all the punishments, and drank off all the
cup, and has left none for you? then me thinks this may make you go away
cheared: there is no death, no hell, no divine justice for you to undergo; go
your way cheared, and so you may, for you are delivered from wrath, hell, and
punishment: this is an incomparable chearing of soul, to all the faithful of
God; be their condition never so mean, and their estates never so low, come
all hither, and take that grace and mercy that is purchased and offered in the
Lord Jesus Christ.

or no, yet if it be true faith, there is grace and mercy enough for thee in
the Lord Jesus: therefore come and draw the water of life and comfort out of
the wels of salvation, that is, out of the sufferings and obedience of the Lord
Jesus Christ. You have heard that the heart of our Savior was amazed, and
astonished, it was for thee; therefore be thou cheared, Christ suffered the
wrath of the Father, and came from under it, and that is thy victory, be thou
for ever cheared. Our Savior was imprisoned, that thou might be delivered;
he was accused, that thou might be acquitted; he was condemned, and
therefore there is no condemnation to thy soul; he suffered death, that thou
might live for evermore: therefore go your way, and go chearily, and the
God of Heaven go with you: fear not any punishment now, for why should you
fear them, when you shall not feel them? You may here have a ground of double
comfort in the time of thy greatest distress; whether it be in horror of
heart within, or trouble without; in both these the Lord Jesus Christ will
pity you, and will rescue you from all in his own season: therefore lift up
your heads in the midst of all troubles whatsoever.

of thy sins, or because of those punishments which thou fear for sin:
Hebrews 4.15. We have not an high Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort: we
have not an high Priest that is a stranger to crosses and troubles, neither
have we an high Priest like Gallio, that cared nothing for those things, that
is, he was not troubled with the persecutions of others: as their cups are
full, and they are not troubled with the poverty of others, they are at rest
and ease, and they are not troubled with those that are in misery, but he was
tempted in all things like unto us: and so Hebrews 2.13. wherefore in all
things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be
merciful, and a faithful high Priest, because he suffered and was tempted;
he is also able to succor those that are tempted. When the poor do cry, oh
pity and compassion for the Lords sake: oh you know not what belongs to a
hungry belly, nor to a naked back; so I say, you know not what it is to have a
distressed conscience, and therefore you have no remorse to them that are such;
but you must not think that Christ was not touched with our infirmities: though
he sit at the right hand of the Father, yet he has not forgotten his people,
but he has left his love, and his compassion with us, and he is touched when
we are troubled: Paul persecuted the Church, and Christ says, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? the foot is pricked in earth, and the head complains of
it in Heaven; he felt the rage and malice of Paul's persecutions, though happily
poor goodman such a one, and poor goody such a one was persecuted, yet our
Savior was touched and troubled with it: therefore let me tell you how to
succor your selves, when you find the wrath of God lie heavy upon you, and
the anguish of soul lies sore upon you: I might also speak of the rage and
malice of the wicked, but when the arrows of Gods wrath seize upon the soul,
and God seems to be displeased, and to go away from the soul, and mercy,
and love, and the sweetness of compassion is going; as it was with Christ,
when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He finds not
that sweetness of mercies that formerly he had done; these are troubles
indeed: Now learn you to look up to Christ, and look to be pitied by the
Lord Jesus Christ. It may be thy husband, or thy wife, or thy friends will not
pity thee, but will say, he is turned a precise fellow, and see now what good
he has gotten by running to Sermons: thus they add sorrow to sorrow, and
persecution to persecution; because God has smitten thee, therefore they smite
thee too, but yet notwithstanding all this, look thou up to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and know that thou shall find favor; he will have a fellow-feeling
with thee in all thy miseries; therefore plead with the Lord Jesus Christ, and
say, Lord in thy estate of humiliation, thou were a man full of sorrows, and
thou sufferedst much perplexity, thou know what it is to suffer the wrath of
a displeased Father, and thou did cry out, Father, is mercy, and love, and
goodness, and all gone? Oh blessed redeemer, hear those cries of them that cry
to thee for mercy; thou that did suffer for poor sinners, do thou succor
poor sinners: and Jesus Christ will certainly pity you, and will send his
good Spirit from heaven to comfort you, and he will command loving kindness to
comfort and refresh thee. You that groan under your burdens, he will command
loving kindness to come to such a man's house, and to visit such a one, and
will say, such a man is troubled, I command thee to comfort him: and,
salvation, I charge thee go to such a house, and tell such a man that I love
him, tell him that I suffered for him, and was forsaken, that he might not be
forsaken, I was condemned, that he might be redeemed: It is a great comfort
that the Lord Jesus Christ is touched, and knows how to deliver such as are
tempted. He that bore up the frame of the heavens, and never groaned under the
pillars of the earth, yet when he was to bear the wrath of God, he shrunk at
it and said, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: he that
bore the wrath of God for thee, he will certainly pity thee.

ones, no he will not lose one of you, but he will in his appointed time help
and deliver you: therefore be not troubled not dismayed, but resolve of this and
say, I shall be delivered, therefore let my soul be for ever cheared, what
would you have, and what do you fear? Is it your sins? do you think that
they bear you an old grudge? and they will be clamouring up to heaven against
you, and complaining of you at the throne of grace, do you fear them? so you
may justly, because of that secret sliding off from the truth: Oh say thou,
my errand is done in heaven before this time, and my sins knock at heaven
gates, and say, Justice Lord, I have taken them in their sins, and therefore
as thou art a God of justice, execute justice upon a rebellious soul. Now
therefore remember that Jesus Christ has suffered, he has taken thy sins
upon him, and has suffered the punishments of them, 1 John 2.1. Little
children sin not at all: It were to be wished that a man might be always
humble and poor in spirit, and do all good against the evil done to him; and
it were to be wished that a man could walk exactly before God; but it is not
possible so long as we have this body of death it will show it self, but if we
do sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just; he is
gone to heaven to tell the Father that all is fully answered, and he says,
Father save all those poor souls whom thou have given me; I have paid all,
and answered all for them; and therefore, Father, I will that all that thou
have given me, may be with me; where I am, that they may behold my glory: thus
he plead; for he does not plead as we do, but he says, Father I will: now if
there be any cry against the soul by reason of sin, Christ stops it; sin
pleads, and Christ pleads, and who will prevail think you? therefore be not
discouraged, we have an Advocate with the Father: the sins of your dreams
this last night, they have done your errands in heaven before you did awake;
but let them plead what they can, we have an Advocate with the Father in
Heaven, and he pleads our cause in heaven, and he will prevail in whatsoever he
pleads for; he will be heard, and all the pleas of sin shall be fully answered:
Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. ye are not come to the mount that might not be touched, nor
unto burning fire, etc. But ye are come unto the mount Zion, and to the city
of the living God, and to the Spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus
Christ the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling,
which speaks better things than the blood of Abel: what did the blood of Abel
speak? see that in Genesis 3.9, 10. where is Abel thy brother, said the Lord, and
he answered, I cannot tell, am I my brothers keeper? Oh thou wretch says the
Lord the voice of thy brothers blood cries to me from the earth for vengeance
against thee; thus all our sins do speak: but there are some sins that
cry and say, Lord, this soul is taken to be a Christian, and a Professer,
and one that has some grace; but, Lord, against knowledge, and conscience, and
the directions of the Ministers, he has sinned thus and this: therefore good
Lord execute judgment upon him; but now here is your comfort you poor Saints;
I confess these wretched corruptions of your hearts play the back friends
with you many times; but we have the blood of Christ, that cries for mercy, and
pardon, and refreshing, and forgiveness: sin pleads and says, Lord do me
justice against such a soul, but the blood of Christ says, I am abased and
humbled, and I have answered all: Christ shall be heard, and if he plead the
cause, the day is certainly yours, and he pleads without any fees, and his
blood speaks on your behalf, and your sins shall never be heard against
you: but what sticks upon your stomachs?

Who then shall be able to stand? How shall I be able to answer it: especially
considering that Satan says, I have sinned, and why should I not be cast out
as well as others have been cast out that have sinned; Lord execute justice
upon them as they have deserved: how shall we help ourselves herein? yes
admirably, for then the blood of Christ comes in, and that satisfies all, Gal.
5.22.23. The fruits of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, meekness, temperance, faith, against such there is no law: so it
is here, there is no law, nor no condemnation to believers truly penitent for
their sins, there is no punishment to them, nor no wrath to execute judgment
upon them, because the debt is paid, and the Lord is just and cannot, and
righteous and will not do it: but says the Devil thou have sinned, and why
shall thou not be condemned for it? but says justice, hold thy tongue Satan,
for there is no law against them that repent: what troubles you now?

Judas and all the wicked of the world, and they of Sodom and Gomorah: there
they lie roaring, and damnation takes hold upon them, and the wrath of God
finks them down to hell: Now I have sinned, and therefore why should not I be
damned, and why should not the wrath of God be executed against me? I answer,
the death of Christ acquits thee of all, and although the wrath of God be of
admirable power and force, yet you shall be acquitted by the death of the Lord
Jesus: Revelations 20.^^. Blessed and holy is he that has a part in the first
resurrection, for on such the second death shall have no power, that is, wicked
men and the ruffians of the world that scorn all commands, and despise all the
ordinances of God, and the laws of men, and neither of them can take place in
their hearts, they break all bonds, and cast away all commands, and the
threatenings of God can take no hold upon them; but though they are so
rebellious here, yet everlasting condemnation shall take hold of them, and
shall have power over them hereafter, and will drag their souls and bodies
down to hell, and there they shall suffer intolerably, and incomprehensibly,
and then hell and condemnation shall tell them thus much, seeing the commands
of God could take no hold upon you, therefore we will: the mercies of God could
not persuade with you, but the judgments of God shall prevail against you.
What becomes of all the great and mighty men of the world? where is Pharaoh and
Nimrod, and the rest of them? the wrath of God has thrown them upon their
backs in hell; but you that are true believers, the second death shall have no
power over you; though wrath and condemnation seem to lay hold upon you, yet
there is no power in them to condemn you, because if Christ has taken away
the pains of the second death, then it shall never oppress such as belong to
the Lord Jesus Christ: therefore go your way comforted, there is nothing that
shall ever prevail against you.



Hebr. 10.19, 20. Seeing therefore brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may
most boldly enter into the holy places by the new and the living way which he
has prepared for us, through the veil which is his flesh: mark two things in
that place, you may have boldness; you fear now that your sins will not be
pardoned, and that God the Father will not accept of you: well, be not proud
and saucy, but take the blood of Christ along with you, and go on boldly, and
cheerfully. All you that have an interest in the great work of God, either for
brokennesse of heart, or vocation to call you to rely upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, be thou a sinner, If thou have faith; I speak not of the measure of
faith, but have thou faith, then why sit thou here drooping? Go you on
cheerily, and undauntedly, and go with comfort to everlasting happiness:
every thing gives you comfort, had you but eyes to see it, God and men, Heaven
and earth, sin, justice, hell and condemnation, gives you all comfort. If you
look up to justice that says, you poor believing creatures go your way
comforted, I am setisfied to the full: If you look to hell, and death, and
condemnation, they say be comforted, you poor believing souls, we have no
power over you, the Lord Jesus Christ has conquered us, and if you look to
your own sins, they tell you thus much, and say, be for ever comforted, for
we have pleaded against you, but we have lost the cause: If you look up to
heaven, there you may see glory and happiness, and blessedness ready to
entertain every believing soul, and they all call after you and say, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: therefore go away
cheerily, and get you to heaven, and when you come there, be discomforted if
you can; if Christ, and God, and Heaven, and all call you and say, come all
hither, you believing souls, then lift up your heads with joy, and draw the
waters of comfort and consolation from this truth; only remember this here,
when you find your sins roaring upon you, and telling your Father that you
have sinned, and justice cries, and hell threatens, then take the blood of
Christ, and see before your eyes all that ever Christ has suffered, and see
justice fully satisfied, and hear the blood of Christ speaking, as well as the
clamours of sin: it is the misery that we are in, that we can here the
bawlings of Satan, and of corruption, crying and saying, what, you salvation,
and yet have these and these corruptions? we hear these, and we hearken not to
the other; the blood of Christ has pardoned all, and will cleanse all: Oh
hear that voice, and you shall see and hear that it speaks admirable things:
this is the second use.

of happiness; oh that you had never sinned, this had been mavelous mercy;
but that Christ himself should come and strive with us in mercy and patience,
and we slight it; and not only to provide the comforts of this life, but the
means of a better life, and to give us peculiar blessings; nay, that the Lord
Jesus should be so fond of a company of rebels, and hell hounds, that he
thinks nothing good enough for them; he has prepared heaven for them, and he
gives them the comforts of the earth for their use too: nay he has given them
his blood and his life, and all, and yet you are not at the highest: what do
you talk of life? he was not only content: to part with life, but he was
content to part with the sense and sweetness of Gods love, which is a thousand
times better than life it self, as David says, The loving kindness of God is
better than life it self: He was content to be accused, that we might be
blessed; he was content to be forsaken, that we might not be forsaken; and to
be condemned, that we might be acquitted. Oh all you stubborn hearts, that
heretofore have made nothing of the blood of Christ and his honor, but though
the judgments of God, and the hammer cannot break your hearts, yet let this
mercy break you, and reason with thy own heart in this manner, and say, Good
Lord, is this possible? Lord, this is too much, for reason cannot reach it, nor
nature cannot do it, to give himself and his life, and to be forsaken and
despised: that a rebbell and a traitor should be received to mercy, certainly I
shall love him as long as I live, yes, and do so too; and seek to that Jesus
Christ, and honor him, and say, for ought I know I may obtain a part in
Christ, therefore I will never wrong him, nor grieve his good Spirit more. The
Lord say Amen to the good desires of your hearts, that you may stand and wonder
at this compassion of the Lord, that is out of measure great.

David had received many kindnesses from the Lord, he looks up to Heaven and
says, I will love thee dearly, O Lord my strength: Love is the loadstone of
love; therefore have love enlarged in this duty, be not scantie in your love,
but bestow your hearts fully, and liberally, upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and
let all return love to the Lord Jesus Christ, and love him in all things by
all means, and at all times, and know that the death of Christ requires this,
and will call for it: I do not love that a man should give the Lord Jesus
Christ a little scanty desire, and a few lazy wishes, but love him with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and say, I will love thee dearly, Oh Lord my
strength: when thou do rise in the morning love Jesus Christ, and bathe thy
heart in it; and when thou art in the way, or at thy labor, love Jesus Christ
that strengthens thee; when thou feedest upon the sweetness of thy meat,
think upon the sweetness that is in Christ, and thank the blood of Christ
for all that thou have, in all the riches thou see, and in all the honors
thou have, and in all thy friends and means, and whatsoever thy heart loves or
esteems, in that see Christ, and in that love Christ: why, what does that
concern Jesus Christ? I answer, it will make it appear that all that thou
have, is from the blood of Christ, and the blood of Christ is better than all
the blessings you do enjoy, and they are all nothing without this: for it is
the death of the Lord Jesus Christ that ads a seasoning virtue to all the good
things thou have; so that these are not good to us, neither do they work good
to us, but that they are given to us in and by the Lord Jesus Christ; for were
they not given us in Christ, there is such venom and gall in our sins, and
the wrath of God it self which slides through all the good things here below,
that it makes all the morsels gravel in the belly: In a word, the blood of
Christ takes away the venom and indignation of Gods curse, which otherwise
would bring a plague upon what we have, and what we do enjoy: how many rich
and honorable are there, if the Lord let but in a vein of vengeance into
their consciences, all their riches and honors are base, and worth nothing;
what is that to me? if I be rich and a reprobate, honored and damned, and the
wrath of God to pursue me: therefore without the death of Christ all these
things are but curses to us; the world is a prison, and the creatures are our
enemies, and every one of our actions are our witnesses to condemn us, and all
our comforts are but gall and wormwood to us, nay were it not for the blood of
Christ, your prosperity would be your ruin, your beds your graves, and your
comforts your confusion: and therefore that they are not so, and that thou have
any comfort from these, go bless God for it, and say, Lord it is through thy
blood that I have received any blessing, upon these blessings Lord, I might
have drunk the cup of thy wrath, when I drunk this beer; I might have eaten
my bane, when I eat my meat. I bless thy Name, blessed Redeemer, for thy love,
it is thy blood that has purchased these things for me: if you have received
from any thing here below any good at all, look up to Christ and bless his
Name for it, and say, if this meat be so sweet, then what is the blood of
Christ? therefore love Christ by all means, let all your words be words of
love, and all your labor be the labor of love, and all your thoughts be
thoughts of love, and muse of love, and speak of the treasures of mercy, and
let all your affections be full of love, and all your works be love, and lift
up his Name and say, all ye that see my conversation that I walk so
comfortably, bless his Name for it; the blood of Jesus Christ has done all
this for me; I was a wretched creature, but the blood of Christ has overpowred
this rebellious heart of mine: honor him, and lift him up and say, my heart
was hard and filthy, and my soul was destitute of all good, and my sins
many, yet now I have some evidence of the love of God, blessed be his Name for
it, the blood of Christ has done this for me: muse of him, speak for him,
work for him, and do all for him, in all miseries and troubles, sorrows and
vexations, temptations without, and terrors within; love Jesus Christ therein,
though these befall thee, yet the venom and poison of them is gone, and they
are sweetened unto thee: thy prison is liberty, thy contempt is advancement, in
all the things thou have, love Jesus Christ that has procured these: and now
if you will not love Jesus Christ, let me ask you whom will you love? nay,
whom else can you love? answer me, will you love your friends that are dear
unto you, or your Parents that do provide for you, or your wife that is loving
and merciful to you? you will love these, as there is good cause you should,
but love Christ more than all these. If you will love a friend, or a father,
then much more Christ, that is the Author of all, and the continuer and
preserver of all: a friend would be an enemy, but that the blood of Christ
frames his heart. A wife would rather be a trouble, than a help, but that the
blood of Christ orders her: therefore I say with Paul, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha: ask your
neighbors if they love not the Lord Jesus Christ; Let that soul be accursed
until the coming of Christ to judgment: Curse him all ye Angels in Heaven,
and all ye Devils in Hell: Curse him all ye creatures, and let this curse
remain upon him until the coming of Christ unto judgment, and let these
curses be sealed down upon him for ever, and when you are come to the end of
all, this will be the plague and the curse of all, that you had Christ and
mercy rendered to you once, and you would not receive it: therefore since
Christ has thought nothing too good for us, even his life and blood, and was
content to part with the sense and feeling of the sweetness of the love of God
the Father, think nothing too good for Christ, but love him in all things, and
by all means; the Lord grant we may.

FINIS.

