THE ACTS and life of the most Victorious Conqueror, Robert Bruce King of
SCOTLAND.

WHEREIN also are contained the Martial deeds of the valiant Princes, Edward
Bruce, Sir James Douglas, Earl Thomas Randel, Walter Stewart, and sundry
others.

Newly corrected and conferred with the best and most ancient Manuscripts.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Heart. ANNO 1620.

The Printers Preface to the Reader.
THere is nothing unto which the mind of man does more aspire tha^ to renown
and immortality: therefore it is, that no time has been so barbarous, no
countries so uncivil, but they have had a care to preserve worthy actions
from the injury of oblivion, and labored that the names of these that were
virtuous, while they lived, should not perish with their breath. And amongst
all the strange and diverse fashions of remembering the dead, no record has
been found to be compared to that of books, and amongst all books none so
lasting as these in verse, which how so ever rudely done, yet seem to have
striuen with days, and even to compass time, being the first remembrances
that either Greece or Rome have, and apparently shall be the last.

How curious our Antecessours in this Isle have been to extend their memory
to after ages* many old monuments yet to be seen, can bear witness, but
more than any, that fame of which many years since was amongst forrainers of
their ancient Poets the Bardes, who wrote in verse the deeds of their most
valiant men, and song them in the wild Forests and mountains, with which
(though long time after) the many records we have of the ancient defenders of
our Country, may be brought forth: and amongst all the rest, this story of
the valiant BRVCE is not the least: it speaks the language of that time, if
it spoke ours, it would not be it self: yet as an antique it is venerable.

To speak somewhat of the occasion of those wars, that the History may the
better appear. Alexander the third of that name, King of SCOTLAND departed
this life suddenly without succession to the crown, except Margaret his
Niece, daughter to the King of Norway, who being left the undoubted heir to
the Kingdom, King Edward of England desired her in marriage to his son Prince
Edward, whereunto our Scottish Nobility easily condescended, but she being
dead, before the ambassadors arrived, they returned with sorrowful hearts:
whereupon arose great t^oubles and contention amongst the Nobility, who should
succeed to the Crown: and albeit there were many contendents: yet at length,
came only betwixt the Bruce and Baliol. The Nobility to avoid further strife,
conueened themselves, to decide who should have the undoubted right: but
because they could not agree, both the parties being so great, that their power
could not make the parties stand to their arbitrament, they with one voice
referred the deciding thereof to Edward of England, supponing, that he should
deal most sincerely therein, considering how willingly they had condescended
to the marriage of his son with Margaret the Niece of King Alexander, who
accepting very gladly of the matter, hoping to atchieue by craft, that which
he and his predecessors could never obtain by force, left off his Journey to
the Holy LAND, hoping to speed better at home for the enlarging of his
Dominions, being a man greatly inclined that way, called the parties before
him at Barwike, protesting here withal that he called them not upon any
presumption, that he pretended over them, but as they had chosen him to be
arbiter in the cause: so he called them to the deciding of the matter, and to
color his purpose, he had conueened a number of learned Lawyers out of
France, and other Countries, pretending that he would do nothing without law
and reason: yet the most part of the Doctors there conueened, as namely, Mr.
Siluius, Mr. Rainerius, Decius, Mr. Severius de Florentia, mentioned in the
Pluscadin Chronicle, and in Scotichronicon condescended, that Robert Bruce had
the best right, quod propinquior in gradu debet succedere: and therefore Robert
Bruce in respect he was uno gradu stipiti propinquior, and was also the first
Male, albeit begotten on the younger sister. But King Edward had his own
decinct, not regarding their arbitrament, called first secretly the Bruce unto
him, to whom he was well inclined, promising to decide in his favors, if he
would hold his Kingdom in homage of him. But Bruce being a man of Heroik
spirit, refused absolutely to subject a free Realm to the servitude of any
foreign Prince whomsoever. The King highly offended, turned himself frowardly
in great anger from the Bruce, called John Ballioll also secretly, and promised
him the same conditions: the man being blinded with ardent desire to reign,
not regarding what he did promise, so he might have Soueraignitie,
condiscended easily to whatsumeuer Edward required, and so by him was nominate
King, and sent home to Scotland, where he was conveyed to Scone, and there
crowned, and all, except Bruce, swore to him obedience. Shortly after, there
fell out a slaughter of Makdulffe Earl of Fife, by the Abirnethies men at that
time in great authority and wealth, and because Makdulffe his brother
suspected the King to be partial in judging, summond him to be judged before
King Edward. The Ballioll being there present, and sitting beside King Edward
in the conuention of Estates, and being called, thought to answer by a
Procutour, was compelled to arise and defend his cause at the Bar, wherewith
being sorely grieved, albeit he durst not peep for the time, yet returning
home in a marvelous chaufe, reuoluing in his mind, how he might cast off this
yoke and bondage, whereunto foolishly he had subjected himself, and as he
did meditate upon this, a profitable dissension for his purpose, interueened
between France and England, which immediately brast forth in war: so that at
a Conuention in Scotland both the Kings Ambassadors were present. The French
to renew their old league with the new King, the English by the recent
surrender of the Realm, desired assistance in that war. Both the
Ambassadors were referred to the Parliament, the Nobility prone to cast off
the late yoke of England decerned the French petition just, and the English
unjust, for that league with France, was made five hundredth years ago, by the
consent of the whole Realm, inviolably observed to that day, but that
surrender was but new thrown out of the King against his will, which albeit
he had been willing to do, yet neither was the King, nor the Realm bound to
bide at it, seeing it was done without the consent of the Estates in
Parliament, without whose consent, the King could do nothing. These News
coming to King Edwards ears, having taken some Months truce with France, he
sent his Navy that was bowne to France into Scotland, thinking to overthrow
the Scots, before they were provided, and to keep Barwike vnvittalled. The
Scots encountering this Navy at the River mouth of Tweed, wanne eighteen
ships, and chased the rest. King Edwards wrath was by this loss more
vehemently provoked to revenge, summond the Ballioll thrice to compeare before
him at Newcastle, and because he compeared not at all, he sent for Bruce, and
promised him the Kingdom, if he would write to his friends, either to leave
their King, or to flee in battle. The King with all diligence past toward
Barwike, where finding the town strongly garnished with men: and coming small
speed in his pursuit, he fained a retreat, and caused some of the Bruces
faction sparse brutes that the Ballioll with a great Oast was even there at
hand, whereupon the most notable men of the town, supponing themselves to be
free of the common enemy, ran forth for to receive their King honorably: and
so both horse and foot went out of the town confusedly. But Edward had
appointed a number of horsemen to wait upon that turn, who cutted them off
easily from their companies, being vshed so confusedly, and out of order, and
coming to the next Port, entered in the town, the King with his foot-hoste
following, made miserable slaughter upon all sorts of people, and increasing in
multitude, sent a part of his army to besiege Dumbar, himself within few
days received the Castle of Barwike, which the keepers randred, despairing of
relief: then joining all his forces together at Dumbar, encountered with the
Scots host which came hither with a great battle to raise the siege: the
victory inclined to the English side. The chief men of the Nobility fled
to the Castle, but the Captain not having Viuers sufficient to sustain such
a multitude randered, and all kind of cruelty execute upon the captives. But
when the Bruce desired the Kingdom in recompense of his travel, and according
to promise. Edward answered him in French, have we nothing ado, but to purchase
Kingdoms for you. Dumbar, and some other Castles upon the Border being
randred, Edinburgh and Striuiling were delivered also: from Striuiling Edward
passed Forth, and marched toward Forfare, where the Ballioll was, when without
impediment he came to Monrosse: The Ballioll by persuasion of John Cummine of
Strabogie randred himself, and the Kingdom into King Edwards hands, whom he
shipped, and sent into England. Edward returned to Barwike, and by sharp edict
summond all the Scottish Nobility to come thither, such as came were compelled
to swear obedience unto him. William Douglas a man of Noble blood, and
valiant, refusing to swear, was cast in prison, where within few years he
died. Thus all things succeeding to his wish, he appointed John Warre^ Earl of
Surrey Viceroy, Hew Cressingham Thesaurer, and leaving them behind him, he
returned to London, where he warded John Ballioll, when he had reigned 4.
years. But he within a short space at the request of the Bishop of Rome was
sent to France, leaving his son Edward in pledge for him. Afterward Edward
with a great army, took shipping to pass in France. The Scots in esperance of
liberty (he being absent) chused twelve Regents, and by all their aduises,
John Cummine Earl of Buchan with a sufficient army was sent in England. The
English Garrisons left in Scotland dispersed here and there, durst not stir:
so he without impediment spoiled Cumberland and Northumberland. Albeit this
voyage somewhat encouraged the Scots, yet did it but small help to the whole
war, for all strong holds were fortified by the enemies garrisons. But while
as Noblemen lacked both strength and sufficient courage to enterprise greater
matters, William VVallace a man of Noble and ancient Family, who did Acts, in
those Wars not only above all men's exspectatio^, but also incredible, being a
man of great bodily strenght, and high courage: He hardened his body against
injuries of Fortune, and confirmed his courage by perilous attempts to
enterprise higher and greater, even with danger: he gathered unto him some
company of Men, and herewith not only slew any Englishmen he met with, but
often times also with few foght with great numbers in sundry places where he
met with them, and slew them. In short space his fam filled both the Realms: so
they that had lik causes as he had, and not unlike love to their Country,
gathering together swarmed to him from all parts, and within few months he
amassed an indifferent Army: Noblemen for fear or lashnes lying still, Wallace
was proclaimed Governor, and as Lieutenant for Ballioll, commanded as lawful
Magistrate. He took not this name of pride or of desire to Empire, but only
(like another Sampson) upon compassion, and love of his Countrey-people. After
this, he essayed with open force, took many Castells, (either not sufficiently
furnished or not weill guarded, or negligently kept) and razed them. His Men of
Wars minds were so confirmed, that under his conduct they feared no perrill,
for that his hardiment lacked never wisdom, nor his wisdom the wished event.
So in short space he wan all the Forts that Englishmen possessed beyond Forth.

King Edward hearing these rumors, and having all his Army with him in France,
he wrote to Henry Pearsie Lord of Northumberland, and to William Latimer, to
raise quickly Forces out of the next adjacent Country, and join themselves
with Cressinghame, to suppres the Scots. Wallace in this time besieged the
Castle of Cowper in Fyfe, to the end his men of war should not be idle,
attending the coming of the English army: his enemies now cuming near, marched
directly to Striuiling, (The River of Forth has no foords at Striuiling) Yet
there was a vvoodden bridge, over the which Cressinghame past, with the great
part of his a^m^: the rest following so thick, (the bridge being ouerburthened
with so hudge a weght) brak in pieces. The Scots charged these that were
past, before they could be Arrayed, slew their leader, drove back the rest in
the water, with so huge a slaughter, that almost the whole were either slain by
the Scots, or drowned in the river. Wallace after this so followed his fortune,
that he left not an Englishman in Scotland, except prisoners. This victory was
obtained upon the Ides of September. 1297. Hereafter followed great Famine for
not manuring of the ground: and Pest followed Hunger: whereof greater
destruction was feared than of the War. Wallace to remedy this as well as he
might, charged al sensible men, to come unto him at a certain day, and carried
them with him into England: where living in vvinter in their enemies lands,
they spared Viuers at home; where he remained from the kalends of November,
unto the kal. of Febr. and no man durst match him, And then having enriched
the^selfs with their enemies spoils, returned with great glory. As this
journey augmented Wallaces fame and authority among the people, so it increased
the Noble men's envy against him: whereof Edw. being privy, setting things in
France in order, as time would permit, leaving his old soldiers beyond sea,
amassing a very great army upon the sudden, of nouices, he marched toward
Scotland: but when in the plain of Stanemure both armies stood in order of
battle, about half a mile from other: Edw. viewing Wall. host, his skill and
order of battle: albeit he had a greater number of people, yet durst he not
hazard; returning his standerds, softly retired: but Wallace for fear of
ambushment durst not follow. This victory obtained without blood, against a
most potent King. The enemies of Wall. more sharply assaulted him, raising
brutes through the country, that he openly shot at the Kingdom. So they
conclude, by all means to subvert Wall. authority. These devises not unknown to
King Edw. he raised a great army of English and Scots, who had remained
constant in their promise made to him the next So^mer came unto Faw-kirk:
which village is builded upon the very ruins of Seuerus Wall, distant from
Striuiling 6 miles. The Scottish host abade not far from thence, strong enough
indeed, for they were 30 thousand, if the Rulers had agreed amongst themselves.
The Rulers were John Cumming, John Stewart, and Will. Wallace. the former two
in blood, and puissance, the last in Marshall glory, most flourishing of al
Scotland. While as the 3 battles stood in redines to fight, a new contention
was added to the former envy, Who should lead the Vanguard: and neither of them
giving place to the other: the Englishmen ended the strife who in order of
battle, with displayed Banners, came upon them with expedition: Cummine with
his company fled without stroke: Steward environed both behind and before,
was slain with his host. Wallace being sore set upon in front, and Bruce
coming about a Knowle, to charge him on the back, contained his men together
in such order, as in such state he best could, and returned back over CARROVN
Water, where he defended himself, having gathered together those that were
fled, and Bruce desiring to speak with him, he refused not: when these two
alone stood right over against other, at a deep and narrow part of the River,
Bruce first said, he wondered at him, that being carried with the facile favor
of the people, would hazard himself in so many perils again a King, most
puissant of that age: assisted also with great support of Scots, and that
without any hope of recompense of his pains? For albeit he vanquished Edward,
the Scots would never allow of him to be King: and if he were overthrown he
had no refuge, but in the mercy of his enemy. To whom Wallace answered: I (said
he) never took these pains to purchase to my self a Kingdom, for that is
vnagreeable with my condition, and my mind couets it not, but seeing my
Contrymen through your cowardice, to whom the Realm rightly appertains,
destitute of Rulers, and hereby casten into their most cruel enemies hands: not
only in bondage and slavery, but even to the shambles, I pitied their case,
and have enterprised the defense of their cause, forsaken by you, whose liberty
I shall not forsake, bef^^e my life forsake me. And so the conference ended:
either of both returning to their own. After this unhappy Battle Wallace
returned to Perth, and there skailed his army giving place to the envy born
against him: and after that day enterprised nothing for the Realm: and
renounced the name of Magistrate: albeit he left not off the inuading of the
English Nation, wheresoever he could be their master. Edward, after this wasted
by all warlike calamities, the Lands beyond Forth even to Perth: subduing those
that in respect of the present misery durst not stir: and so retired with his
army into England. The Scots that were careful for the liberty of their
Realm, a little refreshed after the enemies departure, made John Cumming
younger, Regent: who by the advice of the Counsel sent Ambassadors to Philip
Valloys King of France, to travel with him that by Mediation of his Sister,
who was then affianced to Edward, they might at least obtain Truce. By her
travels they obtained Truce for seven Months, but not observed ( bona fide:)
for Englishmen took the Ambassadors that were directed to Bonifacius the
eight, and imprisoned them. The Scots in the mean time who could not abide the
tyranny of Englishmen, nor culd by no punishment satiat Edwards cruel mind,
neither yet obtain peace upon just conditions, prepared themselves with
obstinat minds to fight it out, without all hope of pardon. First they drove
all Edwards Captains forth of all Towns, and Fortresses, and vexed the Scots,
of the English faction, with all the force they might: while as the stat of
matters thus continued almost two years. Edward sent Rodolph Confrey, with a
puissant Army, to suppress this rebellion of the Scots, and to put an end to
those Wars. This Army without impediment wasted all to Rosling, a place in
Louthian, four miles distant from Edinburgh, and to destroy farther within the
Country divided their Army in three, John Cummine, and John Fraser, the most
wealthy men in Tweed-dale, gathering to the number of 8000 men, marched toward
the enemy, of purpose either to keep in the enemy, that he should not run at
randon to spoil the Country, or if they found better occasion, to follow
Fortun. Better occasion was offered then they looked for: For Englishmen
fearing nothing less than the coming of their enemies, so often overthrown,
behauing themselves more losely than was expedient, in their enemies ground, by
sudden coming of the Scots upon the first of their Camps, were ouerthrown with
a great slaughter: they that escaped raised great tumult in the second camp,
where th'alarm was fearfully raised, every man exhorting his Mate to support
their own, they prepared themselves for revenge. The conflict was terrible, as
betwixt these that were fires, through victory, and these that were enraged by
thirst of revenge: in end, the Englishmen discomfist and chased, victory,
albeit not unbloody, yielded to the Scots: the third host, which had bin further
off, afraid the Scots, for many being wounded, and most part wearied with
travels in 2 late battles foresaw manifest danger to ensue by fighting, and
assured destruction by flight, at length the Heads commanded to slay al
captives: left while they were occupied with the enemy, they should come upon
their backs: they armed their servants with slain men's armor* and so made show
of a greater army to their enemies: the battle begun was keenly foghten on
both sides: the fight being doutfull for a while, the scots by exhortation of
their leaders, and calling to mind their late doble victory, renewing their
strength: ran so fiercely upon their enemies that their array broken, they gave
backs, It was foghten at Rosline, the 6 of the kal. of March, 1320. The more
notable that this victory was, 3 hosts in one day ouerthrown by one, the more
sharply Edw. set his mind to deface this ignominy, and once to put an end to
their longsome War. He amasseth a greater army than ever he did before, and
persued Scotland both by land and sea, to the utter most borders of Ros. No man
in warfare durst hazard him self against so puissant an army, except Wallace,
with his few folks, sometimes behind, and somtims before, and somtims upon their
wings, chopped at such as had rashly run forth from the host. Edw. preast by
great promises to make him his own, but in vain: his answer was ay to all men,
that he had auowed his life to his Country. Thus things achieved: Edw.
adjoined himself to his son Edward, whom he had left at Perth, took in sundry
Strengths and Forts and Striuiling, after 3 months siege, the rest rendered for
fear Edward held a Parliament in Sainct-Andrews, vvher he made most part of the
Nobility for fear to swear to be his true subjects; Wall, always excepted; who
for fear to be betrayed of the nobility, withdrue himself to his old lurking
places. Edw. appointed Lieutena^ts and Magistrates throughout Scotland, past
home to England, and left no Monuments, Histories, Books, Laws, nor learned
men, undestroyed, or transported with him: thinking thereby to exterminate the
name of that Nation. He left Odomare Valentine, Viceroy, to extinguish all
innouations, if any begin to peep. But now Wars arose, where he least meaned.
Among the rest of Scottish Nation with Edward was Robert Bruces son, who
conte^ded with Ballioll for the Kingdom, and John Cummine, cosen german to
John Ballioll, late King of Scots. Edw. had spoken often times severally, and
long time holden them in the hals, upon vain hope of the Kingdom, and so used
their means in the conquest of the same, being both me^ of great power and
friendship: but the deceitful mockage at length manifested: there was nothing
more desired of either of them, than occasion to be reue^ged upon Edw. falset
against promise and trust to both: but emulation whereby the one suspected the
other, was the stay, that neither durst co^municat his counsel to the other.
Now Cum. perceived these doings misco^te^ted Bruce, vehemently deplored unto
him the misery of their Country, beginning from the ground thereof and
inueighing greatly against the King of Englands persidie, accused first
himself, and then Bruce, by whose assistance and travels their people were
brought to this misery proceeding further from this beginning of speech, every
of them promising secrecy to other upon their Faith and honesty. They agreed
betwixt themselves thus: That Bruce should be King and Cummine should resign
his Right in his favors: and Cummine should have all Lands that Bruce
possessed in Scotland (he had many fair and fruitful Lands) and Cummine
should be second in honor next unto the King. These things sworn, written, and
sealed, Bruce waiting opportunity of change, past to the Court of England,
leaving behind him in Scotland his wife and brethren. After his departure,
Cummine either repenting his former advise, or else he thought by craft to cut
away Bruce, that thereby he might more easily come by the kingdom. He bevvrayed
these secrets to Edward: and to purchase credit herein, he sent him the
Contract signed by both. Bruce was summo^d to a day for treason, charged not to
depart from Court, and quiet keepers appointed unto him, commanded to spy both
his words and deeds. The cause why the King protracted time in this so
manifest a turn, was, that his brethren might be apprehended before the brute
of his execution should arise. Bruce in the mean time was informed of the
sudde^ danger, by his old friend the Earl of Gomera: who durst not counsel
him by letter to flee, but warning by example, sent a pair of guilt spurs with
some pieces of gold, as if he had borrowed them the day preceding. Robert, as
men in danger are most tenty, not ignorant what was meant by the propine called
for a Smith in the night, caused shoo three Horses backward, lest the print of
the Horse feet in the snow might bewray their flight, and that same night might
be espied: accompanied with other two, took journey upon the 7 day thereafter:
themselves and their horses weary, came to a Castle of his own standing beside
Lochmabene: there finding his brother David and Robert Fleming: and taking them
with him, scarcely opening unto them the cause of his flight, chanced upon a
Messenger, carrying letters from Cummine to Edward, bearing, That Robert should
be executed with diligence: for delay brought danger, lest a Noble man,
^auoured of the people, and therewith also wise and stout should raise new
troubles, etc. The Cummines treason also by this testimony tried, Robert
inflamed with rage of ire, past directly to Drumfreise, where he understood his
enemy was: and finding John Cummine in the Gray-Friers Kirk: produced his
letters, and reproved him bitterly, while as he impudently stood to the denial
thereof: but he impatient, in wrath strak him in the belly with his Dagger, and
left him for dead. When he was horsing again, James Lindesay his cosen, and
Roger Kirk-Patricke, his friend, perceiving his countenance changed inquired
the cause? He told them in a word, He believed Cummine was dead. What? said
LINDESAY, Have thou left so dangerous a deed in doubt? and therewith he entered
into the Kirk, and not only slew him but also Robert Cummine, his kinsman,
preassing to support him. This murder was committed the 4 of the Ides of
February 1305. about this time William Wallace was taken, and betrayed by John
Menteith, his familiar companion, corrupted by Edwards Money in the bounds of
Glasgow, where he lurked for the time: sent to London, where by Edwards command
he was unhonestly beheaded and quartered: his members t^ terrify others) hung
up in most public places in England and Scotland. This was the end of this
most worthy man's life, who for high spirit in interprising dangers, for
fortitude in execution, comparable in deed to the most famous Chiftains,
amongst the Ancients: for love to his native Country, second to no^e, he only
free, the rest slaves, could neither be b^ught with benefits, nor compelled
by force to leave the public cause which he had once professed; whose death
appeared more to be lamented, that being invincible, to his enemy he was
betrayed by his Familiar, that in no case should have done so.

The Bruce staying only till he had obtained pardon of the Bishop of Rome, for
the murder committed in holy Church. In the next month of Aprile, 1306.
passing to Scone, he was crowned King. First knowing well the great puissance
of his enemy, he amasseth all the forces he could, from all parts, although
the whole clan of Cummines, the greatest in Scotland that ever was before them,
or since in puissance withstoode him, and his assisting of Edward, offended
many, and the greater part of the Realm beside, lay quiet for fear of English
force, he, notwithstanding of his few number, hazarded against Odomar at
Meibwen, with the loss of a few was put to the worst. The like bad success
he had in passing from Atholl to Argyle* where the Cummines beset him, and
forced him to fight at Dalry, his men fleeing to save themselves in places of
greatest surety. From this time with one or two in company, thinking himself
in that state more sure with few than many. He wandered in the wilderness like a
wild man: and albeit he would have assayed Fortoun, he saw no appearance of
force in any part: for the common people upon the construing of the two former
losses caused him be forsaken of all: two only of his old friends stood
constantly by him, Micolum Leuin Earl of Lennox, and Gilbert Hay, Englishmen
not saciate sufficiently with his miseries, sent, and apprehended his kinsemen
throughout all the Country, his wife token by William Earl of Rosse, was sent
into England, his brother Nigell, the Castle of Kildrummie betrayed by the
Captain thereof, with his wife, and children, were randred to the enemy,
Thomas and Alexander his brethren also passing from Galloway to Carrik were
taken at Lochrien, and sent into England. These three in sundry places were
beheaded, the remnant of the Bruces faction were sought also and slain, and
their goods confiscate. The King himself most often with one in company in
this time kept the unhaunted mountains, every day and hour changing lurking
holes, and while as he thought not himself sure that way, neither from
treason of the people, nor cruelty of his enemies, past to the Isles, to an old
friend of his called Angus, and lurking there certain months, he was supposed
to be dead, and so the enemy ceased searching. This brute as it was not
unprofitable for his security, so if it had any while continued, it appeared
to his friends, to cut away all hope of recovering the Realm: thinking
therefore to attempt some what, getting a small company from his friend, with
whom he lurked: he sailed to Carrik, where he took a Castle of his own
inheritance, at unawares kept by a strong garrison of Englishmen, and slew them
all, least he might be environed by force of the enemy, and crossing the
Firth of Clyde, with the like felicity took the Castle of Innernesse far
distant from there and so passing from place to place, taking in towns,
Castles, and strengths. The Countrie-people (being heavily oppressed by the
enemy) flocking to him from all quarters, he gathered a reasonable army: and
albeit he had not only the common enemy to withstand, but also a number of
mighty intestine enemies at home, especially the Cummines faction, yet from
this time forth, whatsoever he attempted succeeded prosperously, till he had
expelled the enemy utterly out of the Realm, and subdued the whole Country
to his obedience: but leaving the History of his further progress, because it
will appear more particularly it self, I remit the Reader to the perusing
thereof. This is he of whom it may be said, that was said of that Roman Scipio,
unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Into what bondage found he his Nation?
To what liberty did he restore it? Since the times of the old Heroes none has
more excelled in all virtues. Who more courageous in war? Who more temperate
in peace? Who ever had a fortun more hard? Who ever did more hardly lead Fortun
captive, and less regarded her frowns? a constant course of victory still
enabling all his enterprises, whose mind would not bin broken, much more bowed
under such heaps of miseries? whose eonstancy would not be queld to have his
wife taken captive, his four brethren slain, his friends with all mischiefs
oppressed: to have himself not only barred of his patrimony and estat, but of a
Kingdom? and all done against faith, by a Prince the mightiest of that age.
Beside all these calamities, thralled, and brought to the extremest of want:
he neither doubted of ye recovery of his Crown, nor was at any tim seen, to
commit any thing unworthy of a kingly mind. Let Rome boast of Camillus and
Scipio, France of her Charles, Epirus of great Scandeberge, Scotland shall not
forget this Prince, for she cannot. And if he be not so renoumed as these, it
is not for that he is not as worthy: but for that he has not had so brave
trumpeters of his fame, being born in so unpolished an age: which time the
destroyer and restorer of every thing may perhaps hereafter in these more
learned days amend. There be some who hold the opinion that the publishing of
those books is hurtful, as embers of consumed discord, but it is not the
publishing of the simplicity of our predecessors that can divide us, or cause
any discord, but rather our own too great subtilty, ambition and avarice, and
the turning the pages of Tacitus and of Secretar Machiauell that ca^ breed an
ague in our state. Can the reading of the wars betwixt Longcaster and York
separate the red and white Roses? I think no. But I am persuaded that al men
of sound minds will rather abhor discord in reading of these books, seeing what
miseries and horrible calamities these wars, bring forth and what great
occasion we of both Nations have to magnify Gods goodness, yt in our days
since the Gospel has been in sincerity published amongst us, has turned all
these bloody broils into a peaceable Calm, especially now in the person of
our dread Sovereign: So that now, as the Prophet says, Our swords are broken
into mattocks, and our spears into siths. But if we would consider what means
have been used, what pains taken, and plots laid by the wisest of both
Nations, to knit up this union, and yet could never effectate the same, until
it pleased GOD to cut down this partitio^ wall of long debate, in the person
of our most gracious SOVEREIGN. GOD give us grace to be thankful for it.
AMEN.

ROBERTUS BRVSSIVS Regni instaurator, ac pene novus conditor, in omni Fortuna
invictus.
QVIS varios casus, quis dura pericula BRVSSI,
Fatorumque vices commemorare queat?
Qui victus toties, toties qui victor and hostis,
In vacuo fixit Martia signa solo.
Qui domitis Fatis pugnando restituit rem;
Civibus and patriam, jusque suum patriae.
Cum tot acerba virum, cum tot cumulata suorum
Funera funeribus cerneret ante oculos;
Men's generosa animi Fortunae excelsior omni
Imperio, stabili perstitit usque gradu?
SCOTIA quae statues VICTORI justa trophaea?
Qui Fati, ac hostis, Victor and ipse Sui est.
The same in English.
Who can the hazards hard, the chances strange
Of Bruce report, a Mark of Fortunes change?
Often was he thrall'd, his Foes often from him fled,
Often ensigns on the purple Plains he spread.
He danted Fates, his native Soil ou'rthrowne
Her to her own, to her brought back a Crown.
By fight he all restored, and having seen
So many funeral heaps before his cene
His Mind vnquell'd reached Fortunes wheel above,
And in the Sphere of Courage ^ixt did move.
Where have thou ( Scotland) for his Trophies room,
Who Fates, Foes, and himself for thee overcome.
THE ACTS AND LIFE OF the most victorious Conqueror Robert Bruce King of
SCOTLAND.
WHEREIN ALSO ARE contained the Martial deeds of the valiant Princes: Edward
Bruce, Sir James Douglas, Earl Thomas Randell, Walter Stewart, and sundry
others.
STories to read are delectable,
Suppose they naught contain but fable
Then sold Stories ye soothfast were,
If they be spoken in good manner:
Have double pleasure in hearing:
The first is their pleasant carping,
The other is, their soothsastnesse,
That shows the thing right as it we.
And soothfast things that are likand,
To men's hearing are pleasand:
Therefore I would feign set my will,
If my wit might suffice theretill.
To put in write a soothfast story,
That it may last in memory:
Sa that no length of time may let,
Nor gar it hailly be foret,
For ald Stories that men reides,
Represents to them their deides
Of stalward folk that lived air,
Right as they then present wair.
And certes they sold weill have prise,
That in their time were wicht and wise:
And led their life in great travel:
And often intill hard stoure of battle,
Wan richt greit praise of Cheualrie,
And was void of all Cowartrie:
As was King Robert of Scotland,
That hardy was of heart and hand:
And good Schir James of Douglas,
That in his time sa worthy was:
That of his praise and his bounty,
In sindrie lands honor wan he.
Of tham I think this buke to ma.
Now God of grace, that I may swa
Treit it, and bring it to good ending,
That I say nocht but suithfast thing.
QUhen Alexander the King was deid
That Scotland had to steir and leid
The land sex eires, and mair perfay
Lay desolate after his day:
Till all the Barouns at the last
Assemblit them, and that full fast,
To cheis a King the land to steir:
That of the ancestree cummin weir,
Of Kings that had that Royalty,
And had most richt their King to be,
But Inuy that is so felloun,
Maid among them dissensioun,
For some would have the Balliol King,
For he was cummin of the offspring
Of her, that eldest sister was:
Uther sum contrary it that cais:
And said, that he there King sold be,
That was of als neir degree,
And cummin was of the first Male,
And of Branches Collaterale.
They said, succession of Kinrike,
Was not till lower state alike:
For there micht not succeid a Female,
Quhill foundin micht be any Male,
That were in line even descendand:
They beir all other ways in hand:
For then the nixt cummin of their seid,
Man, or woman sold succeid.
By this ressoun the Lords thocht haill,
That the Lord of Annandaill,
Robert the Bruce, Earl of Carrik,
Aught to succeid to the Kinrik.
THe Barons thus were in discord,
And on no manner micht accord:
Till at the last they all accordit,
That all their speich sold be recordit,
To Schir Edward of England King,
And he sold sweir but feneing,
He sold as arbiter declair,
Of the two that I told of air:
Quho sold succeid to sit on hicht,
And let him Regne that had the richt.
This Ordinance they thocht the best,
For at that time was peace and rest
Betwixt Scotland and England both,
That they could not perceive the skaith,
That toward them was appearand,
For why the King of England
Held such friendship, and company,
With their King that was worthy:
They trow'd that he as good nighbour,
And as friendfull Compositour,
Would have judged in leele Lawtie,
But otherwise yeed all the glie.
A Folk blinded full of great folly,
Had ye bethought once earnestly,
What peril to you might appear,
Ye had not wrought in that maneare.
Had ye taken keep, how that this King
Always withoutten fainyeeing,
Trauell'd for to win Senyeorie,
And through his might did occupy
Lands, that were to him marchand,
As Wales was, and all Ireland,
That he put into such thirlage,
That they that were of hie Parage,
Should run on foot, as Ribalds all,
When he would any folk assail.
Durst none of Wales in battle ride,
Nor yet fra Even fell, abide
Castle, nor walled town within,
But he should lith and limbs tine*
Into sik thirlage them led he,
Whom he ou'rcame with his poustie,
Ye might see he should occupy
Through slight, that he might not through mastrie.
Had ye tan^ keep what was thirlage,
And had considred his usage,
That gripped ay but gane giving,
Ye should withoutten his denying,
Have chosen you a King, that might
Have holden well your Land at right.
Wales ensample might have been
To you, had ye it well foreseen.
And wise men say he is happy,
That will therein himself chastie,
For vnfaire things may fall perfay
The morn, as they did yesterday:
But ye trusted into lawtie,
As simple folk but subtlety,
An^ wist not what might after tide:
For in the world that is so wide,
As none, determinatly that shall
Know any thing that is for to fall,
For GOD that is of most Poustis,
Reserved it to his Majesty,
For to know in his Prescience,
Of things to come the contingence.
IN this manner assented were,
The Barons (as I said you air)
And through their own haill consent,
Messengers to him they went.
Then to the holy land boun was he,
To Saracens to weere surely.
And fra he wist what charge they had,
He busked him but more abade,
And to England again is gane,
And left the purpose that he had taken.
And syne to Scotland word sent he,
That they should make an assembly,
And he in hie should come to do:
In all thing, as they write him to.
But he thotht weill throw their debait,
That he sold slely find sum gait,
How that he all the Senory
Throw his greit micht sold occupy:
And to Robert the Bruce said he:
Gif thou will hald in chief of me
For evermore, and thine offspring:
I sall do so, thou sall be King.
Schir (he said) so God me saif,
The Kinrik arne I nocht to haif:
But gif it fall of richt to me:
And gif God will that it so be,
I sall als freely in all thing
Hold it, as longes to a King,
Or as mine Elders before me
Held it in freast Royalty.
The other wryit him, and swair,
That he sold never have it mair:
And turnit him in wraith away,
But Schir John Ballioll perfay
Assentit sone till all his will:
Quherethrow after fell mekill ill.
He was King but a litill quhyle,
Quhen throw greit subtlety and gyle
For litill enchesoun or for nane,
He was arreistit and syne taken,
And degradit fine was he
Of honor and of dignity,
Quhether that it was wrong or richt,
God wait it, that is most of micht.
QUhen Schir Edward the michty King,
Had on this ways done his liking,
With John the Ballioll, that so sone
Was all degrad and it undone:
To Scotland went he then in hy,
And all the land can occupy:
So haill, that both Castle and Town,
Were all in his possessioun:
From Weik anent Orknay,
To Mulesnuke in Galloway,
And stuffit all with Englishmen,
Schireffs, and Bailleis made he then,
And all kin other Officers,
That to govern the land affeires,
He made of Inglis Natioun.
Then worthit they so feirs and felloun,
And so wickit and so grievous,
So heavy, and so covetous,
That Scottismen micht do nothing,
That ever micht pleis to their liking^
Their wyfes would they oftly by,
And their daughters despiteously,
And gif any thereat were wraith,
They would him wait with a great skaith:
For they sold sone find enchesoun,
To put him to destructioun:
And gif any man neir them by,
Had any thing that was worthy,
Hound, or horse, or other thing,
That pleasand was to their liking:
With richt, or wrong have it would they,
And gif any would them ganesay,
They would so do, that he sold tyne,
Outher life, or land, or live in pyne:
For they dampnit them even at their will.
Takand no keip to richt, nor skill.
Alace they dampnit them fellounly:
For good Knichts that were worthy,
For little enchesoun, and often for none
Were hanged by the necks ilkone.
Alace, they sore that ever was free,
And ay in freedom was wont to be,
Through their mischance and their folly,
Were thirled then so wickedly:
That their foes their judges were:
What wickedness may men have maire?
O how freedom is Noble thing:
For it makes man to have liking.
Freedom all solace to men gives:
He lives at ease that freely lives:
A Noble heart may have none ease,
Nor naught else that may it please,
If freedom failyee: for free liking
Is yarned above all other thing.
O he that has ay lived free:
May not know well the property,
The anger nor the wretched dome,
That is coupled unto thirldome:
But if he had as^ayed it,
Then all perqueir he might it wit:
And should think freedom more to prise,
Then all the gold men may devise.
For contrary things ever mare,
Discouerings of the other are:
And he that into thraldom is,
All that he has in bandoun is,
To his Lord what ever he be:
Yet he has not so meekle free,
As free liking to leave or do
It* that his heart draws him to:
And yet Clerks make Question,
When they fall in disputation:
If a man bad his thirle ought do:
And in the same time came him to
His Wife, and asked him his det,
Whether he his Lords need should bet,
And pay first what he ow, and syne
Do forth his Lords commanding:
Or leave his Wife unpaid, and do
It that his Lord commanded him to.
I leave all the solution,
To men of more discretion.
But sen they make sik comparing,
Betwixt the debts of wedding,
And Lords bidding to their will thirl.
Ye may well see though none should tell,
How hard a thing that thraldom is:
For men may well wit that are wise,
That wedding is the hardest band,
That any man may take on hand,
And thraldom is well war then dead,
For while a thirle his life may lead,
It marres him both body and banes,
And dead annoyes him not, but ones.
Shortly to say, is none to tell
The sore condition of a Threll.
THus gate they lived in thirlage
Both poor and rich of hie parage.
For of the Lords some they slew,
And some they hanged, and some they drew;
And some they put into prison,
Withoutten cause or Encheson,
And among other of Douglas,
Sir William put in prysoun was,
That of Douglas was Lord and Sire,
Of him they have made a Martyr:
For in presoun they him slew,
And his lands that were fair anew,
They to the Lord of Cliffurd gave,
He left a son, a litill knave,
That then was but a litill Page,
And syne came to great vassalage,
His fathers death he venged sa,
That in England I vnderta,
Was none in life, but they him dred:
For he so feill in arms sched,
That none that lives can it tell.
So wonder hard things befell
Till him, or he to state was broucht,
But there was none auentour that mocht
Astoney his heart, nor gar it let
To do the thing it was on set.
How that he ay thocht ernistly
To do his deed auisedly.
He thocht he was not worth no weill,
That might not of annoyes feill:
And that for to encheif great things,
With hard travel and barganings,
Sold gar his prise ay doubled be:
Therefore in all his lifetime he
Forsuike never pain nor travel,
Nor never would for mischief fail,
To drive the thing even to the end,
And tak the chance that God would send.
His name was James of Douglas,
And quhen he heard his father was
Put in presoun so fellounly,
And that his lands so haillely
Were given to the Cliffurd, perfay
He wist not what to do, or say.
For he had nothing to dispend,
Nor there was none that ever him kend,
Would do so mekle for him that he
Micht with sufficience found in be.
THus was he wonder will of wane,
And suddenly in heart hes taken,
That he would travel over the sea,
And a quhile into Paris be,
And dree mischief quhere none him kend,
Quhill God sum succor to him send:
And as he thocht, he did richt sa,
And soon to Paris can he ga,
And lived there full simpilly,
Quhere that he glaid was, and ioly,
And to sic exercise often he eid:
As course craves of outhheid,
And quhiles in play and vanity,
The quhilk sumtime may avail:
For knowledge of money estates,
May quhiles avail money gates,
As to the good Earl of Artois,
Robert befell intill his days:
For often feneing of Ribaldie,
Auaileit him, and that greatly,
And Cato says intill his writ,
To fene folly quhyles is wit.
In Paris neir three eires dwelt he,
And then came tything over the sea,
That his father was done to dead,
Then was he wonder will of read.
And thocht that he would home again,
To look gif he throw any pain*
Micht wyn again his heritage,
And his men out of all thirlage.
The first rising of Lord DOUGLAS.
TO Sanctandrous he came in hy,
Where the Bishop full courteously
Received him, and gart him bear
His knives, to carue to him, and sheare:
And cled him then full honorably,
And ordainde chamber where he should ly.
A well great while there dwelt he,
All men him loved for his bounty:
For he was of full fair affeir,
Wise, courteous, and deboneir,
Large, and loving als was he:
And over all thing he loved lawtie,
Lawtie to love is no folly,
Through lawtie lives men right wisely.
With one virtue of lawtie,
A man may yet sufficient be:
And but lawtie may none have prise,
Whether that he be wight or wise:
For where it failyies, no virtue,
May be of price, nor of value:
To make a man so good, that he
May simply good man called be.
He was in all his deeds leele:
For he deinyied not to deal
With traitourie nor with falset:
His heart on hie honor was set:
And him contented on sik manner,
That all him loved that were him near:
But he was not so fair that we
Should speak greatly of his beauty.
In visage was he some deele gray:
And had black hair (as I heard say)
But then of limbs he was well made,
With banes great and shoulders brade.
His body well made, and lenyie,
(As they that saw him said to me)
When he was blyth he was lovely,
And meek and sweet in company
But who in battle might him see,
Another countenance had he:
And in his speech lisped some dell,
And that set him full wonder well
To good Hector of Troy might he
In many things likened be.
Hector had black hair as he had,
And stark limbs, and right well made.
And lisped also as did he,
And was fulfilled of all bounty,
And was courteous, wise and wight:
But of manheed and meekle might,
To Hector dare I none compare,
Of all that ever in world were*
For in his time so wrought he,
That he should greatly loved be.
HE dwelt there thus till on a tide
The King Edward with meekle pride
Came to Starling with great menyie:
For to hold there an assembly,
Hitherward went many a Baroun,
And Bishop William of Lambertoun
Who hither als, and with him was
His Esquyre James of Douglas,
The Bishop led him to the King
And said Sir, here to you I bring
This Child, that claims your man to be,
And prays you for Charity,
That ye receive here his homage,
And grant to him his heritage.
Quhat lands claims he, said the King?
Schir, gif that it be your lyking,
He claims the Lordship of Douglas:
For Lord thereof his father was.
The King then wrythed him angerly,
And said, Schir Bischop, sikkerlie
Gif thou would keep thy fewtie,
Thou make no sic speaking to me.
His father was ay my felloun:
And died therefore in my presoun:
And was agains my Majesty:
Therefore I ought his air to be.
Go purches lands quhere ever he may,
For thereof gets he none perfay,
The Clyffurd shall have them, for he
Ay leillely he hes served me
The Bischop heard him so answer,
And durst then speak to him no mair:
Bot from his presence went on hy,
For he dred sore his felony:
So that no more he spoke thereto:
But did that he came for to do.
The King in England went again,
With money men of mekill maine.
LOrdings who likes for to hear,
The Romans now begins here:
Of men that were in greit distres,
And assayed full greit hardynes,
Or they micht come to their intent.
But syne our Lord sic grace them sent,
That they sensyne through greit valor,
Came to greit hicht, and hie honor,
Magre their foes ever ilkone,
That were so fell,, that ay for ane
Of them, they were well a thousand,
Bot where God helps, who may wtstand?
et if we say the suithfastnes,
They were eir more then they were less,
But God that is of mekill micht,
Preserved them in his foresicht,
To venge the harms and the contrares,
That they fell folk, and oppressares
Did to simple folk and worthy
That could not save themselves: for thy
They were like to the Maccabees,
That as men in the Bible sees,
Throw their great worship and valor,
Faucht in money a stalwart stour:
For to deliver their Country,
Fra folk that throw Iniquity
Held them, and theirs into thirlage,
They wrocht so throw their vassallage,
That with few folk they had victory,
Of michty Kings (as says the Story)
And delivered their lands all free,
Quherefore their names sold loved be.
This Lord the Bruce I spoke of air.
Saw all the Kinrik so forfair,
And so troubled the folk saw he,
That he thereof had great pity.
Bot quhat pity that ever he had,
No countenance thereof he made.
Quhill on a time Schir John Cuming,
As they came ryding from Striuiling,
Said to him, Schir, will e not see,
How that governed is this Country?
They slew our folk but Enchesoun,
And hes this land against reasoun:
And ye thereof Lord should be.
And if that ye will trow to me,
Ye shall thereof gar make you King,
And I shall be in your helping:
With thy, ye give me all the land,
That ye have now into your hand:
And if that ye will not do swa,
Nor sik a state upon you ta:
All haill my lands shall yours be,
And let me take the state on me,
And bring this land out of thirlage:
For there is neither man nor Page,
In all this land, but they will be
With us, to make themselves free.
The Lord the Bruce heard his carping,
And weinde he spoke but soothfast thing:
And for it liked to his will,
He gave soon his assent theretill.
And said, sen ye will it be swa,
I will blythlie upon me ta
The name for I wot I have right:
And ri^ht makes often the feeble wight.
Their Barouns thus accorded are:
And that ilk night written were,
Their Indentours, aithes made,
To hold that they forespoke^ had.
But over all thing woe worth treasoun:
For there is neither Earl nor Baroun,
Nor Duke, nor Prince, nor King of might,
Though he be never so wise nor wight,
For wit, worship praise, nor renoun,
That ever may keep him fra treasoun.
Was not all Troy with treason taken
When ten years of the siege was gane,
Where there was slain eight hundred thousand
Of them thereout through strength of hand,
As Dares in his book did wraite,
And dyted their battle and their state.
They might not have been taken with might:
But treasoun took them through her slight,
And Alexander the Conqueror,
That conquered Babylons Tower,
And all this world of length and breed,
In twelve year through his doughtie deed*
Was syne destroyed by poysoun,
In his own house through treasoun:
But ere he died his land dealt he,
To see his death was great pity,
Julius Caesar als that wan
Britane and France, as worthy man,
Africa, Arabie, Egypt and Syrie,
And als Europe all haillelie.
And for his worship and valor,
Of Rome was first made Emperor,
Syne in his Capitol was he
Through them of his counsel privy,
Slain with botkins unto the dead,
And when he saw there was no read,
His ene with hand enclosed he,
For to die with more honesty.
Als Arthur that through Cheualrie,
Had Britane Maistres and Lady,
Of twelve Kinrikes that he wan,
And also as a Noble man,
He wan through battle France all free,
And Lucius Tyber vanquished he*
Then he of Rome was Emperor,
And yet for all his great valor,
Modreed his Sister son his slew:
And good men als ma than anew,
Through treason and through wickedness,
The Bruce thereof bears witness.
So fell it of this cunning making,
Of the Cuming to the King
Of England, and told all the case,
But I trow not all as it was.
The Indentour to him gave he,
And syne shawed the iniquity,
And therefore syne he tholed dead,
That to it could set no remead.
WHen the King saw the Inden^our,
He was angry without measure.
And swore that he should vengeance ta,
Of the Bruce that presumed sa,
Against him for to braull and rise,
Or to conspire in sic a wise:
And to Sir John Cumyng said he,
That he should for his lawtie
Be rewarded, and that highly,
And he him thanked humbly,
And thought well to have the leading
Of all Scotland but gane saying:
Fra that the Bruce to death was brought,
But often failyeis that fools thought.
And wise men's etteling
Comes not aye to that ending,
That they think that it should come to:
For GOD wats what is ado,
Of his etling right so it fell,
As I shall afterward you tell,
He took his leave, and home is went,
And the King cummed a Parliament
Hes set, then after hastily,
And hidder summon he in hy,
The Barons of his fewtie,
And to the Lord the Bruce sent he,
Bidding to come to that gaddring:
And he that had no perceiving,
Of the treasoun, and the falset,
Rade to the King but langer let:
And in London him harbred he
The first day of their assembly:
Syne on the morn to Court he went,
The King sat into Parliament,
And before his counsel privy,
The Lord the Bruce there called he:
And showed him the Indentour,
He was in full great auentour,
To tyne his life: but GOD of might
Reserved him to hier hight:
That would not that he so were dead,
The King besought him in that stead,
The Indentour, the Seal to see,
And asked if that it sealde he,
He looked the Seal full tentiuely,
And answered him full meekely,
And said, though that I simple be,
My Seal is not all time with me.
I have another it to bear:
Therefore if that your wills were,
I ask you respet for to see
The letter: and therewith auise me
Till the morn that ye be set,
And then but any longer let,
The letter sall I enter here
Before your Court plane year,
And there till broch draw I
Mine heritage all halely.
The King thought he was traist an^ugh,
Gif he his land in Borrow dreuch,
And let him with the letter pas,
To enter as forespoken was.
The escaping of the Bruce, and the dead of John Cuming.
THe Bruce went to his Innes swyth,
And wit ye well he was full blyth,
That he had gotten that respyte,
He calde his Marshall to him tyte,
And bad him look on all maneare
That he made to his men good cheer,
For he will in his chamber be,
A well great while in priuitie.
With him one Clarke and no ma.
The Marshall to the hall can ga,
And did his Lords commanding.
The Lord the Bruce but more letting,
Gart privily bring Steedes two,
And he, and the Clarke withoutten ma
Lap on withoutten perceiving,
And day and night but soiourning
They rade, till on the fifth day
Coming to Lochmabene are they,
His brother Edward there they fand,
That thought ferlie he took on hand,
For to come home so privily,
He told his brother halely:
How that he there summond was,
And how he escaped through ca^e.
So fell it in the samine tide,
That at Dumfreis right there beside,
Sir John Cumyng soiourne made,
The Bruce lap on but any bade,
And thought but any more letting,
For to quite him his discovering,
Hidder he rade but longer let,
And Sir John Cumyng there he met,
In the Friars at the hie Altar,
And showed him with bourding cheer,
The Indentour, syne with a knife
Right in that place he reft his life.
Sir Edward Cumyng als was slain,
And other als of meekle maine:
And not for thy yet some men says,
That that debate fell otherwise:
But whosoever fell in debaite,
Therethrough he died well I wait.
He misdid that greitly but weere,
That gave no gyrth to the Alteere.
Therefore so hard mischief him fell,
That I heard never in Romans tell,
Of man so hard sted as was he,
And after came to sic bounty.
NOw again to the King go we.
That on the morrow with his barnie
Sat into his Parliament,
And after the Lord the Bruce he sent,
Right to his Innes with Knights kene,
When he ofttime had called been.
And his men after him asked they,
They said that he sen yesterday,
Dwelt in his chamber it handly,
And a Clarke with him anerly,
Then knocked they at the chamber there:
And when they heard none make answer,
They brak the door, but they found noght,
He was away that they there soght:
They told the King all haill the case,
And how that he escaped was,
He was of his escape sorry,
And swore in ire full stalwartlie.
That he sold drawn and hanged be,
He menassed as him thought, but he
Thought it sold pass another way:
And when he, as ye heard me say,
Into the Kirk John Cumyng had slain,
To Lochmabene he went again,
And gart men with his letters ride,
To friends upon ilk side.
They came to him with their menye,
And his men als assembled he,
And thought that he would make him King,
Over all the land the word can spring,
That the Bruce had the Cumyng slain,
And among others letters a^e gane,
To the Bishop of Androistoun,
That told how slain was the Baroun.
The Letter told him haill the dead,
And he till his men can it read:
And then he said, full sikkerly,
I hope that Thomas prophecy,
Of Erstiltoun, sall verray be
In him for so our Lord me see,
I have great hope he shall be King,
And have this land all in leading.
The Douglas Meeting with King Robert.
James of Douglas that aye where
Always before the Bishop share:
He had well hard the Letter red,
And he took also full good heed
To all that the Bishop had said,
And when the boordes down were laid:
To Chamber went he then in hy,
And James of Douglas privily:
Said to the Bishop, Sir, ye see
How Englishmen through their poustie,
Disherites me of all my Land,
And men have gart you understand,
Als that the Earl of Carrike,
Clames to govern this Kinrike:
And for your Man that he has slain,
All Englishmen at him again.
And would disherite him blythly,
And in a Line with him am I.
Therefore Sir, if it be your will
I would take with him good and ill,
Through him I think my Land to win,
Magre the Cliffurd, and his kin.
The Bishop heard, and had pity,
And said, Sweet Son so God me see,
I would blythly that ye were there,
So that I not reproved were.
On this manner well work thou may,
Thou shall take farrand my Palfray.
For there none Horse is in this Land
So wight, nor yet so well rinnand,
Take him as of thine own head,
As I had given thereto no read.
And gif his keeper often grunches,
Look that thou take him magre his,
So sall I more assonyied be,
Almighty GOD, for his poustie,
Grant, that he thou passes to,
And thou so well all time may do,
That ye you fra your foes defend.
He taught him silver for to spend:
And syne gave him his bennisoun,
And bad him pass his way off town:
For he would sleep till he was gane,
The Douglas then his way hes taken,
Right to the horse as he him bad:
But he that him in keeping had,
Warned him well despiteously,
But he that wraithes him angerly,
Felled him with a swords dynt,
And syne but any longer stint,
The horfe he sadled hastily,
And lap on him delyuerly:
And passed forth but leave taking.
Dear GOD that is over all things King,
Save him and shield him fra his faes:
All him alone the way he taes
Toward the town of Lochmabane,
And a little fra Ayrik stane,
The Bruce with a great rout he met,
He rade to Scone for to be set
In Kings stool, and to be King.
And when Douglas saw his coming,
He rade and hailsed him in hy,
And lowted to him courteously,
And told him hai^ly all his state,
And what he was and als what gate,
The Clyffurd held his heritage,
And that he came to make homage
To him, as to his righteous King,
And that he boun was in all thing
To take with him both good and ill.
And when the Bruce had heard his will.
He received him in great dayntie,
And men and arms to him taught he.
He trowed well he should be worthy,
For all his friends were ay doughty.
Thus gate made they their acquaintance,
That never yet for no mischance
Departed while they living waire.
Their friendship ay waxt more and maire:
For he served ay leelely*
And the other ay wilfully
That was both worthy, wight and wise,
Rewarded him well his service.
The Lord the Bruce to Glasgow rade,
And sent about him till he had
Of his friends a great menye.
Coronatio Regis ROBERTI.
And then to Scone in hy rade he,
And was made King but longer let,
And in the Kings stool he was set:
As in that time was the maneir,
But of their noble and great affeir,
Their service nor their royalty,
Ye sall hear now nothing of me.
Outtane that he, of the Barnage
That hidder came took their homage,
And syne he went over all the land,
Friends and friendship purchasand:
To maintain that he had begun.
He wist ere all the lands were win,
That he should find hard barganing
With him that was of England King:
For there was none in life so fell,
So proud, so hie, and so cruel.
And when to King Edward was told,
How that the Bruce that was so bold:
Had brought the Cumyng to an ending,
And how he had syne made him King,
Out of his wit he yeed full near,
And syne gart call him Sir Aymeere,
Of Wallans, that was wise and wight,
And of his hands a doughty Knight,
And bade him men and Arms ta,
And in all hy to Scotland ga,
And burn, and ^la, and raise Dungeoun,
And heght all Fife in warisoun
To him, that might outher take or sla,
Robert the Bruce that was his fa.
Sir Aymer did as he him bade,
Greit Cheualry with him he had,
With him was Philip the Mowbray,
Sir Ingrayme Vmfraywile perfay,
That was both wise and als worthy,
And fulfild of greit Cheualrie,
And of Scotland the most party,
They had into their Company.
The first Speaking of King Robert with Sir Aymer
FOr yet then mekle of the Land
Was into the Englishmens hand.
To Perth they went into a rout,
That then was walled all about.
With fell Towers right hie battailled,
For to defend if it were sailyeid,
Therein dwelt Sir Aymery
With all his great Cheualry,
The King Robert wist he was there,
And what kin Chiftanes with him were,
He assembled all his menye,
And had feill folk of great bounty:
But their foes were mo than they,
By fifteen hunder as I heard say:
And yet he had there at that need,
Feill folk that doughtie were indeed,
And Barons that were bauld as Baire,
Two Earls als was with him there
Of Lennox, and Athol were they
Edward the Bruce was there alsway,
Thomas Randell and Hew de la Hay,
And good Sir David de Barclay,
Fresell, Somerwell, and Inchemertine,
James of Douglas there was syne,
That then was but of little might,
And other feill forcie men in fight:
Als was good Cristall of Setoun,
And Robert Boyde of great Renown:
And other feill men of meekle might,
But I cannot tell what they hight.
Though they were few they were worthy,
And fulfilde of great Cheualry,
And in battle in good array,
Before Saint Iohnstoun they lay:
And bad Sir Aymer ish and fight:
And he that in his meekle might
Trusted on them that were him by,
Bade his men arm them hastily:
But Sir Ingrayme of Vmfrawile,
Thought it was all too great peril,
In plain battle to them to go,
While that they were arrayde also:
And to Sir Aymer then said he,
Sir, gif that ye will trow to me,
Ye shall not ish them to assailye:
Till they are purvayed in battailye:
For their leader is wise and wight,
And of his hand an noble Knight,
And he hes in his company
Money a good Knight and worthy,
That shall be hard for to assay
While they are in so good array:
For it sold be full mekle might
That now should put them to the flight.
For when they folk are well arrayed,
And for the battle are puruayed,
With thy that they all good men be
They sall far more be auisie,
And well more to be dred then they
Were set some deill out of array.
Therefore ye may gar say them till,
That they may this night gif they will,
Gang harbrie them, and sleep and rest,
And on the morn but longer frist,
Ye shall ishe forth to the battle,
And feght with them but gif they fail.
So sall they wend to their harbrie,
Some sall to Forray pass sickerlie.
And they that dwells at the ludging,
Gif they come out of traveling,
Sall in short time unarmed be,
Then on our best manner may we
With all our fair Cheualry
Ryd toward them full hardely:
And they that wenes to rest all night,
When they see us arrayde to fight,
Coming on them so suddenly,
They shall afraid be greetumly,
And ere they knit in battle be,
We sall speed us ^ic sort that we
Sall be all ready for to semble,
That some for erynesse sall tremble,
When he assailyde is suddenly,
That with auisement is doughty.
The Ludging of King Robert in the Park of Methwen.
AS he devised, so have they done,
And to them outwith sent he soon:
And bad them harbrie them that night,
And on the morn come to the fight.
When they saw they might do no mair,
Toward Methwen soon can they fare:
And in the Wood them lodged they,
The third part went to the Forray:
And the laue soon unarmed were,
And skailed to lodge them here and there.
Sir Aymer then but more abade,
With all the folk he with him had,
Ished enforcedly to the fight,
And rade into a randoun right,
The straight way toward Methwen
The King that was unarmed then,
Saw them come on enforcedly,
And to his men can highly cry.
To arms swyth, and make you yaire,
Here at our hand our foes are:
And they did so in full great hy,
And on their horse lept hastily:
The King displayed his baner,
When that his folk assembled were.
He said, Lordings, now may ye see
That you folk through subtlety,
Shapes them to do with slight,
If that they dread to do with might.
Now perceive I, that who will trow
His fa, it sall him sometime grow:
and noght for thy, though they be feill,
GOD may right well our werdes deill:
For multitude makes no victory,
As men have red in money Story.
As few folk often have vanquished ma,
Trow ye that we sall do right sa,
Ye are ilkane wight and worthy
And called of great Cheualrie,
And wate right well what honor is,
Work ye therefore on sic a wise,
That your honor be saved ay,
And one thing will I to you say,
That he that dies for his Country,
In hight of heaven sall harbred be.
When this was said they saw cummand,
Their foes ryding at their hand,
Arrayed right auisedly,
Wilful to do Cheualry.
The Battle of Methwen, and the first Discomfite of King Robert.
ON either side thus were they there,
And to assemble ready were:
And so rudely can raging ride,
That Spears all too frushed are,
And fe^^l men dead and wounded saire,
The blood out of the beirnes brast,
Of best and of the worthiest,
That wilful were to win honor,
Plunged into that stalwart stour,
And routes rude about them dang,
Men might have seen into that thrang:
Knights that wight and worthy were,
Under Horses feet defouled there.
Some wounded and some all dead,
The grass waxt all of blood all red:
And they that held on Horse in hy,
Swapped out Swords deliueredly,
And so fell strokes gave and took,
That all the rinke about them shook,
The Bruces folk full hardely,
Shawed their great Cheualry:
And he himself attour the laue,
So hard and heavy dints gave,
That where he came they made him way,
His men them put to hard assay,
To stint their foes meekle might:
Than they so fair had of the fight:
That they wan place aye mair and mair.
The Kings small folk near vanquished were.
ANd where the King his folk hes seen,
Begin to failye for proper teene:
To his Ensenye can highly cry,
And in the stour so hardly.
He raged till all the semble shook,
He all so hewed that he ouertooke:
And dang on them while he might dree,
And to his folk he cried hie.
On them, on them, they feeble fast,
This bargane may no longer last,
And with that word so wilfully,
He dang on them so hardly:
That who had seen him in that fight,
Sold hold him for a doughtie Knight:
(...) it though he stout was, and hardy,
And other als of his company,
There might no worship there auailie,
For there small folk all haill they failie.
And fled and skailled here and there,
But the good that escaped were,
Baide fighting in that stalwart stour,
To conquesse them endless honor.
And when Sir Aymer he has seen,
The small folk fleeing haill be deene,
And saw so few abide the fight.
He drew to him money a Knight,
And in the stour so hardly,
He rushed with his company,
That he rushed his foes ilkane.
Sir Thomas Randell there was taken,
That then was a young batcheler,
And Sir Alexander the Fraser,
And Sir David the Barclay,
Inchemertine and Hew de la Hay,
And Somerwell, and other ma,
And the King himself alswa,
Was set into so hard essay,
Through good Sir Philip the Mowbray,
That rade to him full hardly:
And hint his renyie, and then can cry:
Help, help, I have thee now made King,
With that came griding in a ling,
Christill of Setoun when he so
The King saw seized with his foe,
To Sir Philip sic routes he rought,
That thought he was of meekle might,
He gart him stakker desilie,
And had to eird gane haillelie:
War not he held him by the Steed,
Out of his hand the bridle yeed,
And the King his Enseigne can cry,
Relieved his men that stood him by,
That were so few that they not might,
Endure the force more of the fight.
They pricked then out of the preasse,
And the King that all angry was:
For he his men saw flee him fro,
Said then, Lordings, sen it is so
That weere runs again us here,
Good is we pass off their danger,
While God us send eftsoons some grace,
And it may fall, if they will chase.
Quite them combat some deill we shall.
To that word they assented all.
And from them walloped vppermere,
Their foes also they weary were:
That of them all they chased nane.
But with prisoners that they had taken,
Right to town they held the way,
Right glade and joyful of their Prey.
That night they lay all in the town.
There was none of so greit renown,
Nor none so hardy of them all.
That durst harbrie without the wall:
So dread they sore the gane coming
Of Sir Robert the doughtie King,
And to the King of England soon,
They wrote haillie as they had done:
And he was blyth of that tything,
And for despite bade draw and hing
All the prisoners, though they were mo,
But Sir Aymer did nothing so:
To some both life and land gave he,
To leave the Bruce and his fewtie,
And serve the King of England,
And of him for to hold their land:
And wary the Bruce as their foe,
Thomas Randell was one of tho.
That for his life became their man,
And others that were taken then,
Some they ransomde, and some they slew,
And some hanged, and some they drew.
IN this manner rebuted was
The Bruce that greit mourning mais:
For his men that were slain and taken,
And he was also will of wane:
For he trowde in none sikkerlie,
Except them of his company
That were so few they scarce might be,
Five hunder men of haill menyie,
His brother also was him by,
Sir Edward that was so worthy,
And with him was a bold Baroun,
Sir William the Halyburtoun,
The Earl of Atholl he was there:
Bot ay sen they discomfite were.
The Earl of Lennox was away,
And was put to full hard assay,
Ere he met with the King again,
Bot always as a man of maine,
He him maintained manfully,
The King had in his company
James also Lord of Douglas
That wise, wight, and worthy was.
Sir Gilbert de la Hay alswa,
Sir Neill Campbell and other ma:
That I their names cannot tell,
And Outlawes went to daill and fell,
Dreeing in the mountains pine,
And eat flesh, and drank water syne,
He durst not into plains ga,
For all the Commons went him fra:
That for their lives were full feign,
To pass to English peace again.
So fares it always commonly,
In Commons may no man affy,
Bot he that may their warrant be:
So fare they then with him, for he
Them fra their foes might not warrant,
They turned all to the other hand,
Bot thraldom that men gart them feel,
Gart them ay yarne, that he fure well.
THus in the hi^les lived he,
Till the most part of his Menye
Was reuen and rent, and no shoone had,
Bot as they then of Hydes made:
Therefore they went to Aberdene,
Where Neill the Bruce came, and the Queen
And other Ladies fair and pleasand,
Ilkone for love of their husband:
And for leele love and loyalty,
Partner of their pains would be.
They choosed rather with them to ta
Anger and pains, than be them fra:
Syne love it is of sik a might,
That it does all the pains make light,
And money times makes tender wight,
Als of sik strength, and of sik might:
That they may meekle pain endure,
And to forsake none adventure,
That ever may fall: with thy that they
Therethrough succor their lives may.
Men reads when Thebes was taken,
And King Adrestus men were slain,
That assieged the City,
All the women of his Country,
Came for to fetch him home again*
When they heard all his folk was slain,
UUhere that the King Campeus
Through the Oast of Menestheus,
That came through case ryding them by,
UUith three hunder in company,
That through the Kings prayer assailyeed,
And yet to take the town had failyeed,
War not the wives that thrilde the wall,
With pikkes where the assailyeours all
Entered and destroyed the town,
And slew the people but ransoun:
Syne when the Duke his ways was gane
And all the Kings men were slain:
The Wives had him to his Country,
UUhere was no living man but he,
In women meekle comfort lies,
And great solace in money wise.
So fell it here for their coming
Comforted gretumly the King:
For why euerilk night he woke.
And his rest on the day he took,
A good while there he soiournde then,
And eased wonder well his men,
While that the Englishmen heard say,
That he there with his menyie lay:
At all kin ease, and sikkerly,
Their Oast assembled they in hy.
And trowed there him to supprise:
But he that in his deeds was wise,
Wist, they assembled were, and where:
And wist that they so money were:
That he might not against them fight:
His men in hy he gart them dight,
And bushe them of the town to ride,
The Ladies rade hard by his side:
Then to the hills they held their way,
Where great default of meat had they:
Bot worthy James of Douglas,
Ay trauellde he, and busy was,
For to purchase the Ladies meat:
And eeles in money wise wald get:
For whiles vennison he them brought,
And with his hands whiles he wroght.
Girnes to take Geddes, and Salmons,
Troutes, Celes, and Menons,
And whiles they went to the Forray,
And so their meat purchased they
Ilke man trauellde for to get,
And purchased them that they might eat,
But of all that ever there were,
There was not one among them there,
That with the Ladies more praisde was,
Than was Sir James of Douglas:
And the King often comforted was
Through his wit, and his business,
On this manner then gouernde they,
Till they came to the head of Tay,
How John of Lorne discomfist King Robert.
THe Lord of Lorne winned thereby,
That was Capital enemy,
To the King for his Emes sake
John the Cumyng, and thought to take
Ueng^ance upon cruel maneere.
When the King wist he was so near:
He assembl^d his Men in hy,
And had into his company,
The Barons of Argyle alswa.
They were a thousand well and ma.
That come for to suppress the King,
That was well ware of their coming,
But all too few with him he had:
And yet he boldly them abade:
And feill of them at their first meeting
Was laid at eird but recovering:
The Kings folk full well them bare,
And slew and feill wounded sare:
But the folk of the other party
Faught with axes so fellounly:
For they on foot were euerilkane,
But they feill of their Horse hes slain,
And to some gave they wounds wide,
James of Douglas was hurt that tid,
And als Sir Gilbert de la Hay,
The King his men saw in affray,
And his Ensenye right fast began cry:
And in the stour full hardly,
He rade, and rushed among them all,
And feill of them there gart he fall:
But when he saw they were so fell*
And saw them so greit dints deal,
He dread to tine his men for thy,
His solke to him he can rely.
And faid Lordings, it folly were,
To us for to assemble mare:
For they feill of our Horse have slain,
And if we feght with them again:
We shall tyne of our small Menie,
And our selves shall in peril be,
Therefore me think most according,
To withdraw us, we defending,
Till we come out of their danger,
Our strength is at our hand well near.
Then they withdrew them haillelie:
But that was nothing cowartly,
For samin into a sop held they,
And the King him abandound ay,
To defend behind his Menyie:
And through his worship so wrought he,
That he rescued all the fleears,
And so astonished all the chasers.
That none durst ont of battle chase:
For at their hand always he was.
So well defended he his men,
That who so ever had seen him then
Prove so worthy vassalage:
And turn so oft-time his visage,
He should say, he ought well to be,
A King of full greit Royalty.
WHen that the Lord of Lorne saw,
His men stand of him sik aw,
That they durst not follow the chase.
Right angry in his heart he was.
And sair wondered that he should so,
Stoney them him allone but more,
He said, Me think Martheokes son,
Right as Golmakmorne was won,
To have from Fyngall his menyie,
Right so from us all his, hes he,
He set ensample thus him like,
The whilk he might more manerlyke,
Likened him to Gaudifer Delaryse:
When that the mighty Duke Betyse
Assayed in Gaders the Forrayours,
And when the King them made recourse:
Duke Betyse took on him the flight,
And would no more abide the fight,
But good Gaudifer the worthy
Abandound him so hardly.
For to rescue all the fleears:
And for to astoney the chasers:
That Alexander to eird he bare,
And so did he Ptolome there,
And good Corneus also,
Danchine, and also other more,
But at the last there slain he was,
In that failied the liklinesse
For that the King Cheualruosly,
Defended all his company,
That was set in full greit danger,
And yet escaped haill and feere.
How the King slew the three men that swore his death.
TWo brether were into the land,
That were the hardiest of hand,
There were in all that same Country:
And they had sworn if they might see
The Bruce and him over ta,
That they should die, or then him s^a,
Their Surname was Makindorser,
That is als meekile to say here,
As Durwarts sons perfay,
Of their conueene the third had they:
That was right stout, ill and felloun.
When they the King of greit renoun
Saw so behind his Menie ride,
And saw him turn so money a tide.
They abade ay while that he was
Entered into a narrow place,
Betwixt a Loch and a narrow Bra,
That was so strait I vnderta,
That he might not well turn his Steed:
Then with ane will to him they yeed,
And ane him by the Bridle hint:
But he raught to him sik a dint,
That arm and shoulder flaw him fra,
With that another can him ta
By the Leg, and his hand can shoot
Betwixt the stirop and his foot,
And when the King felt there his hand,
In steroppes stythlie can he up stand.
And struck with Spurs his Steed in hy,
And he lanced deliueredly:
So that the other failied feet.
And naught for thy his hands was yet,
Under the sterop magre his.
The third in full greit hy with this,
Right to the braes side he yeed.
And stert behind him on a Steed.
The King was then in full greit preasse,
The whilk bethought, as he that was.
In all his deeds auisie,
To do an outrageous bounty:
He hint him that behind him was,
And magre him he can him raise.
From behind him though he had sworn,
And laid him even him beforne:
Syne with his sword sic dints him gave.
That he the head till harnes claue.
He rushed down of blood all red,
As he that stoun^ felt of the dead:
And then the King in full greit hy,
Struck at the other vigorouslie,
And at the first struck he him slew,
That he after his sterop drew.
On this wise him delivered he,
Of all these felloun foes three.
WHen John of Lorn hes seen ye King
Set for himself so greit helping,
And defend him so manfully:
Was none among them so hardy:
That durst assailie him more in fight,
So dred they of his meekle might.
There was a Baroun Maknaghtane,
That in his heart greit keep hes taken
Unto the Kings greit Cheualrie,
And praisde him in his heart greitly,
And to the Lord of Lorne said he.
Surely Sir may now ye see
Betane the starkest pondlayne
That in your lifetime ye saw taken,
For you Knight through his doughtie deed
And through his courageous manheed,
Hes felled into a little tide
Three men of meekle might and pride,
And stoneyed all our menyie swa,
That after him dare no man ga,
And turns so money time his Steed,
It seems of us he hes no dread.
Then can the Lord of Lorne say,
It seems it likes thee perfay,
That he slayes yone gate our menyie.
Sir said he, so our Lord me see,
To save your peace, it is not sa,
Bot whether he be friend or fa,
That winnes praise of Cheualrie,
Men sold speak thereof leelely,
And sikkerly in all my time,
I heard never in song, nor ryme,
Tell of a man that so smertly,
Encheefed so great Cheualry.
Sik speaking of the King they made,
And he after his menyie rade,
And to sic sauitie them led,
Where he his foes nothing dred:
And they of Lorn^ again are gane,
Meening the skaith that they had taken.
The King that night his watches set,
And gart ordain that they might eat.
And bade them comfort to them take,
And at their mights merry make:
For discomfort as then, said he,
Is the worst thing in world may be:
For through meekle discomforting,
Men ofttimes falls in desparing.
And fra a man despared be,
Then utterly vanquished is he:
And fra the heart be discomfite,
The body is not worth a myte:
Therefore he said, attour all thing.
Keep you well from discomforting,
And think, though we now harms feel.
That GOD may yet relief us well.
Men reads often of money that were
Far harder sted, then we yet are:
And syne our LORD sik grace them lent,
That they came well to their intent:
For Rome vmwhile so hard was sted,
When Hanniball them vanquished had:
That of Kings with rich stane,
That was off Knights fingers taken,
He send three bolles to Carthage,
And syne to Rome took his voyage,
For to destroy the City all,
And they within both great and small,
Had fled when they saw his coming,
Had not been Scipio the ying,
That ere they fled would them have slain,
And so he turned them again:
And syne for to defend the City,
Thrilled, and servants made he free,
And made them Knights euerilkane:
And of the Temple syne hes taken,
The arms that their Elders bare,
In name of victory effeered there.
And when they armed were and dight,
They stalwart Carles were and wight,
And saw that they were free alswa,
They thought that they had rather ta
The deed: than let the town be taken:
And with common assent as ane,
They ished of the town to fight,
UUhere Hanniball of meekle might,
Against them arrayed was:
Bot through the might of Gods grace,
It rainde so hard and so heavy,
That there was none so hardy.
That durst then into the plain abide,
But sped them all in hy to ride.
The one part to the Palliouns,
And the other part to the tounes.
The rain thus let the fighting:
So did it twice thereafter syne.
UUhen Hanniball saw this ferly,
UUith all his great Cheualry,
He left the town, and held his way,
And syne was put to sik assay,
Through the power of that City,
That his life and his land tint he,
Sen so wheene and so unworthy
Man sik a Knight, and so mighty:
Ye may well by example see,
That no man sold despared be,
Nor let his heart be vanquished all:
For no mischief that ever may fall:
For nane wate in how little space,
That GOD will sometime send his grace,
Had they fled and their ways taken,
Their foes sold the town have taken:
Therefore men that weering are,
Sold set their intent euermare,
To stand against their foes might,
Outher with strength or else with flight:
As they think to come to purpose,
And gif that they were set in chose,
To die or to live cowardly,
They should erer die Cheualrously.
THus gate them comforted the King,
And to comfort them in can bring,
Old Stories of men that were
Set into hard assayes feere,
And that Fortoun contraried fast,
And came to purpose at the last:
Therefore he said, that he that would
Their hearts vndiscomfite hald*
Sold ay think Ithingly to bring
All their purposes to good ending.
As whylum did Caesar the worthy,
That trauellde ay so busily,
With all his might following to make
End of the purpose that he would take
That him thought he had done right noght
Ay to do while he left oght:
For thy great things encheeued he,
As men may in his Story see,
Men may see by his Ithand will,
And it sold als accord to skill,
That who takes purpose intierly,
And follows on it Ithandly:
Withoutten fainting or falding,
With thy it be cunnable thing,
Bot he the more be unhappy,
He sall encheeue it be party
Have he lifedaies it may befall,
That he sall well encheeue it all.
For they should none have desparing,
For to encheeue a full greit thing:
For if it fall, he therefore fa^lye,
The fault may ly in his trauailye,
He preached to them on this manner,
And fainied to make better cheer,
Then he had matter to, be far,
For his cause yeed from ill to war,
They were ay in so hard travail,
While the Ladies began to fail:
That might the trauele dree no mare,
So did other als that were there,
The Earl John was one of they,
Of Atholl, when that he saw say,
The King thus be discomfist twice,
And so feill folk against him rise,
And leave him in sik travel and dout,
His heart began to faill all out:
And to the King upon a day,
He said, if I durst to you say,
We live into so meekle dread,
And of meat hes so meekle need,
And is ay in sik traveling,
With Called and Hunger and waking,
That I set of my self in so,
I count not of my life a stro.
Their angers may I no more dree.
For thought me worthed therefore to die.
I mon sojourne where ever it be.
Leave me thereto for Charity,
The King saw that he thus gate failied,
And that he was so sair trauailyied,
He said Sir Earl we shall soon see,
And ordain how it may best be.
Where ever ye be our Lord you send
Grace, from your foes you to defend.
With that in hy to him calde he,
They that were to him most privy,
Then among them they thought it best,
And ordainde for the likeliest,
That the Queen and the Earl also,
And the Ladies in hy should go,
With Neill the Bruce to Kildromy
For they thought they should sikkerly
Dwell there, while they were vittaild well
For so stark was the Castle.
That it with strenth was hard to get,
While that within were men and meat,
As they ordainde they did in hy,
The Queen and all her company,
Lap on their Horse, and forth they fare,
Men might have seen who had been there,
At lieue taking Ladies great,
And made cheeks with tears wat:
And Knights for their loves sake
Both sigh and weep, and mourning make.
They kissed their loves at their departing,
The King bethought him of a thing
That he fra thine on foot would go,
And take on foot both well and woe,
And would no Horsemen with him have,
From them there all haill they gave,
To the Ladies that mister had.
The Queen forth her ways rade,
And safely came to the Castle,
Where her folk were received well.
And eased well with meat and drink:
Yet might none ease let her to think
On the King that so hard was stad,
That but two hunder with him had.
The whilke them well governed ay,
God help them that all mights may*
The pain of King Robert among the Mountains
THe Queen dwelt thus in Kildromie,
And the King and his company.
They were two hunder and no mo,
Fra they had sent their Horse them fro:
Wanred among the hie mountains,
Where he and his often tholled pains:
For it was to the Winter near,
And so fell foes about them were,
That all the Country them weirrayed.
With so hard noy they them assayed.
Of hunger, cold, and showers snell,
Is none that lives that can tell,
The King saw how his men were stad,
And what annoy else that they had:
And saw was Winter drawing near,
And that he might on no maneere,
Dree in the Hills the cold lying*
Nor yet the long nights waking,
He thought he would to Kintyre go,
And so long sojourne there to more,
While Winter weather were away,
And then he thought but more delay,
In the maneland for to arrive,
And to the end his weirds drive.
And for Kintyre lies in the sea,
Sir Neill Campbell before sent he,
For to get him Nauing and meat,
A certain time to him he set,
When he should meet him at the sea,
Sir Neill Campbell with his Menie,
Went his way but more letting.
And left his brother with the King,
And in ten days so trauelde he,
That he gate shipping good plenty,
And vittane in greit abundance,
So made he Noble Cheuisance:
For his friends winned thereby,
That helped him full willingly.
How the King past-ouer Lochlowmond.
THe King after that he was gane,
To Lochmabene the way hes taken:
And came there on the third day:
But there about no Boat fand they,
That might them over the Water bear,
Then were they noyed in greit manner.
For it was far about to ga,
And they were into doubt alswa:
To meet their foes that spread were wide,
Therefore endlang the Loeh side,
They sought so busily and so fast,
While James of Douglas at the last,
Fand a little sinking Bait,
And it to land they drew full hait:
But it so little was, that it
Might but three over the Water flit.
They send thereof word to the King,
That was joyful of that finding:
And first into the Batte is gone,
With him Douglas: the third was one*
That rowed them over deliuerlie,
And set them on the land all dry:
And rowed so often syes to and fra,
Fetching ay over two and two:
That in a night and in a day,
Commed over the Loch are they:
For some of them could swoome full well,
And on his back bear a Fardell,
So with swooming and with rowing,
They brought them over, and all their thing.
The King a while merrily,
Read to them that was him by,
Romans of worthy Ferembras,
That worthily ouercommen was,
With the right doughtie Olyuer,
And how the doughtie Dutch peers were,
Assieged into Egrymor,
Where King Lanyn lay them before,
With mo thousands than I can say,
And but eleven within were they,
And a woman: that were so stad,
That they no meat there with them had*
But as they fra their foes it wan.
Yet they contained so them than,
That they the town held manlely,
While that Richard of Normandy,
Magre his foes warned the King,
That was joyful of that tything:
For he weind they had all been slain,
Therefore he turned in hy again:
And wan Monetribill and past Flagote:
And syne Lauyn, and all his flote,
Despiteously discomfite he,
And deliured his men all free.
And wan the Nails and the Spear,
And the Crown that JESUS bear,
And of the Cross a great party,
He wan through his great Cheualrie.
The good King upon this manner,
Comforted them that were with him near,
And made him gaming and solace,
While that his men ouerpassed was.
WHen they had past the Water brade,
Suppose they feill of foes had,
They made them merry, and was blyth,
Yet not for thy full feill sith,
They had full great default of meat,
And therefore Uennison to get,
In two parts are they gane.
The King himself was into ane,
And good Sir James of Douglas,
Into the other party was,
Then in the hight they held their way.
And hunted lang while of the day,
They sought Shawes, and seattes set:
Bot little good gate they to eat.
Then happened in that time through eace,
That the Earl of Lennox was,
Among the hills near thereby,
And when he heard sik blow and cry,
He had wonder what it might be,
And on sik manner spyed he,
That he knew well it was the King,
And then but any more dwelling,
With all them of his company,
Right to the King he went in hy.
So blyth and so joyful, that he
Might on no manner blyther be:
For he the King weind had been dead,
And he was also will of read:
That he durst rest into no place,
Sen that the King discomfite was
At Methwen: he heard never tithing,
That ever certain was of the King:
Therefore in full great dainty,
The King full homely hailsed he,
And he him welcomed right blythly,
And kissed him full tenderly,
And all the Lords that were there,
UUere joyful of their meeting there.
And kissed him in great dainty,
It was great pity for to see,
How they for joy and pity great,
When that they with their fellows met,
That they weind had been dead: for thy
They welcomed him more hartfully:
And he for pity great again:
That never of meeting was so feign.
Though I say, that they great soothly,
It was no greeting properly,
For I trow traistly that greeting,
Comes to men through misliking:
And that none may but anger greet,
Bot it be women that can weet
Their cheeks, when them list with tears
The whilk often times none ill them deeres.
Bot I wate right well but leesing,
Where ever men hes of sik greeting,
That meekle joy and great pity,
May gar men so amooued be,
That water fra their heart will rise.
And weet their eene on sik a wise,
That it is like to be greeting,
Though it be not like in all thing.
For when men greetes inkerly,
The heart is sorrowful or angry:
Bot for pity, I trow greeting,
Be nothing but an opening
Of heart: that shawes the tenderness,
Of reuth, that in it closed is.
THe Barons upon this manner.
Through Gods grace assembled were
The Earl had meat, and that plenty,
And with blyth heart, them it gave he:
And they, eat it with full good will,
And sought none other sauce theretill,
Bot appetite that often men takes,
For well scowred was their stomachs.
They ate and drank sik as they had.
And to the Lord sik loving made,
And thanked him with full good cheer,
That they were met on that manner,
The King at them then asked yarne,
Sen he them saw, how they had farne:
And they full piteously can tell,
Of auentures that them befell:
And great annoyes. and poverty.
The King thereat had great pity,
And tauld them piteously again,
The noy, the travel, and the pain.
That he had tholed sen he them saw,
Was none among them hie, nor law:
But he has pity, and pleasance,
When he heard make remembrance
Of the perils that passed were.
For when men ought at liking are,
To tell of pains passed by,
Pleases the hearing wondrously.
And to rehearse their old diseases,
Does them often comfort, nor eases.
With thy thereto follow no blame,
Dishonor, Wickedness* nor Shame.
How the King past to the Sea, and how the Earl of Lennox was chaist.
AFter the meat soon raise the King,
When he had leaued his speaking,
And busked him with his Menie,
And went in hy toward the sea,
Where Sir Neill Campbell soon them met
Both with ships and with meat,
Sails, Aires, and other thing.
That was speedfull to their faring.
Then shipped they withoutten mair,
Some went to Steer, and some to Air,
And rowed about the I Will of Boot,
Men might see money freely foot,
About the Coasts there bowning,
As they on Aires were rowing
And neeues that stalwart were and square
That wont to span greit spears were.
So spanned Aires that men might see,
Feel of their Hide left on the tree:
For all was doing, Knight and Knave,
Was none that other disport might have,
From Steer, from Air and from rowing
To further them in their flitting,
But in the samine time that they,
Were shipped, as ye heard me say,
The good Earl of Lennox was,
(I cannot tell you through what case)
Left behind all with his Gaillay,
While the King was far on his way.
And when that they of his Country,
Wist, that so left behind was he,
By sea with ships they him sought,
And he that saw that he was naught
Of pith, to feght with these traitors:
And that he had no near succors,
Nor the Kings flote: for thy
He sped him after them in hy:
But the traitors him followed so,
That they well near can him ouerta:
For all the might that he might do,
Aye near and near they came him to.
And when he saw they were so near:
That he might well their manance hear,
And saw them near and near come aye,
Then to his Menie can he say,
But if we find some subtlety,
We shall all soon overtaken be:
Therefore I reed but more letting,
That outtaken our arming.
We cast all thing into the sea,
And fra our ship so ligh^ed be,
We shall all row and speed us so,
That we shall well escape them fro,
With that they shall make dwelling,
Upon the sea to take our thing,
And we shall row but resting aye,
Till we escaped be them fray
As he divised so have they do one,
And their ship have they lighted soon,
And rowed soon with all their might,
And when their ship was made so light.
She raiked sliding through the sea,
And when their fo^s can them see.
Before them always maire and maire.
The things that there fleeting were
They took and turned syne again,
And so they leesed all their pain.
WHen that the Earl on this manner,
And his Menie escaped were.
After the King he can him hy,
That then with all his company
Into Kintyre arrived was.
The Earl he told him all the case,
How he was chased on the sea,
With them that should his own men be:
And how he had been taken but dout,
War not it that he wapped out.
All that he had him light to ma,
And so escaped he them fra
Sir Earl, said the King perfay,
If thou escaped is away,
Of thy tynsall is no plenyeing:
But I will tell thee well ane thing:
That there will fall thee greit folly,
To pass often from my company:
For often syes when thou art away,
Thou art set in full hard assay:
Therefore me think it best for thee,
To hold thee always near by me.
Sir, said the Earl, it shall be so,
I shall no ways pass far you fro,
Till GOD give grace we be of might,
Against our foes to hold our right.
ANgus of the Isles that time was sire
And Lord, and leader of Kintyre.
The King right well received he,
And undertook his man to be:
And him and his on money wise,
He abandounded to his service:
And for more sikkernesse gave him syne,
His Castle of Donabardyne:
To dwell therein at his liking,
Full greitly thanked him the King.
And received his service:
Yet not for thy on money wise,
He was dreading for treasoun aye
And therefore as I heard men say,
He trusted in none sikkerlie,
While that he knew him utterly,
But what kin dread that ever he had,
Fair countenance to him he made,
And in Donabardyne days three:
He sojounrde still with his Menyie:
Syne gart his men all make them yare,
Toward Ranchoyn by sea to fare,
That is ane I Will into the sea,
And may well in the midway be,
Betwixt Kintyre and Ireland,
Where als greit streams are rinnand,
And als perilous and mair,
For to sail them in ship fair,
And the greit Raes of Britanye,
Or Straites of Marroke into Spainye,
Their Shipes to sea they set.
And made ready but longer let,
Ankers, Rapes, both Sail, and Air,
And all that needed to Ship-fare,
When they were boun, to ship they went,
The wind was well to their intent,
They raised Sails, and swith they fare,
And by the Mule they passed there.
And entered soon into the Raes,
Whereat the storm so sturdy was,
With waves wide that bolning were,
UUaltering as hills here and there.
The ships over the waves slade,
For wind at will blowing they had:
But not for thy, who there had been,
A great stertling he might have seen
Of ships. For while some would be
Right on the waves summitie:
And some slade fra the hight so law,
Right as they down to hell would draw:
Syne on the waves stert suddenly,
And other ships that were by,
Delyuerly drew to the Deep,
It was great Cunning for to keep,
Their Takle into sik a thrang,
And wait sik waves ay amang,
That reft them often sight of the land.
When that they to it were marchand.
And when ships were sailing near,
The sea would rise on sik manner*
That of the waves the waltering hight,
Would reaue them often off their sight:
Yet into Raughring sikkerly,
They arrived ilkone safely,
Right blyth, and glade that they were sa,
Escaped the hiddeous waves fra.
IN Raughring they arrived are,
And to the land they went but mare,
Armed upon their best manner:
When the folk that there winning were,
Saw men of arms in their Country,
Arrive into sik quantity:
They fled in hy with their Cattle,
Right toward a stalward Castle,
That in the land was near them by:
Men might hear women highly cry,
And flee with Cattle here and there:
Bot the Kings folk that were
Deliver of foot, them can ouer-hy,
And them arreested haillely,
And brought them to the King again.
So that none of them all was slain.
Then with them treated so the King,
That they to fulfill his yarning,
Became his men euerilkane:
And hes him truly vndertane,
That they and theirs loud and still,
Sold be in all things at his will:
And while him liked there to leind,
Euerilk day they sold him send
Uittaile for three hunder men:
And ay for Lord they sold him ken,
So that their Fortresses might be,
For all his men their own free.
The Cunnand on this wise was made,
And on the morn but longer bade:
Of all Raughring both man and page
Kneeled, and made the King homage,
And therewith swore to him fewtie,
To serve him into leele lawtie:
And held him therewith leele Cunnand.
For while he dwelt into that land,
They gave meat to his company,
And served him right faithfully.
How the Queen, and other Ladies were taken, and prisoned, and her men slain
AT Raughring leave we now the King,
In rest withoutten barganing:
And of his foes a while speak we,
That through their might and their poustie,
Made sik a persecutioun,
So hard, so strait, and so felloun,
On them, that to him loving were,
Or kyn or friend in any manner.
That it to hear was great pity,
For they spared none of no degree,
That they trowed his friends were,
Nouther of the Kirk nor Seculare.
For of Glasgow Bishop Robert,
And Marcus of Maine they stythly spared
Both in fetters and in prisoun,
And als good Cristall of Setoun
Into Lochdon betrayed was,
Through a Disciple of Judas.
Maknaght a false Traitor that ay
Was with him dwelling night and day,
Whom to he made good company,
It was far war than traitoury,
For to betray sik a persoun,
So Noble, and of so good Renoun:
Bot thereof had he no pity,
In Hell condemned mot he be.
For when he him betrayed had,
The Englishmen right with him rade
In hy in England to the King:
And gart draw him, and head and hing,
Withoutten pity or mercy,
It was great sorrow sikkerlie,
That so worthy a person as he,
Sold in sik manner hanged be.
Thus gate ended the worthiness
Of Craufurd als, Sir Reynald we^,
And Sir Bryse als of the Blaire,
Were hanged in a barn at Air.
The Queen and Dame Mariory,
Her Daughter that syne worthily,
Was coupled into Gods band,
With Walter Stewart of Scotland,
That would in no wise longerly
In the Castle of Kildromy,
To bide a Siege. Bot ridyng raith
With Knights and with Squyars both,
To Rosse, right to the gyrth of Thane.
Bot that travel they made in vain.
For they of Rosse they would not bear
For them no blame, nor no danger.
Out of the gyrth them als hes taken,
And syne hes send them euerilkane:
Right into England to the King,
That gart draw all the men and hing,
And put the Ladies into prison,
Some in Castle and some in Dungeoun.
It was great pity for to hear,
Folk troubled on sik manner.
How Englishmen sieged the Castle of Kildromy.
THat time was into Kildromy,
Good men that were wight, and worthy,
Sir Neill the Bruce this wate ye well,
And the Earl also of Atholl,
The Castle right well vittailde they,
And meat, and Fuel they can puruay:
And enforced the Castle so,
That them thought no strength might ta it,
And when it to the King was told
Of England: how they shoope to hold
The Castle: he was all angry,
And calde his Son to him in hy,
The Eldest and appearand air,
A young Batchler, stark and fair,
Sir Edward of Carnauerane:
That was the starkest man of ane,
That might be found in a Country:
Prince of Wales that time was he,
And he gart call Earls two,
Glochester and Harfoorde were tho,
And bade them wend into Scotland,
And set a Siege with stalwart hand,
To the Castle of Kildromy,
And the holders (...) haillily,
He bade destroy them but ransoun,
Or bring them to him in prisoun.
When this mandament they had taken
They assembled an Host on ane:
And to the Castle went in hy,
And it assieged vigorously:
And money a time it hard assailyied:
And yet to take it often they failyied:
For they within were right worthy,
And them defended doughtely,
And repugned their foes often again:
Some baissed, some wounded, and some slain
And money a time ishe they would,
And bargain at the Barras hold,
And wound their foes often and sla,
Surely they them contemned sa,
That they thereout despaired were,
And through England again to fare,
For so stark saw they the Castle,
And thought that it was weaponde well,
And saw the men defend them sa,
That they none hope had it to ta,
None had they done all that sessoun,
Gif it not war right false treasoun.
For there within was a Traitor,
A false Lurdane, a Losyngeour*
Osbarne to name made the tressoun,
I wate not for what enchesoun:
Nor whom with he made the conuine,
But as they said, that were within,
He took a Coulter hot glowing,
That red was in a fire burning:
And went into the meekle Hall,
That then with corn was filled all.
And high up in the mow it did,
But it full long was not there hid,
For men says often that fire nor pride,
But disconering may no man hide:
For the pomp of the pride foorthshawes,
Or else the greit boast as it blawes,
Nor there may no man fire so cover,
But it shall low or reeke discover.
So it fell here: for fire so clear
Soon through ye thick board can appear.
First as a Stern* syne as a Moon,
And well braider thereafter soon.
The fire out soon in bleases brast,
And the reeke raise so wonder fast:
The fire over all the Castle spread,
There might with force no man it red,
Then they within drew to the wall,
That at that time was battailde all
Within, right as it was without.
That battalling withoutten doubt,
Saved their lives, for to brake,
Fire blasts that them would overtake.
And when their foes that mischief saw
To arms went they in a thraw.
And assailled the Castle fast,
Where they durst come for fires blast*
But they within that mister had,
So greit defense and worthy made,
That they full often their foes rushed,
For no kin peril they refused.
Nor travel for to save their lives,
But Weird, that to the end all drives,
The Worlds things them so traveled:
That they on two sids were assailled.
Within with fire, that them so broolyied:
Without with folk that them so tuilyied*
That they brint magre theirs the et,
But for the fire that was so het,
They durst not enter so soon in hy,
Therefore their folk they gart rely,
And went to rest for it was night,
Till on the morn that day was light.
AT sik mischief as ye may see,
Were they within, which was pity,
They them defended doughtely:
Contemning them so manfully,
That they ere day throw mekill pain,
Had timmered up the at again:
But on the morn when day was light.
And sun was shinning fair and bright:
Then they without in haill battle,
Came puruayed ready to assail:
But they within they were so stad,
That they not meat nor fuel had.
Where with they might the Castle hald,
Treated first, and syne them yald,
To be into the Kings will.
That aye to Scottish men was ill:
As soon after well was knawne:
For they were hanged all and drawn.
When this Cunnand thus treated was,
And affirmed with sikkernesse,
They took them off the Castle soon,
And in short time so have they done,
That all a quartter of Snawdoun,
Right to the eird they tumbled down,
And toward England held their way:
But when that King Edward heard say,
How Neill the Bruce held Kildromy,
Against his son so stalwatrly,
He gathered greit Cheualry,
And toward Scotland went in hy.
And as he in Northumberland,
Was with his greit rout rydand.
A sickness took him by the way,
And put him to so hard assay,
That he might neither gang nor ride,
Him behooued magre his abide,
Into an Hamelet was thereby,
A little town and unworthy,
With greit pain they him hither brought,
He was so stad, that he na moght
His breath but with greit pains draw:
Or speak but if it were well law.
But then he bad they sold him say,
What place was that where he in lay.
Sir, they said, Burgh in the sand:
They call this place into this land.
Call they it Burgh, alas (said he)
My hope is now fordone to me:
For I weind never to thole the pain
Of death: while I through meekle maine,
The Burgh of Jerusalem had taken,
My life there weind I sold be gane.
In Burgh, I wist well I sold die,
But I was neither wise nor sly,
To other Burghes help for to ta.
Now may I no wise further ga,
Thus plenyied he him of his folly,
As he had matter sikkerlie.
When he weind to wit certainty
Of it, that none might certain be.
Yet some men said, inclosde he had
A Spreit that him an answer made,
Of things that he would inquyre:
But he was fool withoutten weere,
That gave traist to that Creature:
For Feynds are of sik nature,
That they to Mankind have envy:
For they will on no wise truly,
That they that well are living here,
Sall win the Siege, where fra they were
Tumbled through their meekle pride.
Wherethrough often times will betide,
That when Feynds distrenyied are,
They will appear, and make answer,
Through force of coniuration:
But they so false are, and so felloun,
That they make ay their answering,
Into double understanding,
To deceive them that will them trow.
Ensample will I set you now,
Of a Were, as I heard tell,
Betwixt France and the Flemings fell.
The Earl of Flanders Mother was
A Negromancer, and Sathanas
She raised: and him asked syne,
What sold worth of the feghtyne,
Betwixt the French King, and her Son.
And he (as all time he was wone)
Into deceit made her answer,
And said to her their verses here.
Versus Bellide BOSBEK.
Rex ruet in bello, tumulique carebit honor.
FERRANDVS (comitissa) tuus, mea chara Minerva,
Parisios veniet, magna comitante caterva.
This was the speech he made perfay,
And is in English thus to say.
The King sall fall in the feghting,
And sall failye honor of eirding,
And thy Ferrand, thy Nephew, my Dear,
Sall right to Paris wend but weere:
Following him a great company,
Of Noble men, and of worthy.
This is the sentence of the Saw,
That he in Latin can her shaw.
He called her his dear Minerue.
For she was ay wont for to serve
Him* till she leesed at his devise:
And for she made the samine service,
His Minerue and her called he:
And als through his subtilitie,
He called her Dear, her to deceive:
That she the titter should conceive,
Of his speech the understanding,
That most pleased to her liking.
His double speech her so deceived,
That through it her son the dead received:
For she was of his answer blyth,
And to her son she told it swyth,
And bade him to the battle speed,
And he sold Uictor be but dread:
And he that heard her sermoning,
Sped him in hy to the fighting.
Where he discomfite was and shent,
And taken and to Paris sent:
But in the fighting not for thy,
The King through his Cheualry,
Was laid at eird and laimed both:
But his men horsed him well raith.
And when Ferrandus Mother heard,
How her son in the battle farde:
And that he was so discomfite:
She raisde the ill Spirit tyte,
And asked him why he lied had,
Of the answer he to her made,
And he said, that he said sooth all.
I said he, that the King sold fall
In the battle, and so did he,
And failyeed eirding, as men may see,
And I said he, that thy son sold go
To Paris: and he did right so:
Following him sik a menyie,
That never in his lifetime, he
Had sik a Menye into leading.
Now sees thou, I made no leesing.
The Wife convicted was perfay,
And durst no more to him then say.
Thus gate through double understanding,
That bargain came to sik ending,
That the one part deceived was.
Right so fell it upon this case,
At Jerusalem trowed he,
Graven into the Burgh to be,
At the whilk Burgh into the sand,
He swelt right in his own land.
And when he to the death was near,
The folk that at Kildromy were,
Came with the prisoners they had taken:
And soon unto the King are gane,
And for to comfort him they tauld,
How they the Castle to them yald:
And how they to his will were brought.
To do with them what ever him thought.
Asked what they sold with them do?
Then looked he angerlie them to,
And said girning, gar hang and draw.
It was great wonder of sik saw:
That he, that to the death was near,
Sold answer upon sik manner,
Withoutten meaning of mercy:
How might he trust on him to cry,
That soothfastlie deemes all thing,
To have mercy for his crying.
Of him that through his fellonie,
Into sik point had no mercy.
His men his mandament have done,
And he died thereafter soon.
And syne was brought to Burying,
His Son syne after him was King.
How James of Douglas past into Arrane.
TO King Robert again go we
In Raughring with his Menie
Lay* till all the winter near was began
And of that I Will his meat hes taken
James of Douglas was angry,
That they so long should idle lie.
And Sir Robert Boyd said he,
The poor folk of this Country,
Are Charged upon greit manner,
Of us that idle lies here.
I have heard say: that in Arrane,
In a strong Castle made of stane,
Are Englishmen, that with strong hand,
Holds the Lordship of that Land.
Go we hidder, and well may fall,
Annoy them in some thing we shall.
Sir Robert said, I grant theretill,
To ly here more were little skill:
Therefore to Arrane pass will we.
For I know right well the Country,
And the Castle also know I.
We shall come there so privily,
That they shall have no perceiving,
Nor yet knowledge of our coming,
And we shall near inbushment be,
Where we their coming well may see.
So shall it on no manner fall,
But catch them in some wise we shall:
UUith that they busked them on ane,
And at the King their leave hes taken.
And went soon forth upon their way,
Into Kintyre soon come are they:
Syne rowed alwaes by the land,
While that the night was near at hand,
Then to Arrane they held their way,
And safely their arrived they.
And in a Glen their Gaillay dreugh,
And syne it hailled well eneugh.
Their Takle aires, and all their Steer,
They had all on the same manner:
And held their way then in the night,
So that ere Day was dawen light:
They were enbusht the Castle near,
Armed upon their best manner:
And though they wet were and weary,
And long fasting all hungry:
They thought to hold them all privy.
Until that they their time might see,
Sir John the Hastings at that tide,
With Knights of full meekle pride,
And with Squyers and Yemanrie,
And had a well greit company:
Was in the Castle of Brathwyke:
And often time when it would him like,
He went to hunt with his menyie,
And so the Land abandound he.
That none durst warn to do his will,
He was into the Castle still,
The time that James of Douglas,
So near hand by enbushed was,
So happened at that time through chance,
That with vittaile and purveyance,
And with cleething and als arming,
The day before in the Evening,
The Under Wardane arrived was,
With three Baittes right near the place,
Where the folk I spoke of air,
Full privily enbushed were.
Soon from the Baittes saw them go,
Of Englishmen thretty and more,
Charged all with sundry things,
Some bare wine, and some armings,
The remanent all charged were,
With things of sundry manner.
And other sundry yeed them by,
And they were Masters idly:
They that enbushed were them saw,
And then withoutten dread or aw,
Their bushment on them they brake,
And slew all that they might overtake.
They cried hiddeously and hie,
And they that dreeding were to die,
Right as beasts can rairre and cry,
And they slew them without mercy,
So that into the samine stead,
Were near so forty that were dead.
When they that in the Castle were,
Heard the folk so cry and raire,
They ished forth to the fighting,
But when the Douglas saw their coming,
His men to him he can rely,
And went to meet them hastily.
And when they of the Castle saw,
Him come on them but dreed or aw,
They fled withoutten more debate,
And they them followed to the yate,
And slew of them as they in past:
But they their ets barred so fast,
That they at them might do no mair,
Therefore they left them ilke one there,
And turned to the place again,
Where that the men before was slain,
And when they that within the Baittes,
Saw them coming, and what gaites
They had discomfite their Menyie,
In hy they put them to the sey,
And rowed fast with all their maine,
But the wind was them again:
And so greit the Land birst rise,
That they might weeld the sea no wise.
Nor they durst not come to the Land,
But held them there so long hobland.
That of three Baits drowned two,
And when Douglas saw it was so,
He took the arming and the cleething,
Uittaile, and wine, and other thing,
That they found there: and held their way
Right glad and joyful of their prey.
On this manner James of Douglas,
And his Menyie through Gods grace,
Were well relieved with arming.
And with Uittaile and als Cleething.
Syne to a strait they held their way,
And them full manly gouernde they,
While on the tent day that the King,
With all that were in his leading,
Arrived were in that Country,
With threttie Gaillaies come and three,
The King arrived in Arrane,
And syne to the Land is he gane:
And in a town took his Harbrie,
And syne speared full specially,
If any men could tell tithand,
Of any strangers in that land.
Yes said a woman, Sir, perfay,
Of strange men, I can you say,
That are come into this Country,
And short while syne through their bounty
They discomfited our Wardane,
And money of his men have slain,
And to a stalward place hereby,
Repaireth all their company.
Dame, said the King, will thou me wis,
To the place where their repair is,
I sall reward thee but leesing:
For they are all of my dwelling,
And I right blythly would them see,
And as I trow, so would they me.
Yes Sir: said she, I will blythly,
Go with you and your company,
While that I show you their repair.
That is enough, my sister fair,
Now go we forward, said the King.
Then went they forth but more letting
Following her. And she them led,
While at the last she show the steed
To the King in a woodie Glen:
And said, Sir, yonder saw I the men
That ye speere after, make ludging,
Here trow I, is their repairing:
The King then blew his horn in hy,
And gart the men that were him by,
Hold them still in priuitie,
And syne again his horn blew he:
James of Douglas heard him blow,
And well the blast soon can he know.
And said, surely yone is the King,
I ken him well by his blowing,
The third time therewith als he blew,
And Sir Robert Boyd him knew:
And said, yone is the King but dreed,
Go we will forth to him good speed,
Then went they to the King in hy,
And to him inclined courteously,
And blythly welcomed them the King,
That was joyful of their meeting,
And kissed them, and speared syne
How had they farne in their huntyne?
And they him told all but leesing:
Syne loved they GOD of their meeting,
Then with the King to his harbry
They went, both blyth and joyfully.
How the King sent his man to spy in Carrik* who were to him friendly.
THE King upon the other day,
To his privy men can say:
Ye know all well, and well may see,
How ye are out of your Country
Banished through Englishmens might,
And that which ours sold be with right,
Through their mastrie they occupy,
And would also without mercy,
Gif they had might, destroy us all:
But GOD forbid, that it sold fall
To us, as they make menassing,
Then were there no recovering,
And manheed bids us, that we
To procure vengeance busy be:
For ye may see we have three things,
That makes us admonishings.
For to be worthy, wise, and wight,
And to annoy them at our might.
One is, our lives safety:
That could in no wise saved be.
Gif they had us at their liking.
The other that makes us egging,
Is that they our possession
Holds with strength against reason:
The third is, the joy that we abide,
Gif that it happens (as well may tide)
That we have victory and maistrie,
To overcome all their fellonie.
Therefore we sold our hearts raise,
So that no mischief sold us abase:
And shape always to that ending,
That bears in it mense and loving:
And therefore, Lordings, if that ye see,
Among you, that it speedfull be:
I will send a man in Carrik,
To spy and spear how the Kinrik
Is led? and who is friend or fo.
And gif he sees we land may to:
On Turneberyse-nuke he may
Make a fire on a certane day,
To make takning to us, that we
May there arrive in safety:
And if he sees, we may not sa,
Look on no wise the fire he ma.
So may we thereof have witting
Of our passage and our dwelling.
To this speech all assented are,
And there the King withoutten mare,
Calde one that was to him privy,
And borne was of Carrik Country:
And charged him in life, and mair,
As ye heard he devised air:
And set him certain day to mo
The ^ire: gif he saw it were so,
that they had possibility,
To maintain weere in that Country:
And he that was right well in will,
His Lords yarning to fulfill,
^s he that worthy was and leele,
And could his secret well conceele.
Said, he was boun into all thing,
For to fulfill his commanding,
And said, he sold do so wisely,
That no reproof sold after lie.
Syne at the King his leave hes taken,
And forth upon his way is gane.
NOw goes the Messenger his way,
That hight Cuthbert (as I heard say)
In Carrik soon arrived he:
And passed through all the Country:
But he found sew therein perfay,
That good would of his Master say.
For feill of them durst not for dread,
And other some right into deed,
Were faes to the Noble King,
That rewed syne their barganing,
Both hie and low the land was then,
All occupied with Englishmen:
That despised attour all thing,
Robert the Bruce the doughtie King.
Carrik was given then whollelie
To Sir Henry the Lord Percie*
That into Turnberyse Castle then,
Was well near with three hundredth men,
And danted so all hail the Land,
That all to him were obeyand.
This Cuthbert saw his felony,
And saw the folk so haillely,
Be worthen English, both rich and poor,
That he to none durst him discover:
But thought to leave the fire unmade:
Syne to his Master went but bade:
All that conuyne to him to tell,
That was so angry, and so fell.
Of the fire the King saw burning
THE King that into Arrane lay.
When that commin was the day,
That he set to his Messenger,
As I to you devised air,
After the fire he looked fast,
And soon as the Noone was past,
He thought well that he saw a fire,
By Turneberie burning fair and shyre,
And to his men he couth it shaw,
Ilkane thought well that they it saw,
Then with blyth heart the folk can cry.
Good King, speed you deliuerly,
So that we soon in the Evening,
Arrive withoutten perceiving.
I grant (said he) now make you yare,
God further us into our fare:
Then in short time men might them see,
Shoot all their Gaillayes to the sea,
And bare to sea, both Air and Steer:
And other things that needful were.
And as the King upon the sand,
Was ganging up and down bydand,
His menyie till they ready were:
His Hosts came right to him there,
And when that she him hailsed had,
A privy speak she to him made:
And said, Take good keep to my Saw,
For ere ye pass, I shall you shaw,
Of your Fortune a greit party,
And attour all thing especially,
A wittering here I shall you ma.
What end that your purpose shall ta.
For in this Land is none truly,
Wats things to come so well as I.
Ye pass now forth in your voyage,
To venge the harm and the outrage,
That Englishmen hes to you done,
But ye wat not what kin Fortune.
Ye mon dree in your weraying,
But wit ye well without leesing,
That fra ye have now taken Land,
There shall no might nor strength of hand
Gare you pass out of that Country,
UUhile all to you abandounde be,
Within short time ye shall be King,
And have the Land at your lyking,
And overcome your foes all,
But fell annoyes feel ye shall,
Or that your purpose end have taken:
But ye shall them ouerdriue ilkane.
And that ye trow this sikkerly,
My two sons with you shall I
Send: to take part of your ^^auaile,
For I wot well, they shall not fail.
To be rewarded well at right,
When ye are raised to your hight.
The King that heard all her carping
Thanked her in meekle thing,
For she comforted him some deill,
And he trowed not all well
Her speech: For he had greit ferly,
How he should wit it sikkerly.
As it was wonderful perfay,
How any man's science may
Know things that are to come,
Determinatly, either all or some,
But if that he inspired were,
Of him that all things euermare
Sees, in his own Prescience,
As it were aye in his presence.
As was David and Jeremy,
Samuel, Joseph, and Esaias.
That through his holy grace could tell
Feill things that afterward befell,
But these Prophets so thin are sown,
That none in eird may now be known.
But feill folk are so curious,
And to wit things so covetous,
That they trow through their great Clergy,
Or else through their deuiltie,
Of their twain manners makes finding,
Of things to come to have knowing,
Ane of them is Astrology,
Wherethrough Clerks that are witty,
May know Conjunction of Planets,
And whidder that their course them sets,
In soft Sieges, or in angry,
And of the Heaven all haillelie,
How that the dispositioun
Wirkes upon things here down:
On Regions or on Climates,
That all where works not all gaites.
Yet may they fail the truth to say,
In things that them happen may.
For whether that man inclined be,
To virtue or iniquity:
He may right well refrain his will,
Either through virtue or through skill,
And to the contrare turn it all,
As has been money time seen fall,
That men kyndlie to ill given,
Through their greit wit away have driven
Their ill: and worthen of renown,
Magre the constellatioun.
As Aristotle, if as men reeds,
He had followed his kindly deeds:
He had been false and covetous,
But his wit made him virtuous,
And syne that man may on this wise,
Work against the course, that is
Principal cause of their deeming,
Me think they deem no certain thing,
Negromancie another is,
That kens men on sundry wise:
Through stalwart Conjuration:
And als through Exhortation
To gar Sprites to them appear.
And give them answer on seir manner,
As whylum did the Pithonesse,
That when Saul abased was,
Of the Philistimes might,
Raised through her meekle s^ight.
Samuels Spreit als tite,
Or in his stead the evil spreit,
That gave right graith answer her to:
But of her self right noght wist sho,
And man is into dreeding ay,
Of things that he hes heard say,
Namely that are to come, while he
Know of the end the certainetie:
And sen they are in sik wening,
Withoutten certain witting:
Me think, who says he knows things
To come: he makes great gabings.
But whidder she that told the King,
How his purpose sold have ending,
Weind, or wist it utterly,
It fell after all hollelie,
As she said, for syne King was he,
And reigned into free poustie.
Of the Kings Hansaling in Carrik, at his first arriving.
THis was in Ver, when Winter tide,
With his blasts hideous to bide,
Was ouerdriuen: and birds small,
As Turtle, and the Nightingale,
Began right sweetly for to sing,
And for to make their solacing.
Sweet notes and sounds seere,
And melodies pleasant to hear.
And trees begouth breaking to ma
Burgeons, and blyth bloomes alswa,
To win the hewing of their head,
That wicked Winter has them made,
And all gersse begouth to spring.
In that sweet time the Noble King,
With his flote, and a few menyie.
Four hunder I trow they might be,
Went to the sea out of Arrane,
A little before the Even was gane.
They rowed fast with all their might,
While that upon them fell the night,
That woxt mirke on great manner:
So that they wist not where they were,
For they no needle had nor stane,
But rowed always forth in ane.
Steering always upon the fire,
That they saw burning light and shire.
It was but auentour them led,
And they in short time so them sped,
That at the fire arrived they,
And went to land but more delay:
And Cuthbert that has seen the fire,
Was full of anger and of ire,
For he durst not do it away.
And he was also doubting ay,
That his Lord sold pass to the sea,
Therefore their coming waited he.
And met them at their arriving:
He was right soon brought to the King:
That speered at him how he had done?
And he with sore heart told him soon*
How there was none there well willand:
But all were foes, that ever he fand.
And that Sir Henry the Percy
With near three hunder in company,
Was in the Castle there beside:
Filled full of despite, and pride,
But more then two parts of his rout,
Were harbred in the towns about;
And despises you more, Sir King,
Then men may despise any thing,
Then said the King in full great ire,
Traitor* why made thou then the fire?
Ah (Sir) he said, so God me see,
The fire was never made through me:
Nor ere this night I wist it noght:
But fra I wist it, well I thought,
That ye and wholly your Menyie,
In hy sold put you to the sea,
For thy come I to meet you here,
To tell perils that may appear.
The King was at his speech angry,
And asked his privy men him by.
What that they thought was best to do.
Sir Edward answered first thereto,
His brother that was so hardy:
And said, I say you sikkerlie,
There sall no peril that may be,
Drive me again unto the sea
Mine adventure here take will I,
Whether it be easefull or angry,
Brother (he said) sen ye will sa,
It is good we the ^amine ta,
Disease, or ease, or pain, or play.
After as GOD will us puruay.
And sen men says, that the Percy,
Mine heritage will occupy:
And his Menyie so near us lies.
That us despises money ways.
So we venge some of the despite,
And that may we have done full tyte:
For they lie traistlie but dreeding
Of us, or of our here coming:
And thought we sleeping slay them all,
Reprove us thereof no man sall:
For werrayour no force should mo,
Whether he might overcome his fo,
Through strength, or great subtlety,
But at good faith ay holden be.
When this was said, they went their way,
And to the town soon commen are they,
So privily but noise making:
That none perceived their coming,
They skailled through the town in hie,
And broke up doors sturdelie:
And slew all that they might overtake,
And they that no defense might make,
Full piteously can raire and the cry:
And they slew them without mercy,
As they that were in full great will,
To venge the anger and the ill,
That they and theirs to them had wrought
With so felloun a will them sought:
That they slew them up euerilkone,
Except Makdowell him alone,
That escaped through meekle slight,
And through the mirkenes of the night.
In the Castle the Lord Percie,
Heard well the noise and the cry.
And so did the men with him were,
And full infrainly got their geire:
But of them none was so hardy,
And durst ishe forth to cry,
In sik affray baide they that night,
While on the morn that day was light,
And then ceased into party,
The noise, the slaughter and the cry.
The King gart then departed be,
All haill the spraith to his Menyie,
And dwelt there syne days three,
Sik hansell to these folk gave he:
Right in the first beginning,
Newlings at his Incomming.
WHen that the King and his folk were,
Arrived, as I told you air.
A while in Carrik leinded he,
To see who friend, or foe would be,
And he found little tenderness.
But not for thy the people was,
Inclined to him in party:
But Englishmen so angerlie.
Led them with danger and with aw,
That they no friendship durst him shaw
But a Lady of that Country,
That was to him in near degree,
In Cosinage, was wonder blyth
Of his arriving, and als swyth*
Sped her to him in full greit hy,
With forty men in company,
And betaught all unto the King,
To help him in his warraying.
And he received them in dainty,
And her full greitlie thanked he,
And speered tithings of the Queen,
And of his friends all bedeene,
That he had left in that Country:
When that he put him to the sea,
And she him told sighing full saire,
How that his brether token were:
In the Castle of Kildromy,
And syne destroyed villanously.
And the Earl of Atholl also,
And how the Queen and other more,
That his party were holdand,
Were taken and led into England
Were put into felloun prisoun,
And how good Crystal of Setoun
Was slain: greeting: she told the King,
That was sorrowful of that tithhing.
And said when he had thought a thraw,
The words that I shall to you shaw,
Alace, he said, for love of me,
And for their meekle leele lawtie,
They Noble men; and they worthy,
Are destroyed so villanouslie:
But if I live in liege poustie,
Their death right soon shall venged be,
Yea, whether the King of England,
Thought that the Kinrike of Scotland:
Was all too little for him and me,
Therefore I will it mine all be.
But of good Crystal of Setoun,
That was so worthy of Renown,
That he should die were greit pity.
Where any worship might preeud be,
THe King thus sighing made his mane
And the Lady her leave hes taken:
And syne went home to her winning.
And feill syes comfort she the King,
Both with silver and with meat,
Sik as she in the land might get,
And he often ryoted the land,
And made all his that ever he fand,
And syne he drew him to the hight,
To stint better his foes might.
In that time was the Percie,
With a full simple company:
In Turn^berise Castle yet lying,
For the King Robert sore dreeding,
That he durst not ish forth to fare
Fra thine to the Castle of Air.
That was then full of Englishmen,
But lay lurking in a Den,
While the men of Northumberland,
Should come armed with strong hand,
And conduct him to his Country,
For to them send his Poist has he,
And they in hy assembled then,
Passing attour a thousand men:
And asked counsel them amang,
Whether that they should dwell or gang:
But they were stonisht wonder saire,
So far in Scotland for to fare,
For a Knight Sir Gawter de Lile,
Said it was too greit peril,
So near these Soldiers to go:
His speech discomforted them so.
That they had left all the voyage.
Were not a Knight of greit courage,
That Sir Roger of Saint John hight,
That them comforted with his might,
And sic words can to them say,
That they together held their way,
To Turnebery where the Percy
Lap on, and went with them in hy.
In England his own Castle till,
Without distroublance or more ill.
Now in England is Percy,
Where I trow he a while shall ly,
Or that he shape him for to fare,
To weirray Carrik any mare:
For he wist that he had no right:
And als he dred the Kings might:
That in Carrik was dwelland,
In the most strengths of that Land.
Where James of Douglas on a day
Came to the King, and can him say,
Sir, with your leave I would go see
How that they do in my Country.
And how my men demained are,
For it annoyes me wonder sare:
That the Cliffurde so peaceably,
Brooks and holds the Senyeory,
That should be mine with all kin right,
But while I live, if I have might,
To lead a Yeaman or a swane:
He shall not brook it but bargain,
The King said, Certes, I cannot see,
How that ye yet may sikker be.
Into that Country for to fare,
While Englishmen so mighty are:
And thou wat not who is thy friend,
He said, Sir, needless I will wend,
And take the adventure God will give,
Whether it be to die or live.
The King said, Sen that thou will so
And sik a yarning hes to go:
Thou shall pass forth with my blessing,
And if thee happens any thing,
That annoyous or skaithfull be,
I pray thee speed thee soon to me:
Take we together what ever may fall.
I grant, he said, and therewithal
He louted, and his leave hes taken,
And is toward the Country gane.
The first winning of the Castle of Douglas.
NOw takes James his voyage,
Toward Douglas his heritage.
With two men withoutten ma,
This was a simple store to ta,
Castle or land of weere to win.
But fast he yarned to begin,
To bring his purpose to ending:
And good help lies in beginning:
For good beginning and hardy,
Gif it be followed wittily,
May gar often syes vnliklie thing,
Come to right good and fair ending:
So did he here: for he was wise,
And saw he might not on no wise,
Weary his foe with even might:
Therefore he thought to work with slight,
In Dowglasdaill his own Country:
Upon an Evening entered he,
And then a man winned thereby,
That was of friends right mighty,
And rich of money and of Cattle,
And had been to his father leell:
And to himself in his Youthhead,
Had done money a thankful deed.
Thomas Diksoun was his name perfay,
To him he send, and can him pray,
That he would come allanerlie,
For to speak with him privily,
And but danger to him he gaes:
But when he told him what he was,
He great for joy, and for pity,
And him right to his house had he*
Where in a chamber privily,
He held him and his company:
That none of him had perceiving,
And meat, and drink, and other thing,
That might them ease, they had plenty:
So wrought they with their subtlety,
That all the leele men of the land,
That with his Father were dwelland,
This good man gart come one and one:
And make him man^ent euerilkone:
And he himself first homage made.
Douglas in heart great gladness had.
That the good men of his Country,
Would this wise to him bounden be,
He speered the conueene of the land.
And who the Castle had in hand?
And they him told all haillelie,
And syne among them privily:
They ordainde that he still sold be,
In hiddles and in priuitie,
Till Palmesunday that was near hand,
The third day after followand.
For then the folk of that Country,
Assembled at the Kirk would be:
And they that in the Castle were,
Would als be there their Palms to bear.
As folk that had no dreed of ill:
For they thought all was at their will,
Then sold he come with his two men,
Before that folk sold not him ken.
He sold a mantle have old and bare,
And a flaile, as he a Ta^ker were.
Under the mantle not for thy,
He sold be armed privily:
And when the men of his Country,
That sold all boun before him be:
His Ensenyie might hear him cry,
Then sold they all right enforcedly,
Right in mids the Kirk assaill,
The Englishmen with hard battaill.
So that none might escape them fra,
For therethrough trowed they to ta
The Castle: that beside was near:
And when this, that I tell you here
Was devised and vndertane,
Ilkone home to his house is gane:
And held this speak in priuitie,
Until the day of their assembly.
How Douglas in Sanct Brydes Kirk, With the Englishmen can wirke.
THE folk upon the Palmesunday,
Held to Saint Brydes Kirk their way:
And they that in the Castle were,
Ished out both less and maire:
And went their Palms for to bear,
Except a Cook and a Porter.
James of Douglas, of their coming:
And what they were had good witting,
And sped him to the Kirk in hy:
But ere he came, so hastily,
One of his men cried Douglas, Douglas,
Thomas Dikson, that nearest was,
To them that were of the Castle,
That were then Inwith the Chancell.
UUhen they the Douglas so heard cry,
Drew out his sword, and fellounlie
Rushed among them to and fro,
And one other withoutten mo.
But they in hie were left lyand,
UUith that Douglas came near at hand,
And they enforced on them the cry:
But they the Chancell sturdelie
Held, and them defended well,
While of their men were slain some dell.
But, the Douglas so well him bare,
That all the men that with him were,
Had comfort of his well doing.
And he himself spared nothing:
But proved so his force in fight,
That through his worship and his might,
His men so keenelie helped than,
That they the Chancell on them wan.
Then dang they on so sturdelie,
That in short time men might see lie,
The two part dead, or then dieand.
The laue were seized soon in hand:
So that of threttie lived nane,
But they were slain ilkane or taken.
James of Douglas when this was done,
The prisoners hes taken full soon,
And with them of his company,
Toward the Castle went in hie:
Or onie noise of cry sold rise.
And for he would them soon supprise:
That in the Castle leaued were,
They were but two withoutten mare,
Five or sex before send he,
That fand all open the entry,
And entered, and the Porter took,
Right at the et, and syne the Cook.
With that the Douglas came to the et,
And entered in without deba^te,
And ^ound the meat all ready graithed,
With boordes set, and claithes laid,
The ets then he gart them spare,
And sat at meat all at laissair,
Syne all the goods tursed they,
That they thought light to bear away.
Silver, treasure, and als cleething,
And namelte weapons, and all arming,
Uittaile that might not tursed be,
On this manner destroyed he,
All the Uittaile outtaken salt,
And Wheat* and Flower, and Meal and Malt,
In the wine Cellar gart he bring.
And syne all on the Floor down fling,
And the Prisoners that he had taken,
Right there in gart he hid ilkane,
Syne off the Tons the hedes out struck:
A foul melle there gart he make.
For Meal, and Malt Bread, and Wine,
Ran together in a melline:
That was unseemly for to s^e.
Therefore the men of that Country,
Called it the Douglas Ladnaire.
And will be called this money year,
Then took he Salt as I heard tell,
And dead Horse and forded the Wall,
And syne burnt all outtaken stone,
And is forth with his Menyie gone.
To his reset: for he trowed well,
If he had holden the Castle,
He should had been assieged raith:
And that thought him to meekle skaith*
For he none hope had of rescuing,
And als it was right perilous thing,
In Castle assieged for to be,
When a thing wants of their three:
Uittaile, or meat, with arming,
Or else good hope of rescuing,
And for he dred their things should fail,
He choosed forward to travail,
Where he might at his larges be,
And so drives forth his Destiny:
IN this wise was the Castle taken,
And slain that were therein ilkane,
The Douglas syne all his menyie,
Gart in seir places parted be,
That men should wit less where they were
That yeed aye parted here and there,
Them that were wounded gart he ly,
Into hiddles all privily,
And gart good Leeches to them bring,
While that they were into leeching:
And himself with a few menyie,
While one, while two, and whiles three,
And sometime, he himself alone,
In hiddles through the Land is gone.
So dred he Englishmens might,
That he durst not well come in sight:
For they that time were all weeldand:
As Masters and Lords over all the Land,
But their tithings were skailled soon,
Of this deed the Douglas had done.
Came to the Cliffurdes ear in hy:
That for his tynsell was right sorry.
And meened his men that were slain:
And syne he hes to purpose taken,
To big the Castle up again.
Therefore as men of meekle mane
He assembled a great company,
And syne to Douglas went in hy,
And bigged up the Castle swyth,
And made it right stalwart and styth:
And put therein Uittaile and Men.
And ane of the Thrilwailes then,
He left behind him the Captain,
And syne to England went again.
How one man and his sons two, Undertook King Robert to sla.
INto Carrik yet was the King.
With a full simple gaddering,
He past not two hundredth men,
But yet Sir Edward his brother then
In Galloway was near hand by,
With him another company,
They held the Strengths of the Land,
For they durst not yet take on hand,
To ride over all the Land plainly,
For of Wallange Sir Aymery,
Was into EDINBVRGH lyand,
And als was Wardane of the Land,
And when he heard of his coming,
Of King Robert and his Menyie,
Into Carrik, and how that he,
Had slain so of the Persies men:
His counsel he assembled then.
And with consent of his Counsel,
He sent to Air him to assail,
Sir Ingrame Bell that was hardy,
And with him a greit company,
And when Sir Ingrame come was there,
Him thought not speedfull for to fare,
For to assailyie him in the hight,
Therefore he thought to work with slight,
And lay still in the Castle than,
While he gat speering of a man
Of Carrik that was sly and wight,
And als a man of meekle might:
As any man of that Country,
Was to King Robert most privy,
As he that was his sibbe man near,
And when he would, without danger,
Might to the Kings presence go,
The whilke man and his Sons two,
Were winning still in that Country,
For they would not perceived be,
That they were special to the King,
They made him money time warning,
When that they might his tynsell see,
Therefore in them affyed he,
His name I cannot tell perfay,
But I have heard of sooth men say,
Forsooth that his ane eye was out.
But he so sturdie was and stout,
That he was the most doughtie man,
That into Carrik was living than,
And when Sir Ingrame gat witting,
Forsooth this was no leesing.
After him in hy he sent.
And he came at his commandment.
Sir Ingrame that was sly and wise,
Treated with him on sik a wise:
That he made sikker undertaking,
UUith treasoun for to slay the King:
And he sold have for his service,
Gif he fulfilled this devise:
Well forty pounds worth of land*
To him and all his aires liuand.
THE treasoun thus is vndertane,
And he home to his house is gane:
And waited opportunity,
To fulfill his iniquity.
In great peril then was the King,
That of this treasoun wist nothing:
For he, that he trowed most of ane,
His dead hes fully vndertane.
None may betraise tittar than he,
That man introwes into lawtie.
The King in him traisted: for thy,
He had fulfilled his felony,
Were not the King through Gods grace,
Got warning how his purpose was:
And how, and for how meekle land,
He took his slaughter upon hand.
I wate not who the warning made:
But in all time sik hap he had:
That when men shupe him to betrayse,
He got witting thereof always:
And money a time as I heard say
Through women that him loved ay:
That would tell all that they might hear,
And so may fall that it did here,
But how so ever it fell pardie,
I trow he sall the warrer be.
Yet not for thy the Traitor ay,
Had in his thought both night and day:
How he might best bring to ending,
His treasonable undertaking.
Till he bethought him at the last:
And in his mind can vmbecast,
That the King had in custom ay,
For to rise airlie every day:
And pass well far from his Menyie:
UUhen he would pass to the Prinie,
And seek a covert him alone,
And at the most had with him one.
There thought he with his sons two,
For to supprise the King, and sla:
And syne wend to the UUood their way:
But yet of purpose failyied they.
And for this cause came all three,
Into the covert that was privy:
UUhere that the King was wont to ga,
His privy needs for to ma.
There hid they them till his coming,
And the King airlie in the morning
Raise, when that his liking was,
And right toward the Covert gaes:
UUhere lying were the Traitors three,
For to do there his priuitie.
To treasoun then he took no heed:
But he was wont where ever he yeed,
His sword about his halse to bear:
And that auailde him greatly there.
For had not GOD all things weildand:
Sik help set in his own hand,
He had been dead withoutten dread:
A chamber Page then with him yeed:
And so withoutten fellows mo.
Toward the Covert can he go.
Now but GOD help the Noble King,
He is near brought to his ending.
For that Covert that he yeed till,
Was on the other side of the hill:
That none of his men might him see:
Thitherward went his Page and he.
And when he commen was in the Shaw,
He saw the three coming on raw,
Against him full sturdelie.
Then to his boy he said, in hie,
Yone men will slay us, if they may.
What weapons have thou? ah Sir, perfay
I have a bow, but and a wyre.
Give me them smertlie, he said, ah Sir,
UUhat will ye then that I sall do?
Stand on far, and behold us to.
If thou me sees above to be,
Thou salt have weapons great plenty,
And if I die, withdraw thee soon:
And with the sword withoutten hone,
He took the bow out of his hand,
For the Traitors were near cummand.
The Father had a sword but maire:
The other both sword and handare bare:
The third a sword had, and a spear.
The King perceived by their affeere,
That all was sooth, men to him told,
Traitor (he said) thou hes me fold:
Come thou no further, but hold thee there,
I will thou come no furthermare.
Ah Sir, bethink you then said he,
How near that I sold to you be.
UUho sold come nearer you then I?
The King said, I will sikkerlie,
At this time that thou come not near,
Thou may say what thou will on feere,
But he with false words fleeching,
With his two sons was near coming.
UUhen the King saw he would not let,
But ay came on with fleeching falset:
He takes the wyre and lets it flee,
And hit the Father right in the eye:
UUhile that it in the harnes ran,
And he backward fell down right than.
The brother that the hand axe bare,
That saw his father felled there.
A gird right to the King can make,
And with the axe can him overtake.
But he that had his sword on hight
Raught him sik routes in ran down right:
That he the head to harnes claue,
And dead down to the eird him drove.
The other brother that the spear bare,
Saw his brother was fallen there:
UUith the spear as an angry man,
In a race to the King he ran.
But the King that him dred some thing,
Waited the spear at the coming:
And with a wiske the head off struck.
And ere the other had coming to take
His sword, the King sik swak him gave,
That he his head to the harnes claue:
He rushed down of blood all red:
And when the King saw they were dead,
All three lying, he wipes his brand.
With that his boy came fast rinnand.
And said, Our Lord mot loved be,
That granted you might and poustie,
To fell the felony and the pride,
Of their three in so little tide.
The King said, So our Lord me see
They had been worthy men all three,
Had they not been full of treasoun,
But that made their confusioun.
The King is went to his ludging,
And of this deed came some tithing:
To Sir Ingrame of Vmfrawile:
That thought his subtlety, and gyle
Had all failyied in that place.
Therefore he so annoyed was,
That he again to Lochmabane,
To Sir Aymer his way is gane,
And to him told all hail the case,
But he thereof sore wondered hes.
How any man so suddenly,
Might do so greit a Cheualry,
As did the King, that him allane,
Uengeance of the three Traitors hes taken,
And said, Now may men well pardie
Wit that it is all in certainetie,
That Ure aye helps the hardy men,
As by this dead we may well ken,
Were he not so outrageous hardy,
He had not so vnabasedly:
And so smertly done his auantage.
I dread that his greit vassalage,
And his greit travel bring to end,
The thing that men full little wend.
Sik speaking made they of the King,
That they withoutten Sojourning.
Trauelde in Carrik here and there,
His men from him so skailled were.
To purchase their necessity,
And als the Country for to see,
That they left not with him sixty,
And when the Gallowayes wiste surely,
That he was with so few Menyie.
They made a privy assembly,
Of well two hunder men and ma:
And a slooth-Hound can with them ta.
For they thought him for to supprise:
And if he fled in any wise,
To follow him with Hounds so,
That he should no wise pass them fro:
They shupe them in ane Evening,
To supprise suddenly the King,
And to him held they straight the way:
But he that had his Watches ay,
On ilke side: of their coming,
Long ere they came had sure witting,
And how feill folk that they might be,
Therefore he thought with his Menyie,
To withdraw him out of that place,
For the night near hand fallen was,
And for the Night he thought that they,
Should not have sight to hold the way:
That he were past with his Menie,
And as he thought, right so did he,
And went him down to a Marace,
On a Water that rinning was:
And in a Boge he found a place,
Was strait, and well two Bow-drawght was,
From that watter they passed had,
He said, here may we make abade:
And rest you all a while and ly,
I will go wait all privily,
If I hear ought of their coming:
And if I hear of any thing,
I shall gare warn you, so that ye,
At your aduantag ay shall be.
How he discomfist him allane, Two hunder, and slew fifteen certain.
THe King now taks his gate to go,
And with him took servants two,
And Sir Gilbert de la Hay left he
There, for to rest with his Menie.
To the Water he came in hy,
And harkened full tentfully,
If he might hear of their coming,
But yet then might he hear nothing,
Endlang the water then yeed he,
On either side greit quantity,
And saw the braes high standing,
The Water how through slyke rinning:
And fand no Foord, that men might pass,
But where himself ouerpassed was.
And so strait was the vpcomming,
That two men might scarce through it thring,
Nor on no manner might guide them so,
That they together long might go.
And when he long time had been there,
He hearkened and heard as horsemen were
And Hounds whilssilling upon feer,
That aye he thought came near and near
He stood still for to hearken maire:
And aye the longer he stood there,
He heard it near and near command:
But he thought he would still yet stand,
While that he heard more takinning,
Then for a Hounds whissilling,
He would not waken his Menyie.
Therefore he would abide, and see,
What folk they were: and whether they
Held toward him the right way:
Or past another gaite far by,
The Moon was shining right clearly:
So long he stood, that he might hear,
The noise of them that commen were,
Then his two men in hy sent he,
To waken and warn his Menyie,
And they are forth their ways gone:
And he left still there him alone,
And so long stood he hearkenand,
While that he saw come at his hand,
The haill rout in full greit hy,
Then he bethought him hastily,
If he held toward his Menyie,
That ere he might repaired be:
They should be past the foorde ilkane,
And then behooved to choose him ane
Of these two: outher flee, or die,
But his heart that was stout and hie,
Counseld him alone to bide:
And keep them at the Foordes side,
And defend well the vpcomming,
Sen he was garnisht with arming.
That he their arrows should not dreed.
And if he were of greit manheede:
He might astoney them ilkane,
Sen they could come but ane and ane,
He did right as his heart him bade:
For manheed, strength and courage he had
When he so stoutly him allane,
For little strength of earth hes taken:
To feght with two hunder or more,
Therewith he to the Foord can go:
And they upon the other party,
That saw him stand allanerlie,
Thringing in the Water rade,
For of him little doubt they had,
And came to him in full great hy:
He smote the first so rigorously,
With his Sword that sharply share,
While he down to the eird him bare,
The laue came on in a randoun:
But his Horse that was borne down,
Cumbred them the vpgang to ta,
And when the King saw it was sa,
He stikked the Horse* and he can fling,
And syne fell in the vpcomming.
The laue with that came with a shout,
And he that stalward was and stout,
Met them right stoutly at the bra,
And so good payment can them ma,
That fiuesome in the Foord he slew.
The laue then some deill them withdrew,
That dred his strakes wonder sair:
For he in nothing them forbear.
Then said ane, Certes we are to blame:
What shall we say when we come hame,
When one man feghts against us all,
When saw men ever sik foully fall,
As us, if we it thus gate leave?
With that all haill a shout they gave.
And cried: on him, he may not last.
With that they preassed on him so fast,
That had he not the better been,
He had been dead withoutten wene.
But he so great defense can make:
That where he hit with even struck,
There might no thing against him stand.
In little space he left lyand
So feill that the vpgang was then,
Ditted with slain horse, and men.
So that his foes for that stopping,
Might not come to the vpcomming.
Ah dear GOD, who had been by,
And seen how he so hardely,
Addressed him against them all:
I wate well that they sold him call,
The best that lived in his day:
And if that I the sooth would say,
I heard never in no time gone,
One stint so money him allone.
Example how Tydeus slew forty nine men, And the Lieuetena^t thold shame and
pain.
Even like when that Achilles,
Fra his brother Polynices,
UUas sent to Thebes in message,
To ask wholly the heritage
Of Thebes, to hold it for a year:
Two twynnes of one both they were.
They straue: for either King would be.
But the Barnage of that Country,
Gart them assent on that manner,
That the one sold be King one year,
And the other with his Menyie,
Sold not be found in that Country,
While the first brother reigning were.
Syne sold the other reign ane year,
And then the first sold leave the land,
While that the other were reignand.
Thus ay one year sold reign the one,
The other one year, when that were gone.
To ask holding of this assent,
UUas Tydeus to Thebes sent:
And so spoke for Polynices,
That of Thebes Eteocles,
Bad his Constable with him ta,
Men armed well, and so forth ga:
To meet Tydeus in the way:
And sla him but longer delay.
The Constable his way is gane,
And nine and forty hes with him taken:
So that he* with them made fifty,
Into the Evening privily,
They set a bushment in the way,
UUhere that Tydeus behoou'd to ga,
Betwixt an hie Craig and the Sea.
And he, that of their Mauitie
UUist nothing: his way hes taken,
And toward Greece again is gane,
And as he rode into the night,
So saw he with the Moons light,
Shining of shields great plenty:
And had wonder what it might be.
With that all haill they gave a cry:
And he that heard so suddenly
Sik noise, some deill affrayed was:
But in short time he to him taes
His spreits full hardly:
For his gentle heart and worthy,
Assured him into that need:
That with spurs he struck the Steed,
And rushed in among them all.
The first he met he gart him fall,
And syne his sword he swapped out,
And raught about him money a rout:
And slew sexsome well soon or ma
Then under him his horse they sla:
And he fell: but he smertlie raise,
Stryking about him rowme he mais,
And slew of them a quantity.
But wounded wonder sore was he.
With that a little rod he fand,
Up toward the craig strykand:
Hither he went in full great hie,
Defending him right doughtelie:
While in the craig he clam somedeill,
And found a place enclosed well:
Where none but one might him assaill.
There stood he* and gave them battle,
And they assailyied him ilkone:
And often syes when that he slew one,
As he down to the eird did drive:
He would bear down well four or five.
There stood he, and defended so,
While he had slain the half and mo.
A great stone then by him saw he:
That through the great mauitie,
Was lowsed ready for to fall.
And when he saw them coming all,
He tumbled down on them the stane,
And eight men therewith has he slain.
And so astoneyed the remnand,
That they were near all reteerand.
Then would he prison hold no maire.
But on them ran with sword all baire:
And hewed and slew with all his maine,
While he had nine and forty slain,
The Constable syne can he ta,
And gart him swear that he should ga:
To King Eteocles, and tell,
The auentures that them befell:
TYDEVS bare him doughtelie,
That overcame him allane fifty.
Ye that this reads, judge ye,
Whether that more should praised be:
The King that with his auisement
Under took sik hardement?
As to stynt him allone but fear,
The folk that fully two hundredth were,
Or Tydeus that suddenly
Fra they had raised on him the cry,
Through hardement that they had taken,
Wan fifty men all him alane?
They did their deed both in their night,
And faught both with the Moons light,
But the King he discomfit ma,
And Tydeous the ma can sla.
Now deem ye whidder more loving
Should Tydeus have or the doughtie King
IN this manner as I have told,
The King that stark was stout and bold
Was feghting on the Foordes side,
Giving and taking routes red:
While he sik martyrdom had made,
That he the Foord all stopped had:
That none of them might to him ride,
Then thought they folly for to bide,
And haillelie the flight can ta,
And went homeward where they came fra.
Then the Kings men with the cry,
Wakned, and full frayedlie,
Came for to seek the Lord the King,
The Galloway men heard their coming
They fled* and durst no longer bide,
The Kings men that dreading were that tide,
For their King full speedily,
Came to the Foorde: and syne in hy
They found the King sitting allane,
And had his Basnet off taken,
To take the air: for he was heat,
Then speered they at him his state:
And he told them all haill the case,
And how that he assailyied was.
And how that GOD him helped so,
That he escaped haill them fro:
Then looked they how feill were dead:
And they found lying in that stead,
Fifteen that was slain with his hand,
Then loved they fast God all weildand,
That they their Lord fand haill and feir,
And said* they would in no manner
Dread their foes* sen their Chiftane
Was of sic heart and of sik mane:
That for them had vndertane,
With so feill folk to feght allane.
SIk Words spoke they of the King,
And of his hie undertaking,
They ferlied and yarned him to see,
That wont was often with him to be
Ah, how worship is a perfect thing,
Worship makes men to have loving,
^f it be followed worthelie,
But pryse, and worship not for thy,
^s hard to win but great travel,
Often to defend, and often assail,
And to be in their deeds wise,
Garres men of worship win the prise.
There may no man have wo^thheed,
But he have wit to steer the deed:
And see what is to live or ta,
Worship extremities hes two,
Fool hardement the formest is,
And the other is Cowardice.
And they are both to forsake.
Fool hardement all will overtake:
As well things to leave as ta,
But Cowardice does nothing sa,
But utterly forsakes all.
And that were wonder for to fall,
Were not wanting of discretion:
For thy hes worship sik renown,
That it is mid betwixt the two,
And takes that it will vnta:
And leaves that is to leave. For i^
Hes so greit garnishing with wit,
That it all perils well can see:
And all auantage that may be.
It would to hardement hold holy.
With thy away were the folly,
For Hardement with folly is,
But Hardement that melled is
With wit, is worship aye, pardie,
For but wit worship cannot be.
THis Noble King that we of read,
Melled all time Wit with Manheed,
That may men by his mellie see,
His Wit shewde him the strait entry
Of the Foord, and the ishing alswa,
That him thought was hard to ta,
Upon a time that was worthy.
Therefore his hardement hastily
Thought well, it might be vndertane,
Sen atanes him might assail but ane,
Thus hardiness gouernde with wit,
That he in all time together knite,
Gart him of worship win the prise,
And often overcame his enemies.
How James of Douglas with a train, Slew Thriswaile, and his men of maine.
THe King in Carrik dwelt then still,
His men assembled fast him till,
That in the Land were traveling,
When they of this deed heard tything,
Then thought they well with him to ta.
Their hap, that sik defense can ma.
But yet then James of Douglas
In Dowglasdaile dwelling was,
Or else well nee^e hand thereby,
In hiddles some deill privily.
For he would see his governing,
That had the Castle in keeping,
And gart make money jeopardie,
To see if he would ishe blythly,
When he perceived well, that he
Would ishe blythly with his Menie,
He made a gaddering privily,
Of them that were of his party:
That were so fell, that they durst fight
UUith Thriswaile, and all his haill might
Of them that in the Castle were,
He shupe in one night for to fare
To Sandylands, and near thereby,
He him embushed privily:
And sent a few a train to ma,
That soon in the morning can ta
Cattle, that were the Castle by.
And syne withdrew them hastily
Toward them that embushed were.
Then Thriswaile withoutten maire
Gart arm his men withoutten bade,
And ished with all the men he had:
And followed fast after the Ky.
He was armed at point cleanly,
Outtaken that his head was bare.
Then with the men that with him were,
The Cattle followed he good speed.
Right as a man that had no dread,
UUhile that he of them got a sight,
Then pricked they with all their might:
Following them out of array:
They sped them fleeing, while that they
The bushment by some deill were past:
And Thryswaile chased them right fas^.
And then they that embushed were,
Rushed on them both less and more:
And raised suddenly the cry,
And they that saw so suddenly.
That folk came egerly prickand,
Betwixt them, and their warrant:
Then were they in full great effray:
And for they were out of array.
Some of them fled, and some abade
And Douglas that there with him had.
A great Menyie, full egerlie
Assailyied, and skailled them hastily.
And in short time them cumbred so,
That well near none escaped them fro.
Thriswaill that was their capitane,
Was there into the Bargane slain:
And of his men the most party.
The laue fled full effrayedlie,
Douglas Menyie fast can chase:
And the fleears their ways gaes.
To the Castle in full great hie:
The formest entered speedily:
But the chasers sped them so fast:
That they ouertooke some at the last,
And them without mercy can sla.
And when they of the Castle swa
Saw them sla of their men them by:
They closed the ets hastily,
And in hy to the walls ran,
James of Douglas Menyie than
Seized well hastily in hand,
All that they about the Castle fand
To their resset: syne went their way,
Thus Thriswaile ished to that essay.
When Thriswaile upon this maneere
Had ished, as I tell you here:
James of Douglas and his men
Busked them altogidder then,
And went their way toward the King
In great hy: for they heard tything,
That of Wallance Sir Aymery
With a full greit Cheualry,
Both of English, and of Scotishmen,
With greit felony were ready then
Assembled for to seek the King,
That was that time with his gaddering,
In Cummok, where it straitest was,
Hidder went James of Douglas,
And was right welcome to the King,
And when he told had that tithing,
How that Sir Aymer was command,
For to hunt him out of the Land,
With Hounds and Horn, right as he were
A Wolf, or else a theifes feere.
Then said the King, It may well fall,
Though he come and his power all,
We shall abide in this Country,
And if he comes, we shall him see,
The King then spoke on this manner,
And of Wallance then Sir, Aymer,
Assembled a greit company,
Of Noble men and right worthy,
Of England and of Louthiane:
And he hes also with him taken,
John of Lorne, and all his might,
That had of worthy men and wight
With him aught hunder, and ma,
A Slooth-hound had he there alswa
So good that change would for nothing,
And some men says yet, that the King,
As a traitor him nourisht had,
And aye so meekle of him made:
That his own hands would him feed,
He followed him where ever he yeede:
So that the Hound him loved sa,
Through him he thought the King to ta:
For he wist that he loved him sa,
That he would pass no ways him fra.
But how that John of Lorne him had,
I heard never no mention made:
But men said, it was certain thing,
That he had him in his leading,
And through him thought the King to ta:
For he wist that he loved him sa,
That fra that he might ones feel
The Kings Sent* he wist right well,
That he would change it for nothing.
This John of Lorne hated the King,
For Sir Cumyng his Emes sake:
Might he him outher sla or take,
He would not prise his life a stra:
But if he vengeance might of him ta.
How Sir Aymer and John of Lo^ne, Chased the King with Hound and horn.
THis Wardane then Sir Aymery
UUith John of Lorne in company:
And other of great renoun alswa:
Sir Thomas Randell was one of tha,
Came in Cumnok to seek the King.
That was well war of their coming:
And was up in the strengths then,
And with him well three hundredth men,
His brother that time with him was,
And als Sir James of Douglas.
Sir Aymers xout there they saw,
That held the Plains and the Law,
And in haill battle was arrayed,
The King that no supposing had,
That they were more then he saw there:
To them, and nouther else where
Had eye: and wrought vnwittily.
For John of Lorne full craftily,
Behind thought to supprise the King,
Therefore with all his gaddering,
About an Hill he held his way,
And held him into Covert aye,
While he so near came to the King,
Ere he perceived his coming,
That he was at his hand well near.
The other Host, and Sir Aymer,
Preassed upon the other party,
The King was in greit ieopardy,
That was on either side beset
With foes, that to sla him thret.
And the least party of the two,
Was starker than the other two,
And when he saw them preasse him to,
He thought in hy what was to do.
He said Lordings we have no might,
At this time for to stand in fight.
Therefore depart we us in three,
So shall we not all sailyied be,
And in three parts hold on your way,
Syne to his Menyie can he say,
Betwixt them into priuitie,
In what steed their repair should be.
With that their gate all are they gane,
And in three parts their way have taken,
John of Lorne came to the place,
Wherefra the King departed was.
And in his trace the Hound is set,
That then withoutten longer let,
Held even the way after the King,
Right as he had of him knowing.
And left the other parties two,
As he no Keep would to them ta
And when the King saw his coming,
After his rout into a ling:
He thought he knew that it was he,
Therefore he said to his Menyie,
Ye then in three depart you soon,
And they did so withoutten hone:
And held their ways in three parties.
The Hound did there so greit Maistresse,
That he held aye without changing,
After the rout where was the King.
ANd when the King hes seen them so,
All in ane rout after him go
The way, and followed not his men,
He had a greit perceiving then,
That they knew him, for thy in hy,
He bad his men right hastily
Skaill, and ilke man hold his way
Right by him: and so did they
By themself and sundry gates are gane:
And the King hes with him taken
A Foster-brother withoutten ma,
And togedder held their gate they two,
The Hound always followed the King,
And changed not for no parting,
But ay followed the Kings trace,
But wavering, as he passed was.
And when that John of Lorne saw
The Hound so fast after him draw,
And followed fast after them two:
He knew the King was one of tha,
And bade five of his company,
That were right wight men and hardy:
And als of foot the speediest were,
That they might find among them there:
Run after him, and him ouerta:
And let him no wise escape you fra.
And fra they have heard his bidding,
They held their way after the King,
And followed him so speedily,
That they well soon can him ouerhy,
How the King slew the five men, That John of Lorne sent to him then.
THE King that saw them coming weere,
Was annoyed in great manner.
For he thought, if they were hardy,
They might him travel, and tarry,
And hold him still so tariand,
While the remnant were at hand.
But had he dred but anerly
They five, I trow full sikkerly,
He should not have full meekle dreed:
And to his Fellow as he yeede:
He said, their five are fast cummand,
They are well near now at our hand.
Say, Is there any help in thee?
For we shall soon assailyied be.
Yea Sir (he said) all that I may,
Thou says well, said the King perfay:
I see them coming to us near,
I will no farther, but right here
Abide while I am into aynd,
And see what force that they will faynd.
The King then stood full sturdelie:
And the five men in full greit hy,
Came with greit shore and manassing.
And three of them went to the King,
And to his man the other two,
With Swords in Hand can stoutly go.
The King met them that to him sought,
And to the first sik rout he rought,
The Ear and Cheek down to the halse,
He share off, and the shoulders als,
He rushed down, all desily,
The two that saw so suddenly
Their Fellow fell: effrayed were,
And start a little backermare.
The King with that blenked him by,
And saw the two men sturdely,
Against his men sik mellie ma,
With that he left his own two,
And to them that fought with his man,
A loupe right lightly made he than,
And smote the Head quite off the one,
To his own two syne is he gone,
That came on him right sturdely:
He met the first so egerly,
That with the sword that sharply share
The arms he from the body bare,
What strakes they gave I cannot tell,
But to the King so sore befell.
That though he travel had and pain,
He of his foes four hes he slain.
His Foster-brother after soon,
The fist hes out of his days doom.
And when the King saw that all fife,
UUas on this wise brought out of life,
To his fellow can he say:
Thou hes helped right well perfay.
It likes you to say so (quod he)
But over great part to you took ye:
Ye slew four of the five alone.
The King said, as the glee is gone,
Better than thou I might it do:
For I had more leisure thereto.
The two fellows that dealt with thee,
UUhen they me saw assembled with three,
Of me right no kin doubt they had:
For they weind I was straightly stad.
And for thy that they dred me naught,
Noy them more than thou I moght,
But let us thank GOD of his grace,
That fra our foes us delivered hes:
UUith that the King looked him by,
And saw of Lorne the company,
Well near with their sloothhound cu^mand
Then to a UUood that was near hand
He went; with his fellow in hy,
GOD save them for his great mercy.
How the King escaped fra his faes, And how the sloothhound slain was.
THE King toward the Wood is gane,
Weary for sweit, and will of wane.
Into the Wood soon entered he,
And held down toward a vaillie,
Wherethrough the Wood a water ran:
Hidder in great hy went he than,
And begouth for to rest him there:
And said, he might no further fare.
His man said, Sir, that may not be:
Bide ye ought long, ye sall soon see
Five hunder yarning you to sla,
And that is money against us two.
And sen we may not deal with might:
We man help that we may with slight.
The King said, sen that thou will so,
Go forth, and I sall with thee go:
But I have heard often times say,
That who endlong a Water ay,
Would w^^de a bowdraught, he sold gar
Both the ^^^thhound and his leidar,
Tyne the Sent that men gart them ta,
Prove (...) i^ it will now do swa.
For (...) deuilish Hound away:
I rek (...) all the ^e^ue perfay.
As he devised so have they done,
And entered in the UUater soon:
And held down endland it their way,
And syne unto the Land yeede they,
And held their way as they did air,
And John of Lorne with greit effeere
Came with his rout right to the place,
Where that his five men slain was,
He meened them When he them saw:
And after said, in a little thraw,
That he should soon revenge their dead,
But otherwise the gaming yeede,
There would he make no more dwelling,
But forth in hy followed the King.
Right to the Burn they passed were,
But the Slooth-hound made stinting there:
And wauered long time to and fro,
That he no certain gate could go.
UUhile at the last that John of Lorne
Perceived the Hound the Sent had forne:
And said: we have tint this travail,
To pass further may not avail:
For the Wood is both long and wide,
And he is far forth by this tide,
Therefore is good we turn again,
And wast no more travel in vain.
With that resyed he his Menyie,
And his way to the Oist took he.
THus escaped the Noble King:
But some men says, his escaping,
Upon another manner fell*
Then through the waiding, as they tell,
That the King a good Archer had.
And when he saw his Lord so stad:
That he was left so anerly.
He ran on side always him by,
While he into the Wood was gone.
Then said he to himself allone:
That he right there a rest would ma,
To look if he the Hound might sla:
For if the Hound might last on live,
He wist, right well that they might drive
The Kings trace, while they him ta:
And he wist well they would him sla.
And for he would his Lord succor,
He put his life in auentour:
And sat into a bush kneeland,
While that the Hound came to his hand,
And with an arrow soon him slew:
And to the Wood syne him withdrew,
But whether his escaping fell,
As I told first, or I now tell:
I wate not, but without leesing,
At that Burn escaped the King.
What manner that the thieues three, Made to the King slight lawtie.
THE King is forth his ways taken,
And John of Lorne again is gane,
To Sir Aymer, that fra that chase
UUith his Menyie repaired was:
That sped but little in their chasing.
And thought that they made following
Full egerlie, they wan but small:
Their foes were escaped all.
Men says, Sir Thomas Randell than
Chasing, the Kings banner wan:
Wherethrough in England with the King
He had great prise, and hie loving.
UUhen the chasers relied were,
And John of Lorne had met them there*
He told Sir Aymer all the case,
How that the King escaped was:
And how that he his five men slew,
And to the UUood syne he him drew.
UUhen Sir Aymer heard tell in hy,
He sained him for this ferly:
And said, he is greatly to praise,
I know none living in their days:
That at mischief can help him sa.
I trow he sall be hard to ta,
And he were bodin euenlie,
On this wise spoke Sir Aymerie,
And the good King held forth his way,
Betwixt him and his men, while they
Passed out through the Forest were:
Then in a Moore they entered are,
That was both hie, long and brad,
And by the half they passed had,
They saw on side three men cummand:
Like to light men, and wauerand,
Swords they had, and axes als,
And one of them about his Hals,
A meekle bound in Wedder bare,
They met the King, and hailsed him fair,
The King again them hailsed yald,
And asked them whether they wald?
They said, Robert the Bruce they sought,
To meet with him, if that they might,
Their Man-rent to him would they ma,
The King said, If that you will swa*
Hold forth your ways now with me,
And I shall gar you soon him see.
They perceived by his speaking,
And his effeeres* he was the King,
They changed countenance, and late,
And held not in the first estate:
For they were foes to the King,
And thought to come into talking:
And dwell with him* while that they saw
Their point, and bring him out of daw,
They granted to his Speak for thy,
But the King that was aye witty,
Perceived well by their having,
That they love him well nothing.
He said, Felloews ye must all three,
(Farther acquanted while that we be)
All by your self before us go,
And on the samine wise we two
Shall follow you behind well near,
Sir (said they) it is no misteere
To trow into us any ill.
None do I (said he) but I will
Ye go before us a little way,
Better with other known while we be,
We grant (they said) sen ye will so,
And forth upon their gate they go.
The slaying of the Thieues three, And how the King his death was nie.
THus yeed they while the night was near,
And then the formest commed were,
To a waste Husband House, and there
They slew the Wedder that they bare:
And struck fire for to make their meat,
And asked the King if he would eat,
And rest him while the meat were dight:
The King that hungry was, I hight,
Assented to their speech in hy,
But he said, he would alanerly
Betwixt him and his Fellow be
At a fire, and they all three,
In the end of the House should ma
Another fire, and they did swa,
They drew them to the House end,
And half the Wadder to them send:
And they roasted in hy their meat,
And fell right freshlie it to eat:
For the King right long fasted had,
And had full meekle travel made:
Therefore he ate full egerly,
And when he eaten had hastily,
He had to sleep so meekle will,
What he might make no let theretill,
For when the Ueines filled are,
The body is heavy euermare,
And to sleep draws heaviness,
The King that all fortrauelde was,
To his Foster brother says,
Certes, me behooues to sleep need ways.
Say, may I trust thee me to wake,
While I a little sleeping take.
Yes Sir (he said) while I may dree,
The King then winked a little wi^,
And slept, but not right inkerlie,
And glifned up often suddenly,
For he had dred of the three men,
That at the other fire were then:
That they his foes were well he wist,
Therefore he sleeped as foul on twist*
The King sleeped but little than.
While sik a sleep fell on his man.
That he might not hold up his eye,
But fell on sleep and snored hie.
Now is the King in greit peril:
For sleep he so a little while,
He shall be dead withoutten dread,
For the three tratours took good heed,
That he on sleep was, and his man,
In full greit hy they gate up than,
And drew their Swords full hastily,
And went toward the King in hy,
And sleeping thought him for to sla,
And his Foster brother alswa.
To him they yeed a full greit pace,
But in that time, through Gods grace,
The King up blenked suddenly,
And saw his man sleeping him by:
And saw coming the Traitors three,
Deliuerlie on foot start he:
And drew his sword, and syne them met,
And as he yeed his foot he set,
Upon his man right heavily,
He wakned and rose desily,
For the sleep mastered him sa,
That ere he gate up, ane of tha,
That came up for to sla the King,
Gave him a straike in his rising,
That he might help himself no maire
The King so straightly stad was there,
That he was never yet so stad,
Were not the arming that he hade,
He had been dead withoutten weere,
Yet noughthelesse on this maneere,
GOD helped him so in that bargane,
That the three traitors hes he slain,
Through Gods grace, and his manheed,
His Foster brother there was dead,
Then was he wonder will of wane,
When he saw he was left allane,
His Foster-brother sore meened he,
And waried all the other three,
And syne his way took him alone,
And is toward his tryst then gone,
The King went forth right wrathfully
Meenand his man full tenderly,
And held his way all him alone,
And right toward the House is gone,
Where he set tryst to meet his men.
It was well near the night by then,
He came soon in the House and land,
The House-wife on the Benke sittand,
She asked him soon what he was,
And whence he came, and whether he gas?
A traveling man good Dame (said he)
That trauells here through the Country,
She said, all traveling men here
For anes sake more welcome are.
The King said, Good Dame what is he?
That garres you have sik specialtie
To men that trauells? Sir perfay,
(Quoth the Goodwife) I will you say.
The King Robert the Bruce is he,
Whilke is right Lord of this Country,
His foes now holds him in thrang,
But I think to see ere it be long,
Him Lord and King over all this Land,
When that no foes shall him withstand,
Dame love ye him so well, said he?
Yea Sir (she said) so GOD me sie*
Dame (he said) lo him here the by:
For I am he, I say thee soothfastly,
Ah, Sir (she said) and where are gone
Your men, that ye are thus alone,
At this time, Dame, I have na ma,
(She said) it may no wise be sa,
I have two Sons wight and hardy,
They shall become your men in hy.
As she devised so have they done,
His sworn men became they soon,
The Goodwife gart him sit and eat*
But he sat short while at the meat.
UUhen that he heard great stamping,
About the house: then but leesing,
They stert up the house for to defend:
But soon after the King hes kend
James of Douglas: then was he blyth,
And bade open the doors swyth:
And they came in all that they were,
Sir Edward his brother was there,
And James also of Douglas,
That was escaped fra the chase,
And with the Kings brother met:
Syne to the tryst that there was set,
They sped them with their company,
That was a hunder and fifty.
And when that they have seen the King,
They were joyful of that meeting:
And asked how he escaped was?
And he them told all haill the case:
How the five men him preassed fast,
And how he through the Water past,
And how he met the thieues three,
And how he sleeping slain sold be*
When he wakned through Gods grace,
And how his Foster brother was
Slain, he told them haillelie.
Then loved they GOD almighty,
That their Lord was escaped so.
Then spoke they words to and fro:
While at the last the King can say,
Fortoun hes traueld us fast this day,
That skailled us so suddenly.
Our foes this night traistlie lie:
For they trow we so skailled are,
And fled to warrant here and there,
That we sall not their days three,
All togidder assembled be.
Therefore this night they sall traistlie,
But UUatches take their ease and lie:
And this day they have done despite.
Therefore this night I would them quite:
UUherefore who knew their harberie:
And would come on them suddenly:
With few Menyie men might them skaith,
And yet escape withoutten waith.
Here tranoynted the Noble King, And to his faes made an affraying.
PErfay (quoth James of Douglas)
As I came hitherward by case,
I came so near the harberie,
That I can bring you where they lie:
And would ye speed you yet ere day
It might well happen that we may
Do them a greater skaith well soon,
Than they us all this day hes done:
For they lie skailled as them list,
Then thought they all it was the best,
To speed them to them hastily:
And they did so in full great hie,
And came on them in the dawing.
Right as the day begouth to spring,
So fell it that a company
Into a town had taken harbrie,
UUell fra the Oist a mile, or maire:
Men said, that they two hunder were.
There assembled the Noble King:
And soon after their assembling,
They that sleeping assailyied were,
Right hideouslie can cry and rear,
And other some that heard the cry,
Ran forth so right effrayedlie:
That some of them all naked were,
Fleeing to warrant here and there.
And some their Harness to them drew.
And they withoutten mercy them slew,
And so cruel vengeance can ta,
That the two part of them and ma,
Were slain into that samine stead,
And to their Host the remnand fled.
THe Oist then heard the noise and cry,
And saw their men so wretchedlie,
Come naked fleeing here and there,
Some all haill, some wounded sare,
Into full greit effray they rose,
And ilke man to his Baner goes:
So that the Oist was all on steer,
The King and they that with him were,
When they on steer the Oist saw so,
Toward their warrant can they go,
And there in sauitie came they,
And when Sir Aymer heard say,
Now that the King their men had slain.
And how they were turned again,
He said, Now may ye clearelie see,
That Noble heart where ever it be,
Is hard to over come with Mastrie,
For where an heart is right worthy,
Against Stoutnesse it is ay stout,
And as I trow there may no doubt,
Gar it all out discomfite be,
While body living is in poustie,
As by this melle may be seen:
We weind Robert the Bruce had been
So discomfite, that by good skill,
He should have neither heart nor will,
Sik jeopardie to under ^a,
For he was put at under sa.
That he was left all him alone,
And all his men were from him gone,
And he was so sore traveled,
To put them off that he assailyied:
That he should have yarned resting,
More than feghting and traveling,
But his heart full is of bounty,
So that it vanquished may not be.
IN this wise spoke Sir Aymery,
And when they of his company
Saw that they trauelde had in vain:
And how the King their men had slain
That at his larges was then all free,
Them thought it was but Nicitie,
For to make there longer dwelling,
Sen they might not annoy the King,
And then said Sir Aymery,
That vnbethought him hastily:
That he to Carlisle then would ga,
And there a while so journey ma:
And leave his spies on the King,
To know always his contening,
And when that he his time might see.
He thought that with a greit Menyie,
He should set on them suddenly,
Therefore with all his company,
To England he his way hes taken.
And ilk man to his House is gane.
A while to Carlyle went is he,
And therein thinked for to be,
While he his time saw of the King,
That then with all his gaddering,
Was in Carrik as he was wount,
And would wend with his men to hunt.
How the King and his Hounds two, Three men in the Wood can sla.
SO happened it upon a day,
He went to Hunt for to assay,
What gaming was in that Country,
So happned it that day when he
By a Wood side to a seat is gane.
With his two Hounds him allane,
But he his sword ay with him bare,
He had but short while sitten there,
When he faw from the Wood command,
Three men with bows in their hand,
That toward him came speedily,
And he perceived them in hy,
By their effeere and their hasting,
That they him loved no kind thing,
He raise up, and his Leech drew he,
And leet his Hounds gang all free,
GOD help the King now for his might:
For bot he both be wise and wight,
He shall be set in meekle preasse,
For tha three men withoutten lies,
They were his foes all verily,
And waited him ay busily,
To see when they might vengeance take
Of him: for Sir John Cumyngs sake,
And they thought then they leisure had.
And sen he him alone was stad.
They thought in hy they should him sla.
And if that they might cheuish sa,
That they might win the Wood again:
Fra that they had the good King slain.
His men they thought they should not dread.
In ire toward the King they yeed,
And bent their bows, when they were near.
And that he dred on greit maneere
Their arrows: for he naked was,
In hy a speech to them he mais:
And said, you aught to shame pardie,
Sen I am one and ye are three,
For to shoot at me upon feere.
But had you hardiment to come near,
And with your swords to essay.
Win me on sik wise if ye may,
Ye shall all out maire praised be,
Perfay, quoth one then of the three:
Shall no man say we doubt of thee sa,
That we with arrows shall thee sla,
With that their bows away they kest,
And came on fast but longer frist,
The King them met full hardly,
And smote the first so rigorously,
That he fell dead down on the green,
And when the Kings Hounds had seen,
Two men assailyie their Master sa,
They lap to one, and could him ta,
Right by the neck* full sturdely,
While top over tail they gart him ly,
And the King that his sword out had.
Saw the Hounds sik succors made.
Ere he that fallen had might up rise,
He him assailyied on sik a wise,
That he the back struck even in two,
The third that saw his fellow so,
Without recovering to be slain,
Took to the Wood his gate again,
But the King followed speedily,
And als the Hounds that were him by,
When they the man saw flee him fra,
Ran to him soon, and can him ta
Right by the neck while he him dreugh,
And the King that was near aneugh.
In his rising a straike him gave,
That stark dead to the eird him drove.
The Kings Menyie that were near
When that they saw on sik maneer,
The King assailyied so suddenly,
They sped them toward him in hy,
And asked how that case befell?
And he all haill it can them tell:
How they assailyied him all three.
Perfay (say they) we may well see
That it is hard to undertake,
Sik mellie with you for to make,
That so smer^lie hes slain three,
Withoutten hurt: Perfay (said he)
I slew but one withoutten ma.
GOD and mine Hounds hes slain two,
Their treason cumbred them perfay,
For right wight men all three were they.
WHen that the King through Gods grace,
On this manner escaped was,
He blew his Horn, and then in hy,
His good men can to him rely,
Then homeward buskde he him to fare:
For that day would he hunt no maire.
In Glentrolle a while he lay,
And went often times to hunt and play,
For to purchase them vennisoun:
For then the Deire were in season.
In all that time Sir Aimery,
With Noble men in company,
Lay in Carlisle his time to see.
And when he heard the certainetie,
That in Glentrolle was the King,
And went to hunt and to playing:
He thought then with his Cheualrie,
To come upon him suddenly,
And from Carlisle on nights ride,
And in Covert on days bide:
And thus gate with his tranoynting,
He thought for to supprise the King,
He assembled a great Menyie,
Of folk of full great Renounie,
Both of Scots and Englishmen,
Their way togidder held they then,
And rade on nights privily,
While they came to a Wood near by
Glentrolle: where lodged was the King,
That wist right noght of their coming:
Into great peril now is he.
For but GOD through his great bounty
Save him, he sall be slain or taken:
For they were sex where he was ane.
How the King with a few Menyie, Discomfite Sir Aymer in Glentrolle.
WHen Sir Aymer (as I have told)
With his men that were stout and bold,
Were coming so near the King that they
Were but a mile, fra him off way.
He took auisement with his men,
On what manner they sold do then.
For he said them that the King was
Ludged, into so strait a place,
That horsemen might him not assailyie:
And if footmen gave him battailyie,
He sold be hard to win, gif he
Might of their coming witted be,
Therefore I red all privily
UUe send a woman him to spy:
That poorly sall arrayed be.
She may ask meat for Charity,
And see their conueene haillelie.
Upon what manner that they lie,
And in that while we and our Menyie,
Coming out through the Wood may be,
On foot, all armed as we are.
May we do so, that we come there
On them, or they wit our coming,
UUe sall find in them no stynting,
This counsel thought they was the best:
Then send they forth but longer frist,
The woman that sold be their spy:
And she her way held forth in hy,
Right to the Ludging where was the King,
That had no dread of supprising:
For in Glentrolle was the King,
That was near brought to supprising,
Yeed unarmed, merry and blyth.
The woman hes he seen all swyth.
He saw her uncouth, and for thy
He beheld her more tentiuely:
And by her countenance him thought,
That for good commen was she naught.
Then gart he men in hy her ta:
And she that dred men sold her sla,
Told them now that Sir Aimery,
With the Clyffurde in company,
And the flower of Northumberland,
UUere coming on them at their hand.
WHen that the King heard that tything,
He armed him but more dwelling:
So did they all that with him were,
Syne in a sop assembled there.
I trow they were three hundredth near.
And when they all assembled were:
The King his banner gart display,
And set his men in good array.
But they standen had but a thraw,
Right at their hand when that they saw
Their foes through the Wood c^mmand,
Armed on foot, with spear in hand:
They sped them full enforcedlie,
The noise begeuth then and the cry:
For the good King that formest was
Stoutly toward his foes gaes:
And hynt out of a man's hand,
That near beside him was gangand.
A bow, and a brade arrow als,
And hit the formest in the hals,
While throppell and wessand yeed in two,
And he down to the eird can go.
The laue with that made a stinting,
And then but more the Noble King,
Hint from His Banerman his Baner,
And said, upon them: for they are
Discomfist all, and with that word,
He swapped smertlie out his Sword,
And on them ran so hardly,
That all they of his company,
Took hardement of his good deed.
And some that first their ways yeed,
Again came to the feght in hy,
And met their foes vigorouslie.
That all the formest rushed were,
And when they that were backer mair,
Saw that the formest left their steed,
They turned all their back and fled.
Out of the Wood they them with drew,
The King but few men of them slew,
For they right soon their gait can go,
For it discomforted them so,
That the King and his men was,
All armed to defend the place:
When they weind through their tranoynting,
To have winning without feghting,
That they effrayed were suddenly,
And he them sought so angerly,
That they in full greit by again
Out of the Wood can to the Plane:
For they failied of their intent.
They were that time so foully shent:
That fifteen hundredth men and ma.
With a few were rebuted sa:
That they withdrew them shamfullie,
Therefore among them suddenly.
Raise greit debate, and greit distance,
Ilkane with other of their mischance,
The Cliffurde and Vanis made a mellie,
Where Cliffurde raught him routes three
And either side drew to parties.
But Sir Aymer that was ay wise,
Departed them with meekle pain,
And went to England home again,
He wist, fra strife raise them among,
They should not hold togider long,
Without debate or more melle,
For thy to England turned he,
With more shame than he went off tou^,
When so money of sik Renoun,
Saw so few men bide them battle.
Where they right hardy were to assail.
How James of Douglas discomfite than, At Ederfoord Philip Mowbray with money
man,
THe King fra Sir Aymer was gane
Gathered his Menie euerilkane:
And left both Woods and Mountains,
And held the straight way of the Plains.
For he would fane that end were made
Of that, that he begunnen had.
And he wist well he could not bring
It to good end but traveling.
To Kyle first went he, and that land.
He made to him all obeysand.
And of Cuninghame the most party,
He gart yield to his Senourie.
In Bothwell then Sir Aymer was,
That in his heart greit anger ta^s,
For them of Cuninghame and Kill,
That were obeysand to his will.
And had left Englishmens fewtie,
Thereof fane venged would he be,
And sent there Philip the Mowbray
With a thousand (as I heard say)
That armed were in his leading,
In Kill, for to weirray the King,
But James of Douglas that all tide,
Had Spies out upon ilk side,
Wist of their coming: and that they
Would hold down Makyrnoks way.
He took with him all privily,
Them that were of his company,
That were sixty withoutten ma,
Syne in a strait place can they ga,
That is into Makyrnoks way,
The Nether Foord that heght perfay,
And lies betwixt Marraises two,
Where that none Horse on life may go,
On the South half where James was,
Is an vpgang, and a narrow place,
And on the North half is the way,
So ill, as it appears this day.
Douglas with them he with him had.
Embushed him, and there abade.
He might well far see their coming,
But they of him might see nothing.
They bade in bushment all that night.
And when the Sun was shinning bright.
They saw the battle come arrayed,
The Uangard with Banner displayed,
And soon after the remanand,
They saw well near behind cummand.
Then held they them still and privy,
While the foremost of their menyie,
Were entered in the Foorde them by,
Then shout they on them with a cry:
And with the weapons that sharply share.
Some in the Foord they backward bare:
And some with arrows were bleeded brad
Sik martyrdom on them they made:
That they can thraw to void the place.
But behind them so stopped was
The way: that they fast might not flee,
And that gart of them money die:
For they no wise might get away,
But as they came: except that they
Would through their foes hold their gate,
But that way thought they all to hate,
Their foes met them so sturdelie,
And continued the feght so hardely:
That they so dreeding were, that they,
The first might flee, fled fast away.
And when the Reeregard saw them so
Discomfite: and their ways fast go,
They fled on far, and held their way,
But Sir Philip the Mowbray,
That with the formest ryding way,
That entered was into that place,
When that he saw how he was stad,
Through the greit worship that he had.
With Spurs he struck the Steed of prise,
And maugre all his enemies
Through the thickest of them he rade,
And but taking escaped had,
Were not ane hynt him by the brand,
But the good Steed that would not stand,
He lanced forth deliueredlie,
But the other so stubburnelie
Held, while the belt brist from the brand
And sword, and belt left in his hand.
And he but sword his ways rade.
Well outwith them, and there abade,
Beholding how his Menyie fled:
And how his foes obteende the Steed.
That were betwixt him and his men:
Therefore he took his ways then,
To Kilmarnok and to KILWINNYNE
And to Ardrossen after syne:
And through the Larges him alane,
To En^^erkip the way hes taken,
Right to the Castle that well then,
Was stuffed all with Englishmen.
That him received in greit dainty.
And fra they wist what sort that he
So far had ridden him alane,
Through men that were his foes ilkane,
They praised him full gretumlie,
And loved meekle his Cheualrie,
Sir Philip thus escaped was?
And Douglas, that was in the place,
Where he sixty had slain, and ma,
The laue foulie their gate can ga,
And fled to Bothwell home again.
Whereof Sir Aymer was not fane:
When he heard tell on what manner.
That his Menyie discomfist were.
How the King under Lowdon hill, Discomfist Sir Aymer his power still.
WHen to King Robert he it told,
How that the Douglas that was so bold
Uanquisht so feill with so few Menyie.
Right glad into his heart was he:
And als his men comforted were:
For they thought well both less and mare,
They sold the less their foes dreede:
Sen their purpose so with them yeed.
The King then lay into Gastoun,
That is right even anent Lowdoun:
And to his peace took the Country.
When Sir Aymer, and his Menyie
Heard how he rioted all the land,
And how that none durst him withstand,
He was into his heart sorry,
And with one of his company,
He sent him word, and said, if he,
Durst him into the Plains see,
He sold on the tent day of May,
Come under Lowdoun hill always.
And gif that he would meet him there:
He said, his worship were the mare,
And more be turned to Noblene^^e,
To meet him in the Plain hard ways,
With hard dynts and even fighting,
Than for to do into stalking,
The King that heard his Messinger,
Had despite on a great manner,
That Sir Aymer spoke so proudly:
Therefore he answered angerlie.
And to the Messenger said he,
Say to thy Lord, gif that I be
In life: he sall me see that day
Well near, gif he ^are hold the way
That he hes said, for sikkerlie
At Lowdon hill meet him sall I.
The Messenger but more abade,
To his Master his ways rade.
And his answer told him all swyth:
That was no need to make him blyth:
For he thought through his meekle might,
Gif the King durst appear to fight:
That through the great Cheualrie,
That he sold lead his company,
He sold so overcome the King,
That there sold be no recovering:
And the King on the other party,
That was ay wise, and right witty,
Rade for to see, and choose the place:
And saw the hie gate lying was,
Near a fair field both fair and dry.
But upon other side there by,
Was a great Moss, meekle and brade:
And fra the way was that men rade,
A bow-draught well on other side.
But that place thought he all too wide,
To abide men that horsed were:
Therefore three dykes ouerthort he share,
From both the Mosses to the way:
That were so far from other, that they
Were even a bowdraught, or maire,
So holl, and hie tha dykes were,
That men might not but meekle pain
Pass them, though none were the^ again:
But sloppes in the way left he,
So large, and of sik quantity:
That five hundredth might togidder ride
In at the sloppes side for side.
There thought he battle for to bide,
And bargane them, for he no dread
Had, that they sold behind assail:
Nor yet on side give them battaill.
And before, he thought well that he
Sold from there might defended be.
Three deep dykes there gart he ma:
For gif he might not well ouerta
To meet them at the first: that he
Sold have the other at his poustie:
Or then the third, gif it fell so,
That they had past the other two.
On this wise ordained he:
And syne assembled his Menyie:
That wexe sex hundredth feghting men,
But Rangald that was with him then,
That were als feill, as he, or ma,
With all that Menyie can he ga:
The Even forow the field sold be,
To Lowdon Bog, where that he
Would abide to see their coming.
Syne with the men of his leading,
He thought to speed him, so that he
Sold at the dykes before them be.
SIr Aymer on the other party,
Gaddered so great Cheualrie:
That he was well three thousand near,
Armed and dight on good maneere.
And as a man of greet Noblay,
He held toward the tryst his way,
When the set day commen was,
He sped him fast toward the place,
That he had named for to fight.
The Sun was risen shining bright,
That blenked on the shields brade,
In battles two ordainde he had,
The folk that he had in his leading.
The King well soon in the morning,
Saw coming soon the first battle,
Arrayed seemly, and wonder well:
And at their back they saw cummand,
The other battle followand.
Their Basnets burnisht all were bright,
Against the Sun lemand of light.
Their spears, pennons, and their shields,
With light illuminate all the fields.
Their best and browdred bright Baners,
And horse hewed on seire manners:
And coat-armours, of seire colors:
And Hawbreekes that were white as flowers
Made them glittering, that they were like
To Angels hie of heavens Kinrike.
THE King said, Lordings, now ye see,
How yone men through their great poustie
Would if they might fulfill their will,
Sla us, and make sembland theretill.
And sen we know their fellonie,
Go we and meet them hardly,
That the stoutest of their Menyie,
Of our meeting abased be:
For gif the formest egerlie
Be met, ye sall see suddenly,
The hindmest full abased be,
And though they be far mo than we,
That should abase us little thing,
For when we come to the feghting,
There may meet us no more than we:
Therefore, Lordings, ilkane should be,
Of worship, and of greit valor,
For to maintain here our honor.
Think what worship us abides,
If that we may, as well betides.
Have victory of our foes here:
For there is no man far nor near,
In all this Land that we them doubt.
Then said they all that stood about,
Sir if GOD will, we shall so do,
That no reproof shall ly us to,
Now go we forth, then said the King,
And he that made of naught all thing,
Lead us, and save us for his might,
And help us for to hold our right.
With that they held their way in hy,
Well sex hundredth in company:
Stalward and stout, worthy and wight.
But they were all too few I hight,
Against so feill to stand in stour.
Were not their outrageous valor.
Now goes the Noble King his way
Right stoutly into good array,
And to the formest dykes is gane,
And in the slop the field hes taken,
The Carage men, and the pouerall,
That were no worth into battle,
Behind him leaued he all still,
Sitting together upon an Hill.
Sir Aymer the King hes seen,
With his men that were cant and keen,
Came to the Plain down from the Hill,
As him thought, into full good will,
For to defend or then assailyie,
If any man would come into battailie,
Therefore his men comforted he,
And bade them wight, and worthy be:
For if that they might win the King,
And have victory of that feghting,
They should greitly rewarded be,
And eke greitlie their Renounie,
With that they were right near the King,
And heard well often his manassing:
And gart trumpe up to the assembly,
With the formest of his Menyie,
They embraced to them shields brade,
And right syne together rade,
With heads stouping and spears straught,
Right to the King their way they raught.
That met them with so greit vigor,
That of the best and most valor.
Were laid at eird at their meeting,
Where men might hear sick a breaking
Of spears: that too frushed were,
And the wounded so cry and raire,
That it annoyous was to hear.
For they that first assembled were
Fonyeed, and faught full sturdely,
The noise begouth then, and the cry.
O mighty GOD who had there been,
And had the Kings worship seen,
And his brother that was him by,
That them contained so manfully.
That their good deed and their bounty,
Gave greit comfort to their Menyie.
And how the Douglas so manfully,
Comforted them that was him by,
He should well say, they had good will,
To win honor and come theretill,
The Kings men so worthy were,
That with their spears that sharply share,
They stiked men, and Steeds both:
While red blood ran of wounds raith,
The Horse that stikked were can fling,
And rushed the folk in their flinging.
So that they that foremost were,
Were stikked in sloppes here and there,
The King that saw them rushed so.
And saw them reilling to and fro,
Ran upon them so egerly,
And dang on them so hardely,
He feill gart of his foes fall.
The field well near was covered all,
Both with slain Horse, and with men,
For the good King that followed then,
With five hundredth with weapons bare,
That would nothing their foes spare,
They dang on them so hardely.
That in short time men might see ly,
At eird an hundredth well and maire,
The remnant well the weaker were,
Then they begouth them to withdraw.
And when they of the Reeregard saw,
Their Uangard be so discomfite,
They fled withoutten more respite,
And when Sir Aymer hes seen,
His men flying all bedeene,
Wit ye well he was full woe,
But he could not admonish so.
That any for him would turn again,
And when he saw he tint his pain,
He turned his bridle, and to go,
For the good King them preassed so,
For some were dead, and some were taken,
And all the laue their gate were gane.
THe folk fled on this manner
Withoutten rest: and Sir Aymer,
Again to Bothwell is he gane,
Meenand the skaith that he hes taken,
So Shamefullie that he vanquished was.
Then to England in hy he gaes.
Right to the King, and shamefullie,
He gave up all his Wardanerie:
Nor never syne for no kin thing,
But if he come right with the King,
Come he to weere into Scotland.
So heavy took he that in hand,
That the King into set battle:
With few folk like a Pouerall,
Uanquisht him with a greit Menyie.
That were renouned of greit bountis,
Sik anger had Sir Aymery:
And King Robert that was worthy,
Abade all still into the place,
While that his men had left the chase,
Syne with prisoners they had taken.
They are toward their Innes gane.
Fast loving GOD of their welfare:
He might have seen that had been there,
Folk that right merry were and glad,
For their victory, and als they had,
A King so sweet, and debonaire,
So wise, and of so fair affeere,
So blyth, and als so well bourdand,
And in battle so stout to stand,
So wise, and also so worthy,
That they had great cause blyth to be.
So were they blyth withoutten doubt:
For feill that winned thereabout,
Fra they saw the King use them sa,
To him their homage can they ma.
Then waxt his power more and waire:
And he thought well that he would fare,
Out over the Mount with his Menyie,
To look who there his friend would be.
Into Sir Alexander Fraser
He traisted for they Cousings were:
And his brother Simon alswa.
He had great mister of money ma:
For he had foes money ane,
Sir John Cumyng Earl of Buchane,
And Sir John the Mowbray syne,
And Sir David of Brechine,
With all the folk of their leading,
UUere foes to the Noble King:
And for he wist they were his faes,
His voyage hitherward he taes:
For he would see what kin ending,
They would make of their menassing.
THe King busked and made him yare,
Northward with his men to fare.
His brother can he with him ta:
And Sir Gilbert de la Hay alswa.
The Earl of Lennox als was there,
That with the King was over all where,
Sir Robert Boyde and other mo.
The King can forth his ways go.
He left James of Douglas,
UUith all the folk that with him was,
Behind him, for to look if he
Might recover his own Country.
He put himself in full great peril:
But eiter in a little while,
UUith his great Worship so he wrought,
That to the Kings peace he brought,
The Forest of E^t^ik all haill,
And even so did he Dowglasdaill,
And Iedburgh Forest alswa:
And who so well on hand would ta,
To tell his worshippes one and one:
He sold of them find money one:
For in his time as men told me,
Thretteine times vanquished was he:
And had victory times seven and fifty
He seemed not long time idle to lie:
By his travel he had no will.
Me think, men sold him love of skill:
How James of Douglas slew Webtoun, And wan his Castle, and kest it down.
THis James when the King was gane,
All privily his men hes taken*
And went to Dowglasdaill again,
And privily hes made a train,
To them that in the Castle were,
A bushment s^elie made they there,
And of his men fourteen and ma
He gart, as they would sekkes ta,
Filled with gers, and syne them lay
Upon their horse, and hold their way,
Right as they would to Lanerik fare.
Out with where they embushed were.
And when they of the Castle saw,
So feill lades ganging on raw,
Of that sight were they wonder fane,
And told it to their Capitane:
That heght Sir John of Webroun,
That was both stark, stout and felloun:
Iolie also, and courageous.
And for that he loved Paramours,
He would ishe far the lightlier.
He gart his men all take their gear,
And ishe to get them vittaile,
For it that they had fast did fail.
They ished all abundantly,
And preiked forth so wilfully,
To win the lades that they saw pas,
Till the Douglas and his men was
Betwixt them and the Castle.
The lade-men then perceived well,
And they cast down their lades in hie,
And their gowns deliuerlie,
That heilled them, they cast away.
And in great hy their horse hynt they:
And start upon them sturdelie,
And met their foes with a cry.
They had great wonder when they saw,
Them that were eir lurking full law,
Come upon them so hardly,
They were abased suddenly.
And at the Castle would have been.
When on the other side they have seen,
Douglas break his Embushement,
That against them so stoutly went,
They wist not what to do or say,
Their foes on ather side saw they,
That struck on them without sparing:
That they might help their self nothing,
But fled to warrant where they moght:
And they so angerlie them soght,
That of them all escaped nane.
Sir John of Webtoun there was slain:
And when he dead was as ye hear,
They fand into his Awmanneir
A letter, that to him sent a Lady,
That he loved for Drowrie.
That said when he had kept one year,
In weere as worthy Batcheleere,
The auentrous Castle of Douglas,
That for to keep so perilous was:
Then might he well ask a Lady,
His Armours, and her Drowrie.
The Letter spoke on this manner:
And when they slain on this wise were,
Douglas right to the Castle rade,
And there so great debate he made:
That in the Castle entered he:
I wate not all the certainty,
Whether it was through strength or slight:
For he wrought so with his great might,
That the Constable, and all the laue,
That was therein both man and knave
He took, and gave them dispending,
And sent them home but more grieuing,
To the Cliffurde, in their Country:
And syne so busily wrought he,
That he all tumbled down the wall:
And destroyed the houses all.
Syne to the Forest held his way,
Where he had many hard assay:
And money fair points of weere befell,
Who could them all rehearse or tell,
He should say that his name should be
Lasting in full greit Renounie.
How over the Month past the King, And there fell sick in his passing.
NOw will we leave in the Forest
Douglas, that shall have little rest.
While the Country delivered be,
Of Englishmen, and their poustie:
And turn we to the Noble King,
That with the folk of his leading,
Toward the Month hes taken his way,
Right short, into full good array,
Where Alexander Fraser him met.
And als his brother that Simon het?
With all his folk they with him had.
The King of their coming was glad:
And cherisht them in all kin thing.
And they told him of the coming
Of Sir Coming Earl of Buchane,
That to him help, had with him taken
Sir John Mowbray, and other ma,
And Sir David Brechine alswa:
With all the folk of their leading,
And yarnes more than any thing
Uengeance of you, Sir, King to take,
For Sir John Cumyng his Emes sake,
That whilum at Drumfreis was slain,
The King said, So our Lord me sane,
I had greit cause him for to sla.
And sen that they on hand will ta.
Because of him to weere on me,
I shall abide a while and see,
On what wise they will prove their might,
And if it fall that they will fight.
If they assail, we shall de^end:
Let fall after what God will send.
After this speech the King in hy,
Held straight his way to Enrowry:
And there he took sik a sickness,
That put him to so heard distress:
That he forbure both drink and meat.
His men no Medicine might get,
That ever might to the King auailyi^,
His heart all haill begouth to failyie:
That he might nouther ride, nor go.
Then wit ye well his men were woe,
For none was in that company.
That would have been half so sorry,
For to have seen his brother dead:
Lying before them in that stead,
As they were all for his sickness,
For all their comfort in him was,
And good Sir Edward the worthy,
His brother that was so hardy,
And wise and wight, set meekle pain,
To comfort them with all his maine.
And when Lords that were there,
Saw that the evil aye mair and maire
Traueld the King: they thought in hy,
It was not sp^edfull there to ly,
For there all plain was the Country,
And they were but a few Menyie.
To ly but strength into the Plain.
Therefore while that their Captain,
Were recovered of his meekle ill,
They thought to wind some strengths till:
For folk withoutten Captain,
But they the better be in pain,
Shall not be all so good indeed,
As they a Lord had them to lead,
That put himself in adventure:
But abasing to take the Ure
That God will send: for when that he
Of sik will is and sik bounty,
That he dare put him to essay,
His folk shall take example ay,
Of his good deed, and his bounty,
And ane of them shall be worth three,
Of them, that wicked Chiftane hes,
His wretchedness so in them gaes,
That they their manliness shall tyne.
Through wickedness of his conuyne.
For when the Lord that them should lea^,
May do naught, but as he were dead.
Or from his folk holds his way
Fleeing: trow ye not that they
Uincust shall in their hearts be.
^es shall they, as I trow pardie:
But if their hearts be so hie,
They will not for their worship flee,
And though some be of sik bounty,
When they the Lord and his Menyie
Sees flee, yet shall they flee a pain:
For all men flees the deed full feign,
See what he does, that so foullie,
Flees thus for his Cowardrie?
Both him and his vanquishes he,
And garres his foes abone be:
But he through his greit Nobilay
To peril him abandounes ay,
For to recomfort his Menyie,
Garres them be of sik greit bounty,
That money time a unlikely thing
They bring right well to good ending,
So did this good King as I of read,
That through his courageous manhead,
Comforted his men on sik manner:
That none had radnesse where he were,
They would not feght while that he was
Lying in sik greit sickness,
Therefore in Litter they him lay,
And to the Slenath held their way.
And thought into that Strength to ly,
While passed was his Malady.
How the Kings men with feghting, Defended the King in his lying.
BOt fra the Earl of Buchane
Wist, that they were hidder gane:
And knew that so sick was the King
That men doubted of this recovering,
He sent after his men in hy,
And assembled a great company.
For all his own men were there,
And als his friends with him were,
There was Sir John the Mowbray
And his brother, as I heard say,
And als Sir David of Breching
With feill folk of his leading.
And when they all assembled were,
In hy they took their way to fare
To the Slenath, with all their men,
For to assailyie the King, that then
UUas lying into his sickness.
This was after the Martimesse,
UUhen snow ouerhailed all the land.
To the Slenath they came near hand,
Arrayed on their best manner:
And then the Kings men that were
Ware of their coming, them apparelled
To defend gif they were assailyied,
And not for thy, their foes were
Ay two for one, or else maire.
The Earls men near coming were,
Trumping, and making meekle fare,
And made Knights when they were near,
And they that in the UUoodside were,
Stood in array right sturdelie,
And thought to bide there hardly
The coming of their enemies:
But they would upon no kin wise
Ishe to assailyie them in feghting,
While recovered were the Noble King,
And gif other would them assailyie,
They would defend, vailyie quoth vailyie.
And when the Earls company
Saw, that they wrought so wisely:
That they their strength shupe to defend,
Their Archere forth to them hes send,
To bikker them as men of mane:
And they sent Archers them again,
That bikkered them so sturdelie,
That they of the Earls party,
Right to their battle driven were,
Four days on this wise lay they there,
Bikkering them euerilke day:
But the Bowmen the war had ay.
And when the Kings company,
Saw their foes before them lie,
That ilk day waxt ma and ma:
And they were wheene, and stad were sa,
That they had nothing for to eat:
But gif they traveled it to get.
Therefore they took counsel in hie,
That there they would no longer lie:
But hold their way where they might get
To them, and theirs, vittaile and meat.
In a Litter the King they lay:
And graithed them upon their way,
That all their foes might it see.
Ilke man busked in their degree
To fight, if they assailyied were.
In mids of them the King they bare,
And yeed about him right worthelie,
And not full greatly can them hie.
The Earl, and they that with him were,
Saw that they busked them to fare:
And how with so little affray,
They held forth with the King their way.
Ready to fight, who would assailyie:
Their hearts then begouth to failyie,
And in peace leete them pass away,
And to their houses home went they.
How the King discomfist at Enrowry, The Earl of Buchane shamefully.
THe Earl his way took to Buchane:
And Sir Edward the Bruce is gane
Right to Strabogie with the King:
And so long made their Soiourning,
UUhile he begouth to recover and ga.
And syne their ways can they ta
To Enrowrie straught again:
For they would lie into the Plain
The UUinter season: for vittaile
Into the Plain they might not fail.
The Earl wist that they were there,
And gaddered Menyie here and there:
Brechine, Mowbray, and their men,
All to the Earl assembled then,
They were a full great company
Of men arrayed iolelie,
To old Meldrome they held their way:
And there with their men lodged they.
Before Yule-Euen one night but maire.
A thousand trow I well they were:
They lodged them there all the night,
While on the morn that day was light,
The Lord of Brechine, Sir Dauy,
Is went toward Enrowry.
To look gif he in any wise,
Might do skaith to his enemies.
And to the end of Enrowry,
^e came riding so suddenly,
That of the Kings men he slew
One part, and other men withdrew.
That fled their way toward the King:
That with most part of his gaddering,
On yond half of the town were lying:
And when men told him the tything,
How Sir David had slain his men,
His horse in hie he asked then:
And bade his men all make them yare,
In full great hie: for he would fare
To bargane with his enemies.
UUith that he busked him to rise,
That was not well recovered then,
Then said some of his privy men:
What think ye, Sir, thus gate to fare
To feght, and ye not recouexed are?
Yes, said the King withoutten weere,
Their boast hes made me haill and feere,
There sold no Medicine so soon
Have cured me, as they have done.
Therefore so GOD himself me see,
I sall have them, or then they me.
And when his men hes heard the King,
Set him so well for the feghting:
Of his recovering all blyth they were,
And made them for the battle yare.
THe Noble King and his Menyie,
That might well near seven hunder be
Toward old Meldrome held the way,
UUhere the Earl and his Menyie lay.
The discurreours saw them cummand
UUith Baners to the wind waiuand:
And told it to their Lord in hie,
That gart arm his men hastily,
And them arrayed for the battle,
Behind them set they their poueraill,
And made good semblance for to fight.
The King came on with meekle might.
And they abade making greit fear,
While that they near assembled were,
But when they saw the Noble King
Come stoutly on without stinting:
A little on bridle them with drew,
And the King that right well knew
That they were all discomfist near.
Preassed on them with his Baneere,
And they withdrew them maire and maire
And when the small folk they had there,
Saw their Lords withdraw them so,
They turnde their back, and haill to go,
And fled, and skailed here and there.
The Lords that yet togidder were.
Saw that their small folk were fleeing,
And saw the King stoutly coming:
They were ilkeane abased so,
That they the back gave, and to go,
A little stound togidder held they,
And syne ilke man took ^undrie way,
Fell never man sik foul mischance,
After so sturdie countenance.
And when the Kings company
Saw that they fled so foullelie.
They chased them with all their mane.
And some they took, and some hes slain.
The remanand were fleeing ay.
Who had best Horse, got best away.
To England fled the Earl of Buchane:
Sir John Mowbray is with him gane,
And were resset there with the King:
But they both short while had resting
For they died both soon after syne,
For good Sir David of Breching
Fled to Brechin his own Castle,
And garnist it both fair and well:
But the Earl of Atholl Sir Dauy,
His son, that was in Kildromy,
Came syne, and him assieged there,
And he that would hold weere na mair,
Nor bargane with the Noble King.
Came syne his man with good liking.
Of the heirship of Buchane, And how the Castle of Forfare was taken
NOw go we to the King again,
That of his victory was fane,
And gart his men burn all Buchane,
From end to end, and spared nane:
And heryed them on sik maneere,
That after that well fifty year,
Men meened the heirship of Buchane.
The King then to his peace hes taken,
The North Country all hailelie,
Obeyed they to his Senyeorie:
So that by North the Month was nane
But they his men were commen ilkane.
The Lordship aye woxt maire and maire,
Toward Angous syne can he fare,
And thought soon to make his all free:
That were on Northside the Scots Sea,
The Castle of Forfare was then,
Stuffed all with Englishmen:
But Philip the Frasar of Platane,
Hes of his friends with him taken.
And with Ladder all privily
He to the Castle can him by:
And clambe up over the walls of stane,
And syne all that he fand hes slain:
Syne yald the Castle to the King.
That made him right fair rewarding,
And syne he gart break down the wall,
And forded well and Castle all.
How the King wan Saint Iohnstown. And tumbled all the Towers down.
WHen that the Castle of Forfare,
And all the towers down tumbled were,
Right to the eird, as I have I told,
The King that stout was, stark and bold,
Thought that he would make all free,
Upon North half the Scots sea.
To Perth he went with all his rout,
And vnbeset the town about,
But unto it hes a Siege set,
But while they might have men, and meat,
It might not but greit pain be taken:
For all the wall were then of stane.
And thick towers, and high standing:
And that time were there in winning,
The Methwenes and the Olyphands:
They two the town had in their hands,
Of Stratherne als the Earl was there:
But his Son and his men were,
Without into the Kings rout,
There was ilke day bikkering stout,
And men flaine on either party:
But the good King that was witty
In all his deeds euerilkane,
Saw the walls so stight of stane,
And saw the fence that they can make.
And that the town was hard to take.
With open assault of strength and might,
Therefore he thought to work with slight,
And in all time that he there lay,
He spied, and slely gart assay,
Where at the dykes it shaldest was:
While at the last he found a place,
That they might to their shoulders waid.
And when he that place had founden had,
He gart his Menyie buske ilkane,
When sex Oulkes of the siege was gan^:
And tursed their Harness haillelie,
And left the siege all openly,
And forth with all his folk can fare,
As he would do thereat no mare.
And they that were into the town,
When they to fare saw him all bowne,
They shouted him, and scorning made,
And he forth on his ways rade,
As he no will had again to turn,
Nor beside them to make sojourne:
And in aught days naught for thy,
He gart make Ladders privily:
That might suffice to this intent:
And in a myrke night syne he went
Toward the town with his Menyie:
And Horse and knaves leaued he
Far from the town: and syne hes taken
His Ladders: and on foot are gane
Toward the town all privily,
They heard no Watches speak nor cry,
For they that were therein may fall.
As men that dred noght, but slept all.
They had no dread then of the King,
For they of him heard no tyding,
All the three days before or maire:
Therefore sikker and traist they were,
And when the King heard them not steer,
He was right blyth in great maneere,
And his ladder in hand can ta:
Example to his men to ma.
Arrayed well in all his gear:
Shot in the dyke, and with his spear
Cast till that he it over wade,
But to his throt the water stood.
THat time was in his company.
A Knight of France, wight and hardy
And when he in the UUater sa
Saw the King pass, and with him ta
His ladder vnabasedlie,
He saned him for the ferlie,
And said, O Lord, what shall we say,
Of our Lords of France, that ay
With good morcells fairses their panche,
And will but eat, and drink, and dance?
UUhen sik a King, and so worthy,
As this is through his Chenalrie,
Into sik peril hes him set,
To win a wretched Hamelet,
UUith that word to the dyke he ran,
And over after the King he wan.
And when the Kings Menyie saw,
Their Lord the King into a thraw,
Past to the dyke, and but more let,
Their ladders to the wall they set,
And to climb up fast preassed they:
But the good King, as I heard say,
UUas the second yeed over the wall,
And bade there while his Menyie all,
UUere coming up in full great hy:
Yet then raise neither noise nor cry,
But soon after they noise made,
That of them first perceiving had.
So that the cry raise through the town:
But he that with his men was boune,
To assailyie, to the town is went.
And the most part of his men sent*
And skailled through the town: but he
Held with himself a great Menyie.
So that he might be ay puruayde
To defend, gif he were assayde:
But they that he sent through the town
Put to so great confusioun
Their foes: that in beds were,
Or skailled: fleeing here and there:
That ere the sun raise, they had taken
Their foes, and discomfist ilkane.
The Wardanes both therein were taken,
And Malise of Stratherne was gane
To his father, the Earl Malis,
And with strength took him, and all his.
Syne for his sake, the Noble King
Gave him his land in governing.
The laue that ran out through the town,
Seized to them in great fusioun,
Men, arming, and Merchandise,
And other good of sundry wise,
While they that were both poor and bare,
Of their goods rich, and mighty were.
But there was few slain: for the King
Had given them in commanding,
Upon great pain they should sla nane,
That but great bargane might be taken:
For they were kind to the Country
He wist: and had of them piety.
IN this manner the town was taken:
And syne the Towers euerilkane,
And walls great were tumbled down,
He left nothing about the town,
Tower standing, nor stone wall,
But he gart haillelie destroy them all,
And prisoners that there took he:
He sent where they might kept be:
And to his peace took all the land.
Was none that then durst the^ withstand,
On North half the Scots sea,
All obeyed to his Majesty:
Except the Lord of Lorne, and tha
Of Argyle, that would not with him ga.
He held him ay against the King,
And hated him attour all thing.
But yet ere all the gaming ga,
I trow well that the King sall ta
Uengeance of his great cruelty:
And that him sore repent sall he,
That he the King contraried ay,
May fall, when he it mend not may.
THE Kings brother when the town
Was taken thus* and doungen down
Sir Edward that was so hardy,
Took him with a great company,
And took his gate in Galloway:
For with his men he would assay,
Gif he recover might that land,
And win it fra Englishmens hand,
This Sir Edward the Bruce I hight
UUas of his hand a Noble Knight:
And in blythnesse sweet and iolie,
But he was outrageous hardy:
And of so hie undertaking:
That he had never yet abasing
Of multitude of men, for thy
He discomfist commonly
Money with wheene: therefore had he
Attour his Peers the Renounie.
And who rehearse would all his deed,
Of his worship, and his manheede,
Men might a meekle Romans make.
And not for thy I think to take
On hand to say, of him some thing:
But not teind part his traveling.
How Sir Edward discomfist at Cree, Sir Ingrame Vinfrauile, and Aymerie.
THis good Knight that I spoke of air,
With all the folk that with him were
And into Galloway commen is,
All that he found he makes all his,
And heryed greatly all the land.
But then in Galloway was winnand
Sir Ingrame Vmfrauile that was
Renouned of so great Prowes,
That he of worship past the rout:
Therefore he gart ay bear about
Upon an spear a red Bonet,
Into takinning that he was set
Into the hight of Cheualry,
Of Saint John: als Sir Aymery
Their two the Land had in steering:
And when they heard of the coming
Of Sir Edward, that all plainly,
Ouer-rade the land, then in greit hy,
They assembled of their Menyie,
I trow twelve hundredth they might be:
But he with fewer folk them met,
Beside Cree, and so hard them set,
With hard battle and stalward fight,
That he them put all to the flight.
And slew two hundredth well and ma,
And the Chiftanes in hy can ta.
There to Both well for to be,
Received there into sauitie.
And Sir Edward them chased fast,
Both to the Castle at the last.
Gate Sir Ingrame and Sir Aymery:
But the best of their company,
Lay dead behind them in the place,
And when Sir Edward saw the chase
Was faillyied, he gart sese the Prey,
And so feill Cattle had away,
That it was wonder for to see,
Of Both well tower they saw, how he
Gart his men with him drive the Prey:
But no let there till set might they.
Through his courageous Cheualrie,
Galloway was stoneyed gretumlie,
And doubted him for his bounty,
Some of the men of that Country
Came to his peace, and made him aith:
But Sir Aymer that had the skaith,
Ester the bargane I told of air,
Rade in England to purchase there,
Of armed men greit company,
To venge him of the velanie,
That Sir Edward the Noble Knight,
Him did at Cree into the fight,
Of good men he assembled there,
^ell fifteen hundredth men and maire,
That was of right greit Renounie:
His way with all the folk took he:
And in the Land all privily
Entered with that Cheualrie:
Thinking Sir Edward to supprise,
If he might upon any wise,
For he thought he would him assailyie,
Ere he left into plain battailyie.
How Sir Edward with fifty, Wan fifteen hundredth, and Sir Aymery.
NOw may ye hear of great ferlie,
And als of right hie Cheualrie
For Sir Edward was in the land
With all his Menie right near hand,
And in the morning right airlie,
He heard the Country men make cry,
And had a witting of their coming,
Then busked he him but delaying,
And lap on Horse deliuerlie,
He had into his rout fifty,
All lap on Horse arrayed well,
His small folk gart he ilke deill,
Withdraw them to a strait thereby:
And he rade forth with his fifty.
A Knight that then was in his rout.
Worthy, and wight, stalward and stout,
Couries, and fair, and of good fame,
Sir Alane Cathkart is his name,
Told me this tale, I to you tell.
Greit Mist into the morning fell.
So that men might not see them by
For a Mist a bowdraught fullly,
So happened, that they fand the trace.
Where the greit rout passed was
Of their foes that before rade,
Sir Edward that greit yarning had
All time to do greit Cheualry,
With all his rout in full greit hy.
Followed the trace where gane were they*
And before midmorne of the day,
The Mist woxe clear all suddenly:
And then he and his company,
Was not a bowdraught from the rout.
Then set they on them with a shout:
For if they fled, they wist that they
Should not get fourt part well away
Therefore in auentur to die
They would them part ere they would flee
And when the English company
Saw on them come so sudddenly,
Sik folk withoutten abasing,
They were put into greit affraying,
And the other but more abade,
So hardly among them rade:
That feill of them to eird they bare,
Astoneyed so greitly they were,
Through the force of the first assay,
And they that were to so greit affray,
They weind by far he had been ma,
For that they were assailyied sa.
And Sir Edwards company,
When they had thrilled them hastily,
Set stoutly in the head again:
(...) at their course bounden, and slain
Were of their foes a greit party,
That they affraiyed were utterly:
So that they skailled greitly then,
When good Sir Edward and his men
Saw them into so evil array:
The third time on them preiked they,
And they that saw them so stoutly,
Come on them, and so hardely,
All their rout both less and maire,
^^ed fast skailling here and there,
Was none of them all so hardy
To bide, but fled all commonly,
To their warrant, and he can chase,
That wilful to destroy them was:
And some he took, and some hes slain:
But Sir Aymery with meekle pain
Escaped, and his gaite is gane:
His men discomfist euerilkane.
Some taken, some slain, some fled away,
This was a full fair point perfay.
Lo how Hardement taken suddenly,
And driuene syne to the end sharply,
May gar often time vnliklie thing,
Come to right fair and good ending,
As it fell into this case here
For Hardement withoutten weere,
Wan fifteen hundredth with fifty,
When aye for one they were threttie,
and two men is over money here,
But they were led on sik maneere,
That they discomfist were ilkane.
Sir Aymer home his gaite is gane,
Right blyth, that so he got away:
^ trow, he sall not money a day,
Have will to weirray that Country,
With thy Sir Edward therein be.
And he dwelt still into the land,
Them that rebelled still weirrayand*
And in one year so weirrayed he:
That he wan quyte all that Country,
To his brothers peace the King:
But that was naught but hard feghting.
For in that time there him befell,
Money sore point, as I heard tell,
The whilk are not all written here:
But I wot well that in that year
Thretteene Castles with strength he wan,
And overcame money a moody man.
And who of him the sooth would read,
Had he had measure in his deed,
I trow that worthier than he,
In his time might not founden be:
Except his brother alanerly,
To whom into good Cheualry,
I dare compare none, was in his day;
For he led him with measure ay.
And with wit all his Cheualry
He governed ay so worthily,
That he full often unlikely thing
Brought right well to a good ending.
How James Douglas took Thomas Randell, And Alexander Stewart, as I heard tell.
IN all that time James of Douglas
Into the Forest ay traveling was*
And it through hardement and slight,
Occupied all, magre the might
Of his feill foes, the whilk they
Set him often syes in hard assay.
But often through wit, and through bounty,
His purpose to good end brought he:
Into that time himself through case
One night, as he traveling was,
And thought to have had his resting,
In a house by the Water of Lyn^,
And as he came with his Menyie,
Near hand the house, so listened he,
And heard their Sawes euerilke deill.
And he by that perceived well,
That they were strange men that there
That night in that house harbred were:
And as he thought, so fell through case:
For of Bonkill the Lord there was
Alexander Stewa^t heght he.
With other two of great bounty:
Thomas Randell of great Renoun,
And also Adam of Gordoun:
That came there with great company,
And thought in the Forest to lie,
And occupy it with all their might,
And with travel and stalward fight,
To chase Douglas from that Country:
But otherwise all yeed the glee.
When James of Douglas had witting,
And als to him there came tyding,
That strange men had taken harberie,
Into the place where he shupe to lie,
He to that place past hastily.
Both he and all his company
And vmbeset the house about.
When they within heard sik a rouf
About the house, they raise in hy,
And took their gear right hastily,
And came forth fra the harvest were.
Their foes them met with weapons bare,
And them assailyied right hardly,
And they defended doughtelie,
With all their might, while at the last,
Their foes preassed them so fast,
That their folk failed them ilkane,
Thomas Randell there was taken,
And Alexander Stewart alswa,
Wounded into one place, or two.
Adame of Gordoun fra the fight,
What through strength, and what through slight,
Escaped, and als seire of their men.
But they that were arreisted then,
Were of their taking wonder wa:
But needlings them behooude be sa.
That night good James of Douglas
Made to Sir Alexander, that was
His Emes son right gladsome cheer:
So did he als withoutten weere
To Thomas Randell, for that he
Was to the King in near degree
Of blood, for his sister him bare.
And on the morn withoutten maire,
Toward the noble King he rade,
And with him both the two he had.
The King of that present was blyth,
And thanked him thereof feill sith,
And to his Neuoy can he say
Thou hes a while renoun^d thy fay,
But now recounsailde thou mon be.
Then to the King answered he,
And said, ye chastie me, but ye
Ought better for to chastyed be.
For sen ye weirrayed the King
Of England into plain feghting,
Ye sold preasse to direnye you right
With might, and not yet with slight.
The King said, yet fall it may
Ere it be long, to sik assay:
But sen thou speaks so rudely,
It is great reason* that men chasty
Thy proud words, while that thou know
The right, and duerie that thou aw.
The King without more delaying,
Sent him to be in firm keeping,
UUhere that he a while sall be,
Naught all upon his own poustie.
How the King at Gleclab^n, Discomfist John of Lornes men.
WHen Thomas Randel on this wise
Was taken, as I here devise:
And sent to dwell in firm keeping,
For his speech he spoke to the King.
The King that thought upon the skaith,
The despite, and the velanie both,
That John of Lorne had to him done:
His ^ist assembled he alsoone,
And toward Lorne he took the way,
With all his men in good array.
But John of Lorne of his coming,
Long ere he came had good witting.
And men on ilke side gathered he:
I trow two thousand they might be.
And sent them for to stop the way,
Where the good King behooued to ga.
Clochmabanie heght that mountain,
I trow that into all Britain,
A higher Hill may not founden be.
There John of Lorne gart his menyie,
Enbushed be above the way.
If the King held that gait perfay,
He thought he should soon vanquished be:
And himself held him on the sea,
Well near the place with his Gaillayes,
But the King that at all assayes,
Was founden wise, and right witty,
Perceived well their subtlety,
And him houed that gaite to go,
His men departed he in two.
And that to the good Lord of Douglas,
In whom all virtue winning was.
He taught his Archers euerilkane.
And the good Lord hes with him taken
Sir Alexander the Phraser wight,
And William Wiseman a good Knight,
And with them then Sir Andro Gray,
That with their Menyie held their way,
And clambe the Hill deliuerly,
And ere they of the other party
Perceived them, they had ilkane,
The hight abone their foes taken.
The King and his men held their way,
And when into the place were they
Entered, the folk of Lorne in hy,
Upon the King raised the cry,
And shot, and tumbled on them stanes,
Both greit and heavy for the nanes.
But they skaithed not greitly the King,
For he had there in his leading,
Men that light and delivered were,
And light armor upon them bare,
So that they stoutly clambe the Hill,
And stopped their foes to fulfill
The most part of their felony,
And als upon the other party,
Came James of Douglas, and his rou^,
And shot upon them with a shout,
And wounded themwith arrows fast,
And with their Swords at the last,
They rushed among them hardely
But they of Lorne full manfully
Greit and a peart defense can ma.
But when they saw, that they were sa
Assailyied upon two parties,
And saw well that their enemies,
Had all the fairer of the fight,
In full greit hy they took the flight,
And they a felloun chase can ma,
And slew all that they might ouerta.
And they that might escape perfay,
Right to a Water held their way,
That ran down by the Hills side,
That was so strait so deep and wide,
That men on no wise might it pass,
But at a Brig that narrow was.
To that Brig held they fast their way,
And to break it can fast assay.
^ut they them chased when they them saw
Make their a rest but dread or aw
They rushed upon them hastily,
And discomfist them utterly:
And held the Brig hail while the King,
With all the folk of his leading,
Passed the Brig all at their ease,
To John of Lorne it should displease,
I trow when he his men might see,
Out of the shipes into the sea.
Be slain and chased from the Hill,
And he might set no let theretill:
For it angers as gretumlie,
To good hearts that are worthy,
To see their foes fulfill their will,
As to themself to thole the ill,
How Linlithgow-Peill winnen was Through William Binnie, and his purchase.
AT sik mischief were they of Lorne,
For feill their lives there hes forlorn
And other some had fled away.
The King in haste gart sease the Prey,
Over all the Land, where men may see,
So greit abundance come of fee,
That it were wonder to behold,
The King that stout was stark and bold,
To Dunstaffage right sturdely,
A Siege set: and busily
Assailyied that Castle for to get:
And in short time he hes them set
In sik thrang, that therein were than,
That magre theires he it wan:
And a good Wardane therein set.
And betaught him both men and meat:
So that he long time there might be,
Magre them all of that Country.
Sir Alexander of Argyle that saw
The King destroy up clean, and law
His land, sent treitise to the King,
And Came his man but more dwelling:
And he received him to his peace.
But John of Lorne his son, that was
Sittell, as he was wont to be,
He ^led in ships to the sea,
But they that left were on the land,
Were to the King all obeysand:
And he their pledges all hes taken,
And toward Peirth again is gane,
To play him there into the Plain,
Yet Lowthiane was him again:
And at Linlithgow was yet a Peill,
Meekle and stark, and stuffed well
With Englishmen that was resset
To them that with armours, and meat,
From Edinburgh would to Striuilng ga,
And from Striuiling would again alswa,
That to the Country did greit ill,
Now may ye hear if that ye will,
Of interludes and jeopardies,
That men assailyied money wise,
Castells and Peills for to ta,
And this Linlithgow was ane of tha.
And I sall tell you how it was taken.
In the Country there winned ane,
That husband was, and with his fee,
Often hay unto the Peill led he.
William Binny to name he heght,
A stalward man he was in feght.
He saw so hard the Country stad,
That he great noy and pity had:
Through Fortresses that were then
Gouernde and led with Englishmen,
Then trauelde men out of measure.
He was a stout Carle, and a sture:
And of himself doure, and hardy.
And had friends that winned him by,
And showed to some his priuitie:
And upon his conueene gate he:
Men that might enbushment ma,
UUhile that he sold with his UUane ga:
To lead them hay into the Peill:
But his UUane sold be stuffed well.
For aught men armed in the body,
In his UUane sold sit privily:
And with hay heilled all about.
And himself that was dour and stout,
Sold by the UUane gang idly,
And a Yeoman wight, and hardy,
Before sold drive the Wane, and wear
A hatchat that would sharply sheare
Under this belt: and when the et
UUere opned, and they were thereat:
UUhen he heard him cry sturdely,
Call all, call all, then in great by,
He sold stryke with the axe in two
The chenyies: and then in hy sold they
That were within the Wane come out,
And debate make, while that the rout
That sold near by enbushed be,
Come for to maintain that melle,
This was into the Harvest tide,
When fields that fair were, and wide,
Charged with corn, and furnished were
For sundry corns that they bare,
Woxt ripe to win to man his food.
And the trees all charged stood,
UUith seire fruits on sundry wise.
In this swee time, as I devise,
They of the Peill had winnen hay,
And with that Binny spoken had they,
To lead their hay, for he was near:
And he consented but danger.
And said, that he in the morning
Well soon a Fodder sold in bring.
Fairer and greater, and well more,
Than he did onie that year before,
And held them cunnand sikkerlie,
For that night warned he privily,
Them that in his Wane sold ga,
And them that bushed sold be alswa.
And they so greatly sped them there,
That ere day they enbushed were,
Well near the Peill, where they might hear,
The cry, als soon as any weere.
And held them so still, but steering,
That none of them had perceiving,
And this Binny fast can him pain,
To dress his Menyie in his Wane:
And all a while before the day,
He had them heilled well with hay.
And made him then to yoke his fee
While men the sun might shining see:
And some that were within the Peill,
Were ^^hed out on their own Seele,
To win their harvest near thereby.
Then Binny with his company,
That in his Wane closed he had:
UUent on his way but more abade:
And called his Wane toward the Peill,
And the Porter that saw him well.
Came near the et, it opned soon.
And then Binny withoutten hone,
Gart call the Wane deliuerly,
And when it set was euenly,
Betwixt the cheeks of the et:
So that he might it close no gaite:
He cried loud, call all, call all.
And he then leete his Gad-wand fall,
And hewde in two the chenyie in hy,
Binny with that deliuerly
Raught to the Porter sik a rout,
That blood and harnes both yeed out:
And they that were within the Wane,
Lap out belyue, and soon hes slain
Men of the Castle haillelie,
Then in a while begouth the cry,
And they that near embushed were,
Lap out, and came with swords bare,
And took the Castle all but pain,
And hes them that therein was slain.
And they that were went forth beforne,
When they the Castle saw forlorn,
They fled to warrant here and there:
And some to Edinburgh can fare.
And to Striuiling are other gane,
And some into the gaite were slain.
How Thomas Randel came to the Kings Peace, And was made Earl withoutten lies.
BYnny on this wise with his Wane,
Wan the Peill, and their men hes slain;
Syne gave it to the King in hy,
That him rewarded worthelie,
And gart down drive it to the ground.
And syne over all the Land can send,
Setting in peace all the Country:
That unto him obey and would be,
And when a little time was spent,
After Thomas Randell he sent,
And with him so well treated he,
That he his man heght for to be,
The King his anger there him forgave,
And to maintain his state him gave
Murray, and Earl thereof him made,
And other sundry Lands brade,
He gave him into Heritage:
He knew his worthy vassallage,
And his greit wit, and his auise.
His traistie heart, and his leele service.
Therefore in him affyed he,
And made him rich of lands and fee,
As he was certes right worthy:
For if men speak of him truly,
He was so courageous a Knight.
So wise, so worthy, and so wight.
And of sa Sovereign greit bounty,
That meekle of him may spoken be.
And for I think of him to read,
And to tell part of his good deed,
I will describe you his fassouns,
And part of his conditiouns.
He was of measurable stature,
And all well portrayed at measure.
With brade visage pleasant and fair,
Courts at point, and debonaire,
And of right sikker conteening:
Lawtie he loved attour all thing.
Falset, treasoun, and felony,
He gainestood ever allutterly:
And loved Honor and Larges,
And aye maintained Righteousness:
In company he was Solacious,
And with that blyth, and amorous,
And good Knights he loved aye.
And if that I the sooth will say,
He was fulfilled so of all bounty:
As of all Uertues made were he.
I will commend him here no more,
But ye shall well hear farthermore.
That he for his deeds worthy,
Sold well be praised Souerainely.
How Thomas Randell that was worthy, Sieged Edinburgh Castle stoutly.
WHen the King was with him saught,
And greit Lordship had to him taught.
He woxt so wise, and so auisie:
That his lands first stablisht he.
And syne he sped him to the weere,
To help his Eme at his power.
And with the consent of the King,
And with a simple apparelling,
To EDINBVRGH he went in hy
With good men into company,
And set a Siege to the Castle,
That then was garnisht wonder well.
With men and vittaile at all right,
So that they dred no man's might.
But this good Earl not for thy,
Set a Siege to it full peartlie,
And preassed the folk that therein was:
So that not ane the et durst pass.
They may abide therein and eat
Their vittaile, while they ought may get:
But I trow they shall let be,
To purchease more in that Country,
That time Edward of England King,
Had given the Castle in keeping,
To Sir Peirs Libald a Gascoun.
And when they of his Warnisoun,
Saw the Siege left there so straightly,
They mistraisted him of Traitourie,
That he spoken had with the King,
And for that ilke mistrowing*
They took and put him in prison:
And of their own Nation,
They made a Constable them to lead,
Both witty and ware, and wight of deed
And he set wit, and strength, and slight,
To keep the Castle with all his might*
But now of them I will be still,
And speak a little while I will
Of the doughtie Lord of Douglas,
That left into the Forest was.
Where he money a jeopardie,
And fair points of Cheualry
Proved, as well by night as day,
To them that in the Castle lay:
Of Iedburgh, and Roxburgh, but I
Will let feill of them now pass by:
For I cannot rehearse them all,
And though I could, trow well ye shall
Say, that I might not suffice thereto,
There should so meekle be to do,
But it, that I wate sikkerlie,
After my wit, rehearse shall I.
How James Douglas gart Ladders make Of hemp, the Castle of Roxburgh to tak^
THe time that the good Earl Thomas,
Assieged, as the letter says,
Edinburgh, James of Douglas
Set all his wit for to purchase,
Now Roxburgh through subtlety:
Or any craft, might winnen be.
While he gart Sym of the Ledhouse,
A craf^ie man, and curious,
Of Hempine rapes Ladders ma,
And treene steps bounden la,
That they would break on no kin wise,
A Crook they made at their devise
Of Yrne, that was stark and square,
That fra it in a kernel were
Festened, it should hing thereby,
And the Ladder therefra straightly.
This good Lord Douglas as soon
As this devised was, and done
Gaddered good men in priuitie:
Three score, I trow that they might be:
And in the Fastings Even right,
In the beginning of the night,
To the Castle took their way,
With black Frogs all heilled they,
The armours, that they on them had.
They came near by there, and abade.
And sent haillely their horse them fro,
And in a raying on a rout they go,
On hands and feet, when they were near
Right as they Ky, and Oxen were,
That were vnbounden left thereout,
It was right mirke withoutten dout:
But one upon the Wall that lay,
Beside him to his Feere can say:
This man thinks to make good cheer,
(And named a Hu^band thereby near)
That hes left all his Oxen out.
The other says, that is no dout:
He shall make good cheer this night though they
Be with the black Douglas led away:
They weind the Douglas and his men
Had been Oxen: for they yeed then
On hands and feet, aye ane and ane.
The Douglas right good tent hes taken
To all their speech, but right soon they,
Held speaking inward both their way.
Douglas men there of was blyth.
And sped them to the wall swyth.
And soon had up their ladders set,
That made a clap when the crook knet,
And fastened fast in the kyrnell.
Ane of the watches heard it well,
And busked hidderward but bade.
But Ledhouse that the ladders made,
Sped him to climb up first the wall:
But ere he was commen up all,
He that that Waird had in keeping,
Met him right at the vpcomming.
And for he thought to ding him down,
He made nouther cry nor soun:
But sought to him deliuerly.
And he that was in ieopardy
To die, a loup he to him made,
And got him by the neck but bade,
And stikked him upward with a knife:
UUhile with his hand he reft his life,
And when he dead so saw him ly:
Up on the Wall he went in hy:
And down the body kest them till.
And said: all gangs as we will,
Speed you all up deliuerly.
And they did so in full great hy:
But ere they gat up there came ane
That saw Ledhouse stand him allane:
And knew he was noght of their men,
And in great hy rushed to him then,
And him assailyied sturdelie:
But he slew him despiteouslie:
For he was armed, and was wight:
The other naked was I hight,
And had not for to stynt a straike.
Sik melle there up can he make,
While Douglas and his Menyie all,
Were winnen up upon the UUall:
Then to the Tower they went in hy,
The folk that time were haillely
Into the hall, at their dansing,
And singing, and other ways playing:
As upon Fastings Even is
The Custom, to make joy and bliss,
To men that were in sauitie.
So trowed they that time to be:
But ere they wist, into the hall,
Douglas, and his rout came all.
And cried on hight, Douglas, Douglas,
And they that mo were then he was,
Heard Douglas cry so hiddeously,
They were abased for the cry:
And shupe them no defense to ma.
And they but pity can them sla,
While they had gotten the upper hand,
The other fled to seek warrant,
That out of measure the deed can dread.
The Wardane saw how that it yeed,
That called was Gilmyn de Fyrmes:
In the great Tower he gotten hes,
And other of his company,
And closed the ets hastily*
The laue that left were thereout,
Were taken, or slain* this is no dout:
But gif that any lap the wall.
The Douglas held that night the hall,
Although his foes thereat was wa.
His men were ganging to and fra,
Throughout the Castle all that night,
While on the morn that day was light.
THe Wardan that was in the Tower:
That was a man of great valor,
Gilmyn de Firmes when he saw,
The Castle tynt both hie and law:
He set his might for to defend
The Tower, but they without him send
Arrows in so great quantity,
That sore annoyed thereof was he.
Yet while the other day not for thy
He held the Tower full sturdely.
And then at an assault he was
Wounded so felly in the face,
That he was dreeding of his life:
Therefore he treated them but strife,
And yald the Tower on sik manner,
That he, and all that with him were,
Sold safely pass into England,
Douglas held them full good cunnand,
And conuoyde him to his Country.
But there full short while lived he:
For through the wound into the face,
He died soon, and buried was.
Douglas the Castle seesed all,
That then was closed with stalward wall:
And sent this Ledhouse to the King,
That made him right good rewarding:
And his brother in full great hy,
Sir Edward that was so doughty,
He sent hidder to tumble down,
Both Tower, Castle, and als Dungeoun,
And he came with great company,
And gart travel so busily,
That Tower, and Wall, right to the ground
He gart cast down in little stound:
And dwelt there, while that Teuydaill,
Came to the Kings peace all haill:
Except Iedburgh, and other that near
To the Englishmens bounds were:
How William Frances led Thomas Randell, Up to the Craig of Edinburgh Castle.
WHen Roxburgh was win on this wise,
The Earl Thomas that hie emprise,
Set ay on Souerane hie bounty,
At Edinburgh with his Menyie,
Was lying at the Siege, as I
Told you before all openly.
But fra he heard how Roxburgh was
Taken with a train, all his purchase,
And wit and business, I hight:
He set to purchase him some slight:
How he might help him through victory,
Melled with hie Cheualrie:
To win the wall of the Castle,
Through some kin slight, for he wist well,
That no strength might it plainly get,
While there within were men and meat.
Therefore privily speered he,
Gif any man might there founden be,
That could find any ieopardy,
To climb the wall right privily:
And he sold have his warisoun:
For it was his intentioun,
To put himself in adventure:
Or at that Siege on him misfure.
Then was there one William Frances,
Wise and expert, wise and courts:
And he in his youthhead had been
In the Castle, when he had seen
The Earl so ernestly him set
Some subtlety, or wyle to get,
Where through the Castle have might he,
He came to him in priuitie.
And said, Me think ye would blithlie,
That men found you some jeopardie,
How ye might over the walls win:
And certes, if ye will begin
For to assay on sik a wise,
I undertake for my service,
For to ken you to climb the wall,
And I shall formest be of all
Wherewith a short Ladder may we
(I hope of twelve foot it may be)
Climb the Wall up all quietly.
And if that ye will wit how I
Wate this, I shall you blythlie say.
When I was young this hinder day,
My father was keeper of yone house,
And I was somedeill lecherous,
And loved a Wench here in the town,
And that I but suspitioun:
Might repair to her privily,
Of rapes to me a ladder made I:
And therewith over the wall I slade,
A strait rod there I spyed had,
Into the Craige syne down I went,
And often syes come to mine intent.
And when that it drew near the day,
I held again the samine way,
And aye came in but perceiving,
I used so long that traveling:
So that I can that rod go right,
Though men see never so mirke a night.
And if ye think ye would assay,
To pass up after me that way,
Up to the Wall I shall you bring,
If GOD us save from perceiving
Of them that Watches are on the wall,
And if it us so fair may fall,
That we our ladders may up set,
While a man on the Wall may get.
He shall defend if there be need,
While the remnand up them speed,
The Earl was blyth of that carping,
And heght to him fair rewarding:
And undertook that gate to ga,
And bade him soon his ladder ma.
And hold him privy while they might,
Set for their purpose on a night,
Soon after was the Ladder made:
And then the Earl but more abade,
Puruayed him a night privily,
With threttie men wight and hardy:
And in a myrke night held their way,
They put them in full hard assay,
And to greit peril sikkerly,
I trow, might they have seen clearly,
That gate had not been vndertane,
Although to stop them had not been ane
For the Craig was high and hiddeous,
And the climming right perrillous,
If any happened to slide, or fall,
He should be soon too frushed all,
The night was mirke, as I heard say,
And to the foot soon commen were they
Of the Craige that was high and shore,
Then William Frances them before,
Clambe in the Crookes before them ay:
And at the back him followed they:
With meekle pain, while to, while fro.
They clambe in the Crookes so,
While half the Craig they climmen had:
And there a place they found so brade,
That they might sit on allanerly:
And they were ayndlesse and weary,
And there abode their aind to ta,
And right as they were sitting sa,
Right abone them, upon the Wall,
The Chak-watches assembled all,
Now help them God that all thing may,
For in full greit peril are they.
For might they see them, there should nane
Escape out of that place unslain,
To dead with stons they sold them ding,
For they might help themselves nothing:
But wonder mirke there was the night.
So that they had of them no sight.
And not for thy: yet was there one,
Of them that swakked down a stone,
And said, away treatoure, I see thee well,
Nowbeit he saw of him no deill
Out over their heads flew the stane,
And they sat still lurking ilkane.
The Watches when they heard no steer,
From that place passed all in fear
And car^ing held they forth their way,
The Earl Thomas as soon as they,
That on the Craige, sat then him by,
Toward the Craige clambe hastily,
And hidder came with meekle maine,
And not but greit perrill, and pain,
For fra thine up was grei^ousar,
To climb up, nor beneath by far,
But what kin pain so ever they had,
Right to the Wall they came but bade:
That was well near twelve foot on hight.
And withoutten perceiving or sight,
They set the Ladder to the Wall:
And syne Frances before them all
Clambe up, and syne Sir Andro Gray,
And syne the Earl himself perfay,
Was the third man the Wall can ta*
When they there down their Lord swa
Saw, climb up upon the Wall,
As wood men they clambe after all:
But ere up commen all were they,
They that were watches to assay:
Heard steering, and privy speaking,
And also framing of arming.
And on them set full sturdelie,
And they met them full hardly:
And slew of them despiteouslie,
Then through the Castle rose the cry,
Treasoun, treasoun, they cried fast,
Then some of them were so aghast.
That they fled, and lap over the wall
But to say sooth they fled not all.
For the Constable that was hardy,
All armed ished forth to the cry:
And with him feill hardy, and stout.
Yet was the Earl hard with his rout,
Feghting with them upon the Wall:
But soon discomfist he them all,
By that his men were commen ilkane,
Up to the wall: and he hes taken,
His way down to the Castle soon.
In greit peril he hes him done,
For they were ma than he therein.
And they had been of good conuine:
But some thing they affrayed were.
And not for thy with weapons bare,
The Constable and his company,
Met him and his greit hardely.
Their men might see right bargane rise:
For with weapons on money wise,
They dang on other at their might,
While swords that were fair and bright,
Were to the hilts all bloody.
Then hiddeously began the cry:
For they that felled, or stikked were:
Right hiddeously can cry and raire.
The good Earl and his company,
Faught in that feght so sturdelie,
That all their foes rushed were:
The Constable was slain right there.
And fra he fell, the remanand
Fled, where they might best to warrant,
They durst not qide, nor make debate.
The Earl was handled there so haite,
That had it not happened through case,
That the Constable there slain was,
He had been in great peril there:
But then they fled, there was no maire,
Ilke man for to save his life:
Fled forth his days for to drife:
And some slade down out over the wall.
The Earl hes taken the Castle all,
For there was none durst him withstand
I never heard into no land,
UUas Castle taken so hardely,
Outtaken Tire alanerly.
UUhen Alexander the Conqueror,
That conquered Babylons Tower,
Lap fra a Bar forth to the Wall,
UUhere he among his foes all,
Defended him full doughtely,
UUhile that his noble Cheualry,
With ladders over the walls yeed,
That nouther left for dead nor dreede.
For when they wist well that the King,
Was in the town, there was nothing
Into that time that stynt them moght,
For all peril they set at noght.
They clambe the wall and Areste
Came first to the good King, where he
Defended him with all his might.
And they so hard were stad in fight,
That he was felled on his knee,
Then to his back he set a tree:
For dreede they sold behind assailyie.
Areste then to the battailyie
Sped him in hy so sturdely,
And dang on them so doggedly,
That the King well rescued was.
For his men into sundry place
Clambe over the walls, and soght the King,
And him rescued with hard feghting,
And wan the town deliuerly.
Outtaken this taking alanerly,
I heard never in no time gane,
Where Castle was so stoutly taken:
And of this taking that I meene,
Sanct Margaret the good haly Queen
Wist in her time, through reueling
Of him that knows, and wats all thing.
Therefore in stead of Prophecy,
She left a taikning full ioly,
That is there in her Chapel.
Sho gart well portray a Castle,
A ladder up to the wall standing
And a man thereupon climming,
And wrote on him, as old men says,
In French, Guard vous de Francoys.
And for this word she gart write sa:
Men weind ye Frenchmen sold it ta:
But Frances called was he,
That so clambe up in priuitie.
She wrote it as in Prophecy,
And it fell afterward soothly,
Right as sho said, for taken it was,
And Frances led them up that place.
On this wise Edinburgh was taken,
And they that were therein ilkane,
Outher taken, or slane, or lap the walk,
Their goods have they leaued all:
And the house euerilkane.
Sir Peirs Libald that was taken,
As I said air in Boys they fand,
And into hard festning sittand.
They brought him to the Earl in hy,
And he gart loose him hastily,
And he became the Kings man.
They send word to the King right than,
And told how the Castle is taken:
And he in hy is hidder gane,
With money men in company:
And gart cast down all haillely,
Both Tower, and walls to the ground.
And syne over all the land can found,
Seesing the Country to his peace.
Of this deed that so worthy was:
The Earl was praised gretumly,
The King that saw him so worthy,
Was blyth, and glad attour the laue:
And to maintain his state him gave
Rents and lands fair ineugh.
And he to so great worship dreugh,
That all spoke of his great bounty:
His foes often syes astoneied he:
For he fled never for force in fight.
UUhat sall I more say of his might?
His great manheede, and his bounty,
Garres him yet renowned be.
How Sir Edward wan Ruglein-Peill, And Dundie, sine St^iuiling sieged well.
In this time that their ieopardies
Of their Castells, as I devise,
UUere encheeued so suddenly,
Sir Edward Bruce that was worthy
Had all Galloway and Niddisdaill
UUinnen to his liking all haill,
And doungen down the Castells all,
Right to the dykes both Tower and Wall,
He heard them say, and knew it well,
That in Ruglyn was then a Peill.
Hidder he went with his Menyie,
And win it in short time hes he:
Syne to Dundie hes taken the way,
That then was holden (as I heard say)
Against the King: therefore in hy
He set a Siege thereto stoutly,
And lay there till it yolden was.
To Striuiling syne the way he taes,
Where good Sir Philip the Mowbray,
That was so doughtie at assay,
UUas UUardane, and had in keeping
The Castle of the English King.
Thereto a Siege he set stoutly,
They bikkered often syes sturdely.
But greit Cheualrie was done nane.
Sir Edward fra the Siege was taken
A well long while about it lay
From the Lentrone, that is to say,
While forrow the Saint Iohnes Mass.
The English folk that therein was,
Begouth to failyie vittaile by than,
And Sir Philip as doughtie man,
Treated till they consented were:
That if at Midsommer then a year
To come, it were not with battle
Rescued, that then withoutten fail,
He should the Castle yield quietly,
That cunnand brake they sikkerlie,
How Sir Edward withoutten sturne, Undertook the battle of Bannock-burn.
ANd when this cunnand thus was made,
Sir Philip into England rade:
And told the King all the haill tale:
How that he twelve month all haill
Had, as written was in their Tailyie,
To rescue Striuiling with battailyie,
And when he heard Sir Philip say.
That Scottish men had set a day,
To feght, and he such leisure had
To puruay him he was right glad:
And said, It was greit sucquidrie,
That set them upon sik folly:
For he thought to be ere that day
So puruayed, and in sik array,
That there sold no strength him withstand
And when the Lords of England
Heard that this day was set plainly.
They judged it all to greit folly,
And thought to have them at their lyking,
If men abade them in feghting.
But often failies that fools thought,
And yet wise men comes naught
To that end, that they weine always:
A little stone often, as men says,
May gar walter a meekle Wane,
Na man's might may stand again
The grace of God, that all things steeres,
He wates whereto all things affeeres,
And dispones at his liking
After his ordinance all thing.
WHen Sir Edward, as I you say,
Had given so outrageous a day,
To yield, or to rescue Striuiling:
Right to the King then went he syne:
And told what treaty he had made,
And what day he them given had*
The King said, when he heard the day,
That was unwisely done perfay,
I never yet heard so long warning
Was given to so mighty a King,
As is the King of England.
For he hes now into his hand
England, Ireland, and Wales alswa,
And Aquitayne yet with all tha
Dwells under his Senyeory.
And of Scotland a greit party
And of treasure so stuffed is he:
That he may wageours have plenty.
And we are few against so feill.
GOD may right well our weirdes deill:
But we are set in jeopardie
To tyne or win then hastily.
Sir Edward said, So God me reed,
Though he and all that he may ^eede
Come, we shall feght all, though they were more
When the King heard his brother so
Speak, to the Battle so hardly,
He praised him in his heart greatly.
And said (Brother) sen so is gane:
That this thing thus is vndertane,
Shape we us therefore manly,
And all that loves us tenderly,
And the freedom of this Country,
Puruay them at that time to be
Boun on their best wise, that they may.
So if our foes will assay,
To rescue Striuiling with battle,
That we of purpose gar them fail.
The sembling of the English Host, That with great power came and boast.
ON this wise all assented were,
And bade their men all make them yare:
For to be boun against that day.
Weapons and armours puruayed they.
And all that affeered to feghting:
And of England the mighty King,
Puruayed him in so greit array,
That Certes, I heard never say,
That Englishmen more apparel
Made, than they did for that battle.
For when the time was commen near,
The King assembled his poweere.
And beside his own Cheualrie
That was so greit, it was ferlie
He had of money a far Country,
With him good men of greit bounty,
Of France, and other Cheualry,
He had into his company,
The Earl of Henault als was there,
And with him met that worthy were:
Of Gasconyie, and of Almanyie.
And of the worthiest of Brittainyie:
He had wight men, and well farrand,
Armed cleanelie both head and hand.
Of England als the Cheualrie,
He had there gaddered so cleanelie,
That none were left might weapons weeld,
Or worthy were to feght in field.
Of Wales als with him had he:
And of Ireland a greit Menyie:
Of Poytow, Aquitayne, and Bayoun:
He had money of greit renown.
Of Scotland he had yet then,
A greit Menyie of worthy men.
When altogedder assembled were,
He had of feghters with him there,
An hundredth thousand men and ma:
And forty thousand were of tha,
Armed on Horse, both head and hand,
And of tha yet were three thousand,
With barded Horse, in plait and mailyie,
To make the front of the battailyie.
And fifty thousand of Archers
He had, withoutten Hobillers,
And men on foot, and small rangall,
That kept Harness, and Uittaill:
He had so feil it were ferly*
Of Carts als that yeed him by,
So feill, that by them that charged were
With Pauilliouns, and that vessel bare,
And apparel for Chamber and Hall,
Fourscore were charged with Fewall,
They were so feill where that they rade,
And their battles were so brad:
And so greit rout held they there,
That men that meekle Host might see there
Ouertooke the Lands largely,
Men might see there who had been by,
Money a worthy man and wight,
And money an armor gaylie dight.
And money a sturdie steering Steed.
Arrayed aye into rich weed.
Money Helmes, and Haberiones,
Shields, Spears, and eke Pennouns:
And so money a comely Knight,
That it seemed into that sight.
They should vanquish the world all haill.
Why should I make too long my tale?
To Baruike are they come ilkane,
And some therein hes Innes taken:
And some lodged without the town,
In tents, and in Pauillioun.
How Englishmen manassed at will The Scots, and dealt their lands till.
ANd when the King his Oast hes seen
So great, so good men and so clean:
He was right joyful in his thought:
And well supposed, that there were naught
A King in World might him withstand,
Him thought all winnen to his hand.
And largely among his men,
The lands of Scotland dealt he then.
Of other men's lands large was he:
And they that were of his Menyie,
Manassed the Scottishmen haillely,
With great words, and not for thy:
Or that they come to their intent,
Holl^s in haill claith sall be rent.
In ton battles the Englishmen Were dealt, and taught to Chiftanes then
THe King through counsel of his men,
His folk dealt into battles ten.
In ilk battle, were ten thousand,
That thought they stalwardly sold stand
In battle and sold hold their right.
And let not for their foes might,
He set Leaders to ilk battall,
That known were of good gouernall.
And to renouned Earls two,
Of Gloucester and Herfurd were tha,
He gave the Uangard in leading,
With money men at their bidding,
Ordained with full great array,
They were so Cheualrous that they
Trowed, gif they came to the fight,
There sold no strength withstand their might:
And the King when his Menyie were
Divided into battles sear:
His own battle ordained he,
And who sold at his bridle be.
Sir Geiles the Argentine he set,
Upon the one side his renyie to get:
And of Wallance Sir Aymery:
On other half that was worthy,
For into their sovereign bounty,
Over all the laue affyed he.
How all the Noble Cheualry, At Edinburgh took harbery.
WHen the King upon this wise,
Had ordained, (as I here devise)
His battles and his renowning:
He raise early in the morning.
And fra Barwicke they took their way.
Both hills and valleys covered they.
And the battles there was so brade,
Departed over the hills rade:
The Sun was bright, and shined clear:
And armours that bright byrneist were,
So blenked with the Suns beam:
That all the land seemed in a leame,
Banners right freshly flambisighand,
And Pensalls to the wind waiuand:
So feill they were of seir Countries,
That it was wonder to devise:
And I sold tell all their affeere,
Their countenance and their maneere,
Though I couth, I sold cumbred be.
The King with all his great Menyie,
To Edinburgh are they commen right.
They were all out too feill to fight,
With few folk of a simple land:
But where God helps, who may withstand.
How in this time assembled then, To King Robert hes certain men.
THe King Robert when he heard say.
That Englishmen in sik array:
And into so great quantity,
Came in his land* in hy gart he
All men be summonde privily,
And they came all full wilfully,
To the Torwood, where that the King
^ad ordainde to make their meeeting.
Sir Edw^rd the Bruce the worthy,
Came with a full great company
Of good men armed well, and dight:
Hardy and forcy, for to fight.
Walter Stewart of Scotland syne.
That then was but a beardlesse hyne,
Came with a rout of Noble men:
That men be countenance might the^ ken.
And the good Lord Douglas alswa,
Brought with him men, I vnderta:
That well were used into feghting,
They sall the less have abasing,
Gif them betide in thrang to be:
And ane auantage sall sooner see,
For to astoney their foes might,
Than men that uses not to fight.
The Earl of Murray with his men,
Arrayed well came also then,
Into good conueene for to fight:
And wilful to maintain their right.
Outtaken money other Baroun,
And Knights of full greit Renoun,
Came with their men full stalwardly,
When they assembled were hailly,
Of feghting men, I trow, they were
Threttie thousand and some deill mare,
Withoutten carriage and purall:
That carried Harness and Uittall.
Over all the Host yeed the King,
And beheld to their conteening:
And saw that of full fair affeere,
And hardy countenance they were,
By lyklinesse the most Cowart,
Seemed to do full well his part,
The King hes seen all their having,
That knew them well into sik thing,
And saw them all commonly,
Of sikker countenance, and hardy,
Without affray, or abasing,
In his heart had he greit liking,
And thought that men of so greit will,
If they would set their might theretill,
Should be full hard to win, perfay.
And as he met them in the way,
He wel^omed them with gladsome fair,
Speaking good words here and there,
And they that their Lord saw blythly
So welcome them, and so homlie,
Joyful they were, and thought that they,
Aught well to put them in assay,
Of heard feghting, and stalward stour,
For to maintain well his honor.
The parting of the Scots men, That in four battles dealt were then.
THe worthy King when he hes seen,
His Host assembled all bedeene:
And saw them wilful to fulfill
His lyking with good heart and will:
And to maintain well his franches,
He was joyful on money wise:
And called all his connsell privy:
And said them: Lords, now may ye see,
That Englishmen with meekle might,
Hes all disponed them to fight:
For they yone Castle would reskew.
Therefore is good we ordain now,
How we may let them of purpose,
And so fra them the ways close,
That they pass not but greit letting.
We have here with us at bidding.
Well threttie thousand men and ma.
Make we four battles of all tha.
And ordain us on sik maneere:
That when our foes comes near,
We to the new Park hold our way,
For there behooues them pass, perfay.
But if they will beneth us go.
And over the Maras pass, and so,
We shall be at a vantage there,
And me think that right speedfull were,
To pass on foot to this feghting,
Armed but in light arming;
For shape we us on Horse to fight,
Sen that our foes are maire of might.
And better horsed than are we,
We should into greit peril be,
And if we feght on foot, perfay,
We shall be at a vantage aye.
For in the Park among the trees,
The Horsemen cumbred always bees,
And the Syke also there down,
Shall put them to confusioun.
And they consented to that Saw:
And then into a little thraw,
Their four battles ordained they,
And to the Earl Thomas, perfay:
He gave the Uangarde in leading,
For in his Noble governing,
And in his hie Cheualrie.
They had affiance souerainely.
And for to maintain his Baner,
Lords that of greit worship were,
Were assigned with their Menyie,
Within his battle for to be.
The other battle was given to lead,
To him that doughtie was of deed,
And praised als of Cheualrie
That was Sir Edward the worthy.
I trow he shall maintain him so,
That how so ever the gaming go,
His foes to plenyie shall matter have,
And syne the third battle he gave,
To Walter Stewart for to lead,
And to Douglas doughtie of deed:
They were Cousings in near degree:
Therefore to him betaught was he,
For he was young, and not for thy
I trow, he shall so manfully,
Do his devour, and work so well
That men shall of his deeds tell.
The feird battle the Noble King
Took in his own governing:
And had into his company,
The men of Carrik haillelie:
And of the Isles, whereof was sire
And of Argyle and of Kintyre,
Angous of the Isles, and Boot alswa,
And of the plain lands he had ma,
Of armed men a Noble rout:
His Battle stalward was and stout:
He said, the Reeregard he would ma,
And even before him should ga
The Uangard, and on either hand,
The other Battles should be gangand
Behind on side a little space,
And the King that behind them was,
Should see where there was most myster,
And reliue them with his Baner.
How King Robert gart pottes make, And covert them well, I undertake:
THe King that was both wight, and wise.
And right attentive at devise:
And hardy als attour all thing,
Ordained his men for the feghting.
And on the morn on Satterday,
The King heard his discurreours say,
That Englishmen with meekle might,
Had lain at Edinburgh that night,
Therefore withoutten more delay,
He to the North-Parke held his way:
UUith all that in his leading were,
And in the Park them harbred there:
And in a plain field by the way,
Where he thought they behooued have way
The Englishmen gif that they wald
Through the Park to the Castle hald:
He gart men money Pots ma,
Of a foot-brade round, and all tha
Were deep, up to a man's knee:
And so thick, that they might likned be.
To a wax Kame with Bees made.
And then the Pots they covered had
With sticks, and with gersse all green,
So that they might not well be seen.
On Sunday syne in the morning,
Well soon after the Sunrising,
They heard the Mass all reverently.
And money shraue them full devoutly:
That thought to die into that melle,
Or then to make their Country free.
To GOD for their right prayed they,
There dyned none of them that day,
But for the Uigile of Sanct John,
They fasted water, and bread ilkone.
THe King when that the Mass was done
Went for to see the Pots soon:
And at his lyking saw them made,
On other side the way well brade.
It was potted (as I have tauld)
Gif that their foes on horse would hauld,
Forth on the way, I trow they sall
Not all escape withoutten fall:
Throughout the Oast then gart he cry,
That all sold arm them hastily,
And buske them on their best manner.
And when that all assembled were.
He gart array them for to fight,
And syne over all gart cry on hight,
That who so ever he were, that fand
His heart not sikker for to stand,
To win all, or die with honor,
For to maintain that stalward stour:
That he betime should take his way:
And none sold dwell with him but they,
That would stand with him to the end,
And take the grace that God would send.
Then all answered with one cry,
And with one voice said generally,
That none for dout of dead sold fail,
While discomfist were the haill battle.
How the King sent fra him all haill, His small folk, carriage, and vittaill.
WHen the good King hes heard his men
So hardely answer him then:
Saying, that nouther dead nor dread,
To sik discomfort sold them lead:
That they sold eschew the feghting:
In heart he had great rejoicing.
For him thought men of sik having,
So good, so hardy, and so fine,
Sold well in battle hold their right,
Against men of full meekle might.
Syne all the small folk, and puraill,
He sent, with harness, and vittaill,
Into the Park right far him fra,
And gart them fra the battle ga.
And as he bade, they went their way,
Twenty thousand near were they.
They held their way to a valley:
Out of the sight of the great battellyie.
Of men of arms wight and hardy:
The King left with a clean Menyie:
That were togidder twenty thousand,
That I trow stalwardly sall stand,
And do their devour as they aw.
They stood then raynged on a raw,
Ready for to bide battailyie,
Gif any folk would them assailyie.
How the King bade the Earl Murray, To keep beside the Kirk the way.
THe King then gart them busked be:
For he wist into certainetie,
That Englishmen with meekle might
Had lain at the Falkirk that night.
And syne to him the way all straight
Held, with their men of meekle might.
Therefore to his Neuoy bad he
The Earl of Murray with his Menyie,
Beside the Kirk to keep the way:
That none sold pass that gaite, perfay,
Without debate to the Castle:
And he said, that himself sold well
Keep the entry with his battle.
Gif that any would there assail:
And syne his brother Sir Edward,
And young Walter the good Steward,
And the Lord Douglas alswa,
With their Menyie good tent sold ta,
UUhilk of them had most mister,
Sold help with them that with them were.
The King then sent James of Douglas,
And Sir Robert of Keith, that was
Marshall of all the Oast in fee,
The Englishmens coming for to see:
And they lap on withoutten bade,
UUell horsed men with them they had:
And soon the great Oast have they seen:
UUhere shields shining were so sheene:
And Basnets byrnished so bright:
That gave against the Sun sik light
They saw so money browdred Baners,
Standerds, and Pensalls upon spears:
And so feill Knights upon Steedes,
And flawming in their ^oly weeds:
And so feill battles and so brade,
And took so great rowme as they rade.
That the most Oast and the best,
Of Christendom, and the lykliest:
Sold be abased for to see,
Their foes into sik quantity,
And so arrayed for to fight.
UUhen their discurreours had sight
Of their foes (as I heard say)
Toward the King they took their way:
And told him into priuitie,
The multitude, and the beauty
Of their foes, that came so brade:
And of the great might that they had.
Then the King bade, that they sold ma
No countenance as it were swa,
But bade them into common say,
That they came into ill array,
To comfort his men through that wise:
For often times of a word may rise
Discomfort, and tynsall withal:
And als well through a word may fall,
Comfort may rise, and hardement.
To garmen come to their intent:
And on the same wise did it hear.
Their comfort and their hardy cheer,
Comforted them so gretumlie,
That of their Host the least hardy,
By countenance would formest be.
For to begin the greit melle.
How with a hundredth the Earl of Murray To aught hundredth battle gave.
Upon this wise the Noble King,
Gave to his men greit comforting:
Through hardy countenance, and cheer,
That he made on so good maneere,
They thought that no mischief might be,
So greit with thy they might him see
Before them, that should so engreeue,
But his worship should them relieve.
His worship them comforted sa,
And countenance that he did ma.
That the most Coward was hardy.
On other half full sturdelie,
The Englishmen in sik array,
As ye have heard me forrow say:
Came with their battalles approaching,
Their Banners to the wind waiuing.
And when they commen were so near:
That but two mile betwixt them were,
They chused a ^oly company,
Of wight men armed ^olelie,
On fair Coursers ar med at right,
And great Lords of meekle might,
There was Capitane of that rout:
The Lord Cliffurd that was so stout,
Was of them all sovereign leader,
Aught hundredth armed I trow they were,
They were all young men and joly:
Yarning for to do Cheualry
The best of all the Host were they,
Of countenance, and of array:
They were the fairest company,
That men might find of so money,
To the Castle they thought to fare:
For if that they might well come there,
They thought it should rescued be:
Forth on their way held this Menyie,
And toward Stri^iling held their way:
Beneath the Park eschewed they.
For they wist well the King was there,
And beneath the Park so can they fare:
Under the Kirk into a rout.
The Earl Thomas that was so stout.
When he saw them so take the Plain
In full greit by went them again.
With an hundredth withoutten more,
Annoyed in his heart, and woe:
That they so far were passed by.
For the King had him said rudely,
That a Rose of his Chaiplet
Was fallen: for he was set
To keep the way tha men were past,
Therefore he hasted him so fast,
That commen into short time was he,
In the plain field, with his Menie,
For he thought that he should amend,
That he trespassed had, or then end.
And when the Englishmen him saw,
Come on withoutten dread or aw:
And took so hardly the Plane,
In hy they went then him again,
And struck with spurs the Steedes stight.
That bare them even, and hard, and suight
And when the Earl saw that Menyie
Come so stoutly, to his men said he,
Be not abashed for their shore,
But set your Spears you before:
And back to back set all your rout,
And all your spear points out.
That gate defend us best may we,
Environed with them gif we be.
And as he bade, so have they done.
And the other came on all soon:
Before them all there came prickand,
A Knight hardy of heart and hand:
And was a well greit Lord at hame.
Sir William the Hawcourt was his name:
And pricked at them so hardly,
And they met him so sturdelie,
And he, and horse were both borne down,
And slain right there without ransoun.
With Englishmen greitlie was he
Meened that day for his bounty.
The laue come on full sturdelie,
But none of them so hardly,
Rushed among them as did he,
But with far more maturitie,
They assembled all in a rout.
And enuironde them all about.
And to the enemies in that tide,
Rane with Spears wounds wide
To their Horse that came them near:
And they that riding on them were,
That were borne down, lossed their lives:
And als Spears* darts, and Knives,
And weapons upon seir manner,
Kest among them that feghting were,
They defended them so worthelie,
That their foes had greit ferlie,
For some would shoot out of their rout.
And of them that assailyied about,
Sticked Steedes, and bare down men
The Englishmen so rudely then,
Kest among them Swords and Spears,
That in with them a mountyand was
Of weapons that there warped were.
The Earl and his men thus faught there,
At greit mischief, as I heard say,
For fewer by full far were they:
For their foes them all about,
Were enuironde, where money rout,
Were raught them full despiteouslie,
Their foes demained them straightly.
On either side they were so stad,
For the greit bargane that they had,
For feghting, and for Suns heat.
That all their flesh with sweat was weat:
And sik a stew rose over them then.
Of breathing both of Horse and Men,
And of powder, that sike mirknes,
Into the air above them was,
That it was wonder for to see
They were in greit perplexity:
But with great travel not for thy
They them defended manfully:
And set both will, strength and might,
To rush their foes into that fight,
That them demained angerly.
But gif GOD help them hastily,
They sall have their fill of feghting.
But when the Noble renouned King,
With other Lords that were him by,
Saw the Earl so abandountly,
Took plain field, James of Douglas,
Came to the King where that he was.
And said, Sir, ah, Sancta Mary,
The Earl of Murray openly
Takes the plain field with his Menyie
He is in peril, but he be
Soon helped: for his foes are ma
Than he, and horsed well alswa.
And with your leave, I will me speed
To help him, for he hes great need,
All enuironde with his foes is he.
The King said, so our Lord me see,
One foot to him salt thou not ga:
Gif he well does, let him well ta,
Whether it happen to win or lose,
I will not for him break purpose.
^ertes (said he) I may no wise,
See that his foes him supprise,
When that I may set help theretill.
With your lieue, sikkerly I will
Help him, or die into the Pain:
Do then, and speed thee soon again.
The King said, and he held his way,
Gifhe mae come in time, perfay,
I trow that he sall help so well,
That all his foes sall it feel.
How the King slew Sir Henry Bowm, With his handaxe, and struck him down.
NOw Douglas forth his way taken hes,
And in that same time fell through case:
That the King of England, when he
Was commen with his great Menyie,
Near to the place where I said air,
Where Scots men assembled were:
He gart arrest all his battle,
And also for to take counsel.
Whether they wald harbrie the^ that night,
Or then but more go to the fight,
The Uangard then that wist nothing,
Of his arrest, nor his dwelling,
Rade to the Park all straight their way,
But stinting into good array.
And when the King wist that they were
In haill battle coming so near,
His battle gart he well array.
Himself rade on a gray Palfray
Proper and ioly, arrayand
His battle, with an axe in hand:
And on his Basnet heght he bare,
An hatte with Carbuncle ay where,
And thereupon into takinning
An hie Crown, that he was King.
And when Gloucester and Harefurd were,
In haill battle coming so near:
Before them all there came rydand,
With helm on head, and spear in hand,
Sir Henry the Bowme that was worthy,
That was a Knight and hardy:
And to the Earl of Harefurde Cousine,
Armed in armours good and fine:
Came on a Steed a bowshot near,
Before all other that there were:
And knew the King, for that he saw
Him so arraying his men on raw:
And by the Crown also was set,
Abone his head on the Basnet:
And toward him he went in hy.
And when the King so apeirtly,
Saw him come forth before his Feeres:
In hy to him the Steed he steeres,
And when Sir Henry saw the King
Come on withoutten abasing,
To him he rade in full great hy:
And thought that he sold well lightly
Win him, and have him at his will,
Sen he him saw horsed so ill:
They sprent togidder in a ling.
Sir Henry missed the Noble King:
And he that in his stirrops stood,
With axe that was both hard and good,
With so great mane raught him a dynt,
That neither hat, nor helm might stynt
The heavy dynt that he him gave:
The head right to the harnes claue.
The hand axe shaft frushed in two,
And he down to the eird can ga
All flatlings, for him failed might.
This was the first struck of the fight,
That was performed doughtely:
And when the Kings men so stoutly
Saw him even at the first meeting,
Withoutten dout or abasing,
Have slain a Knight even at a struck:
Sik hardement thereat they take,
That they come on right hardly.
And when the Englishmen stoutly
Them saw come on, had sik abasing,
Specially for that the King,
So stoutly that good Knight had slain,
Then they withdrew them euerilkane.
They durst not then abide the fight,
So dred they for the Kings might.
And when the Kings men them saw,
So in haill battle them withdraw,
A great shout to them can they make,
And they in hy gave all the back.
And they that followed, then hes slain
Some of them that they have ouertane:
But they were few, the sooth to say,
Their horse feet had them all away,
Except some part that died there,
Rebuted filthily they were,
They rade their way with well more shame,
By far, then when they came fra hame.
WHen that the King repaired was,
And gart his men leave all the chase,
The Lords of his company,
Blamed him, as they durst greatly,
That he put him in adventure,
To meet so stark a Knight and sture.
In sik point as he then was seen:
For they said, it might have been
Cause of their tynsall euerilkane.
The King answer hes made right nane,
But meened his hand-axe-shafte, that so,
Was broken with that struck in two.
THe Earl Thomas was yet feghtand,
With his foes on either hand:
And slew of them a quantity,
But weary was his men and he.
The whilke with weapons sturdelie,
Themselves defended manfully:
While the Lord Douglas came near:
That sped him on great maneere.
And Englishmen that were feghting,
When they the Douglas saw coming,
Euanishing made an opening,
Sir James Douglas by their reeling
Knew, that they were discomfist near.
Then bade he them that with him were,
Stand still, and preasse no farthermare,
For they that yonder feghting are,
He said, that they are of so greit bounty,
That their foes all soon shall be
Discomfist, through their own might.
Though no man help them for to fight.
And come we now to the feghting,
When they are at discomfiting,
Men should say, we them rescued had:
And then should they that cause had made,
With greit travel, and hard feghting,
Lose a greit part of their losing,
And it were sin to lose his prise,
That of sik soueragine bounty is,
That he through plain and hard feghting
Hes here encheeued unlikely thing:
He shall have that he winnen hes.
The Earl with that that feghting was,
When he his foes saw reeling so,
In hy upon them can he go,
And preassed them so wonderfast,
With hard strakes: while at the last
They sled, and durst abide no maire:
Horse and man both left they there.
And held their way in full greit hy.
Not altogidder, but sinderlie.
And they that were ouertane, were slain:
The laue fled to their Host again.
Of their tynsell sorry and woe,
The Earl that had him helped so,
And his men als that were weary,
Hints off their Basnets in hy,
To draw their braith: for they were haite,
They were all hailling into Swait.
They seemed men forsooth I heght:
That had fended their foes to fight:
And so did they full doughtely.
They sai^ of all their company,
That there was but a some few slain:
Then loved they God, and were feign,
And blyth, that they escaped so:
Toward the King then can they go:
To him well soon they commen are,
He asked them of their welfare,
And gladsome cheer to them he made:
For they so well them borne had.
Then all ran into greit dainty,
The Earl of Murray for to see.
So fast they ran to see him there,
That near hand all assembled were,
And when the good King can them see,
Before him all assembled be,
Blithe and glad, that their foes were
Rebuted upon that manner.
A little while he held them still,
Syne on this wise, he said them till,
How that the King comforted his men, That twice their foes rebuted had then.
LOrdings, we ought to loife and love,
Almighty GOD that sits above
That send us so fair beginning
It is a greit discomforting,
To our foes, that on this wise,
So soon hes been rebuted twice.
For when they of their Host shall hear,
And know the sooth, on what maneere:
Their Uangard that was so stout,
And syne yone other joly rout:
That I trow of the best men were,
That they may find among them there,
Were rebuted so suddenly,
I trow and knows it all clearelie:
That money a heart so wavering be,
That seemed before of greit bounty,
And fra the heart be discomfite,
The body is not worth a mite.
Therefore, I trow that good ending,
Shall follow to our beginning:
And yet I say not this you till:
For that ye should fulfill my will
To feght: for in you it shall be,
And if ye think speedfull that we
Feght, we shall feght: and if ye will
We leave, your lyking to fulfill,
I shall consent in ilke wise
To do right as ye will devise
Therefore say on your will plainly,
Then with a voice all can they cry.
Good King withoutten more delay,
The morn as soon as ye see day,
Ordain you haill for the battle,
For dout of deed we shall not fail,
Nor no pain shall refused be,
While we have made our Country free.
WHen the King heard them so manly,
Speak to the thing, and so hastily:
Saying, that nouther life nor dead,
To sik discomfort should them lead:
That they should eschew the feghting,
In heart he had greit rejoicing:
And to him greit gladship can ta,
And said, Lordings, sen ye will sa,
Shape we us then in the morning,
So that we by the Sunrising
Have heard Mass, and be busked well,
Ilke man in his own battle:
Without our Pauillions arrayed
Ilke man with his Baner displayed:
And look on na wise ye brake array,
And as ye love me, I you pray,
That ilke man for his own honor,
Puruay him a good governor.
And when it comes unto the fight,
Ilke man set will, heart and might,
To stint our foes meekle pride,
They shall on Horse arrayed ride,
And come on us in full greit hy,
Meet them with Spears sturdely:
And think then you on the meekle ill,
That they and theirs have done us till:
And are in will yet for to do,
Gif they have might to come thereto.
And Certes me think well that we
Without abasing ought to be
Worthy, and of great vassalage,
For we have three fair auantage.
The first is, that we have the right,
And for the right ay GOD will fight.
The other is, that they commen are here,
Through lipning in their great power,
To seek us in our own land:
And hes brought here even to our hand,
Riches into so great plenty,
That the poorest of you all sall be
Both mighty and rich therewithal,
Gif that we win, as well may fall.
The third is, that we for our lives,
And for our children, and our wives,
And for our freedom, and our land
Are strenyied in battle for to stand.
And they for their might anerly,
And for they set of us lightly:
And for they would destroy us all,
Makes them to feght, but yet map fall,
That they sall rue the barganing.
And Certes, I warn you of one thing,
Gif happen them, as GOD forbid,
For to prevail into this steed,
So that they win us all plainly,
They sall of us have no mercy.
And sen we know their felloun will,
Me think it sold accord to skill,
To set stoutnesse against fellonie,
And that gaite make a ieopardie.
Wherefore I you require, and pray:
That with all might that ever ye may,
But Cowardice or abasing,
Ye preasse you at the beginning,
To meet them that sall first assemble:
So stoutly, that the hindmest tremble.
And think upon your great manheede,
Your worship and your doughtie deed:
And on the joy that we abide,
Gif that us fall, as well may tide,
Hap for to vanquish the great battailyie,
Into our hands withoutten failyie,
We bear honor, praise, and riches,
Freedom, and wealth, and all blythnesse,
Gif ye conteene you manfully.
And in the contrair, all haillely
Sall fail, gif ye let Cowardice,
Or wickedness your heart supprise.
Ye might have lived into thraldom:
But for ye yarned to have freedom:
Ye are assembled here with me,
Therefore it is needful that we be
UUorthie, and wight but abasing
And I warn you well of one thing,
That more mischief may fall us nane.
Nor in their hands to be taken,
For they sold sla us (I wate well)
Even as they did my brother Neill.
But when I think on your stoutnesse,
And on the money great Prowess:
That ye have done so worthelie,
I traist, and trowes it sikkerlie,
To have plain victory into this fight.
For though your foes be meekle of might,
They have the wrong and succowdry,
And couets wrangous Senyeory,
And the strength of this place ye see,
Sall let us environed for to be.
And I pray you all specially,
Both more and less commonly:
That none of you for greediness,
Have eye to take of their riches:
Nor yet Prisoners to ta,
While ye see them arrayed sa:
And that the field ours plainly be,
Then at our lyking so may we
Take all the riches that there is.
Gif ye will work upon this wise:
Ye sall have victory sikkerly.
I wate not what more say sall I?
But ye wate all what honor is:
Conteene you, that on sik a wise,
That your honor ay saved be.
And I heght here in my laytie,
Gif any dies in the battailyie,
His land freely but Tax or Tailyie,
On the first day his aires sall weild,
Though he be never so young of eild.
Now make you ready for the sight:
GOD help us, that is most of might.
I reed, armed all night we be,
Puruayed in battle, so that we
To meet our foes all be boun.
Then answered they all with one soun:
As ye devise all sall be done.
Then to their Innes went they soon.
And ordainde them for the feghting.
Syne assembled in the Evening:
And that gaite all the night they lay.
While on the morn that it was day.
WHen the Clyffurde, as I heard air,
And all his rout rebuted were:
And the great Uangard alswa,
Were distrenyied the back to ta,
And they had told their rebuting,
They of the Uangard, how the King
Slew at one stroke so apertly,
A Knight that wight was, and hardy.
And how the Kings haill battle
Shupe them so stoutly to assail,
And Sir Edward the Bruce alswa,
When they all haill the back can ta,
And how they left had of their men.
And Clyffurd als had told him then,
How Thomas Randell took the Plain,
With a few folk how he hes slain
Sir William Haward the worthy,
And how the Earl faught manfully,
That as a Hurcheon all his rout
Gart set out spears them about.
And how that they were put again,
And one part of their good men slain.
The Englishmen sik abasing
Took, and sik dread of that tything,
That in five hundredth places and ma,
Together would they rowning ga,
And said, our Lords for their might,
With all gaites feght against the right:
But who makes weeres wrongouslie,
They offend GOD all too greatly,
And they that happen to misfaile,
And so may happen here, we shall.
And when their Lords had perceiving,
Of that discomfort, and that rowning,
That they yeed togidder two and two,
Throughout the Host then can they go,
To gar Heralds soon make cry,
That none discomforted should be,
For in jeopardies is off happennyne,
Whiles to wine, and whiles to tyne,
And that into the greit battailyie,
That upon no manner may failyie,
But if the Scots flee their way,
Shall all amended be perfay,
Therefore they monisht them to be
Of greit worship, and greit bounty,
And stoutly in the battle stand,
And take amends at their own hand.
They may well monish as they will,
And they may heght als to fulfill,
With stalward heart their bidding all:
But not for thy, I trow they shall,
Into their hearts dreeding be,
The King with his counsel privy,
Hes taken to read that he would naught,
Feght while the morn, but he were sought
Therefore they harbred them that night,
Down in the Kersse, and gart all dight,
And make ready all their apparel,
Against the morn for the battle.
For in the Kersse Puilles were,
Houses and thacke, they brake and bare
To make brigges where they might pass.
And some men says, the folk that was
In the Castle, when night can fall,
When that they knew their mischief all,
They went forth all that ever there were,
And doors and windows with them bare
So that they had before the day,
Brigged the Pooles so that they
Were passed over them euerilkane,
And the hard field on Horse hes taken.
All ready for to give battle,
Arrayed into their apparel.
THe Scottish men when that it was day,
Their Mass devoutly heard have they,
Syne took a s^p, and made them yare:
And when that they assembled were,
And in their battles all puruayed,
And their brad Baners all displayed,
They made Knights, as it affeeres.
To men that uses tha mysteeres,
The King made Walter Stewart Knight
And James Douglas that was wight,
And others als of greit bounty,
He made ilkane in their degree.
When this was done, as I you say,
Then went they forth in good array,
And took the plain field apartly.
Money wight men, good and hardy,
They were fulfilled of greit bounty,
Men might into that rout there see.
The Englishmen on other party,
That right as Angels shine brightlie,
Were not arrayed on sik manner,
For all their battles togidder were
In a shilltrum: but whidder it was,
Through greit straitness of the place,
That they were in to bide feghting:
Or then it was for abasing.
I wat not, but in a shilltrum,
It seemed they were all and some,
Except the Uangard allanerlie,
That with a right greit company,
By them selves arrayed were,
Who had been by, might have seen there
Tha folk ouertooke a meekle field
On breadth, where money a shining shield,
And money a birnisht bright armor,
And money man of greit valor,
And money a Baner bright and sheene.
Might in that greit shiltrum be seen,
And when the King of England,
Saw Scottishmen take on hand*
To take the plain Field sa openly,
Upon foot he thought ferlie:
And said, What? will you Scottishmen fight:
Yea, sikkerlie, Sir, said a Knight,
Sir Ingrame the Vmfrauile heght he,
And said, Forsooth* Sir, now I see,
But dread the most marvelous fight
That ever I saw: wheene for to fight,
The Scottishmen so few hes taken on hand
Against the haill might of England,
On plain hard field to give battle,
But if ye will trow my counsel.
Ye shall discomfite them lightly.
Ye shall with draw you hyne suddenly,
With Battles, Baners and Pennons,
While that we pass our Pauillions,
And ye shall see as soon that they,
Magre their Lord, shall break array,
And skaill then our Harness to ta,
And when we skailled see them sa
Prick we on them then hardely:
And we shall have them well lightly.
For then shall none be knit to fight,
That may withstand our meekle might,
I will not (said the King) perfay
Do so: for there shall no man say,
That I should eschew the battle,
Nor withdraw me for sik Rangall.
The meeting of the great battailyie, Where Scots defend, and English failyie.
WHen this was said, that hear say I,
The Scottishmen right reverently.
Kneeled all down, to GOD to pray:
And a short prayer then made they
To GOD, to help them in their fight.
And when the English King had sight,
Of them kneeling, he said, in hy
Yone folk kneeles to ask mercy,
Sir Ingrame said, Ye say sooth now,
They ask mercy, but not at you,
For their tresspasse to GOD they cry.
I tell you ane thing sikkerlie.
That yone men will win all, or die,
For dout of deed they will not flee.
Now be it so, then said the King:
And then bot longer delaying,
They gart come to the assembly,
On either side then men might see,
Money a worthy man and hardy,
Ready to do great Cheualry.
THus were they boun on ather side:
And Englishmen with meekle pride,
That were into the Uangard,
To the battle that Sir Edward
Governed and led, held straight their way,
The horse with spurs hardened they,
And pricked on them sturdely.
And they met them right hardely:
So that at their assembling there,
Sik a frushing of spears were:
That far away men might it hear.
At that meeting withoutten weere,
Were Steedes sticked money ane:
And money Knight borne down, and slain:
And money a hardy met doughtelie,
Where they escaped full hardly.
They dang on other with weapons seire.
Some of the horse that sticked were,
Rushed and reilled right rudely:
But the remnand not for thy,
That might come to the assembling,
For all that made no stinting:
But assembled right hardly,
And they met them right sturdelie,
With spears that were sharp to sheere,
And axes that well grounden were,
Wherewith raught was money a rout:
The fight was there so fell and stout,
That money a worthy man and wight,
Through force was felled in that fight,
That had no might to rise again.
The Scottishmen fast can them pain,
Their foes meekle might to frush:
I trow, they sall no pain refuse,
Nor perils, while their foes be,
Set in well hard perplexity.
The Earl of Murray with his battailyie, Came on stoutly but any failyie.
ANd when the Earl of Murray sa
Their Uangard saw so stoutly ta
The way, to Sir Edward all straight,
That met them with full meekle might.
He held his way with his Baner,
To the great rout, where togidder were
The nine battles that were so brade.
So feil Baners with them they had,
And of men so great quantity:
That it was wonder for to see,
The good Earl hidder took the way,
With his battle in good array:
And assembled so hardily,
That men might hear that had been by,
A great frush of the spears that brast:
For their foes assailyied fast,
That on the Steedes with meekle pride,
Came pricking, as they would over ride
The Earl, and all his company:
But they met them so sturdelie,
That money of them to eird they bare,
And money a Steed was sticked there:
And feill good men felled under feet,
That had no power to rise yet.
There men might see an hard battle,
And some defend, and some assail:
And money a rumble great and red,
Be raught there on ather side,
While through the byrnisht breast the blood,
That on the eird in streams yood.
The Earl of Murray and his men,
So stoutly them conteened then:
That they wan place ay maire and maire:
On their foes, the whilks were,
Ay ten for one, or ma, perfay.
So that it seemed well that they
Were tynt among so fell Menyie,
As they were plunged in the sea,
And when the Englishmen has seen
The Earl, and all his men bedeene,
Feght so stoutly but affraying,
Right as they had none abasing.
They preassed the^ fast with all their might:
And they with spears and swords bright,
And axes that right sharply share,
In mids the visage met them there:
There men might see a stalward stour,
And money men of great valor,
With spears, Masses, and with knives,
And other weapons wissell lives:
So that money fell down all dead.
The gersse wort of the blood all red.
The Earl that wight was and worthy,
And his men fought so manfully:
That who so had them seen that day,
I trow forsooth, that he sold say,
That they their devour did full well:
So that their foes sold it feel.
How Walter Stewart and Douglas, Came with their battle that worthy was.
WHen that their two battles were,
Assembled, as I said you air:
The Stewart Walter that then was,
And good Sir James of Douglas,
In a battle when they saw,
The Earl withoutten dread or aw,
Assembled with his company,
On all tha folk so sturdelie,
For to help him they held their way,
With their battle in good array:
And assembled so hardely,
Beside the Earl a little by:
That their foes felt their coming well.
For with weapons stalward of steel,
They dang on them with all their might,
Their foes received them well I hight,
With swords, spears, and with Mas.
The battle there so felloun was.
And als so great spilling of blood:
While on the eird the streams yoode,
The Scottishmen so well them bare,
And so great slaughter made they there:
And fra so feill there lives they reft,
That all the field was bloody left:
That time that the three battles were
All side for side, feghting well near:
Then might men hear money a dint,
And weapons upon armours stint.
And so over tumbled Knights and Steedes
And money one rich in Royal weeds,
Defouled foullie under feet:
Some held on loft, some tint the sweet.
A long time thus they faught, and were
That men no noise, nor cry might hear:
There was noght else but grains and dints,
They shook the fire as men on flints:
They faught ilkane so egerlie,
That they made nouther noise cry:
But dang on other with their might,
With weapons that were birneist bright:
The arrows als so thick they flaw,
That men might say well that them saw,
That they an hiddeous shout can ma.
For where they fell I vnderta.
They left after them takinning,
That needed (as I trow) leeching,
The English archers shot so fast,
That if their shot might have had last,
It had been hard to Scottishmen.
But King Robert that can well ken,
That their archerers were perilous:
And their shot hard and grievous,
Ordained before the assembly,
His Marshall, with a greit Menyie,
Five hundredth armed into steel,
That on light Horse were horsed well,
To prick among the archers,
And so assailie them with Spears,
That they no leisure had to shute,
His Marshall that hereof I mute.
That Sir Robert of Keith was calde,
(As I before have to you talde)
When he saw the battles so
Assembled, and togidder go,
And saw the archers shoot stoutly,
Then with them of his company.
In hy among them can he ride,
And ouertooke them at a side.
And rushed among them so rudely,
Stryking them so dispiteouslie,
And in sik fusioun dushing them down,
And slaying them without ransoun:
That they them skailled euerilkane.
And from that time forth there were nane
That assembled thick shot to ma,
When Scottish archers saw it was sa,
They were rebuted, they woxt hardy,
And with all their might shot egerlie,
Among the Horsemen that their rade,
And wounds wide to them they made:
And slew of them a well greit deill.
And bure them hardly and well:
For from their foes archers were,
Skailled, as I said to you air,
That more than they were by greit thing
So that they dred not their shooting,
They woxt so hardy, that they thought
They should set all their foes at naught.
THe Marshall and his company,
Was yet (as to you air said I)
Among the archers where they made,
With spears rowm, where ever they rade
And slew all that they might ouerta:
For they right lightly might do so:
For they had not an struck to stynt,
Nor for to hold again an dynt,
Against armed men into the fight,
May naked men have little might.
They skailled them on sik manner,
That some to their greit battle were
Withdrawn then, in full greit hy,
And some were fled allutterly.
But the folk that behind them was,
That for their own folk had no place,
Yet then to come to the feghting,
Again right smertly can them ding.
The Archers that they met fleeing,
That then was made right recreeing
That their hearts were tynt cleanely,
I trow they shall not skaith greitlie,
The Scottish men with shot that day:
And the good King Robert that ay
Was filled full of great bounty,
Saw how that his battles three,
So hardly assembled were,
And in the fight so well them bare
And so fast on their foes can ding:
That him thought none had abasing,
And how the Archers were skailled then,
He was all blyth: and to his men
He said, Lordings, now look that ye
Worthy, and of good comfort be,
At this assemble, and hardy.
And assemble you so sturdely,
That nothing may before you stand,
Our men so fiercely are feghtand.
That they their foes hes cumbred sa:
That be they preassed, I vnderta
A little faster, ye shall see
That they discomfist soon shall be,
Now go we on them so hardely,
And ding on them so doughtely.
That they may feill at our coming,
That we them hate in meekle thing:
For greit cause they have us made,
That occupied our lands brade,
And put all to subjectioun:
Your goods made all theirs commoun:
Our kin and friends for their own,
Despitteouslie hanged and drawn:
And would destroy us if they might,
But I trow God through his foresight,
This day hes granted us his grace,
To wreke us on them in this place.
When this was said, they held their way,
And on ane side assembled they
So stoutly, that at their meeting,
Their foes were rushed a greit thing,
Their men might see them fiercely fight,
And they that worthy were and wight,
Do money a worthy vassalage.
They faught as they were in a rage.
For when the Scots archerie,
Saw their foes so sturdelie
Stand in the battle them again,
With all their might, and all their maine,
They laid on as men out of wit:
And where they with full struck might hit
There might none armor stint their strak
They frushed all they might overtake:
And with axes sik dushes gave,
That they Heads, and Helmes claue.
And their foes right hardly,
Met them, and dang on doggedlie,
With weapons that were styth of steel.
There was a battle right cruel.
So great dinging there was of dynts,
As weapons upon armours stynts:
And of spears sik bristing,
And sik thrang, and sik thrysting:
Sik graining, girnyng, that was so great,
And noise: that they can other beat:
Crying Ensenyies on ilk side,
Giving and taking wounds wide,
That it was hiddeous for to hear:
All the four battles with that weere
Feghting in a front hailly,
O mighty GOD, how doughtely,
Sir Edward the Bruce and his men,
Among their foes conteened them then?
Feghting in so good conuyne:
So worthy, hardy, and so fine,
That their Uangard rushed was,
And magre theirs, left all the place.
And to their great rout into warrant
They went, that then had upon hand
So great noise, that they were affrayed
For Scottish men that them hard assayed:
That they were in a shiltrum all,
Who happened in that preasse to fall,
I trow, again he sall not rise.
Their men might see on money wise,
Hardements encheeued doughtely:
And men that wight were and worthy,
Down under feet lying all dead:
Where all the field with blood was red:
Armoures and coats that they bare,
Were so with blood defouled there:
That they might not described be,
And who had then been by to see,
The Steward Walter, and all his rout,
And the Lord Douglas that was stout,
Feghting into that stalwart stour,
They sold say, that of all honor,
They were worthy, that in that fight,
So fast preassed their foes might:
And rushed them where ever they yeed,
Men might see then so money Steed
Fleeing on stray, that Lord had nane.
O G^D, who then good tent had taken
To the good Earl of Murray,
And his, that so great dynts gave:
And so fast fought in that battle,
Tholling sik pain, and sik travel:
That they, and theirs made sik debate,
That where they came, they made them gaite,
There men might hear Ensenyies cry:
And Scottishmen cried hardly:
On them, on them, on them they failyie:
UUith that so hard they can assailyie,
And slew all that they might ouerta.
And the Scots Archers alswa,
Shot among them right sturdelie,
Engreeuing them so greetumlie:
That what for them that with them faught
And so great routs to them raught,
And preassed them full egerlie:
And what for arrows, that fellounlie,
Money great wounds can them ma:
And slew fast of their horse alswa:
That they recooled a little wie,
They dread so greatly for to die:
That their conueene woxt worse than eir.
For they that feghting with them were,
Set hardement, and strength, and will,
And heart, and courage to fulfill:
With all their mane, and all their might,
To put them fully to the flight.
How Scottish Swaynes of sheets made, Them Baners, and in battle rade.
IN this time that I tell of here,
That their battles on this maneere,
Were stricken, where on ather side,
Were money men of meekle pride:
Feghting they were full ernestly:
They might have seen who had been by,
Yeomen, and Swaynes, and Pedaill,
That in the Park to keep vittaile,
Were left, when they wist but leesing,
That their Lords with hard feghting,
On there foes assembled were:
One of themselves that was there,
Capitane over them all they made,
And sheets, that were somedeill brade
They made in stead of Baners,
And fastened on long trees and spears:
And said, that they would see the fight,
And help their Lords at their might:
When hereto all assented were,
In a rout they assembled are.
Fifteen thousand they were, and ma.
And then in great hy can they ga,
UUith their Baners all in a rout,
As they had been men styth and stout,
They came with all their assembly,
While that they might the battles see.
Then all at ones they gave a cry:
Sla, sla, upon them hardely:
And therewithal coming were they,
But they were yet well far away.
And Englishmen that frushed were
Through force of fight, as I said air,
UUhen they saw men with sik a cry
Coming with sik a company,
That they well near als money were,
As they were feghting with them yare:
And they before had not them seen:
Then wit ye well withoutten ween,
They were abased so gretumly:
That the best and the most hardy,
That was into that Oast that day,
Wald with his Mensk have been away,
The King Robert by their reilling,
Saw them well near discomfiting,
Then his Ensenyie he can fast cry
And with them of his company,
His foes he preassed so fast, that they
Then were into so great affray:
That they left place ay maire and maire.
For all the Scottishmen that were there:
When they saw them eschew the fight,
Dang on them so with all their might:
That they skailled in trowples seire,
And till discomfiting drew near.
And some of them fled all plainly:
But they that wight were and hardy,
That shame let to take the flight
With great mischief maintained the fight,
And stoutly in the stoure can stand.
And when the King of England,
Saw his men flee in sundry place,
And saw his foes rout, that was
Worthen so wight, and so worthy,
That all his folk were haillelie
So astoneyed, that they had no might,
To stint their foes in that fight:
He was abased so gretumlie,
That he, and in his company,
Fifteen hundredth armed men at right,
Into that frush took all the flight:
And to the Castle took their way.
And I have heard yet some men say,
That of Vallance Sir Aymery,
When he the field saw vanquished near,
By the renyie led away the King,
Against his will from the feghting,
And when Sir Geiles de Argentie,
Saw the King with his Menie,
Shape then to flee so speedily,
He speed then to the King in hy:
And said (Sir), sen that ye will so,
That ye thus gaite your way will go,
Have good day: for again will I,
Yet fled I never sikkerlie.
And I choose rather to bide and die,
Then for to live, and shamefullie flee,
His bridle then but more abade:
He turned and again he rade,
As dread of no kin thing had he:
And pricked crying, Argentie
Right on Sir Edward Bruces rout.
That was so stalwart and so stout:
And they right sturdely him met,
And so feill Spears on him set,
That he and Horse were charged so,
And both down to the eird can go,
And in that place there slain was he.
And of his death was greit pity.
He was the third best Knight, perfay.
That men wist living in this day:
And did full money fair journey,
On Saracens three derenyies made he:
And into ilke derenyie of tha,
He quickly vanquished Saracens two,
His greit worship took their ending:
And fra Sir Aymer, with the King,
Was fled, there durst not one abide,
But fleeing skailled on ilke side.
And their foes preased them right fast,
To say the sooth they were aghast:
And fled so done affrayedlie:
That of them a greit company,
Fled in the Water of Forth, and there
The most part of them drowned were:
And Banockburne within the braes,
Of Men and Horse so charged was:
That upon drowned Horse, and Men,
Folk might pass dry out over it then,
And Laddes, Swaynes, they Rangall,
When they saw vanquished the battle,
Ran among them, and so can sla
Tha folk that no defense might ma,
That it was pity for to see
I never heard into no Country,
Folks at so greit mischife were stad,
On ane side they their foes had:
That slew them down without mercy,
And they had on the other party,
Banockburne, that so cummersome was,
For slike and deepnesse for to pass:
That there might none out over it ride,
But there behooued them to abide:
So that some slain some drowned were:
Might none eschape that ever came there,
But yet full money got away:
That elsewhere fled, as I hear say,
The King with them he with him had,
In a rout to the Castle rade:
And would have been therein, for they
Wist not what gate to get away.
Sir Philip Mowbray said him till,
The Castle Sir, is at your will,
But come ye in it, ye shall see
That ye shall soon assieged be:
And there is none in all England,
To make rescourse dare take in hand:
And but rescourse may no Castle,
Be holden long, this wate ye well,
Therefore comfort you and rely
Your men about you, right straightly:
And hold about the Park your way,
Als sadly knit, as ever ye may,
For I trow that none shall have might,
That chooses with so feill to fight.
And as he counseld, so have they done:
And beneth the Castle went they soon.
Right by the round table their way,
And the new Park enuironde they.
And toward Linlithgow held in hy:
But I trow they shall hastily,
See conuoyed, with sik folk that they,
^ trow, might suffer well away.
For Sir James Lord of Douglas,
Came to the King, and asked the case:
And gave to him lieue but abade.
But all too few of Horse he had:
He had not in his rout sextie,
But yet he sped him hastily:
The way after the King to ta.
Now let him on his ways ga,
And after this we shall well tell,
What to him in the chase befell.
How the Earl of Hartfurd in Bothwell was. Taken over the walls, fled from the
chase.
WHen the greit battle on this wise,
Was discomfist, as I devise.
Where threttie thousand well were dead,
And drowned, and slain into that stead,
And some were into hands taken:
And other some their gaite are gane.
The Earl of Herfurde for that melle,
Departed with a greit menyie:
And straight to Bothwell held their way,
That then was in Englishmens fay:
Was holden as a place of weere.
Sir Walter Gilbertson was there
Capitane, and it had in ward.
The Earl of Herfurd hidder rade,
And was taken in over the wall,
And fifty of his men withal:
And set in Houses sinderlie,
So that they had there no mastrie.
The laue went toward England,
But of that ro^t, I take on hand,
The third part were slain, or taken:
The laue with great pain hame are gane.
Sir Morise also the Barclay,
Fra the great Oast held his way.
With a great ^out of Wales men,
Where ever they rade, men might them ken:
For they well near all naked were,
Or linen claithes had but maire.
They held their way in full great hy:
But money of their company,
Ere they in England came were taken:
And money of them als were slain.
They fled als other ways seite:
But to the Castle that was near,
Of Striuiling, fled sik a Menyie,
That it was wonder for to see.
For all the Craigges so heilled were
About the Castle here and there:
Of them that for strength of that sted,
Hidderward to warrant fled.
And for they were so feill, that there
Fled under the Castle were.
The King Robert that was witty,
Held ay his good men near him by:
For dread that rise again sold they.
This was the cause forsooth, to say,
Wherethrough the King of England,
Escaped home into his land,
WHen that the field so clean was made
Of Englishmen, that none abade:
The Scottishmen took soon in hand,
So great riches there they fand.
Silver and gold, clothes and arming,
And vessel, and all other thing,
That ever they might lay on their hand,
So great a riches there they fand:
That money men were rich made,
Of the riches that they there had.
When this was done, that here say I,
The King sent a great company,
Up to the Craigges them to assail,
That were fled from the great battle:
And they them yald without debate,
And them in hand they took full haite:
Syne to the King all brought were they,
And they dispended hailly that day
In riches, and in spraith taking:
Fra end was made of the feghting.
And when they naked spoiled were,
That were slain in the battle there,
It was forsooth a great ferly,
To see so money there dead to ly:
Two hundredth pair of spurs red,
Were taken of Knights that were dead.
The Earl of Gloucester dead was there,
That men called, Sir Gilbert of Clare:
And Geiles de Argentie alswa,
And Pain Typont, and other ma:
That there names not tell can I.
And upon Scottishmens party,
There was slain worthy Knights two,
William Wepont was one of tha:
And Sir Walter of Rosse another,
That Sir Edward the Kings brother
Loved, and held in sik dainty,
That as himself him loved he.
And when he wist that he was dead,
He was so wa, and will of read,
That he said, making full evil cheer.
That him had rather the journey were
Undone, ere he so dead had been.
Outtaken him, men hes not seen,
UUhen he for any man made meening.
And the cause was of his loving,
That he his sister in Paramours
Loved, and held at great retoures,
His own wife Dame Issabell:
And therefore so great distance fell
Betwixt him, and the Earl Dauy
Of Atholl, brother to this Lady:
That the Earl on Sanct John's night,
When both the Kings were boun to fight
In Cambuskynneth the Kings vittaile
Took, and hardly can assail
Sir William of Airth, and him slew,
And with him men mo than enew.
Therefore syne into England
He was banished, and all his land
Was seized, as forfeite to the King,
That did thereof all his liking.
ANd when the field, as I told air,
Was dispoyled, and made all bare.
The King and all his company,
Glade, and joyful was, and merry
Of the grace that them fallen was:
Toward their Innes the ways taes
To rest them: for they weary were.
But for the Earl Gilbert of Clare
That slain was in the battle place,
The King somedeill annoyed was:
For to him near sibbe was he,
Then to a Kirk he gart him be
Brought, and walked all that night.
And on the morn when day was light,
The King raise as his use was:
And to an English Knight through case
Happened, that he yeede wauerand:
So that no man laid on him hand:
And in a buske he hid his arming,
And waited while he saw the King,
In the morning come forth early:
Then is he went to him in hie,
Sir Marmaduk the Twemane he hight:
He raiked to the King full right,
And hailsed him upon his knee.
Welcome Sir Marmaduk (said he)
To what man art thou prisoner?
To none (he said) but to you here,
I yield me at your will to be,
And I receive thee, Sir, said he.
Then gart he treat him courteously.
He dwelt long in his company:
And syne in England him sent he,
Arrayed well but ransom free:
And gave him great gifts thereto:
A worthy man that so could do,
Might make him greatly for to prise.
When Marmaduk upon this wise
UUas yolden, as I to you say.
Then came Sir Philip the Mowbray:
And to the King yald the Castle,
His cunnand hes he holden well
Then with him treated so the King,
That he beleft of his dwelling,
And held him leelely his fay,
To the last end of his life day,
How James of Douglas conuoyed the King Of England home but Sojourning,
NOw speak we of the Lord Douglas,
And tell how he followed the chase:
And had wheene in his company,
But he sped him in full greit hy,
And as he through the Torwood foore,
He saw come riding over the Moore:
Sir Lawrence of Abernethie,
That with sextie in company,
Came for to help the Englishmen,
For he was Englishman yet then
And when he heard how that it was,
He left the Englishmens peace,
And to the Lord Douglas there,
For to be leele and true he swear,
And then they both followed the chase:
And ere the King of England was
Passed Linlithgow, they came so near,
With all the folk that with them were,
That well among them shoot they might,
But they thought them too few to fight,
For five hundredth armed they were,
In the greit rout that they had there,
Togidder full surely rade they,
And held them upon bridle aye,
They were governed full wittelie:
For it seemed they were aye ready,
For to defend them at their might
If they assailied were in fight.
And the Lord Douglas and his men,
Thought it was not good purpose then,
To feght with them all openly,
He conuoyed them so narrowly:
That of the hindmest aye took he,
Might none behind his Fellows be,
A pennie-stone-cast, but he in hy,
Was taken or slain deliueredlie
They no rescourse would to him ma,
Although he followed never sa,
IN this mane^ conuoyed them he,
While that the King and his Menyie,
To Wincheburgh all commen are.
Then lighted they all that there were,
To bait their Horse that were weary:
And Douglas and his company,
Bated also beside them near.
They were so feill withoutten weere.
And in arms so cleanelie dight:
And so arrayed for to fight,
And h^e so ween, and but gaddering,
That he would not in plain feghting
Assaillyie them, but rade them by,
Waiting his time so eithandly,
A little while they baited there,
And syne lap on, and forth can fare,
And he was always by them near,
And leete them not have sik leiser
As anes wa^er for to ma.
And if that any stad were sa,
And behind left was (...) space:
Seezed in hand als soon he was,
They conuoyed them upon this wise^
While that the King, and rout is
Comde to the Castle of Dumbar.
Where he, and of his men so were,
Received right well, for yet than.
The Earl Patricke was Englishman:
That gart with meat and drink alswa.
Refresh them well, and syne can ta,
A bait, and send the King by sey,
To Bamburgh in his own Country.
Their Horse there left they all on stray,
But leesed als soon in hand were they.
The laue that lived were without.
Addressed them into a rout:
And held to Berwicke straight their way,
In a rout, and the sooth shall say:
They leaued of there men partly,
Ere they came there, but not for thy
They came to Barwicke soon, and there
Into the town received were:
Else at greit mischief had they been.
And when the Lord Douglas hes seen,
That he had leesed there his pain,
Toward the King he went again.
THe King escaped on this wise,
(Lo what falding to Fortune lies,
That whiles upon a man will smile,
And prick him syne another while:
In no time stable can she stand,
This mighty King of England,
She had set on her wheel at hight,
When with so ferlifull a might,
Of men, of arms and archers,
And of foot men and Hobillers,
He came riding out of his Land,
As I before have borne on hand:
And in a night syne and a day,
She set him into so hard assay,
That he with few men in a bait,
Feign was for to hold home his gaite:
But of this ilke wheel turning,
King Robert should make no mourning,
For his side of the wheel on hight*
Rose, when the other down can light,
For two contrares ye may wit well,
Set against other in a wheel*
When one is hie, another is law,
And if it fall that Fortoun thraw
The wheel about, it that on hight
Was eir, on force it mon down light:
And it that laigh was under air,
Mon leap on hight in the contraire,
So foore it of their Kings two.
For when King Robert stad was so,
That in his greit mischief was he,
The other was in his Majesty.
And when the King Edwards might
Woxt less, then Roberts raise on hight:
And now sik Fortoun came him till.
That he was hied and had his will.
AT Striuiling was he yet lyand,
And the greit Lords that he fand,
Dead in the field, he gart bury,
In holy places honorably.
And the laue syne that dead were there,
Into greit Pittes buried were.
The Castle and the towers syne,
Even to the ground down gart he mine,
And syne to Bothwell sent he,
Sir Edward with a greit Menyie,
For they therein send to him word,
That the rich Earl of Herfurd,
And other mighty als were there.
So treated he with Sir Walter,
That Earl, and Castle, and all the laue,
Into Sir Edwards hand he gave.
Then to the King the Earl sent he,
That gart him right well kept be.
While at the last they treated sa:
That he to England home sold ga,
Without paying of ransom, free:
And that for him sold changed be,
Bishop Robert that blind was made,
And the Queen that they taken had
In prison, as before said I,
And her Daughter Dame Mariory.
The Earl was changed for their three:
And when they commen were home al free,
The Kings daughter that was fair,
And was als his appearand air,
With Walter Stewart can her wed:
And they well soon got of their bed
A man-child through Gods grace,
That after his good old father was
Called Robert, and syne was King,
And had the land in governing,
After his worthy son Dauy:
That reigned nine years and threttie,
And in the time of the compyling
Of this book this last Robert was King:
And of his Kinrik passed was
Five years, and was the year of grace,
A thousand three hundredth and seventy
And five: and of his eild sextie.
And that was after the good King,
Robert was brought to his ending,
Sex and forty UUinter but maire.
GOD grant, that they that commen are
Of his offspring, maintain the land,
And hold the folk well to warrant:
And maintain right, and eke lawtie,
Als well as in his time did he,
How King Robert rade in England, And brunt up all Northumberland.
KIng Robert now was well at hight,
And ilk day the^ grew more his might:
His men wort rich, and his Country
Abounded well of corn and fee:
And of all kind of other riches.
And mirth, solace, and all vlythnes
UUas in the haill land commonly:
For ilk man blyth was, and ioly.
The King after this great journey,
Through reed and counsel of his privy,
In sundry towns gart cry on hight,
That who so clamed to have right,
To hold in Scotland land and fee,
That within twelve months sold he
Come and claim it: and then to do
To the king, as pertained thereto.
And gif they come not in that year,
Then sold they wit withoutten weere
That hard thereafter none sold be,
The King that was of great bounty,
Had busi^es when this was done,
One ^ast gact summond after soon,
And went then into England,
And over rade all Northumberland,
And brunt towns, and took their pray,
And syne went home upon their way.
I let it shortly pass far by:
For there was no great Cheualry
Proved, that is to speak of here.
The King went often in this manner
In England, for to rich his men,
That in riches abounded then.
How Sir Edward took on hand, For to make weere into Ireland.
THe Earl of Carrik Sir Edward,
That stouter was than a Leopard,
And had no will to live at peace,
Thought that Scotland too little was
To his brother, and him alswa:
Therefore to purpose can he ta,
That he of Ireland would be King:
Therefore he sent, and had treating,
UUith the Irshry of Ireland,
That in their lawtie took on hand,
Of all Ireland to make him King:
UUith thy, that he with hard feghting,
Might overcome the Englishmen,
That in that land were winning then,
And they sold help with all their might:
And he that heard them make sik heght,
Into his heart he had great liking.
And with the consent of the King,
Gathered him men of great bounty:
And syne at Air shipped he.
Into the neist month of May,
To Ireland held he straight his way,
And had there in his company,
The Earl Thomas that was worthy:
And good Sir Philip the Mowbray,
That sikker was in hard assay:
Sir John Sowles that was wight,
And Sir John Stewart a good Knight:
The Ramsay als of Oughterhous.
That was right wise and Cheualrous.
And Sir Fergus of Ardrossane,
And other Knights money ane.
In Wolyngs Firth arrived they
Saiflie, but bargane or assay,
And sent their ships home again.
A great thing have they vndertane,
That with so wheene as they were,
That was seven thousand men but maire,
Shupe for to weirray all Ireland,
Where they fall see money thousand,
Come armed on them for to fight:
But though they wheene were, they were wight,
And without dread or affray.
In two battles they took their way,
Toward Craigfergus. it to see.
But the Lords of that Country,
Maundewile, Bisset, and Logane,
Their men they sembled euerilkane.
The Savages als was with them there:
And when they all assembled were,
They were well near twenty thousand.
When that they wist, that in their land,
Sik a Menyie arrived were,
With all the folk that they had there,
They went toward them in hy.
And when Sir Edward wist surely,
That to him near coming were they,
His men right well he gart array.
The Uangard had the Earl Thomas,
In the Reeregard Sir Edward was,
The first battle that Sir Edward Wan in Ireland, with feghting hard.
THeir foes approached to the fighting,
And they met them but abasing,
There men might see a full greit melle,
The Earl Thomas and his Menyie,
Dang on their foes so doughtely,
That in short time men might see ly,
An hundredth that all bloody were,
For hobynes that were sticked there.
Reilled and flang, and greit rowme made;
And kest them that upon them rade,
Sir Edward and his company,
Assembled then so hardly,
That they their foes their rushed all:
Who happened in that feght to fall.
It was greit peril of his rising.
The Scottishmen in that feghting,
So apertlie, and well them bare:
That all their foes rushed were,
And they haillie the flight hes taken,
In the battle were taken and slain,
All haill the flower of Wollistar,
The Earl of Murray greit prise had there
For his right worthy Cheualrie,
Comforted all his company.
This was a well fair beginning,
For newlings at their arriving.
In plain feght they discomfist there
These folk, that aye four for ane were,
Syne to Craigfergus are they gane,
And in the town hes Innes taken.
The Castle new was stuffed then,
Right well with vittaill and with men,
Thereto they set a Siege in hy.
And money ishe full apertlie
Made was, while the Siege there lay:
While truce at the last took they.
When that the folk of Wollister,
To his peace hailly commen were.
Then Sir Edward would take on hand,
To ride farthermore in the land.
The withletting of the pass of Endnellane
ANd of the Kings of that Country.
There came to him and made fewtie*
Well ten or twelve, as I heard say.
But they hold him short while perfay.
For two of them, one Makgoulchane,
And another heght Macarthane,
Umbeset him into his way,
Where him behooued of need to ga.
With two thousand men with Spears,
And als money of their archers:
And all the Cattle of the land.
Were driven hidder to warrant.
Men called that place Endnellane,
In all Ireland straitter is nane:
For thy Sir Edward there kept they:
And thought he should not pass that way.
But he his voyage straight hes taken,
And even toward the place is gane,
The Earl of Murray Sir Thomas,
That first put him to all assayes,
He lighted on foot with his Menie,
And apertlie the place took he.
The Irish King, I spoke of air,
That in the place embushed were,
Met him sull stoutly: But he
Assailed so with his Menie,
That magre theirs he wan the place,
Slain of their foes full money was
Throughout the Wood then chased they,
And seezed in sik abundance the Prey.
That all the folk of their Host were,
Refreshed well an week or mair.
At Kylsagart Sir Edward lay,
And there well soon he hes heard say:
That at Dondalke was an assembly,
Made of the Lords of that Country,
In Host they were assembled there
There was first Richard of Clare
That in all Ireland Lieuetenand
Was to the King of England.
The Earl of Desmound als was there.
And the Earl also of Kildar.
The Bryane eke, and the Wardane
That were Lords of greit Renoun.
The Butler also there was,
And when Sir Morise le fitz Thomas,
That with their men were commen there*
A right greit Host, forsooth they were,
And when Sir Edward wist surely,
That there was sik a Cheualrie,
In hy his Host he gart array.
And hidderward he took his way,
And near the town took his Harbrie,
But, for he wist right perfitelie,
That in the town were money men,
His battles he arrayed then:
And stood arrayed in battle,
To keep them, if they would assail.
The battle of Dondalk in Ireland. That Sir Edward took with his hand.
ANd when that Sir Richard of Clare,
And other Lords that were there:
With that the Scottishmen so were near,
With their battles coming were,
They took to counsel that at night:
For it was late* they would not fight:
But on the morn in the morning,
Well soon after the Sunrising,
They should ishe forth all that there were
Therefore that night they did no maire,
But Harbred them on another party,
That night the Scots company,
Were watched right well at al their might*
And on the morn when day was light,
In two battles they them arrayed.
And stood with Baners in hand displayed,
For the Battle all ready bowne,
And they that were within the town,
When the Sun was risen shinning clear,
Send forth of them that with them were,
Fifty to see the conteening
Of Scottishmen, and their coming.
And they rade forth, and saw them soon,
Syne come again withoutten hone*
And when that they all lighted were,
Then told they to their Lords there,
That Scottishmen seemed to be
Worthy, and of right great bounty,
But they are not withoutten weere:
Half deill a Denner to us are here.
The Lords had of that tiding
Great joy, and great recomforting:
And gart men through the City cry,
That all sold arm them hastily.
When they were armed, and puruayed,
And for the fight all haill arrayed,
Then went they forth in good array:
Syne with their foes assembled they,
That kept them right hardly.
The stour began then cruelly.
For at her party set all their might,
To rush their foes into that fight:
And with all pain on other dang.
That stalward stour lasted well lang:
That men might not perceive, nor see
Who most there at abone sold be:
For fra soon after the Sun rising,
Till after mid-noone the feghting
Lasted, into sik a dout:
But then Sir Edward that was stout,
With all them of his company,
Shot upon them so sturdelie:
That they might thole no more the fight,
All in a frush they took the flight.
And they followed full egerlie,
Into the town all commonly,
They entered both Intermelle:
There men might felloun slaughter see.
For the right Noble Earl Thomas,
That with his rout followed the chase.
Made sik slaughter into the town,
And so felloun Decisioun:
That all the Rewes bloody were,
Of slain men that were lying there*
The Lords were gotten all away.
And when the town (as I heard say)
Was through great force of feghting taken,
And all their foes fled, or slain,
They harbred them within the town,
Where, of vittaile was sik fusioun,
And so great abundance of wine:
That the good Earl had dout therein,
That of their men sold drunken be,
And make in drunkenness some melle.
Therefore he made of wine, Lewerie
To ilk man that he paid sold be.
And they had all enough perfay.
That night right well at ease were they,
And right blyth of the great honor,
That them befell for their valor.
The third battle in Ireland, That good Sir Edward took on hand.
After this fight they soiournde there,
Into Dondalk three days or maire:
Then took they Southerward their way,
Earl Thomas rade before them ay.
And as they rade through the Country,
They might upon the hills see,
So money men it was ferly.
And when the Earl would sturdelie
Dress him to them with his Baner:
They would flee all that ever they were:
So that in fight not one would bide.
And they forth on their ways did ride,
While to a great Forest came they,
Kylros it heght, as I heard say,
And they took all their harbrie there.
In all this time, Richard of Clare,
That was the Kings Lieuetenand,
Of all the barnage of Ireland,
An great Oast there assembled had,
That was five battles great and brade:
And Sir Edward, and his men,
Well near him were they commen then.
He got soon witting, that they were
In haill battle coming near.
His men addressed he them again,
And gart them stoutly take the Plain:
And syne the Earl came them to see:
And Sir Philip de Mowbray sent he,
And Sir John Stewart went alswa,
For to discover the way they ta:
And saw the Oast near come at hand,
That were to guess fifty thousand.
Home to Sir Edward rade they then,
And said, that they were money men.
He said again: the ma they be,
The more honor all out have we,
Gif that we bear us manfully:
UUe are here set in ieopardie,
To win honor, or for to die,
UUe are too far fra home to flee:
Therefore let ilk man worthy be,
Yone are but gaddered of this Country,
And they sall flee, I trow lightly,
Gif we assail them manfully.
All they said then, they sold well do.
With that they approached near them to,
Their battles ready for to fight,
And they met them with meekle might.
They were ten thousand worthy men,
The Scottishmen all on foot were then,
And they on S^eedes trapped well:
Some heilled all in Yrne and Steel.
But Scottishmen at their meeting,
With spears pierced their arming:
And sticked horse, and men down bare,
A felloun slaughter was then there:
I can not tell their straikes all,
Nor who in feght gart others fall:
But in short time I vnderta,
They of Ireland were cumbred sa:
That they durst them abide no maire,
But fled skailled all here and there.
And leaued in the battle stead,
UUell money of their good men dead.
Of weapons, arming, and dead men,
The field was hailly ouerstrowed then:
That great Oast rudely rushed was:
But Sir Edward leete no man chase,
But with prisoners that they had taken,
Toward the Wood again is gain:
Where that their harness leaued were,
That night they made them merry cheer,
And loved GOD fast of his grace.
The good Knight that so worthy was,
To Judas Macchabeus might
Be likened well, that into fight,
Forsook no multitude of men,
While he had one against ten.
How an Irish King false and froward, Leete out a Loch upon Sir Edward.
THus as I said, Richard of Clare,
And his greit Host rebuted were:
But he about him naught for thy,
Was gaddering men aye it handly,
For he thought yet to recover his cast,
It angered him even felloun fast:
That twice into battle was he
Discomfist with a few Menyie:
And Scottishmen that to the Forest,
Were riding for to take their rest:
All tha two nights there they lay,
And made them mirth, solace and play,
Toward Endrossy syne they rade,
An Irish King that aith had made
To Sir Edward of his fewtie
For before that time him prayed he
To see his land, and his vittaile,
Nor not that they might help should fail.
Sir Edward trowed into his hight,
And with his rout rade hidder right,
A greit River he gart him pass,
And in a right fair place that was
Laigh by a Burn, he gart them ta
Their Harbery, and said, he would ga,
To gar men vittaile to them bring,
He held his way but more dwelling,
For to betraise was all his thought.
In sik a place he hes them brought.
Wherefra two journeyes well and mare,
All the Cattle withdrawn were,
So that they in that land might get
Nothing, that worth was for to eat.
With hunger he thought them to feeblish.
Syne bring on them their enemies,
This false treatour men had made,
A little South where he harbred had,
Sir Edward with the Scottishmen:
The Ishe of a Loch to them.
And let it out within the night,
The water then with sik a might,
On Sir Edward, and his men came down
That they in perrill were to drown,
For ere they wist, on flot were they,
With meekle pain they got away,
And held their lives, as God gave grace:
But of their Harness tint there was.
He made them no good feast perfay,
And not for thy auengh had they:
For though they wanted of the meat,
I warn you well, they were well wete
In greit distress there were they stad,
For greit default of meat they had.
And they betwixt greit Rivers two
Were set, and might pass none of tho.
The Ban, that is an arm of the sea,
That with Horse may not passed be,
Was betwixt them and W^sister.
They had been in greit peril there.
Were not a scummer of the Sea,
Thomas of Dun called was he,
Heard that the Host so straightly than
Was stad, he sailled up the Ban:
While that he came near where they lay,
They knew him well, and blyth were they
Then with four ships that he had taken,
He set them over the Ban ilkane,
And when they came in bigged Land,
Uittaile, and meat aneugh they ^and,
And in a Wood them harbred they,
None of the Land wist where they lay.
They resset them, and made good cheer.
Into that time beside them were,
With a greit Host Richard of Clare,
And other greit of Ireland, were
Harbred into a Forest side:
And ilke day they gart men ride.
To bring vittailes in seir manners
To them from the town of Cogners,
That well near ten miles was them froe,
Ilke day as they would come and go,
They came the Scottishmens Host so near,
That but two mile betwixt them were,
How Sir Thomas of Randell, Wan from the Irishmen their vit^all.
ANd when the Earl Thomas perceuing
Had, of their come, and their ganging
He gat him a good company,
Three hundredth on horse wight and hardy,
There was Sir Philip the Mowbray.
And Sir John Stewart als perfay,
And Sir Allane Stewart alswa,
Sir Robert Boyd, and other ma,
They rade to meet the vittallers,
That with their vittaile from Cogners.
Came, holding to their Host the way,
So suddenly on them set they:
That they were so abased all,
That all they let their weapons fall,
And mercy pitteouslie can cry.
And they took them in their mercy,
And hes them up so cleenelie taken,
That of them all escaped nane.
The Earl through them gat wittering:
That of their Host in the Evening,
Some would come out of the Wood-side,
And for to meet their vitttaile ride,
He thought on them a jeopardie,
And gart his men all haillelie,
Dight them in Prisoners array.
Their Prisoners als with them took they:
And while the night was near the^ bade,
And syne toward the Host they rade.
Some of their meekle Host hes seen
Them come, and weind well they had been
Their vittaillers, therefore they rade
Against them safely: for they had
No dread, that they their foes were.
And als they hungered very saire,
Therefore they came abandounlie.
And when they near were, in greit hy
The Earl, and all that with him were,
Rushed on them with Weapons bare:
And their Ensenyie hiely can cry.
And they that saw so suddenly
Their foes ding on them, were rad,
That they none heart to help had,
But to their Wood their way they ta,
And they chased, and so feill can sla,
That all the fields ouerstrowed were.
More then a thousand dead were there:
Right to their Oast they can them chase,
And syne again their ways gaes.
ON this wise was the vittaile taken,
And of the Irish men money slane:
The Earl syne wi^h his company,
Prisoners, and vittaile haillelie,
They brought all to Sir Edward swyth:
And he was of their coming blyth.
That night they made them merry cheer*
For they even at their ease now were:
They were all watched ay sickerlie.
Their foes upon the other party,
When they heard how their men were slain,
And how their vittaile als was taken:
They took the counsel, that they would
Their ways toward Cogneres hold,
And harbrie in the City ta.
And in great hy they have done sa,
And rode by night to the City,
They found their vittaile great plenty,
And made them merry and good cheer:
For in the town all traist they were.
Upon the morn they sent to spy,
Where Scottishmen had taken harbry,
But they were met with* and all taken:
And brought unto the Oast ilkane.
The Earl of Murray right meekelie,
Speered at one of their company,
Where their Oast lay, and what they thought
To do, and said, gif that he might
Find, that the sooth to him said he,
He sold gang home but ransom free.
He said, forsooth, I sall you say,
They think the morn when it is day,
To seek you with all their Menyie.
Gif they may get wit where ye be:
They have gart through the City cry,
On pain of life full fellounly.
That all the men of this Country,
The morn into the City be,
And truly they sall be so feill,
That ye sall no wise with them deal.
How Thomas Randell chased hame, The Scurreours, that fra Cogners came.
DE Pardew (said he) it may well be,
To Sir Edward with that yeed he,
And told him utterly this tale,
Then have they taken for counsel haill,
That they will ride to the City,
That same night, so that they may be,
Betwixt the town with all their rout:
And they that were the town without,
As they devised: so have they done,
Before the town they came all soon,
And but half deill a mile of way
Fra the town, arest took they.
And when the day was dawning light,
Fifty on Hobines that were wight,
Came to a little hill that was
From the town a little space:
And saw Sir Edwards harbrie,
And of that sight had great ferlie:
That so wheene upon any wise,
Durst undertake so hie emprise,
As for to come so hardilie,
Upon all the great Cheualrie
Of Ireland, to bide battle:
And so it was withoutten fail.
For against them were gaddered there,
With the Wardane, Richard of Clare,
The Butlers, and the Earls two,
Of Desmound, and Kyldar alswa:
Brunhame, Wedoun, and Sir Waryne,
And Sir Plastayne, a Florentyne,
That was a Knight of Lombardie,
And was of full great Cheualrie.
And Maundewell was there alswa,
Bissatris, Loganes, and other ma.
The Savages als, and yet was ane,
That heght Sir Michel of Kylcalaue,
And with their Lords so feill was then,
That against one of the Scottishmen,
I wate well they were five or ma.
When their Discurreours hes seen sa
The Scottish Dast, they went in hy,
And told their Lords openly:
How they to them were coming near:
To seek them far was no mysteere.
And when the Earl Thomas had seen:
That tha men at the hill had been,
He took with him a great Menyie,
On horse an hundredth they might be.
And to the hill they took their way,
And in a Slak enbushed they,
And in short time fra the City,
They saw come ryding a Menyie,
For to discover to the hill.
They were blyth, and held them still,
UUhile they were commen to them near:
Then in a rush all that they were,
They set upon them hardly:
And they that saw so suddenly
Tha folk come on them, abased were,
Yet notthelesse, some of them there
Abade stoutly to make debate:
And other some are fled their gaite,
And in short time were all tha,
That made arest disrayed sa:
That they fled hastily their gaite,
And they them chased to the yait:
And one part of them hes slain,
And syne went to their Oast again.
The feird battle made in Ireland, That Sir Edward wan with strange hand.
WHen they within hes seen so slain
Their men and chased home again,
They were all wa, and in great hy,
To arms, highly can they cry.
They armed them all that they were,
And ^or the battle mad them yare,
And ished out all well arrayed:
In haill battle with Baner displayed,
Boun on their ways for to assail
Their foes into fell battle.
And when Sir Philip the Mowbray,
Saw them ishe in so good array,
To Sir Edward the Bruce went he.
And said, Sir, it is good that we
Shape for some slight that may avail,
To help us in this great battle.
Our men are good, but they have will
To do more than they may fulfill.
Therefore I reed, our Carriage
Withoutten any man or page,
By themselves arrayed be,
And they shall seem far more than we.
Set we before them our Baner,
Yone folk that comes out of Cogners
When that out Baners they shall see,
Shall trow trais^lie that they are we,
And hidder in greit hy shall ride,
Come we then on them at a side,
And we shall be at a vantage,
For fra they in our Carriage
Be entered, they shall cumbred be:
And then with all our might may we,
Lay on, and do all that we may,
And as he ordainde, done have they,
And they that came out of Cogners,
Addressed them to the Baners:
And struck the Horse with spurs in hy,
And rushed among them suddenly.
The barrel ferrars that were there,
Cumbred them fast that ryding were:
And then the Earl and his battle
Came on, and sadly can assail.
And Sir Edward a little by,
Assembled with his company.
That money a fey fell under feet.
The field with blood woxt soon all weete,
With so greit felony there they faught,
And so greit routes to other raught:
That it was hiddeous for to see,
How they maintained that greit melle,
So keenelie they faught on either side,
Giving, and taking routes red,
That prime was past, or men might see,
What part soonest abone should be,
But soon after that Prime was past,
The Scottishmen dang on so fast:
They set upon them at aboundoun,
As ilke man were a Scorpioun,
That all their foes took the flight,
Was none of them that was so wight,
That ever durst abide his feere,
But ilke man fled his ways seere,
To the town fled, the most party,
And the Earl Thomas so egerlie,
And his men chased with swords bare.
That among them they mingled were,
And all togidder came in the town,
Then was the slaughter so felloun,
That all the rewes ran of the blood,
Whom ever they got, to death he yood,
So that there were als feill dead,
Well near, as in the battle steed.
The Swaryne was taken there,
And so feared was Richard of Clare:
That he held to the South Country,
All that Month I trow that he,
Shall have no greit will for to fight.
Sir John Steward a Noble Knight
Was wounded through the body there,
With a spear that tight sharply share.
But to Mount Peller went he syne.
And lay there long into Leeching:
But at the last healed was he,
Sir Edward then with his Menie,
Took in the town their Harbaie,
That night they blyth were and jolie,
For the victory that they had there.
And on the morn withoutten maire
Sir Edward gart men gang and see,
All the vittaile of that City:
And they found sik fusioun therein
Of corn, and flower and wax and win^:
That they of it had grief ferlie,
And Sir Edward gart haille lie
To Craigfergus it carried be,
Syne hidder he went with his Menie,
And held the Siege full stalwartly,
While Palm sunday was passed by*
Then to the Tuesday in Pasch Oulk,
On either side they trewes took:
So that they might that holy ti^e,
In penance and in prayed bide,
But upon Pasch Even ^ight,
To the Castle into the night,
From Divilling came ships fifteen,
Charged with armor and men bedeene.
Three thousand trow I well they were,
That entered in the Castle there,
The Maundwell also, and Sir Thomas
Capitane of that Menie was:
In the Castle full privily
They entered: for they ga^^ spy,
That money of Sir Edwards men,
Were skailled in the Country then.
Therefore they thought in the morning,
To ishe but longer delaying.
And to supprise them suddenly.
For they thought they should tra^stly,
For the trewesse that taken were:
But I trow falset ever maire
Shall have mischief, and evil ending.
Sir Edward wist of this nothing:
For of treason had he no thought.
But for the trewes he let naught
To set watches to the Castle.
Ilk night he gart wake it full well:
And Neill Fleming woke that night.
And sextie worthy men and wight,
And as soon as the day was clear,
They that within the Castle were,
Had armed them, and made them bowne:
And syne the draw-brig they lot down:
They ished then in greit plenty,
And when Neill Fleming can them see,
He sent one to the King in hy,
Syne said to them, that was him by:
Now shall men see, I undertake,
Who dar for his Lords sake,
Now bear you well: for sikkerlie,
With all yone Menie feght will I:
Into bargane them hold shall we,
While that our Master armed be.
And with that word assembled they,
That were all out too few perfay,
With sik a greit rout for to fight:
And not for thy with all their might,
They dang on them so hardly,
That all their foes had greit ferlie,
That they were all of sik manheed:
That they no dread had of their dead:
But their feill foes so can assail.
That there might no worship avail,
But they were slain up euerilkane,
So cleene, that there escaped nane.
And the man that went to the King,
For to warn him of their ishing,
Warned him in full great hy.
Sir Edward was then commonly,
Called the King of all Ireland.
And when he had sik haste on hand,
In full great haste he got his gear:
Twelve with him in his chamber were:
That armed them in full great hy
Syne with his Baner hardely,
The mids of the town he taes.
With that near coming were his foes,
That had dealt all their men in three.
The Maundewile with a great Menyie,
Right through the town the way held down
The laue on other side the town,
Held to meet them that fleeing were:
They thought that all that they fand there
Should die but ransom euerilkane:
But otherwise the gyse is gane.
For Sir Edward with his Baneere,
And his twelve that I told of eir,
On all the rout so hardly
Assembled, that it was ferlie.
For Gib Harper before him yeed,
That was the doughtiest of deed,
That might be found of his estate:
And with an Axe made him sik gaite,
That he the first felled to the ground,
And syne into a little stound,
The Mandewile by his arming
(...) knew* and raught him sik a swing.
That he to eird past hastily,
Sir Edward that was near him by,
Reuersed him, and with a knife,
Right in that place he rest his life.
With that of Ardrossane Sir Fergus,
That was a wight Knight and courageous
Assembled with sextie men and ma:
They preassed then their foes sa:
That they that saw their Lord slain,
Tint heart, and would have been again,
And ay as Scottishmen might be
Armed, they came to the melle:
And dang upon their foes sa,
That they haillie the back can ta,
And tha men chased to the yait,
There was great fight and hard debaite.
There slew Sir Edward with his hand
A Knight, that of all Ireland,
Was called best, and of most bounty,
To surname Maundewile heght he,
His proper name I can not say,
But his folk to so hard assay
Was set, that they of the Dungeoun,
Durst open no yait, nor brig let down.
Sir Edward so then fought perfay,
That ished forth on him that day,
That there escaped never ane,
But they were either slain or taken.
For to the fight Manakill then
Came, with two hundredth of speare-men,
And they slew all they might to win,
This ilk Manakill with a gin,
Wan of their ships four or five,
And hailly reft the men their life.
When end was made of that feghting,
Yet then was life in Neill Fleming,
Sir Edward went him for to see,
About him slain lay his Menyie,
All in a lump, on ather hand,
And he to die ready thrawand,
Sir Ed^ard of him had great pity,
And him full greatly meened he:
And ^egrated his great manheed,
His worship and his doughtie deed,
Sik moan he made they had ferlie:
For he was not customablie
Wont, for to mean any thing,
Nor would not hear men make meening*
He stood there by while he was dead:
And syne had him to hallowed Steed:
And syne with worship gart him be
Eirded, with great solemnity.
How King Robert wan the Isles to hand, And gart his ships sail on dry land,
IN this wise ished Mandewile,
But wit ye well that fraud and guile,
Sall always have an evil ending,
As well was seen by this ishing,
In time of trewes ished they,
And in sik time as on Pasch day,
When Christ raise to save man's kin,
Fra weme of old Adames sin.
Therefore so great mischance them fell,
That ilk one (as ye heard me fell)
Was slain up, or else taken there.
And they that in the Castle were.
Were set in sik a fray that hour,
That they could see no where succor
Sold come to relieve them, that day:
That shortly then treitted they,
To yield the Castle to him free
To save their lives, and certes he
Held them full well all his cunnand.
The Castle took he in his hand,
And vittailde it well, and in it set
A good UUardane, it for to get,
And there a while rested he.
Of him no more now speak will we.
BOt to King Robert will we gang,
That we have left unspoken of lang:
When he had conuoyed to the sea,
His brother Edward with his Menyie,
With his ships he made him yare,
Into the Isles for to fare.
Walter Stewart with him took he.
His Maich, and with him great Menyie,
And other men of great Noblay,
To the Tarbarts they took their way
In Gaillayes ordainde for their fare*
But them worthed their ships draw there.
And a mile was betwixt the seas,
And that is loned all with trees:
The King his ships there gart draw,
And for the wind can stoutly blaw,
Upon their back, as they can ga,
He gart men Masts, and rapes ma,
And set them in the ships hie,
And Sails to the tops tie.
And gart men gang there by drawing,
The wind them helped that was blawing:
So that into a little space,
Their flote all there over drawn was,
And when they that in the Isles were.
Heard tell, how that the good King there,
Gart his ships with Sails gee.
Out over betwixt the Tabarts two,
They were abased alluterlie:
For they wist through old Prophecy,
That he that should gar ships so,
Betwixt the seas with Sails go,
Should win the Isles so to hand:
That none with strength should him withstand:
Therefore they came all to the King,
Durst none gainstand his bidding,
Ouertooke ^ohn of Lorne allane,
But well soon after he was taken,
And presented right to the King,
And they that were of his leading,
That to the King have broken fay,
Were all destroyed and dead away.
This John of Lorne the King hes taken,
And sent him forth to Dumbartane,
A while in prison for to be:
Syne to Lochleuen sent was he,
Where he was long time in fasting,
I trow he made therein ending,
The King when all the Isles were
Brought to his liking less and maire,
All that season there dwelt he,
At Hunting, and at game, and glee.
Lord Douglas with battle plain, Reskewed the Prey, and brought again*
WHen the King upon this manner
He daunted the Isles as I tell here
The good Sir James Douglas
Into the Forest dwelling was,
Defending doughtelie the Land,
That time in B^rwicke was winnand,
Edmound of Calhow a Gascoun,
He was a Knight of greit Renoun:
And into Gasconyie his Country,
Lord of greit Senyeorie was he:
And had then Berwick in keeping.
He made a privy gaddering,
And got him a greit company,
Of wight men armed jolelie*
All the nether end of Teuidall,
He preyed into him all haill:
And of the Mers a greit party:
Syne toward Barwicke went in hy.
Sir Adam of Gordoun, that then
Was becommen Scottishman,
Saw them drive so away his fee,
And weind they wheene were for that he,
Saw but the fleeing skaill perfey,
And them that seezed on the Prey.
That to Sir James of Douglas,
In full greit hy the way he ^aes:
And told how Englishmen their Prey
Had taken, and syne were went away:
Toward Berwicke with all their fee,
And said they wheene were: and if he
Would speed him, he should well lightly
Win them, and rescue all the Ky.
Sir James soon gave his assent
To follow them, and forth is went:
And followed them in full greit hy,
And came well ne^re them hastily,
For ere they might fully see,
They came well near with their Menyie.
But then both forray and the staill.
UUere knit into a sop all haill:
Bot knaves and swains that had no might,
For to stand into field to fight,
Before them gart they drive the Ky,
They were a right fair company,
And all togidder in a staill.
The Douglas saw their lump all haill,
And saw them of so good conuyne,
And that they were so money syne,
That they for one of his were two,
Lordings (he said) sen it is so:
That we have chaist on sik maneere,
That we are now commen so near,
That we may not eschew the fight.
But if we fully take the flight,
Let ilke man of his life then meene,
And how we money times have been
In greit thrang, and commen well away.
Think we to do right so this day:
And take we of this Foord here by,
Our auantage: for in greit hy,
They shall come on us for to fight,
Get we then will, and strength and might,
For to meet them right hardly,
And with that word full hastily,
He hes displayed his Baneere,
For his foes were coming near.
And when they saw they were so wheene.
They thought all was their own bedeene.
And assembled full hardly.
Their men might see them feght fellie
And a right cruel melle make,
And money strakes gave, and take.
The Douglas there right hard was stad,
But the greit hardement that he had,
Comforted them on sik a wise,
That no man thought on Cowardice,
But faught so fast with all their maine.
That they feill of their foes have slain:
And though they were full money more
Then they: yet them they demained so:
That Edmund de Callok was dead,
Through Douglas right in that ilke stead:
And all the laue fra this was done,
Were all haill discomfist soon,
And they that chased some hes slain,
And turned the Preyes haill again.
The hardest feghting this was,
That ever the good Lord Douglas
Was in, and of so few Menyie.
For had not been his greit bounty,
That slew their Chiftaine in the fight,
His men to dead had been all dight.
But he had into custom ay.
When ever he came to hard assay,
He preassed the Chiftane for to sla:
And heerefore hope I that he did sa,
That gart him have victory full syse,
When Sir Edmund upon this wise.
Was dead, the good Lord Douglas,
To the Forest his way he tayes:
His foes greatly can him dread,
The word sprang far of his manhead.
So that in England near there by,
Men spoke of it right commonly.
How James of Douglas slew Newel, That vowed to meet him in battle.
SIr Robert Newell at that tide
Winned in Barwike there beside,
The Marches where the Lord Douglas
In the Forest repairing was,
And had him in full great envy,
And for ^he saw him so manfully,
Make his bounds ay more and maire:
He heard the folk that with him were,
Speak of the Lord Douglas might,
And how he forcie was in fight:
And how him often fell fair Fortoun,
He wraithed him thereat full soon:
And said, what ween ye, is there nane
That ever is worth, but he allane:
Ye set him as he were but Peer,
But I avow before you here,
Gif ever he come into this land,
He sall find me near at his hand.
And gif I ever his Baneere
May see displayed upon weere,
I sall assemble it but dout,
Although ye hold him never so stout.
Of this avow soon Bodword was
Brought, to Sir James of Douglas,
That said, gif he will hold his heght,
I sall do so, he sall have feght
Of me, and of my company,
Yet or oght long, well near him by,
His retinue then gaddered he,
That were good men of great bounty:
And to the March in good array,
Upon a night he took the way,
So that in the morning early,
He was with all his company
Before Barwike and there he made
Men to display his Baner brade,
And of his Menyie some sent he,
For to burn towns two, or three:
And bade them soon again them speed,
So that at hand gif there come need,
They might before the feght be read.
The Newell that wist verily,
That Douglas commen was so near,
And saw all broad stand his Baneere:
Then with tha folk that he had there,
That with him a great Menyie were:
For all the good of that Country,
Into that time with him had he:
So that he with him there had then,
UUell mo then were the Scottishmen.
He held his way up to an hill.
And said, Lordings, it were my will,
To make end of the great deray,
That Douglas does to us ilk day.
But me think it speedfull that we
Abide till that his Menyie be
Skailled all, to take our Pray:
Then fiercely set on them we man
And we sall have them at our will.
Then they gave all assent theretill,
And on the hill abade houand.
The men fast gaddered of the land,
And drew to him in full great hy:
And Douglas then that was worthy,
Thought it was folly more to bide,
Toward the hill then can he ride.
And when the Newell saw, that they
Would not pass forth to the Forray:
But preassed to him with all their might,
He wist well then that he would fight:
And to his Menyie can he say:
Lordings, now hold we forth our way:
Here is the flower of this Country,
And mo then they also are we.
Assemble we then hardely,
For Douglas with yone Yemanry,
Sall have no might to us, perfay,
Then in a frush assembled they,
That men might hear the spears brast,
And ilkone dang on other fast,
And blood brast out of wounds wide.
They foght fast upon ather side:
For ather party can them pain,
To put their foes on back again.
The Lord the Newell, and Douglas,
When that the fighting fellest was,
They fought felly with all their maught,
Great routes ather to other raught.
But Douglas stark was I hight,
And more used als in the fight,
And set heart and will alswa:
For to deliver him of his fa:
While at the last through meekle mains
Of forre, the Newell hes he slain.
Then his Ensenyie can he cry,
And on the laue so hardely
He rushed with all his Menyie,
That in short time men might see
Their foes take on them the flight:
And they them chaist with all their might,
Sir Raph the Newell in that place,
And the Baroun of Hiltonn was
Taken, and other of meekle might.
There was reill flaine into that fight,
That worthy in their time had been.
And when the field was cleanged cleene:
So that their foes euerilkane,
Were slain, or chaist away, or taken,
Then gart he forray all the land,
And seesed all that ever he fand:
And burnt the towns in their way,
Syne haill and fear home commen are they.
The Pray among his Menyie,
After their merits dealt hes he:
And held nothing to his behooue,
Sik deeds ought to gar men love
Their Lord, and so they did,, perfay.
He treated them so wisely ay,
And with so meekle love alswa,
And countenance, that he would ma,
Of their deed, that the most Coward,
He made stoutter then a Leopard.
UUith cherissing this gaite made he
His men wight, and of great bounty.
When Newell thus was brought to ground
And of Calhow Sir Edmound,
The dread of the good Lord Douglas,
And his Renown so skailled was,
Throughout the Marches of England,
That all that were therein dwelland,
Dred him as the self Deuit of Hell,
And yet I have heard often syse tell,
That he so greitly dred was then,
That when wives would their children ban
They would even with an angry face,
Betake them to the black Douglas.
Through his greit worship and bounty
So with his foes dred was he,
That they growed to hear his Name,
He may at ease now dwell at hame
A while, for I trow he shall naught,
With foes money days be sought.
Now let him in the Forest be,
And of him speak no more will we,
But of Sir Edward the worthy,
That with all his Cheualrie,
Was at Craigfergus yet lyand,
To speak more we will take on hand.
Here past in Ireland the Noble King, To his brother with great gaddering,
WHen Sir Edward, as I said air
Had discom^^st Richard of Clare,
And of Ireland all the Barnage,
Thrice through his worthy Uassalage.
And syne with all his men of maine,
To Craigfergus was comde again.
The good Earl of Murray Sir Thomas,
Took lieue in Scotland for to pass:
And he him left without grudging,
And syne him charged to the King,
To pray him specially, that he
Would come in Ireland him to see.
For were they both into that lan^.
They should find none should them withstand.
The Earl then forth his way hes taken,
And to his Ships is he gane,
He sailled well out over the sea,
In Scotland soon arrived he,
Syne to the King he went in hy.
And he received him joyfully,
And speered of his brothers fare,
And of his journeyes that they had there,
And he him told all but leesing:
And when the King left had speaking,
His charge to the King told he;
And he said, He would blythlie see
His brother, and also the affair
Of the Country, and what it were,
A greit Menie then gaddered he,
And two Lords of greit bounty,
The one Walter Stewart was,
The other James of Douglas,
Wardans in his absence made he,
For to maintain well the Country,
Syne to the sea he took his way,
And at Lochreane in Galloway,
He shipped with all his Menie,
To Craigfergus soon commen is he,
Sir Edward of hi^ come was blyth*
And went down for to meet him swyth:
And welcomed him with gladsom cheer
So did he all that with him were,
And specially the Earl Thomas
Of Murray, that his Neuoy was,
Syne to the Castle went he there,
And made them meekle feast and fare:
They sojournde therein days three,
In mirth, solace and royalty.
KIng Robert now upon this wise
Into Ireland arrived is,
And when into Craigfergus had he
With his men sojournde days three,
He took counsel that he would,
With all their folk their ways hold,
Through all Ireland from end to other.
Sir Edward then the Kings brother,
Before into the Uangard rade.
The King himself the Reeregard had,
That had into his company,
The Earl Thomas that was worthy,
Their ways fordward have they taken,
And soon passed ever ilkane.
Here faught King Robert in Ireland, With 5. thousand against 40. thousand.
THIS was in mids the mirthfull May,
When Birds sings on ilke Spray:
Making their Notes with seemlie soun:
For softness of the sweet seasoun:
And Leaves of the Branches spreeds,
And bloomes bright about them breeds,
And Fields strowed are with Flowers,
Well sauouring of seir colors
And all thing worthed blyth and gay,
When that the good King took his way.
To ride Southward, as I said air,
The Wardane then Richard of Clare,
Wist the King was arrived sa:
And wist he shupe him for to ta
His way, toward the South Country,
Of all Ireland then gaddered he:
Both Burgess and Cheualrie
And Hobilers, and Yeamanrie,
Till he had near forty thousand:
But he would not yet take on hand.
With all his foes in field to fight,
But vmbethought him of a slight,
That he with all that greit Menyie,
Would in a Wood enbushed be.
All privily beside the way:
Where their foes behooues to ga,
And let the Uangard pass far by,
And assemble syne hardely:
On the Reeregard with all his men,
They did as he devised then,
In a Wood they enbushed were.
The Scottishmen rade by them near,
But they no showing to them made,
Sir Edward well forth before rade.
With them that were of his Menyie:
To the Reeregard no tent took he:
And Sir Richard of Clare in hy,
When Sir Edward was passed by,
Send light Yemen that well couth shoot,
To bikker the Reeregarde upon foot.
Then two of them that sent forth were
At the Wood side them bikkered there,
And shot among the Scottishmen.
The King that with him there had then,
Well near five thousand wight, and hardy
Saw them two so abundantly
Shoot among them, and come so near,
He wist right well withoutten weere:
That they well near some power had.
Therefore a bidding hes he made,
That no man sold be so hardy.
To break at them, bot sowerly.
Ride ready ay into battle,
To defend gif men would assail:
For we sall soon, I vnderta,
He said have for to do with ma.
But Sir Coline Campbell that near
Was by, where tha two Yemen were,
Shooting among them hardely,
Preiked on them in full great hy:
And soon the one he hes ouertane,
And with a spear him syne hes slain.
The other turned, and shot again:
And at that shot his horse hes slain.
With that, the King came hastily,
And into his Melancholy,
With a Truncheoun into his neefe,
To Sir Coline sik dush did give:
That he fell down on his Arsoun.
Then bade he smertlie tit him down.
Bot other Lords that was him by,
Hes meased the King in some party:
Bot he said, breking of bidding,
Might be cause of discomfiting.
Ween ye yone Ribald durst assail
Us so here in our own battle:
Bot gif they had supplee right near,
I wate right well withoutten weere,
That we sall have to do in hy:
Therefore look ilk man be ready,
With that well near threttie and ma
Of bow-men came, and bikkered sa:
That they hurt of the Kings men.
The King hes sent his Archers then
To shoot, for to put them again.
UUith that they entered in the Plain.
And saw arrayed against them stand,
In four battles, forty thousand.
The King said, Lordings, now let see,
UUho worthy in this fight sall be*
On them withoutten more abade.
So stoutly with that on them they rade,
And assembled so hardely:
That of their foes a great party
Were laid at eird, at their meeting,
There was of spears sik a breisting,
As ather upon other rade:
That it a full great frush hes made,
Horse came there rushing head for head:
So that feill on the ground lay dead.
Money a wight, and worthy man,
As ather upon other ran,
Were dushed dead down to the ground.
That blood ran out at money wound,
In sik effusioun, that even than,
Of very blood the streams ran:
With weapons that were bright and bar^
That money a good man died there.
And they that worthy were, and wight,
And stoutly with their foes can fight,
Preassed them formest to be.
There men might cruel battle see,
And hard bargain I take on hand.
In all the weere of Ireland,
So great a feghting was not seen.
And when of great victories nineteen,
Sir Edward had withoutten weere,
And that in less then in three year,
And into sundry battles of tha,
He vanquished twenty thousand and ma,
With trapped horse even to the feet,
But in all that time he was yet,
Ay one for five, when least was he:
But the good King into this melle,
Had always eight of his fa men,
For one, but he so bare him then:
That his good deed, and his bounty,
Comforted so all his Menyie:
That the most Coward hardy was.
For where he saw the thickest preasse,
So hardely he on them rade:
And so great room about him made,
That he slew all he might overtake,
And rudely rushed them aback.
The Earl Thomas that was worthy,
Was in all times near him by,
And foght as he were in a rage.
So that through their great Uassallage:
Their men sik hardement did take,
That they no peril did forsake:
But them abandouned so stoutly,
And dang on them so hardely,
Till all their foes affrayed were.
And they that saw well by there fare,
That they eschewed somedeill the fight,
They dang on them with all their might,
And preassed dinging on them so fast:
That they the back gave at the last.
And they that saw them take the flight,
They dang on them with all their might:
And in their fleeing feill can sla.
The Kings men hes chased sa:
That they discomfist them ilkane.
Richard of Clare the way hes taken
To Deuiling in full great hy:
With other Lords that fled him by,
And garnisht both Castle and tounes,
That were in their Possessiouns.
They were so fellounly fleyed there:
That as I trow, Richard of Clare,
Sall have no will to find his might,
In battle, nor in field to fight,
While King Robert, and his Menyie,
Is dwelling into that Country.
They stuffed strengths on this wise,
And the King that was so to prise,
Saw in the field right money slain.
And one of them that there was taken,
That was arrayed full worthily,
He saw him weep right dulefully.
He asked him why he made sik cheer?
He said, Sir, withoutten weere,
It is no wonder that I greet,
I see so money slain at my feet,
The flower of all North Ireland,
That hardiest was of heart and hand:
And most douted in hard assay.
Then said the King to him, perfay:
Thou have more cause myrths to ma,
That thou the deed escaped sa.
RIchard of Clare on this manner,
And all his foes discomfist were,
With few folks as I have to you told,
And when Edward Bruce the sa bold
Wist that the King had foughten so,
With so money, and he therefro,
Might no man see a wraither man,
But the good King said to him then:
That it was in his own folly:
For he rade so vnwittelie,
So far before making no ward,
To them that were in the Reeregard:
For he said, who on weere would ride,
In the Uangard he should no tide.
Pass from his Reeregard, far from sight:
For greit peril so fall their might.
Of this fight will I speak no maire,
But the King, and all that were there,
Rade forward in a better array,
And near togidder then ever held they.
Through all the land they plainly rade
They fand none that them obstacle made
They rade even before Drochynda,
And before Deuiling alswa:
But to give battle none they fand.
Syne went they Southward in the land,
And right to Lynrike held their way,
That is the Southmest town, perfay,
That in all Ireland may founden be,
There lay he days two or three,
And busked syne again to fare.
And when that they all ready were,
The King hes heard a woman cry,
He asked what was that in hy?
It is a Lauender, Sir, said ane,
That her child-euill here hes taken:
And mon leave now behind you here.
Therefore she makes yone evil cheer,
The King said, Certes, it were pity,
That she in that time left should be,
For I trow Certes there is no man,
But he will rue of Women then.
His Host then all arested he,
And gart a tent soon stented be,
And gart her gang in hastily,
And other Women be her by:
While she delivered was, he bade,
And syne forth on his ways rade,
And how she forth should carried be,
Ere ever he fure, ordained he.
This was a right greit courtesy,
To sik a King, and so mighty,
That gart his men dwell on sik manner,
Only for a poor Lauender.
Again Norward they took their way,
Through all Ireland then passed they.
Through all Connoch, to Deviline,
Through all Mich and Irrelle syne,
Through Monaster, and Lawester,
And syne hailly through all Vlsister
To Craigfergus without battle,
For there was none durst him assail,
The Kings of the Irishrie,
Came to Sir Edward haillelie,
And all manrent can to him ma,
But if that it were one or two,
To Craigfergus they came again,
Into that way was no bargane:
But if it any Skirmish were,
That is not for to speak of here.
The Irish Kings euerilkane,
Then home to their repair are gane,
And undertook in all kin thing,
For to obey to the bidding
Of Sir Edward, that their King called they,
He was well set now in good way,
To conquesse the land haillelie,
For he had now on his party
The Irishry, and all Vlsister,
And he was so forth on his Weere,
That he hes past through all Ireland,
From end to end through strength of hand
Could he have governed him with skill,
And followed not too fast his will,
But with measure have led his deed:
It was well like withoutten dreed:
That he might have conqueissed well,
The land of Ireland euerilk deill.
And his outrageous succudry,
And will that more was then hardy,
Of purpose let him perfay,
As hereafter I shall you say.
How Douglas slew Richmond, syne at meat In battle their harbreours served in
seat.
NOw leave we here the Noble King,
All at ease, and his lyking:
And speak we of the Lord Douglas,
That left to keep the Marches was.
He gart get Wrights that were slay,
And in the hawgh of Lyntalle,
He gart them make a fair manner,
And when the House bigged were,
He gart puruay him right well there:
For he thought to make an Infare,
And to make good cheer to his men.
In Richemond there was winning then,
An Earl that called was Sir Thomas,
He had envy at the Douglas:
And said, If that he his Baner,
Might see displayed upon weere,
That soon on it assemble should he,
He heard how Douglas thought to be.
At Lyntalle a feast to ma.
And he gat witting well alswa,
That the King, and a greit Menie,
Were passed then off the Country:
And the Earl of Murrray Thomas,
Therefore he thought the Country was
Feel of men, for to withstand
Men that them sought with stalwart hand
And of the Marches then had he
The Governance and the paustie,
He gaddered folk about him then,
While he was well ten thousand men:
And Wood axes gart them take*
For he thought he and his men would make,
To hew down Iedburgh Forest cleene,
That no tree should therein be seen.
They held them forth upon their way:
And the good Lord Douglas, that ay,
Had spies out on euerilke side.
Got good witting that they would ride,
And come upon them suddenly,
Then gaddered he right hastily,
Them that he might of his Menyie,
I trow, that then with him had he
Fifty, that worthy were and wight,
And at all point armed and dight:
And of Archers a great Menyie,
Assembled als with him had he,
A place then was there in the way:
Where he wist well that pass would they,
That had wood upon ather side.
The entry was well large and wide:
And as a Shield it narrowed ay,
UUhile that into a place, the way
UUas not a penniestane-cast of bread.
The good Lord Douglas hidder yeed.
When he wist they were near cummand,
In to a Cleugh on the one hand,
All his Archers enbushed he:
And bade they sold hold them privy,
Ay while they heard them raise the cry:
And then sold they shoot hardely
Among their foes, and sail them saire:
While that he through them passed were:
And then with him hold forth sold they.
Then byrkes on ather side the way,
That young and thick were growing near,
They knit tegether on sik maneere:
That men might not well through them ride.
UUhen this was done, he can abide,
Upon the other side of the way:
And Richemond in good array,
Came ryding in the first Eshell.
The Lord Douglas hes seen him well:
And gart his men all hold them still,
While at their hand they came them till.
And entered in the narrow way,
Then with a shout on them set they:
And cried on high, Douglas, Douglas.
And Richemond that right worthy was,
When he had heard so rise the cry,
And Douglas Baner saw plainly:
He dressed him hidderwards in hy.
And they came on so bardely,
That through them have they made their way,
All that they met to eird dang they.
The Richemond borne down there was,
And soon arested him Douglas,
And him reuersed with a knife,
And in that place he left his life,
An Hat upon his Helm he bare,
And that took Douglas with him there,
In takinning that it forced was.
And syne in hy his ways taes,
While in the UUood they entered were.
The Archers well hes taken them there:
For well and hardely shot they.
The Englishmen in great affray
UUere set: for Douglas suddenly
With all them of his company,
Ere ever they wist was in their rout:
And thirled them well near throughout.
And had almost done his dead,
Ere they to help them could take heed.
And when they saw their Lord was slain,
They took him up, and turned again,
To draw them fra the shot away,
Then in a Plain assembled they:
And for their Lord that then was dead,
They shupe them in that ilk stead,
For to take harbry all that night,
And then the Douglas that was wight,
Gat wit that a Clerk Eleis,
UUith well three hundredth enemies,
All straight to Lyntalle were gane,
And harbrie for their Oast had taken:
Then hidder is he went in hy,
With all them of his company,
And found Clerk Eleis at the meat,
And all his rout about him set:
And they came on them stoutly there,
And with swords that sharply share,
They served them full egerlie.
They were slain down so haillelie,
That well near there escaped nane.
They served them in full great wane,
With sheering swords, and with knives,
That well near all leesed their lives.
They had a felloun Intermais,
For that subcharge too charging was.
They that escaped there through case,
To their great Oast the ways taes.
And told, how that their men were slain
So cleene, that there escaped nane.
And when they of the Oast had heard,
How that Douglas with them farde:
That had their herbryours all slain,
And themselves rushed all again:
And slew their Lord in mids their rouf,
There was none of them all so stout:
That more will had them to assail.
Therefore they have taken to counsel,
That time, and to purpose hes taken,
To wend homeward, and home are gane:
And sped them so upon their way,
That to England soon commen are they,
The Forest left they standing still:
To hew it then they had no will,
And specially while the Douglas,
So near hand by their neighbor was:
And he that saw them turn again,
Perceived well their Lord was slain:
And by the hat that he had taken,
He wist right well also for ane
That taken was said him surely,
That Richemound ay commonly,
UUas wont that furred Hat to weere.
Then Douglas blyth that was than eir:
For he wist well that Richemound,
His felloun so was brought to ground.
SIr James Douglas on this wise
Through his worship, and his emprise.
Defended worthily the land.
This point of weere, I take on hand,
UUes vndertane right apertly,
And encheeued right hardely,
For he astoneyed withoutten weere.
Tha folk that well ten thousand were,
With fifty armed men but ma.
I can als tell you other two
Points: that well encheeued were,
With fifty men: and but all weere,
They were all done so hardly:
That they were praised Souerainely,
Attour all other points of weere:
That in their time encheeued were.
This was the first: that with fifty,
UUas brought to end, and so stoutly,
In Galloway the other fell,
When as ye heard me before tell:
How Sir Edward the Bruce with fifty,
Uanquisht of Saint John Sir Aymery:
And fifteen hundredth men by tail.
The third fell into Eskdaile,
UUhen that Sir John of Sowles, was
The governor of all that place,
And to Sir Andro Hardeclay,
With fifty men beset the way,
That had near in his company,
Three hundredth Horsed jolelie.
This Sir John into plain Melle,
Through Sovereign hardement, and bounty,
Uanquisht them sturdelie ilkeane,
And Sir Andro in hands hes taken.
I will not rehearse now the manner,
For who so likes they may hear.
Young Women when they will play,
Sing it among them euerilke day,
Their were the worthy points three,
That I trow evermore shall be
Praised, while men may on them mean,
It is well worth withoutten wene:
That their names for euermaire,
That in their time so worthy were,
That men to hear hes yet dainty,
That their worship, and their bounty,
Be always lasting into loving.
Where he that is Almighty King,
Bring them hie up, to Heavens bliss,
Where always lasting loving is.
How the Bishop of Dunkelden syne, Scomfist the shipmen beside Dumfermling.
IN this time that the Richemound,
Was on this manner brought to the ground.
Men of the coasts of England.
That dwelt in Homber, or near hand,
Gaddered them a greit Menyie,
And went in ships to the sea,
And toward Scotland went in hy,
And to the Firth came hastily,
They went to have had all their lyking:
For they wist well that the King,
Was then far out of the Country,
And with him money of greit bounty.
Therefore into the Firth came they,
And endland it held up their way,
While they beside Innerkething,
On the West half toward Dumfermling
Took Land, and fast begouth to reif.
The Earl of Fyth, and the Shireffe,
Saw to the Coast ships approachand,
They gaddered to defend the Land:
And they forgane the ships ay,
As they sailled they took their way,
And thought to let them land to take.
And when the shipmen saw them make
Sik countenance, and sik array,
They said among them, that they
Would not for them let land to ta,
Then to the land they sped them sa,
That they came there in full greit hy.
And arrived full hardly.
The Scottishmen saw their coming,
And had thereof sike abasing:
That they all haill did ride them fro,
And the land but stop leet them to,
They durst not feght with them for thy
They with drew them all haillely,
And yet they were five hundredth near,
When they away thus riding were,
And no defense begouth to shape,
Of Dunkeldin the good Bishop,
That William was called the Sincler,
Came with a rout on good manner,
I trow on Horse they were sixty,
Himself was armed jolelie,
He rade upon a stalward Steed,
A Chimmer for to heill his weed,
Abone his armor had he then,
And armed also were his men.
The Earl, and the Shireffe met he.
Riding away with their Menie,
He asked them well soon, what hy,
Made them to turn so hastily:
They said, their foes with stalward hand
Into sik fusion had taken land,
That they thought them all out too feill,
And they were few with them to deill.
When the Bishop heard it was sa,
He said, the King ought well to ma
Of you, that takes so well on hand,
In his absence to weere his land
Certes, if he gart serve you well
The gilt spurs right by the heill,
He should in hy gar hew you fro.
Right would, with Cowards men did so:
Who loves their Lord, and his Country,
Turn smertlie now again with me:
With that he kest off his Chimmeere,
And hint in hand a stalwart Spear:
And rade toward his foes in hy,
All turned with him haillelie:
For he had them reproved so,
That of them all none went them fro,
He rade before them sturdelie,
And they followed full manfully,
While that they were near approachand,
Untto their foes that had taken land.
And soon were knit in good array,
Then some were went to the Ferray.
The good Bishop when he them saw,
He said, Lordings but dreed or aw,
Prick we upon them hardly,
And we shall have them well hastily.
If they see us, come but abasing,
So that we hea^e make no more stinting,
They shall right soon discomfist be,
Now do ye well, for men shall see,
Who loves the Kings Menske this dayr
Then all togidder in good array,
They preiked upon them sturdely,
The Bishop that was right hardly,
And meekle and stark, rade forward ay.
Then in a frush assembled they:
And they that at their first meeting,
Felt of their spears so saire sowing,
Uanisht, and would have been away,
Toward their ships in hy held they,
And they them chased fellonlis,
And slew them full despiteouslie,
That all the fields ouerstrowed were,
Of Englishmen that slain were there:
And they that yet held unslain.
Preassed them to the sea again.
And Scottishmen that chased sa:
Slew all that ever they might ouerta:
But they that fled yet not for thy
So to their ships can them hy:
That in some baittes so feill can ga:
For that their foes them chased sa:
That they ouertumbled: and the men
That were therein, were drowned then.
There did an Englishman that day,
A well great strength, as I heard say:
For when he chased was to the bait,
A Scottishman that him handled hait:
He hint up by the arms two,
And were he well, or were he wa:
He even upon his back him slang,
And with him in the bait can gang:
And kest him in even magre his:
This was a well great strength, I wis,
The Englishmen that went away,
Toward their ships in hy went they,
And sailed home angry and wa,
That they had been rebuted sa.
The hame-come of King Robert, Out of Ireland fra Sir Edward.
WHen the Shipmen on this wise,
Was discomfist, as I devise:
The Bishop that so well him bare,
And had comforted all that were there,
Was yet into the feghting slead,
Where near two hundredth well were dead
Withoutten them that drowned were.
And when the field was spoiled baire:
They went all home to their repair.
To the Bishop is it fallen fair:
That through his praise and his bounty,
Enchee^ed sik a great journey,
The King therefore ay fra that day,
Him loved, and praised, and honored ay:
And had him into sik dainty:
That his own Bishop him called he.
Thus they defended the Country,
On both halfes of the Scots sea,
While that the King out of the land
UUas then, as ^ have borne on hand.
Through all Ireland his course hes made,
And again to Craigfergus rade.
And when his brother as he were King,
Had all the Irishry at bidding:
And haillely Vlsister alswa,
He busked home his way to ga:
And of his men that were most hardy*
And praised als of Cheualry,
With his brother great part left he:
And syne is went unto the sea,
When they their lieues on ather party
Had taken, they went to ship in hy.
The Earl Thomas with him he had,
And raised Sail but more abade:
And in the land of Galloway.
UUithout peril arrived they.
The Lords of the land were fane,
When they wist he was come again,
And to him went in full great hy,
And he received them tenderly,
And made them Feast and gladsome cheer:
And then so wonder blyth they were
Of his coming, as man might say,
Great Feast to him for thy made they,
Where ever he rade, all the Country
Gaddered in dainty him for to see.
Great gladness was there in the land:
All was then win unto his hand:
Fra the red Swyre unto Orknay,
Was none of Scotland fra his fay:
Excepting Barwike it alane:
That time therein winued ane,
That Capitane then was of the town,
All Scottishmen into suspicioun
He had, and treated them right ill:
He had ay to them right ill will,
And held them all at under ay:
Till that it fell upon a day:
That a Burgess, Sym of Spalding,
Thought that it was right heavy thing,
On sik sort to rebuted be.
Therefore into his heart thought he,
That he would slely make conuyne,
With the Marshall, whose Cousyne
He had wedded to his wife:
And as he thought, he did belyfe:
Letter to him he sent in hy,
With a traist man full privily:
And set him time to come, one night
With ladders* and good men, and wight,
To the Kow yet right privily:
And bade hint hold his tryst truly:
And he sold meet them at the wall:
For on that night his watch sold fall.
When the letters the Marshall saw,
He vmbethought him a little thraw:
For he wist by himself, that he
Might nouther of might nor power be:
For to encheeue so great a thing.
And gif he took to his helping
One another sold wraithed be.
Therefore right to the King yeed he
And showed him betwixt them two
The letter, and the charge alswa,
When the King heard that this train
UUas spoken into sik certain:
That him thought therein no fantise:
He said him certes thou hes wrought wise
That hes discovered it first to me.
For gif thou had discovered thee,
To my Neuoy the Earl Thomas,
Thou sold displease the Lord Douglas,
And him also in the contrare,
But I sall wirke on sik manner:
That thou at thine intent sall be,
And have of them no magre.
Thou sall take Keep well to thy day.
And with them that thou purchase may,
At Even sall thou enbushed be,
In Dunce Park. but by privy:
And I sall gar the Earl Thomas,
And the Lord also of Douglas,
Ather with a certain of men
Be there, to do as thou sall ken,
The Marshall then but more delay,
Took leave, and held forth on his way,
And held his speech privy and still,
Till the day that was set him till.
The winning of Barwicke and the feghting That was in the town at the winning.
THen of the best of Lowthiane,
He with him to his trysthes taken:
For Shireffe then therefore was he,
To Dunce Park with his Menie,
He came at Even full privily,
And syne with a good company,
Soon after came the Earl Thomas,
That was met with the Lord* Douglas,
A right fair company there were,
When they were met togidder there.
And when the Marshall the conuine,
To both the Lords, syne by line
Had told they went forth on their way,
Far from the town their horse left they,
To make it short, so wrought they then,
That but seeing of any man,
(Out Sym of Spalding allane,
That gart that thing be vndertane)
That set their Ladders to the Wall,
And but perceiving came in all:
And held them in a nuke privy,
While that the night should passed be,
And ordainde that the most party:
Of their men should gang sikkerlie,
With their Lords and hold a staill,
And the remnand should all haill,
Skaill through the town, and take sla,
All the men they might ouerta.
But soon his ordinance brake they,
For als soon as it dawen was day,
The two part of their men and more,
All skailled through the town can go,
So greedy for to get the good,
That they ran even as they were wood,
And sieged Houses* and slew men,
And they that saw their foes then,
Come upon them so suddenly,
Throughout the town they raisde the cry,
And shot togideer here and there,
And aye as they assembled were
They would abide and make debate:
Had they been warned well I wate,
They should have sold their lives dear,
For they were good men: and als they were
Far more, then they were that them sought:
But they were skailled so that they moght
On no manner assembled be.
There was greit melles two or three:
That their foes all rushed were
But Scottishmen so well them bare:
And disrayed at the last were sa:
That they all haill the flight can ta.
Some gat the Castle, but not all,
And some were slidden over the wall,
And some were into hands taken:
And some were in the bargane slain,
On this wise them conteened they,
Till it was near noone of the day,
Then they that in the Castle were,
And other that fled were to them there.
That were a right greit company,
When they the Baners so simpillie
Saw stand, and stuffed with so wheene,
Their yaits have they opened soon,
And ished on them hardly.
The Earl Thomas that was worthy,
And the good Lord als of Douglas,
With all the folk that with them was,
Met them stoutly with weapons seir,
Then men might see who had been near,
Men abandoun them hardely:
And Englishmen faught cruelly,
And with all mights can them pain,
To rush the Scottishmen again,
I trow, they had done so perfay,
For they were fewer far then they,
Had it not been a new made Knight,
That to his name Sir William hight
Of Keith, and of the Gallistoun,
He heght through difference of Surnoun:
That bare him right well that day.
And put him to so hard assay,
That he sik dints about him dang,
That where he saw the thickest thrang,
He preassed with so meekle might:
And so enforcedlie can fight.
That he made to their Menyie way:
And they that near were to him ay,
Dang on their foes so hardely:
That they have taken the back in hy.
And to the Castle held their way:
With greit mischief there entered they:
For they were pressed there so fast:
That they left money of the last.
But they that entered not for thy.
Closed the yates right hastily.
And in hy to the walls ran:
For they were not all sikker then.
Here sent they word to the King, That come to the Castle yielding,
THe town was taken upon this wise*
Through greit worship and greit emprise:
And all the good that they there fand:
Was seesed haillie in their hand.
Uittaile they fand in greit fusioun,
And all that served to stuff a town,
That kept they from destroying.
And syne hes sent word to the King,
And he was of that tything blyth.
And sped him hidderward full swyth,
And as he through the Country rade,
Men gaddered to him while he had
A meekle rout of worthy men,
And the folk that were winning then,
In the Mers and Teuidaile:
And in the Forest als all haill:
And the East end of Lowthiane:
Before that the King came, are gane
To Barwike with a stalwart hand:
That nane that was that time winnand,
On yond side Tweede durst well appear,
And they that in the Castle were,
When that their foes in sike plenty,
Saw before them assembled be,
And had none hope of reskewing,
They were abased in greit thing.
But they the Castle not for thy,
Held fius days right sturdely:
And yaild it on the sext day.
Syne to their Country home went they.
Here Walter Stewart took of the King, Both Town, and Castle in keeping.
THus was the Castle and the Town,
To Scottishmens possessioun
Brought, and soon after the King
Came ryding with all his gaddering
To Barwike: and in the Castle,
He was harbred both fair and well:
And his great Lords all him by.
The remnand all commonly,
To harbrie in the town are gane.
The King hes then to counsel taken,
That he would not break down the wall,
But Castle and the town withal:
Stuffed well with men and with vittaile,
And all kin other apparaile
That might avail, or yet mister:
To hold Castle, or town of weere.
And Walter Stewart of Scotland,
That then was young and vailyeand,
And son in law to the good King,
Had ay sik will, and sik yarning,
Near hand the Marches for to be.
That Barwike in keeping then took he,
And received of the King the town,
And the Castle, and Dungeoun.
The King gart men of great Nobilley,
Ride in England for to take Pray,
And brought out great plenty of fee:
And with some Countries trewes took he.
For vittaile that in great fusioun,
He gart bring smertly to the town:
So that both Town and Castle were
Stuffed well for one year or maire.
The good Stewart of Scotland then,
Sent for his friends and his men,
Till he had with him but Archers,
And but Burgesses, and Aulisters,
Five hundredth men wight and hardy,
That bare arms of Ancestry.
John Crab a Fleming als had he,
That was of so great subteltie,
To ordain, and to make apparaile,
For to defend and to assail,
Castle of weere, or then City:
That no sleear might founden be.
He gart Ingines, and Trains ma,
And puruayed great fires alswa,
Fire-galdes, and shot on seir manners,
That to defend Castle effeeres:
He puruayed into full great wane.
Bot gunnes for crackes had they nane:
For yet in Scotland then but ween
The use of them had not been seen.
And when the town upon this wise,
UUas stuffed (as I here devise)
The Noble King his way hes taken,
And ridden toward Louthiane:
And Walter Stewart that was stout,
He left in Barwike with a rout:
And ordained fast for apparaile,
To defend, gif men would assail.
The King of England his power, Gaddered to siege Barwike but weere.
WHen to the King of England,
Was told, how that with stalwart hand
Barwike was taken, and stuffed syne,
With men, and armor, and vittaile fine:
He was annoyed gretumly.
And gart be summond hastily
His counsel, and hes taken to reed,
That he his Oast would hidder lead:
And with all might that he might get:
Unto the town a Siege set:
And gart dyke them so stalwartly,
That while they liked there to ly,
They sold far out the surer be,
And gif the men of the Country,
With strength of folk would them assail
At their dykes in plain battle:
They sold auantage have greatly.
Although forsooth it great folly
UUere: for to assailyie into feghting,
At their dykes so stark a King.
UUhen his counsel on this manner
Was taken, he gart men far and ner,
His men hailly assembled be.
A great Oast with him then had he,
Of Longcastell the Earl Thomas,
That syne was Sanct, as some men says,
Into his company was there.
And all the Earls als that were
In England worthy for to fight,
And Barouns als of meekle might,
With him to that assiege had he:
And gart the ships by the sea,
Bring shot, and other apparel,
And great Garnisoun als of vittell,,
To Barwik^ then with his Menyie
And with his battles arrived came he.
And to the Lords ilkane sundry,
Ordainde a field for their harbry.
Then men might see their Pauilliouns,
Be stented on sindrie fassiouns,
So feill that they a Town made there,
More then both Town and Castle were,
On ather halse syne, on the sea.
Their ships came in sik plenty,
With vittaile arming* and with men,
That all the haven was stopped then.
And when they that were in the town,
Saw their foes in sik fusioun,
By sea and land come sturdely:
Then they as wight men, and hardy,
Shupe them soon to defend their Steed,
That they in auentour of their dead,
Sold put them, or then rush again
Their foes: for their Captain
Treated them so lovingly:
And therewith als the may party
Of them, that armed with him were,
Were of his blood, or Sib-men near:
Or else they were of his ally.
Of sik comfort men might them see,
And als so fair in their conteening:
That none of them had abasing,
Upon the day well armed were they,
And in the nights well watched ay.
Well sex days they so abade,
That they no full greit bargane had.
How Englishmen dyked them about, And syne went to the Siege but dout,
INto this time as I tell here,
That they withoutten bargane were,
The Englishmen so closed had,
Their Host, with dykes that they made:
That they were strengthened gretumlie,
Syne with all hands busily,
They shup them with their apparel,
Them of the town for to assail:
And on our Ladies Even Mary,
That bure the birth that all can by,
That men calls her Nativity:
Soon in the morning men might see
The English Host armed them in hy,
And display Baners sturdelie,
And assemble to their Baners,
With Instruments on seir manners:
As Scaffolds, Ladders, and Couerings,
Pikkes, Howes and eke staff slings,
To ilke Lord and his battle,
Was ordained where they should assail,
And they within, when that they saw,
These men so raying them on a raw,
Ttheir wairdes they went in hy,
That were stuffed so stalwardly,
With stones, and shot, and other thing,
That needed to their defending.
And into sik manner abade
Their foes, that to them sailyie made.
When they without were all ready,
They trumped to the assault in hy,
And ilke man with his apparaile,
Where he should be went to assail.
To ilke Kyrnell that there were,
Archers to shoot assigned are.
And when on this wise they were bowne,
Then went in hy toward the town,
And filled the Oykes right hastily,
Syne to the walls right hardly,
They went with Ladders that they had.
But they so greit defense hes made,
That were above upon the Wall:
That both Ladders, and men withal,
They gart fall flatlings to the ground.
Then men might see in little stound.
Men assailing right hardly,
Preasing up Ladders doughtelie:
And them above defending well,
Tumbling them down to their vnseill.
With greit annoy defended they
Their town: for if we the sooth shall say.
The walls of the town they were
So law: that a man with a Spear,
Might stryke another upon the face,
And the shot als so thick it was,
That it were wonder for to see*
And Walter Stewart with a Menie,
Kade aye about for to see where
That for to help most mister were*
And where men preassed most he made
Succors, to them that mister had,
The money ^olke that were without.
Had environed the town about:
So that no part of it was free.
Their men might the assailyeares see,
Abandoun them right hardly:
And the defenders doughtelie,
With all their mights can them pain^,
To put their foes force again.
On this wise them conteened they,
While Noone was passed of the day:
Then they that in the ships were*
Ordained a ship with full greit fare,
To come with all their apparaile,
Right to the wall for to assail.
To the mid Mast their bait they drew,
With armed men therein anew:
A brig they had for to let fall,
Right from the bait upon the wall:
With Barges by they can her tow,
They preassed her right fast to row,
Beside the Brighouse to the Wall:
On that intent they set them all:
They brought her white she came well ne^
Then men might see on seir manner,
Some men defended, and some assail,
Full busily, with hard battle.
They of the town so well them bare.
That the shipmen so handled were:
That they the ship on no manner,
Might gar come to the wall so nere:
That their Fall-brig might reeke theretill*
^o long abade they feghting still,
While that she ebbed to the ground,
Their men might in a little stound,
^ee them by far of war conuine,
Then they were ever that was therein,
And when the Sea was ^bbed so,
That men all dry might to her go.
Out of the town ished in h^
To her a well greit company:
And fire in her hes kindled soon.
Into short time so have they done,
That into fire they gart her birne,
And money slain, that was therein:
And some were fled and away gane,
An Ingynour there have they rane,
That was sleest of that misteere.
That men wist outher far, or near
Into the town syne entered they,
It fell them happily that day:
That they got in so hastily.
For there came a great company,
In full greit hy up by the sea,
When they the ship saw burning hie,
But ere they came, the other was past,
The yait they barred and closed fast,
The folk assailyied fast that day,
And they within defended a:
On sik a wise, that they that were
With sik a force assailyeing there,
Might do their will on no maneere.
And when the Eu^nsong time was near,
The folk without that were weary,
And some wounded full cruelly.
Saw them within defend them sa.
And saw it was not eith to ta
The town while sik defense were made,
By them that within the steering had,
The Host saw that their ship was brynt,
And of their men some in hy were tynt.
And their folk wounded and weary,
They gart blew the retreat in hy,
Fra the shipmen rebuted were,
They leet the other assail no maire:
For through the shipmen they weind ilkane,
That they the town sold well have taken,
And men says, that mo^ships then sa,
Preassed that time the town to ta:
But for that there was burnt, but ane,
And the Ingynour therein was taken:
Here therefore mention made I,
But of one ship alanerlie.
WHen they blown had the retreat,
Tha folk that tholed pains great:
Withdrew them haillie ^ta the wall,
The assault have they left withal,
And they within that weary were,
And money of them wounded saire,
Were blyth and glad when they them saw
So in haill battle them withdraw:
And fra they wist surely, that they
Held to their Pauillions the way:
They set good Watches to their wall,
^yne to their Innes went they all:
and eased them that weary were:
And als them that were wounded saire,
^ad good leeches, forsooth I hight:
That helped them with all their might,
^n ather side weary were they:
That night they did no more perfay.
^iue days after they were still,
That none to other did great ill.
Here sent King Robert in England, Douglas and Murray with stalward hand.
NOw leave we their folk here lyand,
All still (as I have borne on hand)
And turn the course of our carping,
To Sir Kobert the doughtie King:
That assembled, both far and near,
An Dast, and when he wist but weere,
That the King so of England,
Had assieged with stalward hand,
Barwike, where. Walter Stewart was:
To purpose with his men he taes,
That he would not sa soon assail,
The King of England with battle,
And at his dykes especially
For it might well turn to folly.
Therefore he ordainde Lords two,
The Earl of Murray was one of tha:
The other was the Lord Douglas,
And fifteen hundredth men, to pass
In England, for to burn and ^^a:
And so great ryote there to ma,
That they that lay sieging the town,
UUhen they hear the destructioun,
That they sold into England ma:
Sold be so dreeding. and so wa:
For their Children, and for their UUiues,
That they sold dreed to loss their lives,
And their goods also, that they
Sold dreede they sold be had away,
And they sold leave the Siege in hy,
And wend to reskew hastily
Their goods, their friends, and their land;
Therefore (as I have borne on hand)
Their Lords sent he forth in hy.
And they their ways held hastily,
In England gart they burn and sla:
And wrought therein so meekle wa:
Ay as they fure through the Country,
That it was pity for to see
To them that would it any good:
For they destroyed all as they yoode.
So long they rade destroying sa:
That they trauersed off to and fra:
So that they commen are to Repoun,
And destroyed haillely that Town.
At Borrow brig their harbery
They took, and at Midtoun there by.
And when the men of that Country,
Their men saw so destroyed be:
They gaddered into full great hy.
Archers, Burgesses, and Yemanry,
Priests, Clerks, Abbots, Freeres,
Husbands, and men of all misters,
While they togidder assembled were,
Well twenty thousand men, and maire:
Right good armor aneugh they had.
The Archbishop of York they made
Their Captain, and to counsel
Hes taken, that they in plain battle,
Would assail the Scottishmen,
That far fewer than they were then.
Then he displayed his Baner,
And other Bishops that were there,
Gart display their Baner alswa.
And in a rout forth can they ga,
Toward Mid^oun the ready way,
And when the Scottishmen heard say,
That they were to them coming near:
They busked them on their best maneere:
And dealt them into battles two,
Dowg^as the Uangard can ma,
And the Reeregard made Earl Thomas,
(For Captain of the Oast he was)
And so ordained in good array,
Toward their foes they held the way,
When that they had of other sight,
They preassed on both the halfes to fight.
The Englishmen came right sadly,
With good countenance, and hardy,
Right in a frount with their Baner,
While that their foes came so ner:
That they their visage well might see.
Three spear length, trow I it might be
Betwixt them, then sik abaissing
Took them that but assonyeing,
They took the back, and all to ga.
When Scottishmen hes seen them sa
Affrayedly flee all their way,
In great hy upon them set they,
And ^lew, and took a great party:
That the laue fled full effrayedly,
As they best might, to seek warrant.
They were chased to near at hand,
That well a thousand died there.
And of tha yet three hundredth were
Priests that died in that place.
Therefore that bargain called was,
The Chapter of Midtoun: for there
Slain so money Priests were.
The other assault of Barwicke, That was right shape to the Scots kinrike.
WHen that their folk discomfist was,
And Scottishmen had left the chase:
They went then forward in the land,
Slaying destroying, and burnand
Then they that at the Siege lay,
Ere it was past the fifth day,
Had made them sundry apparaile,
To gang eft soones to assail*
Of greit Geistes a Sow they made,
That stalward heilling outwith had:
With armed men anew therein,
And Instruments for to mine,
Sundry Scaffolds then made withal,
That were far hier then the Wall,
And ordainde als that by the sea,
The town should right well sailied be:
And they within* that them sa,
So greit apparel to them ma,
Through Crabbes counsel that was ^lee,
A Crane they have gart dress up hie,
Rinning on wheels, that they might bring
It where that need were of helping:
And pick, and far all have they taken,
And Lynt, and Hardes, and Brintstane,
And dry treee that would well birne,
And melled ather other in:
And greit Faggots therefore they made,
Girthed with Irne bands brade
The Faggots well might measured be,
To a greit tons quantity.
The Fagots burning in a baill,
With their Cran thought they should avail:
And if the Sow come to the wall,
To let it burning on her fall:
And with a sta^ke Chenyie hold it there:
While all were burnt up that there were,
Ingins also for to cast,
They ordained, and made ready fast:
And set ilke man to his ward.
And Sir Walter the good Stewart
With armed men should ride about,
And see where that there was most dout,
And succor there with his Menie,
And when they into sike degree.
Had made them for their assailyeing,
On the Rood Even in the dawing,
The English Host blew to assail.
There might men see with seir apparaile,
The greit Host come full sturdelie.
The town environed they in hy.
And assailyied with full greit will:
For all their might they set theretill,
Fast they them preassed to the town:
But they that can them abandoun
To dead, or then to wounds sair:
So well hes them defended there.
That Ladders to the ground they slang,
And with stones so fast they dang
Their foes, that feill they left lying,
Some dead some hurt, and some swoouning,
But they that held on foot, in hy,
Drew them away deliuerly,
And sojournde there for no ^in thing,
But went stoutly to assailyeing.
And they abo^e defended ay,
And set them to so hard assay:
While that feile of them wounded were,
And they so greit defense made there.
That they stinted their foes might,
Upon sike manner can they fight:
While it was near Noone of the day,
Then they without in greit array,
Preassed their Sow toward the wall,
And they within right soon gart call,
The Inginer that taken was,
And greit mannance to him maes:
And swore that he should die, but he,
Preeued on the Sow sik subteltie,
That he should frush her ilke daill:
And he that hes perceived well,
That the dead was near him till,
But if he might fulfill their will,
Thought, that he all his might would do
Bended in greit hy then was sho,
And to the Sow was then even set,
In hy he gart draw the Cleiket:
And smertly swapped out a stone,
That even over the Sow is gone,
And behind her a little wie
It fell: and then they cried hie,
That were in her forth to the wall,
For dreedlesse it is ours all.
The Ingynour then deliuerlie,
Gart bind the gyne full hastily,
That kest the stone right smertly out.
It flew over whiddering in a rout,
And fell right even before the Sow,
Their hearts then begouth to grow.
But if they with their mights all,
Preassed the sow toward the wall.
And hes her set thereto cunningly,
The Ingynour then gart bend in hy
The gyn, and swakked out a stone,
That even towar^ the Lift is gone,
And with greit weight dushed down,
R^ght by the wall in a randoun,
And hit the Sow in sik a manner,
That it that was the most sower:
And starkest for to stint straike,
In sunder with that d^sh he brake.
The men ran forth in full greit hy.
And on the walls they can cry:
That their Sow fecried was there.
John Crab that had his gear all there.
In the Faggots hes set a fire,
And over the walls syne can it wyre.
And brunt the Sow in brandes bare,
With this all fast assaileing were
The folk without with felloun fight.
And they within with meekle might,
Defended manfully that Steed,
Into greit adventure of their deed.
The shipmen with greit apparaile.
Came with their ships to assail.
With Topcasteles garnisht well,
And with men armed into steel,
Their baits v^ in midds their Mast,
Drawn well hie, and fastened fast,
And preassed with their greit adventure,
Toward the wall: but the Ingynour
Hit an Aspine with a stone,
That the men that were therein ilkane,
Came down dushing on the land.
Fra hinefoorth durst none take on hand,
With ships to preasse them to the wall,
Bot the laue were assailyeing all.
On euerlike side so egerlie:
That Certes, it was great ferlie,
That tha folk sik defense hes made.
For the great mischief they then had:
For their walls so low they were,
That a man right with a spear,
Might strike another up in the face:
As here before told to you it was.
And feill of them were wounded saire:
And the la^e so fast traveling were:
That none had laiser rest to ta*
Their adversaries them assailyied sa:
They were therein so straightly stad,
That their Wardane with him had,
An hundredth men in company,
Armed, that wight were and hardy,
And rade about for to see where,
That his folk hardest preassed were:
But he of his haill company,
Behooued to leave a great party.
So that by he a course had made
About of all his men he had^
There was left with him only ane:
For he had them left euerilkane,
To relieve where he saw mister:
And the folk that assailyeing were,
At Mary yait, they hewed had*
The Bars and a fire had made
At the Draw-brig, and brunt it down:
And were thringing in great susioun,
Right to the yait a fire to ma.
And they within gart smertly ga,
Right to the UUardane for to say,
How they were set in hard assay.
And when Sir Walter Stewart heard,
How that his men so straightly farde,
He gart come fra the Castle then,
All that were there of armed men:
For there that day assailyied nane.
And with that rout in hy is gane,
To Mary yait, and to the wall
Is went, and saw the peril all.
And vmbethought him suddenly,
But gif great help were sent in hy
Thereto, they sold burn up the yait,
UUith the fire that he found thereat.
Therefore upon great hardement,
He suddenly set his intent:
And gart all wide set up the yait,
And the fire that he found thereat,
With strength of men he put away.
He set him in full great assay:
For they that were assailyeing there
Preassed on him with weapons bare:
And he defended with all his might.
There men might see a felloun fight,
With sticking, stopping, and straiking:
There made they sturdy defending,
Magre their foes, while the night:
Gart them on both halfes leave the fight.
THey of the Dast, when night can fall,
Fra the assault withdrew them all:
Wounded, and weary, and forbeft,
With faintness there the Sault they left,
And to their Innes they went in hy,
And set their Watches hastily.
The laue them eased, as they might best:
For they had great mister of rest.
That night they spoke all commonly,
Of them within, and had ferly,
That they so stout defense had made,
Against the great assault they had:
And they within on other party,
UUhen they their foes so haillely
Saw them withdraw, they were all blyth,
And their Watches hes ordainde swyth:
And syne are to their Innes gane.
There was but few of them then slain,
Bot feill were wounded cruelly.
The laue out of measure were weary.
It was an hard assault, perfay:
For certainly I heard men say,
That no few men more defense had made:
That so right sharp assailyeing had,
And of one thing that there befell,
I have ferly, that I of tell:
That is, that into all that day,
UUhen all the most assailyied they:
And the shot thickest was with all,
Women with bairnes, and children small.
In arms full gaddered up, and bare,
To them that on the walls were,
Arrows, and not ane slain was there.
Nor yet wounded, and that was maire.
To a miracle of GOD almighty,
And to naught else it set can I.
On ather side, that night they were
All still, while on the morn but maire,
There came tythings out of England,
To the Oast that was mislykand:
How that at Borrowbrig by Midtoun,
Their men were slain and doungen down:
And that the Scotishmen through the land,
Rade yet burning, and slayand,
And when the King hes heard this tale,
His counsel he assembled hale:
To see, whidder better were him till,
Abide about the town all still:
And assail while it winnen were:
Or then in England for to fare:
And reskew his land, and men.
His counsel fast discorded then:
For the South men would that he made
Arest there, while he winnen had
The Town, and the Castle alswa.
But North men would nothing swa:
They dred their friends for to tyne,
And most part of their goods syne,
Through Scottishmens cruelty.
They would he leet the Siege be,
And ride for to reskew the land.
Of Longcastell, I take on hand:
The Earl Thomas was one of tha,
That counseld the King home for to ga.
And for that, more inclined he,
To the folk of the North Country:
Then to the Southeroun men's will,
He took it to so meekle ill,
That he gart turse his gear in hy,
And with his battle haillely:
That of the Oast near third part was,
To England home his ways taes,
But lieue ^ee home hes ^ane his gate:
Therefore fell after sik debate.
Betwext him, and the King, that ay
Lested, and Andro Hardeclay.
That through the King was on him set,
Took him syne, and into Pumfret,
Into the Hill beside the town
Struck off his head but ransoun.
Therefore syne hauged and drowned was he
And with him a greit Menyie.
Men syne said after that this Thomas,
That on this wise martyred was,
Was syne a Saint, mirackles did:
But envy then gart them be hid.
But whidder he holy was or nane.
At Pumfret thus gate was he slain.
And syne the King of England,
When that he saw him take on hand,
To pass his was so openly.
He thought that vecill it was folly*
His Harness therefore cursed he:
And with the laue of his Menie,
To England home can be fare.
The Scottishmen that destroying were
Throughout England full cruelly
Burning and wasting right rigorously,
When t at they have heard tythings tell
Of this greit Siege that was so fell:
That they all skailed were and gane,
Unto England home again:
So that their folks relieved were,
And set now free from all danger:
Then did they take Westward the way,
And by Carlisle returned are they,
With prise, and with prisoners,
And other goods on seir manners,
The Lords to the King are gane.
The King (I wish) was wonder fane,
That they returned haill and feere:
And that they sped on that maneere,
That they their foes discomfist had,
And but tynsell of men had made
Recourse to them, that in Barwike
Were assieged right fair and thick.
That into full greit danger was,
Through strength of them that sieged hes.
And when the King had speered tithand,
How they had farne into England,
And of their journey what progress,
That they have had; and what success?
And they have told him all their fare,
How Englishmen discomfist were,
Right blithe into his heart was he,
And made them Feast with game and glee.
Barwike was on this manner
Reskewed, and they that therein were.
He was worthy a Prince to be,
Through manheede, and subtilitie,
That could with wit so hie a thing,
But tynsell bring to good ending.
To Barwicke syne the King goes,
And when he heard syne how it was
Defended so done manfully,
He loved them that were there greitlie.
Walter Stewarts greit bounty,
Attour the laue commended he,
For the right greit defense he made,
At the et, where men brunt had
The brig, as ye heard me devise.
And Certes, he was meekle to praise:
That so stoutly with plain feghting,
At open Yate made sik defending,
Might he had lived, while he had been,
Of persite eild, withoutten wene,
His Renown should have streiked fer.
But death that watches ever ner,
Into the flour of his Youthheed,
Made end of all his doughtie deed,
As ^ shall tell furthermare,
When the King had a while been there,
He sent for Masouns far and near,
That sleest were of that misteere:
And gart well tenfoote hie the wall,
About Barwike the town over all.
And syne toward Louthiane,
With his Menie his gate hes taken,
And syne he gart ordain in hy,
Both armed men, and Yemanrie,
Into Ireland in hy to fare,
To help his brother that was there.
But he that rest annoyed ay,
And would in travel be always,
Ane day before the arriving
Of them, were sent him from the King,
He took his way Southward to fare,
Magre them all that with him were,
For he had not then in that land,
Of all men (I trow) two thousand.
Except the Kings of the ^rishrie,
That in greit routes rade him by.
Toward Dondalk he took his way:
And when Richard of Clare heard say,
That he came with a few Menie:
All that he might assembled he:
Of all Ireland of armed men.
So that he had there with him then,
Of trapped Horses twenty thousand,
By them that were on foot gangand:
And held forth Northward on his way,
And when Sir Edward heard men say,
That commen near to him was he,
He sent Discurreours him to see,
The Sowles and the Stewart were they
And als Sir Philip the Mowbray,
And when they seen had their coming,
They went again to tell tithing:
And said, they were well money men,
In hy Sir Edward answered then:
And said, that he should feght that day,
Though five, or six times more were they
Sir John Stewart said sickerlie,
I reed ye feght not in sike hy,
Men says your brother is cummand,
With fifteen hundredth men at hand.
And were they knit with you, ye might
Abide stalwartlie the fight.
Sir Edward looked right angerlie
And to the Sowles said in hy:
What say thou? Sir, he said, perfay,
As my Fellow said Sir, I say,
Then to Sir Philip the Mowbray said he,
Sir (said he) so our Lord me see,
Me thought it folly for to bide
Yone men, that speedes them to ride:
For we are few, our foes are feill*
God may right well our Weirds deill,
But it were wonder that our might
Sold overcome so feill in fight.
Then with great ire (alace) said he,
I weind never to have heard that of thee:
Now help who will, for sickerly
This day but more bade fight will I.
Sall no man say while that I die,
That strength of men sall gar me flee.
GOD shield that any sold us blame,
That we deal our Noble fame.
Now be it swagait then (said they)
We sall take that GOD will puruay,
And when the Kings of Irishry,
Heard say, and wist it sickerly,
That their King with so wheene wald fight
Against so money of meekle might:
They came to him in full great hy,
And counselde him full tenderly,
For to abide his men, and they
Sold hold their foes all that day
Doing* and on the morn alswa,
UUith their assaults that they sold ma.
But there might no counsel avail,
He would all gaites to the battle.
And when they saw he was so thra
To fight, they said, ye may well ga:
But we will quite us utterly,
To fight with yone great company,
For none of us will stand to fight:
Trust not therefore into our might:
For our manner is in this land,
To follow, and to fight flee and:
And not to stand in plain Melle.
UUhile the one part discomfist be.
He said, sen that your custom is,
I ask no more of you, but this,
That is, that ye and your Menyie,
UUould all togidder arrayed be,
And stand on far but departing,
And see our feght, and our ending.
They said, well, that they sold do sa:
And syne toward their foes can ga.
They were well threttie thousand near,
Edward, and they that with him were,
They were not fully two thousand,
Arrayed then stalwardly to stand,
Against threttie thousand and ma.
Sir Edward that day would not ^a
His Coat Armor, bot Gib Harper
That men held as withoutten peer,
Of his estate, had on that day,
All haill Sir Edwards array*
The feght abade they on this wise,
And in great hy their enemies,
Came to assemble all ready.
And they met them right hardely.
They were so few the sooth to say,
That rushed with their foes were they:
And they that most preassed to stand,
Were slain down, and the remanand
Fled to the Irishry for succor,
Sir Edward that had sik valor
Was dead, and Sir John Stewart alswa,
And Sir John Sowles als with tha.
And other of their company:
They vanquished were so suddenly,
That few into the Plain were slain,
For the laue hes their ways taken:
To the Irish Kings that were there,
That in haill battle howing were.
John Thomson that was leader,
Of them of Carrike that were there.
When he saw the discomfiting,
Withdrew him to an Irish King,
That of his acquaintance had he:
And he received him in dainty.
And when John commen was to the King
He saw men lead fra the feghting,
Sir Philip Mowbray the wight,
That had been discomfist in the fight:
And by the arms led was he,
With two men upon the Caussey,
That was betwixt them and the town,
That streiked long in a randoun:
Toward the town they held their way,
And when in mids the Caussey were the^,
Sir Philip of his business
Overcome and perceived he was
Taken, and swagaites led with two.
The one he swakked soon him fra,
And syne the other in great hy.
He drew his sword deliuerly,
And to the feght the way he taes,
Endlang the Caussey that there was
Filled into so great fusioun
Of men, that went then to the town.
And he that met them can them ma,
Sik payment, where he can them ta,
That well an hundredth men gart he,
Leave magre theirs the Caussey,
And John Thomson said surely,
That saw his deeds all haillelie,
That toward the battle even he yeede,
John Thomson thereto took good heed,
And cried to him in full great hy.
That they were vanquished all plainly:
And said, come here: for there is nane
On life for they are dead ilkane.
Then stood he still a while, and saw
That they were all done out of daw:
Syne went he toward him sikkerlie.
This John wrought syne so wittelie,
That all that hidder fled, they were
Comde to Craigfergus hail and feere,
Although they left some of their gear.
And they that at the fighting were,
Sought Sir Edward to get his head,
Among the folk that there was dead:
And found Gib Harper in his gear:
And for so good his armings were,
They struck his head off: and syne it,
They have gart salt into a Kit:
And in a Present but hething
In England sent it to the King.
They weind Sir Edward it had been:
But for the arming that was sheene,
They of the head deceived were:
Although Sir Edward died there.
On this wise were the Noble men,
Through wilfulness, all lossed then,
And that was sin, and great pity:
For had their outrageous bounty,
Been led with wit, and with measure,
But gif the more misauenture
Befell them it sold been hard thing,
Sold lead them to discomforting,
But greit outrageous succudrie,
Gart them all dear their worship buy:
And they that fled from the Melle,
Sped them in hy toward the Sea:
And to Craigfergus commen are they:
And they that were into the way,
To Sir Edward, sent from the King,
When they heard the discomfiting,
To Craigfergus they went again,
And that was not withoutten pain,
For they were money times that day
Assailyied with Irishrie: but they
Held them togidder sikkerlie,
Defending them so worthelie:
That they escaped often through might,
And money times often by slight.
For often there to themselves gave they,
To let them skaithlesse pass away.
And to Craigfergus came they sa,
Then baits and shipmen they ta,
And sailled to Scotland into hy,
And arrived all their safely.
When they of Scotland had witting,
Of Sir Edwards discomfiting:
They meened him full tenderly,
Over all the land full commonly:
And they that with him slain were there.
Full tender als meened they were.
SIr Edward Bruce, as is said air,
Was discomfist on this manner:
And when the field was cleanged cleene,
So that no resistance there was seen.
The Wardane then Richard of Clare
With all the folks that he had there.
Toward Dondalke hes taken the way,
So that no debate made they:
At that time with the Irishry,
But to the town they held in hy,
And syne hes sent to the King,
That England had in governing,
Gib harpers head into a Kit,
John Mowppas to the King had it:
Whilke he received in greit dainty,
Right blithe of that Present was he.
For he was glad that he was so
Delivered of sike a felloun foe,
In heart thereof he took sike pride,
That in all haste he would ride.
With a greit Host into Scotland,
To revenge him with stalward hand,
Of the tray, travel and the teene,
That done to him therein had been.
Then a right greit Host gaddered he,
And gart his ships by the sea
Come with greit fusioun of vittaile
For at that time he thought all haill,
For to destroy so clean Scotland,
That none should be therein liuand,
And with his Host in greit array
Toward Scotland he took the way.
And when King Robert wist that he
Came on him with sik a Menie,
He gaddered men both far and near,
While so feill commen to him were,
And was als for to come him to:
That him thought he should well do:
He gart with draw all the Cattle.
Of Lowthiane euerilk deill.
And into strengths gart them be led,
And ordainde men to defend that stead:
And with his Host all still he lay,
At Co^ros: for he would assay,
To gar his foes through fasting
Be feeble, and through long waking.
And fra he feeblished had heir might,
Assemble with them he would to fight.
He thought to work upon this wise,
And Englishmen through greit Maistries,
Came with their Host to ^outhiane,
And then to Edinburgh* are they gane,
And there abade days three.
Their ships that were upon the sea,
Tad the wind contrare to them ay:
So that upon no manner of way,
Power they had to the Firth to bring
Their vittaile to relieve their King:
And they of the Host that failyied meat.
When they saw that they might not get
Their vittailes to them by the sea,
They sent then forth a greit Menyie,
For to forray all Louthiane.
But Cattle have they founden nane.
Except a Kow that was haltand,
That in Tranent town they ^and.
And when the Earl of Warrane,
Saw their Forrayours come again,
And a Kow anerly come sa:
He asked if they found no ma?
And they have said all to him. Nay.
Then Certes said he, I dare say,
This is the dearest beast, that I
Saw ever yet: for sikkerly
It cost a thousand pound and maire.
And when the King, and they that were
Of his counsel, saw they might get
No Cattle to their Host to eat.
Then they of fasting had greit pain.
To England turned they home again.
At Melros shupe they for to ly,
And sent before a company.
Three hundredth near of armed men:
But the Lord Douglas that was then,
Beside into a Forest near,
Wist of their coming and what they were
And with them of his company,
Into Melros all haillelie,
He howered into a bushment,
And a right sturdie Freere hes sent,
Without the Yate their coming to see,
And bade him hold him all privy,
While that he saw them commen all,
Right to the cunyie of the Wall:
And cried on hie, Douglas, Douglas,
The Freere then forth his ways taes,
That was right darfe, stout, and hardy,
His meekle hoode covered haillely
The arming that he on him had.
Upon a stalwart Horse he rade,
And in his hand he had a Spear,
And abade upon that maneere,
While that he saw them commenner,
And when the formest passed were
The cunyie, he cried, Douglas, Douglas,
Then to them all, a course he maes,
And bare one down deliueredlie,
Then Douglas with his company,
Ished upon them with a shoute.
And when they saw so great a rout,
Come upon them so suddenly,
They were abased gretumlie:
And gave the back but more abade.
The Scottishmen among them rade,
And slew all them they might ouerta,
And great martyrdom there can ma:
And they that escaped were unslain:
And to their Oast went home again:
And told them what good welcomming,
Douglas then made at their coming,
Conuoying them again rudely,
And warned them the plain harbrie.
Here followed King Robert in hight, The English King with all his might.
THe King of England, and his men,
That saw their harbreours come then
Rebuted on that great manner.
Annoyed in their hearts they were:
And thought it was a great folly,
Into the wood to take harbrie.
Therefore by Dryburgh in a Plain:
They harbried them, and syne again,
Are went to England but delay.
And when the King Robert heard say:
That they were turned home again,
And how their harbreours were slain,
In hy an Oast assembled he,
And went forth over the Scots sea:
Eighty thousand he was, and ma,
And eight battles he made of tha:
In ilk battle were ten thousand:
Syne went he forth to England,
And in haill rout he followed fast
The English King, while at the last,
He came approaching by Byland,
When at that time there was lyand,
The King of Englan^ with his men,
King Robert that had witting then,
That he lay there with meekle might:
Tranoynted so on him one night:
That on the morn by it was day,
Commen to the plain field were they.
Fra Byland a little space:
But betwixt them, and it there was,
A craig bra streiked well lang:
And a great Path up for to gang.
Otherwise might they not have way,
To pass to Bylands Abbay:
Bot gif they passed far about.
And when the meekle English rout,
Heard that the King Robert was near,
The most part of them that were there,
Went to the Path to take the bra,
There thought they their defense to ma:
Their Baners there they gart display,
And their battles in brade array:
And thought well to defend the place.
When King Robert perceived hes,
That they them thought for to defend,
After his counsel hes he send.
And asked what was best to do?
The Lord Douglas answered him to:
And said, Sir, I will vnderta,
That in short time I sall do sa:
That I sall win yone place plainly:
Or then gar all yone company,
Come down to you into this Plain:
Or ye sall never trow me again.
The King then said great GOD thee speed:
And he on forth his ways yeede,
And of the Oast the most party,
Put then into his company*
And held their way toward the place,
The Earl of Murray Sir Thomas,
Left his battle, and in great hy,
But with few men in company,
Came to the Court of the Lord Douglas,
And ere he entered into the place,
Before them all the place took he:
For he would that men sold him see.
And when the good Lord Douglas,
Saw that he so commen was.
He praised him thereof greatly,
And welcomed him honorably.
And to the place can togidder ga.
When Englishmen saw them do sa,
They lighted, and against them yeed,
Two Knights, that doughtie were indeed,
Thomas of Struthers heght one to name,
And the other Sir Ralph of Cowban^?
Their two Knights of good degree,
Came down before all their Menyie:
They were both of full great bounty,
And met their foes right manfully.
There might men see well other assail,
And men defend with stout battle:
And arrows flee in great fusioun,
And they that above were, tumbled down
Stones upon them from the hight.
But they that set both will and might,
To wi^ the Path, and preassed sa:
That Sir Ralph Cowbane can ta
The way, right to his Oast in hy,
And left Sir Thomas manfully
Defending with great might the place,
UUhile that he so supprised was:
That he was taken through hard fighting.
And therefore syne while his ending,
He was renouned the best of hand,
Of one Knight, was in all England.
For this ilk Sir Ralph of Cowbane,
In all England he had the name:
For the best Knight of that land.
And for Sir Thomas dwelt still fightand,
Where Sir Ralph (as before said we)
Withdrew him, abone him prised was he.
The discomfiting of Englishmen, At Bylands Path into the Glen.
THus were they fighting in the place:
And when King Robert, that was
UUise in his deeds, and eke worthy,
Saw his men ay so doughtelie,
The Peth upon their foes ta,
And saw his foes defend them sa:
Then gart he all the Irishry,
That were into his company,
Of Argyle, and Isles alswa,
Speed them in hy unto the bra.
He bade them leave the Peth haillely,
And climb up on the Craiges thereby:
And speed them fast the hight to ta,
And in greit hy they have done sa:
And clambe as Gaites up to the hight,
And left not for their foes might.
Magre their foes they bare them sa:
That they are gotten abone the bra.
Then faught they wonder fellounlie,
And rushed their foes right sturdelie.
There was a right perilous bargain:
For a Knight heght Sir John of Britain
That lighted hes abone the bra,
With his men greit defense can ma,
But the Scottishmen can so assaille,
And gave to them so feill battle:
That they were set in sike effray,
That they that flee might, fled away.
Sir John of Britain there was taken,
And most part of his Menie s^aine,
Of France there were taken Knights two,
The Lord of Sowllie was one of tho:
The other was the Marshall Britain
That was a right greit Lord at hame,
The laue some dead were, and some slain,
The remnand fled were euerilkane.
And when the King of England,
As yet at Byland was lyand:
Saw his men discomfist plainly,
He took his way in full greit hy,
And Southward fled in all his might,
The Scots men chased him hard, I hight:
And in the chase hes money slain:
But he quickly away is gane,
And the most part of his Menie,
Walter Stewart of greit bounty,
Set ay upon hie Cheualrie.
With five hundredth in company,
To York Yates a chase can ma:
And there some of their men can s^a:
And abade while near the night.
To see if any would ish to fight
And when he saw none would ish out,
He turned again wi^h all his rout:
And to the Host they went in hy,
That then had taken their harbery:
Into the Abbay of Byland,
And Rewes that were near by lyand.
They deal^ among them that was there,
And gave the King of Englands gear:
That he had left into Byland,
All gripped they into their hand:
And made them glad, and eke merry.
And when the King had taken Harberie,
They brought to him their prisoners
All unarmed, as it affeeres:
And when he saw John of Britain,
He had at him full greit disdain:
For he of him would speak highly,
At home, and too dispitefullie.
He bade have him away in hy,
And look he kept were straightly,
And said, were it not that he were
A Capti^e, as he then was there
His words he should full dear aby.
And he full fast can cry, mercy,
They let him forth withoutten maire,
And keept him well white that they were
Commen home to their own Country.
Long after syne ransomed was he:
For twenty thousand pound to pay,
As I have heard among men say.
WHen that the King this speech had made,
The French Knights they taken had.
Were brought there before the King.
And he made them fair welcomming,
And said, I wate right well that ye
For your greit worship and bounty,
Came for to see this feghting here:
For sen ye in the Country were,
Your strength, your worship and your might,
Would not thole you eschew the fight,
And sen that cause led you theretill,
And nouther wrath, nor yet ill will,
As friends ye shall received be,
And welcome be all time to me.
They kneeled, and thanked him greitly*
And he gart treat them courteously,
A long while with him them held he.
And did them honor and bounty,
And when they yarned to their land.
Unto the King of France in Presand,
He sent them quite, but ransom free,
And gifts greit to them gave he,
His friends thusgaite courteously,
He could receive, and right humbly,
And his foes stoutly astoney.
At Byland all that night he lay,
For their victory all blyth they were,
And on the morn withoutten maire,
They have Southwards taken their way
So far at that time trauelde they,
Burning, slaying, and destroying
Their foes, with all their might noying,
While to the wall commen were they,
Syne North again they took the way
And syne homeward in their repare,
They destroyed haill the wall of Bewar,
And syne with prisoners and Cattle,
Riches, and money fair Jewel,
To Scotland took they home their way,
Blithe and joyful of their Prey.
And ilke man went to his repair,
Thanking great God of their welfare,
That they the King of England,
Through worship and through strength of hand
And through their Kings greit bounty,
Discomfist had in his own Country.
THus was the Land a while at peace:
But Couetise that cannot cease,
To set men upon felony,
To gar men come to Senyeorie,
Greit Lords of full greit Renown,
Made a feill Conjuration,
Against Robert the doughtie King,
They thought to bring him to ending:
And for to brook after his dead
The K^nrike, and Reign in his stead.
Of the great Treasoun the ordaining, To Robert the Bruce the noble King*
THe Lord Sowles Sir Williame,
Of this dead had most defame:
For principal thereof was he,
Both of assent and cruelty:
And had gotten with him sundry,
Gilbert Malyerd, and John of Logie,
They were Knights, I tell of here.
And Richard Brown als a Squire:
And good Sir David the Brechyne,
UUas of this deed arested syne,
And I sall tell you furthermare:
But they ilkane discovered were,
Through a Lady (as I heard say)
Ere to their purpose come might they:
For she told hailly to the King,
Their purpose, and their ordaining.
And when that he sold have been dead.
And Sowles King into his stead:
And told him very takinning.
That this purpose was soothfast thing,
And when the King wist that it was sa,
So subtle purpose can he ta:
That he gart take them euerilkane.
And where the Lord Sowles was taken,
Three hundredth, and sextie had he,
Of Squyers, cled in his Leuerie,
At that time in his company,
Outtane Knights that were iolie.
Into Barwike taken was he,
Then might men all his Menyie see,
Sorry, and woe the sooth to say.
The King leet them all pass away,
And held them that he taken had.
The Lord Sowles then after made
^laine granting of that haill purpose.
A Parliament therefore set was,
And hidder brought that Menyie were.
The Lord Sowles hes granted there
The deed, into plain Parliament,
Therefore soon after he was sent,
To his pains in Dumbartane,
And died in that town of stane.
Sir Gilbert Malyerd, and Logie,
And Richard Brown, their three plainly,
Was with assise there ouertane,
Therefore they were drawn ilkane,
And hanged, and headed als thereto.
As men them damned had to do.
And good Sir David the Brechine,
They gart challenge thereafter syne:
And he granted, that of that thing
Was made to him discovering:
But thereto gave he no consent,
But for he heilled their intent,
And discovered it not to the King,
Whom of he held all his holding,
And had made to him fewtie:
Judged to hing, and drawn be
He was, and as they drew him to hing*
The people farly fast can thring
Him, and his mischief for to see:
That to behold was great pity.
Sir Ingrame Vmfrauile that then
Was with the King a Scottishman:
When he that great mischief did see:
He said, Lordings, whereto preasse ye,
To see the mischief of this Knight,
That was so worthy and so wight?
For I have seen ma preasse to see,
Him for his Sovereign bounty:
Than now does for to see him here,
And when their words spoken were,
With sorry cheer he held him still,
While men had done on him their will.
And syne with lieue of the King,
He brought him menskfully to eirding:
And syne to the King said he:
One thing I pray you, Sir grant to me:
That is, that ye of all my land,
That is into Scotland lyand,
Would give me leave to do my will.
The King soon hes said him till,
I will well grant* that it so be:
But tell me what annoyes thee?
He said again, grant me mercy,
And I sall tell you it plainly.
Mine heart gives me no more to be,
With you dwelling in this Country.
Therefore that it not you grieve,
I pray you hartly of your lieue:
For where so Noble and worthy a Knight,
And so Cheualrous and so wigh^*
And so renouned of worship syne,
As Sir David the good Brechyne:
And so fulfilled of all manheede,
UUas put to so villainous a dead:
Mine heart forsooth may not give me,
To dwell for nothing that may be.
The King said, sen that ye will sa
When ever ye will ye may ga:
And you sall have good leave thereto.
Thy liking of thy land to do:
And he him thanked gretumly,
And of his land in full great hy,
As him thought best, disponed he.
Syne at the King of great bounty,
Before them all that with him were,
His lieue he took for euermaire.
And went in England to the King,
And he him told all but leesing.
How that the Knights destroyed were,
And all as I told you air:
And of the Kings Courtesy,
That leaued him debonerlie,
To do with his land his liking,
In that time were sent fra the King,
Of Scotland, Messingers to treat
For peace, gif that they might it get,
As there oftsyse before was send,
Suppose they could not bring it to end.
For the good King in his intent,
Sen GOD sik grace to him had sent,
That he had winnen all his land,
Through strength of arms to his hand,
That he peace in his land would ma,
And all the land established sa:
That his air after him sold be
In peace, gif men held their lawtie.
IN this time that the Vmfrauile,
As I bare on hand air while,
Came to the King of England,
The Scots Messengers there he fand,
Of peace and rest to have tretise.
The King wist Sir Ingrame was wise,
And asked his counsel thereto:
What he would reed him for to do.
For he said he was laith to ma
Peace with King Robert Bruce his fa,
While that he venged of him were.
Sir Ingram^ made to him answer,
And said, he dealt so courteously.
With me, that on no wise sold I
Gave counsel to his hurting:
Thou behooues needwise (said the King)
To this thing say thine auise.
Sir (said he) sen your will it is,
That I say, wit ye sikkerlie:
For all your greit Cheualrie,
To deal with them ye have no might,
His men so worthy are and wight,
For long usage of feghting,
That have been nourished in sik thing,
That ilke Yeman is so wight,
Of his, that he is worth a Knight.
But if ye think your weere to bring,
To good purpose at your liking:
Long trewes with him take ye:
Then shall the most part of his Menie.
That are but simple Yemanrie,
Be strenyied all commonly,
To win their meat with their trauill,
And some of them of need mon call
With pleugh, and Borrow for to get.
And other feere Crafts their daily meat,
So that their arming shall worth old,
And be rousted, destroyed, and sold,
And feill that now of weere are slay,
Into these long trewes shall die,
And others in their stead shall rise,
That shall ken little of sik maistries,
And when they thus diffused are,
Then may ye move on them were,
To this assented they ilkane,
And after soon were trewes taken,
Betwixt the two Kings that were,
Taken to last for thretteene year.
And on the Marches gart them cry,
The Scottishmen kept them leelely,
But Englishmen upon the sea,
Destroyed through greit cruelty.
Merchant ships that sailling were,
From Scotland to Flanders with waire,
And destroyed the men ilkane:
And to their use the goods hes taken.
The King sent often to have redress:
But naught thereof redress there was,
And he abade all time askand.
The trewes on his half gart he stand,
Upon the Marches stabilly,
And gart men keep them leelely.
Walter Stewart here died he, At Paslay eirded syne was he.
IN this time that the trewes were.
Lesting on Marches (as I said air)
Walter Stewart that worthy was,
At Bathcat a greit sickness taes,
His evil woxt ay more and more,
While men perceived by his sore,
That he of need must pay the det,
That no man for to pay may let.
Shriuen and als repenting well,
When all was done to him ilke deill.
That Christen men ought for to have
As good Christen, the Gaist he gave.
Then might men hear folk weep and cry
And money a Knight and fair Lady,
Murning and making full evil chere,
So did they all that ever were there,
All men him meened commonly,
For of his eild he was worthy.
When long tim they their dule had made
The Corpse to Paslay have they had:
And there with greit solemnity,
And with greit dule eirded was he.
GOD for his might his soul mot bring,
Where Joy aye lasts but ending.
The Earl of Murray and Douglas, With their Host commen to Wardel was.
AFter his death (as I said air)
The trewes that so taken were:
For to have lasted thretteene year,
When two of them were passed near,
And an hailfe, I trow alswa:
King Robert saw men would not ma
Redress of ships that were taken:
And of the men als that were slain.
But ay continued their prauitie,
Where ever they met upon the sea:
He sent, and quit him all plainly,
And gave the trewes up openly.
And in vengeance of this trespass,
The Earl of Murray Sir Thomas.
And Donald Earl of Mar alswa,
And James of Douglas with them two,
And James Stewart that leader was,
After his good brothers decease,
Of all his brethers men in weere,
He gart upon their best maneere,
With money men boun them to ga,
In England, for to to burn and sla,
And they held forth soon to England,
They were of good men ten thousand:
And brunt and slew into their way,
Their foes fast destroyed they.
And thusegaite fordward can they fare,
To Wardall Park while they commen are
That time Edward of Carnauerane
The King, was dead, and laid in Lame.
And Edward his son that was ying,
In England crowned then was King:
And surname had of Windsore,
He had in France been before,
With his mother Dame Issobell,
And was wedded (as I heard tell)
To a young Lady fair of face,
That the Earls Daughter was
Of Henault, and of that Country,
Brought with him men of greit bounty
That was right wise, and wight in weere,
Sir John de Henault was leader,
And in that time the Scots men were.
At Wardall Park (as I said air)
Into York was he new made King,
And heard tell of the destroying,
That Scottishmen made in his Country,
A greit Host to him gaddered he:
He was well near fifty thousand,
Then held he Northward in the land,
In haill battle with that Menie:
Eighteen year old that time was he,
The Scots men they had all Cokdaill,
From end to end they haryed haill:
And Wardall again they rade,
Their Discurreours that sight hes head,
Of coming of the Englishmen:
To their Lords they told it then,
Then the Lord Douglas in a ling,
Ride forth for to see their coming:
And saw that seven battles were they,
That came riding in good array.
When he the folk beholden had,
Toward his Oast again he rade.
The Earl speered gif he had seen
The Oast? yea Sir (he said) but ween.
What folk are they? Sir, money men.
The Earl his aith hes made even then:
We sall fight with them, yea, though they were,
Full mo by far, then they now are,
Sir, loved be GOD, he said again:
That we have sik a Capitane,
That so great thing dar vnderta.
Bot by Sanct Bryde, it bees not sa,
Gif my counsel may trowed be:
For fight on no manner sall we,
But it be at our auantage,
For me think it were no outrage,
To fewer folks against ma,
A vantage when they may, to ta:
As they were on this wise speaking,
On an high rig they saw streiking,
Toward them even in battle brade,
Baners anew displayed they had:
And another coming after near,
And right upon the same maneere.
They came while seven battles brade,
Out over that high Rig passed had.
The Scottishmen were then lyand.
On North half near toward Scotland,
The daile was streiked well, I hight,
On ather side there was an hight,
And to the water down somedeill stay,
The Scottishmen in good array,
On their best wise busked ilkane,
Stood in their strength that they had taken:
And that was far fra the Water of Weere,
A quarter of a mile well near:
Their stood they battle to abide*
The Englishmen there on ather side,
Came ryding downward, while they were
To Weeres Water coming near:
And on the other half their foes were:
Then have they made a rest right there,
And sent out Archers a thousand,
With Hounds and Bows in their hand:
And gart them well drink of the wine:
And bade them gang to bycker syne
The Scottish Oast in a randoun:
And look gif they might ding them down,
For might they gar them break array,
To have them at their will thought they:
And armed men down with them send
Them at the UUater to defend.
The Lord Douglas hes seen their fare,
And men that right well horsed were,
And armed a great company,
Behind the battle privily,
He gart hour to abide their coming.
And when he made to them tokenning,
They sold come pricking fast, and sla,
With spears all that they might ouerta:
Donald of Mar their Chiftane was,
And Archibald with him of Douglas,
The Lord Douglas toward them rade*
And a gown on his arming had:
And trauersed always up again:
Them near his battle for to train,
And they that drunken had of wine,
Came ay up endlang in a line,
While that the battles came so near,
That arrows fallen among them were.
Robert of Ogill a good Squyar,
Came pricking on a good Coursar:
And on the archers cried again,
Ye wate not who makes you that train.
It is the Lord Douglas, that will
Of his plays ken some you till.
When they heard speak of the Douglas,
The hardiest man effrayed was,
And again turned haillely.
His taken then he made in hy,
And the folk that enbushed were,
So stoutly pricked on them there,
That well three hundredth have they slain,
And to the UUater home again:
The remanand all can they chase.
Sir William of Erskin that was
New made Knight the samine day,
UUell horsed into good array,
Chased with others that were there:
So far-foorth, that his horse him bare
Among the lump of Englishmen:
And with strong hand he was taken then,
But of him well soon change was made,
Of other men that they taken had:
Fra their English archers were slain,
Their folk rade to their Oast again.
And right so did the Lord Douglas,
And when that he repaired was,
They might among their foes see,
Their Pauillions soon stented be.
Then they perceived soon in hy.
That they that night would take harbry.
And shape to do no more that day:
Therefore them also harbred they:
And stented Pauillions soon in hy,
Tents and Lugges als there by,
They gart make, and set all on raw,
That day two new things they saw:
That before in Scotland had been nane,
Tymbres for Helmes was the ane,
That them thought then of great bounty,
And also wonder for to see.
The other, Craikes were for weere,
That they before had never eere.
Of their two things they had ferlie.
That night they watched stalwardlie:
The most part of them armed lay,
While on the morn that it was day.
THe Englishmen then vmbethought,
Upon what manner that they might,
Gar the Scots leave their auantage:
For they thought folly, and outrage,
To gang up to them to assail
Them, at their strength in plain battle:
Therefore of good men a thousand,
Armed on horse both foot and hand,
They sent before, their foes to be.
Enbushed into a valley:
And shupe their battle as they would
Upon them to the feghting hald.
For they thought Scotsmen of sik will,
That they might not hold them still,
For they knew them of sik courage:
That they sold leave strength and auantage
And meet them in the field plainly.
Then should their bushment hastily,
Behind break on them at the back,
So thought theywel they sold them wrack
And make them to repent their play,
Their enbushment fooorth sent they,
And them enbushed privily.
And on the morn some deill airly,
Into the Host soon trumped they:
And gart their battles brade array,
And held toward the Water right,
And well arrayed for to fight.
The Scottishmen that saw them sa,
Bowne on their best wise can them ma.
And in their battle well arrayed,
With Baners to the wind displayed,
They left their strength and all plainly
To feght they shupe them hastily.
In als good manner as they might.
Right as their foes before had thought.
But the Lord Douglas, that ay where,
Set out watches here and there.
To wit of their enbushment,
Then in greit hy soon is he went,
Before the battalls, and sturdelie,
He bade ilk man turn them in hy.
Right as they stood, them turned he so
Up to the Strength he bade them go:
So that no let be therein made*
And they did as they bidding had.
Then turned they with meekle pain,
While to their strength they came again:
And stood ready to give battle,
If their foes would them assail.
When Englishmen hes seen them so,
Toward their strength again up go.
They cried hie, they flee away.
Sir John of Henault said, perfay
Yone fleeing is right Tragedy,
Their armed men behind I see,
And their Baners so that they there,
Shall turn them, as they standing were:
And be arrayed for the fight.
If any would them preasse with might,
They have seen our enbushment,
And again to their strength are went.
Yone folk are governed wittelie.
For he that leads them is worthy,
For auise, wit, and wisdom,
To govern the Empire of Rome.
This spoke that worthy Knight that day:
And the enbushment, so that they
Saw that they so discovered were
Toward their Host again they fare,
And the battles of Englishmen,
When they saw that they failied then
Of their purpose, to their Harbrie
They went, and ludged them in hy.
On either half right so did they.
They made no more debate that day.
WHen they that day ouerdriuen had,
Fires in greit fusion they made:
Als soon as night fallen was,
Then the good Lord of Douglas,
That spied had a place there by*
That two mile hine where most trustly,
The Scottishmen might harbrie ta:
And defend them better alswa,
Then else, into any place them by,
It was a Park, that haillely
Was ^nnuoned about with wall,
It was near full of trees all:
But a greit Plain into it was.
Hidder thought the Lord Douglas
By night all their Host to bring:
Therefore without more dwelling,
They bet their fires, and made them yar^:
And syne togidder forth can fare.
And to the Park without tinsall
They came, and harbred them all haill
Upon the water, and als near
To it, as they before were.
And on the morn when it was day,
The English Host missed away
The Scottishmen, and had ferlie,
And gart Discurreours hastily
Pass to see where they were away,
And by their fires perceived they,
That they in the Park of Wardaill,
Had gart harbry their Host all haill:
Therefore their Host but more abade
Busked, and even anent them rade,
On other side the Water of Weere,
Gart stint their Pauiliouns all near,
As of before stinted were they.
Eight days on this wise they lay:
That Englishmen durst not assail,
The Scottishmen in plain battaill.
For strength of eird that they had there,
There was ilke day justing of weere,
And skirmishing full apartly.
And men taken on either party,
And they that taken were on ane day,
On another changed were they.
But other deeds were not done.
That greitlie here are for to moan,
While it fell on the ninth day,
The Lord Douglas hes spied a way,
How that he might about them ride.
And come on them at the Forest side,
And at Even puruayed he,
And took with him a greit Menie:
Five hundredth on Horse wight and hardy,
And on the night all privily,
Without noise or din he rade,
While that he near environed had
Their Host, and on the Forest side,
Toward them sleelie can he ride
And the may part that with him were:
Bare in their hands swords bare,
And bade them hew Pauilions in two,
That they the Pauilions might ma,
To fall on them that in them were:
Then should the laue that Forrayours are
Strike down with spears sturdely,
And when they heard his Horn in hy,
To the Water held down the way:
When this was said (as I heard say)
Toward their foes fast they ride,
That on that side no Marches had.
And as they were near approaching,
An Englishman that lay beeking
Him by a fire, said to his Feere:
I wate not what may tide us here:
But a great groouing me taes:
I dreede me sore for black Douglas,
And he that heard him, said perfay,
Thou salt have cause, gif that I may.
By that, with all his company,
He rusted on them hardely,
And proud Pauillions down he bare,
And with spears that sharply share,
They sticked men despiteously.
The noise soon raise, and als the skry:
They stobbed, sticked, and they slew
And money Pauillions down they threw:
And felloun slaughter made they there.
For they that lying naked were,
Had no power defense to ma,
And but pity they can them sla,
They gart them wit that great folly
UUas, near there foes for to ly
But gif they straightly watched were.
The Scottishmen were slaying there
Their foes, ^n this wise, while the cry
Was through the Oast all commonly,
That Lords, and others were on steer,
And when the Douglas wist they were
Armed, then all commonly,
He blew his horn then to rely
His men, and bade them hold their way,
Toward the Water, and so did they.
And he abade hindmest to see,
Lest any of his leaued sold be.
And as he abade so howand,
There came a Carle with Club in hand,
And so great routtes to him raught,
That had not been his meekle maught,
And his right Sovereign great manhead,
Into that place he had been dead.
His men that to the UUater down
Were ridden right in a randoun,
Missed their Lord, when they came there.
They were dreading for him full saire.
Ilkone at other speered tything,
But yet of him they heard nothing.
Then can they counsel togidder ta,
That they to seek him up would ga:
And as they were in that effray,
A towting of his horn heard they.
And they that have it known swyth,
Were of his coming wonder blyth:
And speered at him of his abade?
And he told how a Carle him made.
With his Club so felloun pay,
That met him stoutly on the way:
That had not God helped him the maire,
He had been in great peril there.
Thus gaite speaking they held their way,
While to their Oast commen are they:
That on foot armed on them bade,
For to help gif they mister had,
And as soon as the Lord Douglas,
Met with the Earl of Murray was,
The Earl speered at him tything,
How he had farde in his outting:
Sir (said he) we have drawn blood:
The Earl that was of Noble mood,
Said, and we all had hidder gane,
We had destroyed them ilkane,
It might have fallen well (said he)
But sikkerly anew were we,
To put us in yone adventure:
For had they made discomfiture
On us* that yonder passed were,
It might have stonisht them that are here.
The Earl said, sen it so is
That we may not with ieopardies,
Our felloun foes force assail:
We sall it do in plain battle,
The Lord Douglas ^a^d, by Sanct Bryde,
It were great folly at this tide
To us, with sik an Oast to fight:
That ilk day grows of more might,
And vittaile hes at all plenty:
And in the Country here are we,
Where there may come to us no succors
Hard is to make us here recourse,
Nor we not forray may to get meat,
Sik as we have here, mon we eat.
Do we with our foes therefore,
That are lying here us before:
As I heard tell this other year.
How that a Fox did with a fisher,
How did the Fox the Earl can say?
He said, a Fisher whylum lay,
Beside a River fish to get,
His nets then he had there set,
A little Ludge there had he made,
And there within a bed he had,
And eke a little fire alswa
And one door was withoutten ma.
One night his nets for to see,
He raise, and well long dwelt he,
And when he had done his deed,
Toward his Ludge again he yeede,
And with the light of the li^le fire,
That in the Ludge was burning shyre,
Into the Ludge a Fox he saw,
That fast in can a Salmond draw,
Then to the door he went in hy,
And drew a sword deliuerly:
And said, Traitor, thou mon here lout.
The Fox that was in full great dout:
Looked about him hole to see,
Bot none ishe forth there could get he:
Bot where the man stood sturdely.
A Mantle he perceived him by,
Lying upon the bed, he saw,
And with his teeth he can it draw
Out over the fire, and when the man
Saw his Mantle ly burning then,
To rid it ran he hastily,
The Fox gat out then in great hy,
And held his way his warrant till.
The man thought him beguiled ill,
That he his Salmond so hes tint,
And also had his Mantle brint:
And the Fox harmless got away.
This Example I may well say,
By yone folk, and us that are here.
We are the Fox, they are the Fisher,
That steekes before us the way,
They think we may not get away:
But right where that they ly Parde,
Yet as they think, it sall not be.
For I have gart spy us a gaite,
Suppose that it be somedeill wat,
That not a Page of ours shall tine,
Our foes for this small tranoynting,
Weenes that we shall pride us sa,
That we plainly on hand shall ta,
To give them open plain battle.
But at this time their thought shall faill:
For we the morn and all this day,
Shall make als merry as we may:
And make us bowne against the night,
And then gar make our fires bright,
And blaw our Horns, and make fare,
As all the World our own it were,
While that the night well fallen be,
And then with all our Harness we
Shall take our way homeward in hy:
And altogidder hold sickerlie,
While we be out of their danger,
That thinks us now enclosed here:
And we shall be at our own will,
And we shall think them trumped ill,
Fra they wit well we be away.
To this haillely assented they,
And made them good cheer all that night
While on the morn that day was light.
Upon the morn all privily,
They turst Harness, and made ready,
So that ere Even all bowne were they.
Their foes that against them lay,
Gart have their men that were there dead,
In Carts to an hallowed Steed.
The Hosts both all that day were
In peace till that the night was near.
The Scots Host that lying were
Into the Park made Feast and Fare.
And blew Horns, and fires made,
And gart them burn both bright and brade:
So that their fires that night was maire,
Than any time before there were.
And when the night was fallen well,
With all their Harness euerilke deille,
All privily they rade their way,
Syne in a Moss soon entered they:
That was well two mile of bread,
Out over the Moss on foot they yeede:
And in their hand their Horse led they,
It was a full greit noisome way,
But Flaikes in the Wood they made
Of wands, and them with them had:
And sykes therewith brigged they:
And so had well their horse away.
On sik wise, that all that there were,
Come through the Moss both haill and feere:
And tint but little of their gear,
But if it were any old Sowmeere:
That in the Moss was left lyand,
When all (as I have borne on hand)
Out over the Moss that was so brade
Were commen, greit gladness they had,
And rade forth homeward on their way.
And on the morn when it was day.
Ahe Englishmen saw the Harbrie,
Where Scottishmen before can ly.
All void: and wondered greitlie then,
And sent forth sundry of their men.
While at the last their trace fand they,
And syne when they were goneaway.
That to a meekle Moss them had,
That was so hiddeous for to waid:
That adventure of them durst none:
But to their Host again is gone,
And told how that they passed were.
Where never man had passed air.
When Englishmen heard it was sa,
In hy to counsel can they ta:
That they would follow them no maire:
Their Host right then they skailed there,
And ilke man to his own they rade,
King Robert then that witting had,
That his men so in the Park lay,
And what mischief then at were they:
An Host assembled he in h^^,
Ten thousand men wight and hardy:
And sent them forth with Earls two.
Of Stratherne, and Angus were they,
The Host in Wardaile to relieve:
And if they might so well encheeue:
That samine night that meet might they,
They thought their foes to assay,
So fell it on that samine day,
That the Moss (as ye heard me say)
Was past: the Discurreours that there.
Ryding before the Hosts were,
On ather Host hes gotten a sight.
And they that worthy were and wight,
At their meeting juste^ of weere:
Ensenies hie they cried their,
And by their cry perceived they:
That they were friends, and no fay.
Then might men see them glad and blyth,
And told it to their Lords swyth.
The Hosts met both togidder syne,
There was right homely welcomming,
Made among greit Lords there:
Of their meeting joyful they were:
The Earl Patricke, and his Menie.
Had vittaile with greit plenty.
And gave it to them with glad cheer,
Thus went they hameward all in fear:
Destroying the Country in their way,
In Scotland well commen are they.
The Lords went then all to the King,
That made them right fair welcoming,
For of their coming right glad was he:
And that they ^ith sik property,
Withoutten tinsall escaped had,
They were blithe, merry and glad.
How King Robert assembled there, Three Hosts in England for to fare.
Soon after that, the Earl Thomas,
From Wardall thus repaired was:
The King assembled all his might.
And left none that was worthy to fight.
A greit Host there assembled he,
And dealt his Host in parts three.
Ane part of Norame went but let.
And there a stalward Siege they set:
And held them right in at their dyke,
Another part unto Anuike
Is went, and there a Siege set they,
And while that there the Siege lay,
At the Castle (as I said air)
Part of assaults made they there:
And money fair Cheualrie
Encheeued was full doughtely,
The King at the Castle lyand
Left his folk (as I boore on hand)
And with the third Oast held his way,
Fra Park to Park, him for to play:
Hoouing, as all his own it were.
And to them that were with him there,
The lands of Northumberland,
That next to Scotland was lyand
In fee, and heritage gave he:
And they paid for the Seals fee.
On this wise rade he destroyand,
While that the King of England:
Through counsel of the Mortymer,
And his Mother, that at that time were,
Leaders to him, that then young was,
To King Robert, to treat of peace,
Sent Messengers, and so sped they:
That he assented on this way,
Then a perpetual peace to take.
And they a marriage sold make,
With King Roberts son Dauy,
That five years old was then surely,
And of Dame Jane als of the tower,
That syne was of great valor:
Sister she was to the young King,
That England had in governing,
That had in eild then seven year:
And King Robert for skaithes fear,
That he did to them of England,
Had done in weere through stalward hand
Twenty thousand pound sall pay,
Of silver, and gold, and good money.
When men their things spoken had,
And with Seals, and oaths made,
Seesing of friendship and of peace,
For any cause it sold never cease,
The Marriage then gart ordain they,
To be in Barwike, and the day
They have set when that it sold be:
Syne went ilk man to his Country,
Thus made was peace, where weere was air:
And syne the Sieges raised were.
The King ordained for to pay,
The Silver, and against the day,
He gart well for the Maugery,
Ordain, when his son Dauy,
Sold wedded be: and the Earl Thomas,
And als the good Lord of Douglas,
Into his stead syne ordainde he,
Deuisers of the Feast to be:
For his sickness took him so saire:
That on no wise might he be there.
His sickness came of a fundying,
He had taken through his cold lying.
When in his great mischief was he,
He felt that hard perplexity.
At Cardrosse all that time he lay.
And when near commen was the day,
That ordainde for the wedding was:
The Earl* and the Lord Douglas,
To Barwik^ came with meekle fare,
And brought young David with them there,
The Queen, and with her the Mortimer,
On the other party commen were,
With great effeere and Royalty.
The young Lady of great beauty,
Hidder came with rich affeere,
The wedding have they made right there:
With great feast and solemnity.
There might men mirth, and gladness see:
For full great Feast made they there,
And Scottishmen, and English were,
Togidder in joy, and solace:
No felloun speech betwixt them was,
The Feast a well long time held they.
And when they busked to fare away,
The Queen hes her Daughter left there,
With great riches, and Royal fare.
I trow that long time no Lady
To house was given so richly,
The Earl, and the Lord Douglas,
Her in great dainty received hes,
As it was worthy sickerly.
For she was syne the best Lady,
And the fairest that men might see.
After this great solemnity,
When on both sides the lieue was taken,
The Queen to England home is gane:
And had with her the Mortymer,
The Earl, and they that leaued were,
When a while they her conuoyed had,
Toward Barwike again they rade:
And syne with all their company,
Toward the King they went in hy:
And had with them the young Dauy,
And als Dame Jane the young Lady.
The King made them fair welcomming,
And after but long delaying,
He hes gart set a Parliament,
And hidder with money men is went:
For he thought he would in his life,
Crown his young Son, and his Wife,
At that Parliament, and so did he,
With great fare, and solemnity.
The King David was crowned there,
And all his Lords that there were:
And also all the Commountie,
Made him homage, and fewtie:
And before that they crowned were,
King Robert gart ordain there:
Gif it fell that his son Dauy,
Died but Air Male of his body:
That Robert Stewart sold be
King, and brook the Royalty,
That his Daughter bare in Marriage.
And that this Tailyie sold leelely
Be holden, all the Lords swear,
And with their Seals affirmed if there.
And gif it happened Robert the King,
To pass to GOD while they were ying:
The good Earl of Murray Sir Thomas,
With the Lord also of Douglas,
While they had wit to steer their Reign,
Sold have them into governing.
And then the Lordship they sold ta,
Hereto their aithes can they ma:
And all the Lords that were there,
To tha two Wardanes aithes swear,
To obey them into Lawtie,
Gif it happened them UUardanes to be.
WHen all this thing thus treated was,
And affirmed with sickernes:
The King to Cardros went in hy,
And there him took so suddenly
His sickness, and him trauelde sa:
That he wist him behooued ma,
Of all this life the common end.
That is the death, when GOD will send.
Therefore his* Letters soon sent he,
For all the Lords of his Country:
And they came as he bidden had.
His Testament then hes he made,
Before both Lords and Prelates,
And to Religions of seir Estates,
For haill of his soul gave he
Silver into greit quantity.
He ordainde for his soul right well:
And when this was done ilk deill:
Lords (he said) so it is gone
With me, that there is naught but one,
That is the death withoutten dreed,
That ilke man shall thole on need,
And I thank God that hes me sent
Space in our life here to repent.
For through me and my weering,
Of blood there hes been greit spilling:
Where money saklesse man was slain,
Therefore this sickness and this pain,
I take in thank for my trespass,
And mine heart firmlie set was,
And when I was in prosperity,
From my sins to saved be:
To travel upon Gods faes,
And sen he me now to him taes,
That the body may on no wise,
Perform that the heart can devise,
I would mine heart were hidder sent,
Wherein conceived was that intent,
Therefore I pray you euerilkane,
That ye among you all choose ane,
That be honest wise and wight,
And of his hands a Noble Knight,
On Gods foes mine Heart to bear,
When soul and body disseuered are
For I would it were worthelie
Had there: sen God will naught, that I,
Had power hidderward to go:
Then were their hearts all so woe,
That none might hold them from greeting
He bade them leave their sorrowing,
For it (he said) might not reliue,
And might themselves greitlie grieve.
He prayed them in hy to do
The thing that they were charged to.
Then went they forth with drerie mood
And among them that thought it good.
That the worthy Lord Douglas,
Whom in both wit and worship was.
Should take the travel upon hand,
Heereto they were all accordand,
And to the King they went in hy,
And told him that they thought truly:
That the doughtie Lord Douglas,
Best ordainde for that travel was,
And when the King heard, that they sa
Had ordainde him his Heart to ta,
That he most yarned should it have,
(He said) so God himself me the save,
I hold me right well paid, that ye,
Have chosen him for his bounty,
For Certes it hes been my yarning.
Ay sen I thought to do this thing:
That he mine heart should with him bear
And sen ye all assented are
It is the more liking to me,
Let see now what thereto says he,
And when the Lord of Douglas,
Wist that the King thus spoken hes,
He ^^me, and kneeled to the King,
And on this wise made his talking,
I thank you greitly (Lord) said he,
Of money larges and greit bounty,
That ye have done to me feill syse,
Sen first I came to your service:
But over all thing, I make thanking,
That ye so digne and worthy a thing,
As your heart, that illuminate was,
With all bounty and worthiness.
Will that I in my keeping take.
For you right blithly will I make
This travel, if God will me give
Laiser, and space so long to live.
The King him thanked tenderly,
There was none in that company,
That weeped not for greit pity,
That was greit sorrow for to see.
Here died King Robert, and was syne Solemnedly buried in Dumfermling,
WHen the Lord Douglas, in this wise,
Hes vndertane so hie Emprise:
As the good Kings Heart to bear,
On Gods foes for to wear:
Praised for his Emprise was he.
And the King^ infirmity*
Was more and more, while at the last,
The dulefull death approached fast,
And when he had gart do him to,
All that good Christen men should do.
With true repentance then he gave
The gaist whilke GOD to Heaven mot have,
Among his Chosen for to be,
In Joy, solace, and Angels glee:
And fra his folk wist he was dead,
The sorrow that raise from stead to stead,
There might men see men riue their hair,
And comlie Knights greet full saire,
And their hands togidder drive,
And as wood men their claithes ryue.
Regarding his worthy bounty,
His wit, his strength, and honesty:
And over all the greit company,
That he often made them courteously.
All our defense they said, alas,
And he that haill our comfort was,
Our wit, our heal, our governing,
Is brought alace here to ending.
His worship, and his meekle might,
Made all that were with him so wight.
That they might never abased be,
While before them they might him see.
Alace, what shall we do or say?
For in life while he lasted ay
With all our foes dred were we:
And into money other Country.
Of our Worship ran the Renown:
And that was all for his Persoun.
With sike words they made their mane.
And sickerlie wonder was nane:
For better Governor than he,
Might in no Country founden be:
I hope that none that is on life.
The lament, and sorrow can descriue,
That tha folk for their Lord made.
And when that they long sorrowed had,
And he bowelled was cleanely,
And balmed syne full richly,
The worthy Lord, the good Douglas,
His Heart (as it forespoken was)
Hes received in great dayntie,
UUith great fair and Solemnity,
They have him had to Dunfermelyne,
And him solemnedly eirded syne.
And in a fair Tomb in the Queire,
Bishops and Prelates they there were
Assolyied him when the Service
Was done, as they could best devise:
And syne upon the other day,
Sorry, and wa they went away.
Here bouned the Lord Douglas forwart, To the haly Land with the Bruces Heart.
WHen that the good King buried was,
The Earl of Murray Sir Thomas,
Took all the land in governing,
And all obeyed to his bidding,
And the good Lord of Douglas syne,
Gart make a Case of gold right fine;
Enamalled through subtlety.
Therein the Kings heart put he,
And ay about his halse it bare,
And fast he bouned him for to fare.
His Testament devised he,
And ordained his lands sold be
Governed, while his gaine-comming,
By friends, and all other thing,
That to him pertained any wise,
With sik foresight as men could devise,
Ere his forth passing ordained he,
That nothing might amended be,
And when that he his lieue hes taken,
To ship at Barwike is he gane:
And with him a Noble company,
Of Knights, and of Squyery,
He put him in hy to the Sea,
A long way fordward sailed he,
Betwixt Cornwall, and Bartanyie,
He sailed, and left the ground of Spainyie,
On North-halfe him, and held their way,
While to Massillie ground came they.
But greatly was his men, and he,
Traveled with tempests on the Sea:
Bot though they greatly grieved were,
Haill and feere they commen are,
And landed at the great Sibille,
And after it a little while,
Their horse to land they drew ilkane,
And in the town hes harbery taken:
And him conteened right richly:
For he had a fair company,
And gold enough for to dispend.
The King Alphous after him send,
And him right well received he,
And proffered him in great plenty,
Gold and silver, horse and arming:
Bot he thereof would take nothing:
For he said, he took that veyage,
To pass into his pilgrimage,
On Gods foes, that his travel
Might after to his Saull avail.
And sen he wist that he had weere
With Saracens that dwelled there,
To help him was his will hailly.
The King him thanked courteously,
And betaught him good men that were
Well known with the lands weere:
And the manner of the land alswa,
Syne to his Innes can he ga.
And well good Soiourne there he made,
And meekle treating als he had.
Knights that came of far Country,
Came in great routtes him to see,
And honored him full gretumly:
And over all men most Souerainely,
The English Knights that were there,
Him honored, and great company bare:
Among them all was one strong Knight,
That was holden so wonder wight,
That for one of the best was he,
Praised of all Christaintie.
So fast to Heaven was all his face,
That it well near all wounded was.
Ere he the Lord Douglas had seen,
He weind his face had all wounded been:
But never a hurt in it had he.
When he unwounded can it see,
He said, that he had great ferly,
That sik a Knight and so worthy,
And praised of so great bounty,
Might in his face unwounded be.
And meekely thereto answered he,
And said, GOD lent me hands to bear,
Wherewith I might my head weere,
Thus made he courteous answering,
With a right hie understanding:
That for default of Fence it was,
That so evil hewn was his face.
The good Knights that then were by,
Praised his answer gretumly:
For it was made with small speaking,
And had right hie understanding.
The judging of the Lord Douglas, That in his time sa worthy was.
Upon this manner still they lay,
While through the Country they heard say,
That the King of Palmeryn,
UUith money a moody Saracene.
UUas entered in the land of Spain:
All haill the Country to demaine.
The King of Spain on the other party,
Gaddered his Oast deliuerly,
And dealt them into battles three.
And to the Lord Douglas gave he,
The Uangard for to lead and steer,
And all the strangers that with him were:
And the great Master of Sanct Iake,
The other battle gart he take.
The Reeregard made himself there,
And thus devised, forth they fare,
To meet their foes that in battle
Arrayed was, ready to assail,
And came against them full sturdely.
The Douglas then that was worthy,
UUhen he to them of his leading,
Had made a fair admonishing,
To do well, and no dead to dreede,
For Heavens bliss sold be their meede,
If that they died in Gods service,
Then as good weerryours, and wise.
With them stoutly assembled he.
There men might felloun feghting see,
For all they were wight and hardy,
That were on the Christian party.
But ere they joined in battle.
What the Douglas did, I shall you tell.
The Bruces Heart that on his breast
Was hinging, in the field he kest,
Upon a stone-cast, and well more before
And said, Now pass thou forth before,
As thou was wont in field to be,
And I shall follow, or else die:
And so he did withoutten ho,
He faught even while he came it to,
And took it up in greit^ dainty,
And ever in field this used he,
So fast they faught with all their maine:
That of their servants money were ^laine,
The whilke with money ^ell fusio^n,
Money a Christian dang they down,
But at the last the Lord Douglas,
And the Christians that with him was,
Preassed upon the Saracenes sa,
That they haillie the flight can ta.
And they chased with all their maine,
And money in the chase was slain.
So far chased the Lord Douglas,
With few folks that he passed was,
Forth fare from them that chased then,
He had not with him, but skant ten,
Of all men that were with him there,
When he saw all repared were:
Toward his Hust syne turned he.
And as he turned, can well see,
That all the Chaissers turned again:
And they reelled with meekle pain.
And as the good Lord of Douglas.
(As I said air) repairing was,
So saw he right before him near,
Where that Sir William de Sincleere,
With a greit rout environed was.
He was annoyed, and said, alas,
Yone worthy Knight will soon be dead,
But he have help through our manhead,
Let us then help him now in hy,
Sen that we are so near him by,
And I wate well our intent is,
To live and die in Gods service.
His will in all thing do shall we.
There shall no peril eschewed be,
While he be put out of yone pain
Or then we shall be with him slain.
With that with spears right speedely,
They struck the Horse in full greit hy^
Among the Saracenes they rade,
And room about them have they made.
They dang on fast with all their might,
And feill of them to death were dight.
Greiter defense made never so wheene,
Against so feill, it was right seen,
While the^ might last to give battle,
There might no worship there avail,
That time, for slain was ilkane there:
The Saracenes so money were,
That they were twenty large for ane.
The good Lord Douglas there was slain,
And Sir William Sinclare alswa:
And other worthy Knights two,
Sir Robert Logane, heght the ane,
And the other Walter Logane.
Wherefore our Lord with meekle might,
Their souls have to the Heavens hight.
THe good Lord Douglas thus was dead,
And the Saracenes on that stead,
Abade no more, but held their way,
Their Knights dead there soon live they,
Some of the good Lord Douglas men,
That their Lord dead had founden then,
Yeed near all wood for dule and woe,
Long for him they sorrowed so,
And syne with greit dule home him bare,
And the Kings Heart have they found there.
And that home with them have they taken,
And are toward their Innes gane,
With greeting and with evil cheer,
That sorrow and grief it was to hear:
And of Keith good Sir Williame,
That all that day had been at hame:
For at so greit disease was he,
That he came not to that Journey,
For his arm was broken in two,
When he tha folks sik dule saw ma,
He asked what it was in hy,
And they told him all openly,
How that their doughtie Lord was slain,
With Saracenes that had turned again,
And when he wist that it was so,
Attour all other he was most woe:
And made a wonder evil cheer,
That all wondered that by him were.
But to tell of their sorrowing,
Annoyes, and helps but little thing,
Men might well wit though none them told
What dule and sorrow men make would,
For to tine sike a Lord as he
Was unto them of his Menie,
For he was sweet and debonaire,
And well could treat his friends fair,
And his foes right fellounlie,
Astonish through his greit Cheualrie:
For of full little fear was he:
But over all thing he loved Lawtie:
At treasoun groowed so greitly,
That no traitor might be him by,
But he should wit that he should be
Well punished for his traitourie*
I trow the Lord Fabricius,
That from Rome to weerray Pirrhus,
Was sent with a greit Menyie,
Hated treasoun no less than he.
The whilke when that Pirrhus had
On him, and on his Menie made,
An outrageous discomfiture,
When he escaped through adventure
And money of his men were slain:
And he had gaddered his Host again,
A greit master of Medicine,
That Pirrhus had in governing,
Proffered unto Fabritius,
In treasoun for to slay Pirrhus,
For in his first potatioun,
He should give him deadly poysoun,
Fabricius that wonder had,
That he sik proffer to him made:
Said, Certes, Rome is meekle of might,
Through strength of arms for to fight,
To vanquish well their foes though they
Consent to Treasoun by no way:
And for thou would do that Treasoun,
Thou salt go fetch the warisoun,
Even at Pirrhus, and let him do
UUhat ever him lies in heart thereto.
Then to Pirrhus he sent in hy
This Master, and gart him openly,
From end to end, tell all his tale.
UUhen Pirrhus had it heard all haill:
He said, was never man that sa,
For Lawtie bure him to his fa:
As here Fabricius bears to me.
It is als ill to gar him be
Turned fra way of righteousness,
Or to consent to wickedness,
As at midday to turn again
The sun, that rinnes his course all plain
Thus said he of Fabricius,
That syne vanquished this same Pirrhus,
In plain battle through hard fighting:
His honest lawtie gart me bring
In this Example now, for he
Had Sovereign praise of true Lawtie:
And right so had the Lord Douglas,
That honest, leele, and worthy was,
That was dead, as before said we.
Men meened him in ilk Country:
When his men had made mourning,
They bowelled him but delaying,
And gart sees him, that might be taken
The flesh all quite even fra the bane.
The Corpse there in a holy place,
Eirded with great worship was.
The bones have they with them taken,
And syne are to their ships gane.
When they were leaued of the King,
That dule had of their seuering,
To Sea they went, good wind they had,
Their course to England have they made,
And there safely arrived they.
Syne toward Scotland held their way,
And there they are commen in great hy,
And the bones right honorably,
Into the Kirk of Douglas there
Eirded, with dule and meekle care.
Sir Archibald his son gart syne,
Of Allabast both fair and fine,
Ordain a Tomb full richly:
As it effeered to so worthy.
The Earl of Murray died here, Through Poysoun given by a false Friar.
WHen that on this wise Sir Williame
Of Keith, had brought the bones hame,
And the good Kings Heart alswa,
And had gart men richly ma,
With saire affeere, a Sepulture:
The Earl of Murray that the cure
That time of Scotland had ha^lly,
With great worship hes gart bury
The Kings Heart in the Abbay,
Of Melros, where men do pray ay,
That he, and his have Paradise.
UUhen this was done, as I devise,
The good Earl governed all the land,
And held the poor well to warrant,
The Laws so well maintained he,
And held in peace so the Country,
That it was never led ere his day
So well, as I heard old men say*
Bot syne alas poisoned was ho,
By a false Monk full traitorously.
Their Lords died upon this wise,
He that Lord of all thing is,
Up to his joyful bliss them bring,
And grant us grace, that their offspring
Lead well the land: and intentife
Be, for to follow in all their life:
Their Noble Elders great bounty.
The onefald GOD in Trinity,
May bring us up to Heavens bliss,
Where always joy and resting is. AMEN.
Here ends the Book of the Noble King,
That ever in Scotland yet did ring,
Called King Robert the Bruce,
That was may worthy of all ruce,
And of the Noble and good Lord Douglas,
And money ma that with him was.
A TABLE.
OF the Contention that araise after the death of King Alexander, who should
succeed to the Crown Fol. 2 How by the consent of all the Estates, King Edward
of England was elected as a friendly Compositour of this contention. 3 How King
Edward after the attempting the minds of the Bruce and the Ballioll, declared
the Ballioll King. 6 Of the pleasures and commodities of Liberty, and the
heaviness and hurtes of servitude of strangers. 8 How sir William Douglas was
put in prison, and his lands given to the Clifford: and of his son James
Douglas. 9 How the said James past in France, and returning again in Scotland
after his fathers death, dwelt with the Bishop of Sainctandros. 12 Of the
commoning and band made betwixt the Bruce, and Cumming, and how the cumming
show the Indentour to King Edward 16 How Bruce was examined before the
Parliament, and how he escaped, and slew the cumming in the Kirk of
Dumfreis. 18 Of the meeting of sir James Douglas with Robert Bruce and of his
coronation. 23 How King Robert came to Pearth, and sought battle of sir Aymer
Wallance. 26 The Judging of King Robert in the Park of Methwen. 29 Of the
battle of Methwen, and discomfiture of King Robert, where money Noble men were
taken. 31 Of the distress that King Robert and his folks tholled in the
Mountains 35 How King Robert was discomfist by John of Lorne. 38 How King
Robert slew the three men that swore his death. Fol. 41 How the Queen and the
Earl of Athole departed fra the King to Kildromy. 48 How the King past to
Lochlowmound. 50 Of the meeting of the Earl of Lennox with the King. 52 How the
King past to the sea. 55 How the Earl of Lennox was chaist on the sea. 56 How
the King was received of Angus of the Isles, and was gent^y entreated of him, 58
How the Queen and her other Ladies were taken and prisoned, and her men slain.
61 Of the siege of Kildromie, and how it was betraised to the Englishmen. 62 Of
the death of King Edward of England. 66 The illusion of the Devil made to the
mother of Ferrand Earl of Flanders, and of the success of the battle that
followed thereafter. 68 How James of Douglas past in Arrane, and gart vittall
and armor there. 71 How the King sent a spy in Carrik to spy wha were his
friends there. 76 Of the fire the King saw burning 79 Of the Kings hanselling
at his first arriving in Carrik. 83 How James of Douglas wan his Castle of
Douglas. 97 How a man of Carrik with two sons, took in hand to slay the King
Robert. 97 How King Robert slew the three Traitors 101 How King Robert
discomfist two hundredth Gallowaymen, and slew fifteen of them. 105 How Tydeus
slew forty nine men, and their Captain. 108 How James of Douglas slew
Thriswall, the Captain of Douglas, 114 How sir Aymer and John of Lorne
searched the King with a sleuthhound. 118 How King Robert slew ye ^. men that
followed him. 121 How the King was sairlie sought by the sleuthhound* and how
the sleuthhound was slain. 123 How the three Thieues came to the King, and
fainyied that they would be his men. 126 How the Kings Foster-brother was
slain, and himself in great danger, and how he slew the three Thieues. 128
How the King after his great troubles, effrayed the English company. 133 How
the King and his hounds slew ye 3 men in ye wood. 136 How the King discomfist
sir Aymer in Glentroll. 140 How sir James Douglas discomfist sir Philip Mowbray
with his company at Ederfurd. 143 How the King discomfist sir Aymer, and his
men under Lowdoun hill. 147 How sir James Douglas slew sir John Webtoun and w^
the Castle of Douglas, and syne cast it down. 156 How the King past over the
Month, and fell sick by the way. 159 How the Kings men defended him during the
time of his sickness. 162 How ye King disco^fist the Earl of Buchane at
Enrowry 165 Of the heirship of Buchane, and how the Castle of Forfare was
taken. 168 How the King wan saint Iohnstoun, and cast down all the Tower
thereof. 169 Of the French Knight that was with King Robert at the winning of
saint Iohnstoun. 171 How sir Edward Bruce discomfist sir Aymer, and sir
Ingrame Vmfrauile at the Water of Cree. 174 How sir Edward Bruce with fifty in
company, discomfist sir Aymer with fifteen hundredth. 176 How sir James
Douglas took Thomas Randell, and Alexander Stewart. 180 How ye King discomfist
John of Lornes me^ at Cre^labe^ 182 How William Binny wanne the Peill of
Linlithgowe* through the bringing in of hay to it. 182 How Thomas Randell was
recounselled with the King, and was made Earl of Murray. 190 How Thomas Randel
sieged the Castle of Edinburgh. 191 How Sir James Douglas by the conuoy of Sym
of Lydhouse, wan the Castle of Roxburgh. 193 How Earl Thomas Randell wanne
the Castle of Edinburgh, by the conuoying of William Frances. 198 How sir
Edward Bruce wanne the Peill of Ruglyn, and syne wanne Dundie. 206 How sir
Edward Bruce sieged Sttiuiling, and of the ^rewes taken thereat. 207 How King
Edward gaddered a puissant army to relieve St^iuiling. 208 How King Edward
divided his battles, and took harbry in Edinburgh, 213 How King Robert
gaddered his folks, and ordered his battles, to resist king Edward. 216 How
king Robert gart make deep pots in the field, and ouercouered them with e^rd.
218 How king Robert disseuered his vitaillers, and carriage men fra his camp,
and set Earl Thomas Randell to keep the gaite beside the Kirk. 220 How the
Earl of Murray with an hundredth in company, discomfist eight hundredth
Englishmen. 224 How king Robert slew sir Henry Bowme in the face of ^aith the
Oasts. 228 Of the comfort given by king Robert to his folks. 233 Of the battle
of Bannocburne. 242 How the Scottish vittallers and carriage men, made them
baners of s^eetes, and presented themselves to the field. 253 The valiantnes
and death of sir Geiles de Argentie. 255 How the Earl of Herfurd after the
battle was received in Bothwell. 258 How the king gart honorably bury the
Earl of Gloucester, and the Castle of Striuiling was randered, and sir Philip
Mowbray became the kings man. 262 How sir James Douglas chased king Edward to
Dum^ar, and his company to Barwike. 263 How the Castle of Bothwell, and the
Earl of Herfurd were randred to sir Edward Bruce, and the Earl interchanged for
the Queen, and her Daughter that were prisoners. 267 How king Robert rade in
England, and brunt Northumberland. 268 How sir Edward Bruce with a great
company past in (...) 269 Of the first three battles sir Edward wan in
Ireland. 271 How the Irishmen treasonably leet our a Lo^h on sir Edward and his
company. 279 How Earl Thomas Randell conqueissed the Irishmens vittailes, 287
How Earl Thomas chased the Scurreours that came fra Cogneres. 284 Of the fourth
battle sir Edward wan in Ireland. 286 How king Robert danted the Isles, and
took John of Lorne. 296 How sir James Douglas reskewed the Pray taken by
Englishmen, and slew sir Edmund Calhow Capitane of Barwike. 296 How sir James
Douglas slew the Lord Newell. 299 How king Robert past in Ireland to support
his brother. 303 How king Robert faught in Ireland against a great number of
men, and discomfist them. 305 How sir James Douglas in absenee of king Robert
with a few company slew the Earl of Richmond. 313 How sir James Douglas slew
Clerk Eleis and his company. 317 How sir James Douglas in absence of King
Robert, defended valiantly the Country. 318 How the Bishop of Dunkeld, and
the Earl of Fife discomfist the Englishmen beside Dumfermeling. 320 Of the
returning of king Robert from Ireland. 323 How Barwik was win by the moyen of
Sim of Spaldin. 327 How the King received the Castle of Barwike, and made
Walter Stewart Capitane thereof. 330 How the King of England assembled his
power to siege Barwike. 333 Of the siege of Barwike. 345 How Earl Thomas
Randell and sir James Douglas past and burnt in England to raise the siege from
Barwike. 340 Of the second assault of Barwike. 343 How the siege of Barwike was
skailled, and the town relieved. 350 Of the death of sir Edward in Ireland,
and money noble men with him. 356 How King Edward again invaded Scotland, and
how sundry of his men were slain by sir James Douglas. 363 How Englishmen
were discomfist at Byland. 366 Of the conspiracy devised against King Robert.
370 Of the Trewes taken betwixt Scotland and England, and of the death of walter
Stewart. 376 How the Earl of Murray, and sir James Douglas brunt in England
till they came to Wardall Park, and of the death of King Edward of Carnauer,
and of his son Edward of Windesore. 377 How Sir James Douglas entered in the
English Host, and slew money in their Tents. 386 How the Scottish Host, by the
conuoy of Sir James Douglas returned in Scotland without battle. 391 How King
Robert to relieve his ^olkes, assembled his Host, and entered into England in
three parts. 394 Of the peace taken, and of the Marriage of Edwards sister, with
David King Roberts son. 395 How King Robert took sickness in Cardrosse, and
sent for his Lords. 398 How the Lord Douglas was chosen to pass to the haly
Land, with the Bruces Heart, and of the death of King Robert, and how he was
buried in Dumfermling. 401 How the Lord Douglas past to the haly Land with the
Kings heart. 403 Of the great prowess and valliantnesse done by the Lord
Douglas in Spain. 406 How the Lord Douglas in relieuing Sir William Sinclar,
were both slain by ^uge multitude of Saracenes. 408 Of the noble virtues of
the Lord Douglas, and a comparison betwixt him and the Roman Fabricius. 410
How Sir William Keith brought the Lord Douglas banes in Scotland, and buried
them in the Kirk of Douglas, 412 Of the death of sir Thomas Randell Governor
of Scotland by poison, Fol, eodem.
FINIS TABVLAE.

