HORNBYES HORNBOOK.

Judge not too rashly, till through all you look;
If nothing then does please you, burn the Book.
depiction of master and student

By William Hornbye, Gent.

London, Printed by Aug. Math. for Thomas Bailey, and are to be sold at his shop
in the middle Rowneere Staple Inn. 1622.

TO THE HONORABLE AND HOPEFVLL YOUNG Gentleman, Sir ROBERT CARR, Barronet, W.
H. wishes increase of all honorable virtues.
MY honest, humble, harmless horning-book,
From whence young Scholars their first learning tool
To you I dedicate (true generous spirit)
Your early towardness, and virtues merit
A far more worthy work, then here I can
Set out, that never was Accademian:
Yet in my homely verse (perhaps) you will find
Something, a little which may please your mind.
My booke's but Harden to some Holland wit,
And so with homespun plainest best does fit;
For in a plain and honest simple style,
There lurkes no craft, no subtlety, nor guile.
Here is no vain, nor yet profane discourse,
To make you by the reading be the worse;
I would not stain your thoughts with such a book,
Nor have your chaste eyes on such follies look.
This in a manner does but plainly show
How Scholars do begin, and how they grow
To Learning by their industry and pain,
That rich inestimable Iem to gain.
(The Horn-book is at first Arts Nurce, from whence
We suck the milk of our intelligence)
We must be perfect in our letters all,
E're we to spelling, and to reading fall.
By this Original, we win (indeed)
The Muses glory, if we so proceed:
And as this book (sweet Sir) but young appears
So it is respondent unto youthful years,
Fit for your young days and minority,
Until you come to senioritie.
Into my mind this cogitation came,
Unto your self to dedicate the same,
Presuming of your favor, and your love,
That what I write your virtues will approve
Upon your face, although your years be green,
The portrature of modesty is seen.
Though in the Teenes you scarce have enterd yet,
You have a manly Carriage, pregnant Wit.
God be your good guide, and your happy speed
Even as you have begun, so to proceed
In honorable virtues worthy Car,
To make your name shine like the Morning Star.
Thus Honorable Sir, I take my leave,
In hope you kindly will (this mite) receive.
Yours in all humble service, W. H.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL YOUNG GENTLEMAN, THOMAS GRANTHAM, Esquire, Son and Heir
to Sir THOMAS GRANTHAM, Knight; W.H. wishes all Health and Happiness.
BEtwixt two Roses, I a Lilly place,
Three flowers most sweet, and lovely flourishing,
All hopeful, by Gods blessing and his grace,
In Virtues Garden sweetly up to spring;
A true and worthy Gardener they have
From choking weeds, them to preserve and save.
God was assistant to so wise Elector,
When first he chose so sure a friend indeed
To be his childrens Guardian and Protector,
Who with an honorable care, and heed,
Kindly respects his dear posterity,
Which sure shall lift his honor to the sky.
To you sole Son unto this worthy Knight,
I likewise dedicate my simple Muse,
Conioyning you together, as it is right,
Because a Simpathie in love you use:
As you are Fellows both at School and play,
(I hope) I blameless join you partners may.
And thus relying on your kind affection,
That courteously you will this book receive,
I boldly shroud it under your protection:
And here in brief I humbly take my leave,
Wishing your virtues to grow more and more
In multitudes, like Sand upon the shore.
Yours most officious and obsequius in what he can, W. H.

To the Worshipful and virtuous young Gentleman, Mr. Rochester Carre: W.H.
wishes increase of all spiritual and temporal blessings.
RIght (generous Sir) I kindly you entreat
To be Copartner, for to patronize
This little Orphant of my brains conceit,
Which to you also in all humble wise
I dedicate; my Muse shall still engage her
As well unto the Minor as the Mayor.
And thus my love in equal balance peasde
I equallize your worths with equal thought,
My only wishes are, you would be pleased,
Kindly to take what my poor wit has wrought,
Your kind acceptance is my chiefest gains,
I wish no greater gurdeon for my pains.
At your service to be commanded, W. H.

TO THE READER.
MY Brain now (gentle Reader)'s brought to bed
Of that a while she painful labored:
^ypen a careful Mid-wiues part has played
^o see her of her Orphant safely laid,
Wrapped up in rags of mean intelligence,
Without the Robes of learned eloquence:
And though she be she is not abortiue borne,
Though Retorique her shaps did never adorn:
Nor is she of a base and bastard strain,
Her Parentage is honest, simple, plain,
All of her Father, true Inventions getting,
As it is most honest, requisite and fitting.
She is no filtch-line of another wit,
Such Theft she hates and abhors it,
And she dare look even with a modest grace,
Her better Muse with boldness in the face.
A Cottyers child may be as truly got,
As is a Courtyers every way, why not?
As fair and lovely too in shape and face,
And even as well adorned with inward grace,
And prove as faithful, just, and plain a man,
For he nere temporise, nor flutter can;
He does not know the art of Adulation,
He never is acquainted with such fashion,
The difference of these two in this appears,
The One Robes of silk, th'otherraggs does wear:
Even so although (this homely brat of mine)
Does want rich robes of Art to make it shine
Through out all places, where it happily goes,
Yet mere simplicity, and truth it shows.
The two collauded, and applauded springs,
Where all the Muses most delitious sings,
Within their arms did never me infold,
Nor did my eyes their glory yet behold;
Such bliss to me (alas) did never belong,
I had the greater injury and wrong.
Then (gentle Reader) if that title fair,
With thy good nature I may right compare:
Pardon my Muse, which for no ill intent,
Into the world I homely here have sent.
Here is no envy that at all does lurk
In this my harmless Muses little work:
And if that any discontent does grow,
It Is not my fault, but theirs which take it so.
Those people then whose consciences are clear
From all such things as I have written here,
Accept my minds true meaning and good will,
More then my Retorique, my Art and skill;
If some cannot commend it nor defend it,
Then in their wisdoms let them kindly mend it:
If neither; cease then a malignant tongue,
And do a harmless honest Muse no wrong.
Yours, as you like him, Cornu-apes.

HORNBYES HORNBOOK.
THe Horn-booke of all books I do commend,
For the worlds knowledge, it does co^prehe^d.
There is no book under heavens copious cope,
Of mighty volume, large and full of scope,
Composde of the pure quintissence of wit,
But sure the Horn-booke full contains it.
What ever can be written, read, or said,
Are first of letters framed, composde, and made;
Each word, and sentence are in order set,
Derived from the English Alphabet.
Of all chief learning, litrature and Art,
The Horn-booke is the ground, which does impart
A world of Science; and great Art and skill
Comes from the Horn-booke be it good, or ill;
And I have reason to colland the same,
Because it is sounding somewhat near my name.
The Rtoritian, and the great Logition;
The Arethmatition, and the black Magition;
The learned Physician, and the quaint Musician;
The grounded Grecian, and the sound Hebritian,
Which mount Parnassus Vni^ersity.
Hill; and not to seek
In English, Latin, Hebrew, and in Greek.
And all that deeply politic are found,
Had first their knowledge from the Horn-bookes ground*
Great learned Preachers of Divinity,
Which with the heavens have near affinity;
Profound sound Doctors of the Morrall Law,
First from the Horn-booke did their reason draw.
And from Christ's Cradle, to his bloody Cross,
In Christ-crosse-row is Charactered each loss,
And great affliction that to man does fall;
Being taught by Patience how to bear withal.
There Is an old saying to be understood,
And yet (in deed) is not so old, as good:
In my beginning God be my good speed,
In grace and virtue that I may proceed.
So virtue is the Alpha of Gods grace,
How we should run the Omega of our race.
And what is Patience but a virtue pure,
Which to the end all Crosses does endure:
He that has Patience, is a perfect man,
And well is skild the Christ-crosse-row to skan:
Patience is even the ground, from whence proceeds
All goods conceits, and charitable deeds.
And charity is even the firm foundation,
On which a man does found his souls salvation.
Then to conclude, these virtues first do flow
From the Original, the Christ-crosse-row.
The little Infant that receives his birth,
To pass his pilgrimage upon the earth,
Takes first a respite, and a time to grow,
Before he comes unto the Christ-crosse-row;
And at his Baptism, even from the Font,
Receives the Cross of Christ upon his front,
In sign that he should never shame, nor fear,
The Cross of Christ and Christian life to bear.
For three or four years space, like to a lamb,
He spends his time in sporting, and in gam:
His wanton courage somewhat then to Cool,
His Parents puts him to a petty School.
Then after that, he takes a pretty pride,
To wear the Horn-booke dangling by his side:
And was it not well armed with plate and horn,
It Was in great danger to be rent and torn:
For in his sport, sometimes he falls out
With his Schoole-fellow, so they have a bout
At Buff, and counter-buff; the Horr-bookes then
Are all the weapons for these stout tall men;
As it is agreeing with their childish years,
They briefly fall together by the ears
For a small cause, their quarrel does begin,
Even for a Point, a Counter, or a Pin,
And as a trifle small their friendship brake;
Even so a toy, them friends again do make:
For they (good Lads) in malice cannot sleep,
Within their breasts they anger never keep;
So to their sports they fresh again do fall,
As if they had not fallen out at all: The good nature and disposition of
Children.

For he to learn yet, cannot well betake him,
But finding toys, and sports, sits down to lake him
With Top, and Top-stick, and his Eldern-guns,
And never thinks of time, how fast it runs;
And thus with such like lakings, childish play,
He many times does pass the time away,
Until his Tutor with an awful hand,
Not sternely tho but with a mild command,
Makes him affect his book, not with a twig,
But with a Nut, an Almond, or a Fig.
And having so the child's affection won
(He says) sweet Lad come, and thy Horn-book con.
And so the A.B.C. he first is taught;
From that to spelling, he is after brought;
And being right instructed for to spell,
He learn's his Sillables and Vowels well.
Then with due teaching he does well consider
By's Masters rule how he may put together.
The Horn-booke having at his singers end,
Unto the Primer he does next ascend;
When his capacity, again does alter
From that, he goes into the holy Psalter;
Then next to that, into the Book of Books
The sacred Bible modestly he looks;
As in a glass, where he may plainly see
Both what he is, and what he ought to be.
How that he was conceiu'd-and borne in sin,
Since his first breath to draw, he did begin:
There he may see that he is a mortal man,
Subject to sin, and hard resist it can;
There is a sovereign salve most gracious sent
To heal sick souls which truly do repent;
There he may see, that sin original
Came first from Eve and Adam by their fall;
Before the Masculine I here prefer
The Feminine, because she first diderr:
The woman with inticements did begin
To draw old Father Adam unto sin;
And since her first disease, it still infects
Unto this day a number of her sects.
There he may see by the first Adams fall,
A second Adam did redeem us all
With bis most dearest blood, shed on the Cross,
The greatest gracious blessing that e're was.
And as the Proverb old does teach us, so
We first must creep, before we well can go:
So from the Horn-booke we must first incline,
Before we can attain to things divine.
Divine or human, or in what degree
Of Art and knowledge, what so e're it be;
And as the Bible is the well of preaching,
Even so the Horn-booke is the ground of teaching;
Yet ^e not hold my argument so strong,
To do the Accidence one jot of wrong.
A second worthy ground there is in truth
Of learning, apter for more able Youth:
But yet he cannot unto this attain,
Before the Horn book does direct him plain;
By skill, good will, and times experience,
He enters straight into the Accedence:
There Is the true ground Gramarians ground upon,
To clime unto the Hill of University.
Hellicon:
To that, they are brought with charge and large expenses,
To know their Monds, their Cases, and their Tences:
By that they are learned to scan and prove a Verse;
And also how to Conster, and to Perse;
Then with the Latin Abcee they begin,
And so from step to step, more skill do win:
Puriles next is used in Scholars making,
In which Youth gather profit by pains taking.
By viewing Cato, there they may rehearse
For good examples, many a golden verse;
Ouids lascivious book, in's ^rt to love,
Is good to read, but not so good to prove.
Tully for eloquence does bear the bell,
For a sweet style, he does the rest excel.
Corderus Dyalogues does true relate
Good presidents for youth to i^mitate.
Terence a worthy book, and ready means
Timboulden boys, by acting of his Scenes.
In Ouids Metamorphosis is had
Diverse examples, that are good and bad:
There Phaeton through pride did get a fall,
A goodly president for pride to all;
For he beyond his skill, needs would assay,
That which turned quickly to his own decay.
Acteon, for his longing, and his lust
After chaste Dyna, was transformed just.
Narcissus that proud selfe-conceited Else,
Loving his shadow, fondly lost himself.
There may they find Diana's dignity,
For simple pureness, and pure chastetie:
With diverse more examples I could write,
But time will not permit me to recite.
Virgell, a book that does exceed the rest;
And Horace, equallized with the best.
By these good means, and Gods assisting grace,
They run the happy Helliconian race;
If God preserve their labors, and their health,
They prove good members in a Commonwealth
As Musterd-seed of all the seeds that be, Simile.

Is the least grain: but yet by proof we see,
The flittering fowls of heaven may live and breed
In those large branches that from it do spread;
And though it be (indeed) a grain but small,
Yet does it bear a sound round price withal.
Even so the Horn-booke is the seed and grain
Of skill, by which we learning first obtain:
And though it be accounted small of many,
And happily bought for two pence, or a penny,
Yet will the teaching somewhat costly be,
Ere they attain unto the full degree
Of Schollership and Art: for at a word,
It first does hatch the Vni^ersitie chollers
Helliconian bird,
Learning; a precious Iem I do account,
Which does all treasure in the world surmount;
It is a blessing, if it well be used,
But to a curse it turns, if ill abusde;
Learning's a Ladder, grounded upon faith,
By which we clime to heaven (the Scripture says.
And it is a means to hurrie men to hell,
If grace be wanting for to use it well:
So the Horn-book without Gods grace-guiding still
May be an introduction unto ill;
To every one God does a Talent give,
To try how they can prosper, thrive and live.
That profitable servant that has four,
If frugall, shall have thrice as many more;
He that has three, his labor shall not cease;
For to enrich him with a great increase.
He that has two, with diligence and pain,
Shall be requited with a double gain;
And that same sloathfull sluggard that has one,
If fruitless buried, shall be sure of none.
And now my Horn-booke I may rightly apply
Both to the Clergy, and the Laetie,
How many Pastors are there, Careless and unprofitable shepherds.
that should feed
Their flock (alas) yet starve them in their need
Which do that worthy function much neglect
For worldly causes, or some by respect,
Who the regardles hirelings part do play
That care not how their sheep do go astray,
But leave them all at random, here and there,
For greedy Wolves to spoil, deuower, and tear;
These ill deserve (I say) in such a case,
Their livings, learning, and so worthy place:
These are blind guids, blind in their inward sight,
Which grope at Noone-tide, with a Candle light.
(Me thinks) neglect of this their sacred function
Should strike with horror, a most sharp co^punctio^
Into their Marble hearts: for there is a woe
Pronounced against those, which slip their duty so;
Who more respect the world, and worldly pelf,
Then for to profit others, or himself
In souls salvation; such desire to gain
The riches of this world, which are but vain:
Like Isops Cock, which of more worth did deem
A Barly-corne, then Iem of of great esteem.
These kind of scatter-graces right are found
Like him that hid his Talent in the ground:
For such as these I mourn, and make great moan,
They better never had the Horn-booke known.
Yet many a City, Provident and careful Pastors.
many a Town is blessed
Here in our Land, with Pastors of the best,
Who take most earnest pains, and honest heed,
Not for to fleece their flocks, but them to feed,
And with a special care, and conscience cause,
Reform the wicked to religious laws:
So they which sit in Ignorance black night,
They do inlighten with their splendent light.
These are true Shepherds, even to Christ's desire,
And he will reward them with a Heavenly hire:
Blessed are they, that ever they did know
The Horn-booke, and the happy Christ-crosse-row.
The great grave worthy Judges of the Land, Just Judges

That do with care and conscience understand
The poor men's causes, be they right or wrong,
To give the right, where right does true belong,
(I hope) will with my Horn-booke free dispense,
Knowing that knowledge is derived from thence.
Before we learn, we learn to know each letter,
Or else to learn to read, is nere the better.
And to all gentle Justices of Peace, Upright Justices.

Who do their Talents (in their charge) increase,
In doing Justice with a single eye,
Without respect of men, or briberie,
My Horn-booke very humbly I commend,
Hoping that learning they will still defend.
To all Schoole-founders, Schoole-founders
that have ever been
Most beneficial unto Scholars seen,
By Schools errecting, and protecting those
Under their favors, which in learning grows
To full maturitie; these do support
Poor Scholars in a charitable sort,
These happy Stewards have their Talents spent
Pleasing to God, and for a good intent:
To these my Horn-booke likewise I commend,
Knowing the Muses they do best befrend. Lawyers and Atturnies.

The busy Lawyers, and the brief Atturneys,
Which every Term-time take most tedious iornies
To toil, and moyle, to ride through thick and thin,
And all to bring their fees more roundly in;
Whose only labors to this purpose tends,
They would have all men rathere foes then friends,
Because by controversy they do gain,
And concord makes the^ beggars, they complain.
These from the Horn-book first did draw their skill,
Good cause have they to bear it great good will.
A Constable's a judicious man, A Con^^able.

If he perform his Office wisely can:
But if unlearnedly he do amiss,
(Ales) the Horn-booke was no friend of his.
The learned Poet, The learned Poet
that in Poetry
Does mount aloft unto the lofty sky
In high conceits, through divine inspiration
Who for his Art, is held in admiration;
That which I write, will grant for to be true,
And give unto the Horn-booke praise due.
The Third-bare Poet, The Threadbare Poet.
or the Ballad-maker,
That of lassiuious Rimes, is full partaker,
And baudy songs writes with his unchaste pen,
Which stink in the nostrils of virtuous men:
These show the very dreggs, and froth of wit,
Which an unprofitable, and unfit;
These did at first the Horn-booke learn in waste,
Whose wits ill spent, give even as ill a taste.
And the Pet-Poet I must not forget, The Pe^ Poet.

Which with good liquor does accute his wit;
And when it is got a little into's Crown,
He makes his Pen to gallup up and down;
Writing a song like unto Smug and's Daughter,
Or some such od conceit, procuring laughter.
These make brave songs, and for their greater graces,
Sing them in private, and in public places.
To these (I say) as Drink does them imbolden,
So to the Horn-booke they were first beholden.
The Free-Schoole-Masters, The Fre^ School Masters
which pains do take,
Good Scholars fit for Cambridge to make,
Were Infants first themselves, and little Boys,
Which did delight in trifles, and in toys,
And at the Horn-booke likewise did begin,
Before they do such good preferment win
(Where youth is brought to reverence and grace,
I hold a very venerable place.)
But yet some bad and basely do abuse it,
Because they want discretion how to use it,
Knowing no mean, nor mediocritie
In their correction, but extremity.
As for example, I will here be bold
To tell a tale, the like was never told;
In the brave History of valliant Guy,
You shall not read the like for verity:
Nor in the Mirror of Knighthood can be found
The like; for there huge lies do loudly sound:
This is plain truth, I pray you note it well,
It is no fained fable that I tell.
A Tale.
I Still remember, when I was a Lad,
Long after I the Horn-booke learned had,
I passed over every petty book,
In which young Scholars first do use to look;
When as through care and cost, I then began
To be a pretty good Gramarian.
Unto the Free-schoole I was forthwith sent
By my good Parents, with a good intent,
(That learning still my mind might more adorn;
A sweet light burden, that is easy borne.)
Now I begin to tell a tale of forrow
Even of my tail: I went to Peterborrow
To reap more learning, then before I had;
But yet I proved more backward, and more bad,
By reason that my Masters strict correction,
Turned quite from him my love, and my affection,
That unto learning then I had no mind,
To which before I greatly was inclind.
Before a Christmasse time, Scholars desire liberty to play, but the event
was costly.
we did conspire
Against our Master, for to have desire
Of liberty, for double pains we took
All the year long by toyling at our book,
With many a woeful smarting lash beside,
Which our poor buttocks patient did abide.
So with a general and free consent,
We shut him forth of doors incontinent;
For this did strongly for our reason stand,
It was a common custom through the land,
And since that others did attempt the same,
If we should not do so, it was a shame.
This we resolved, and this we did perform,
Which made him for to stare, to stamp, and storm;
But yet we cared not for his threatening words,
We stoutly stood with Pistals, Pikes, and Swords,
Even like a little Army in the field.
He could not daunt our hearts, nor make us yield;
Though we were boys, yet we by this exclusion, Manly hearts in Boys breasts.

Showed in each one a manly resolution.
Four nights together we were prisoners kept,
The boards our beds, on which we nightly slept,
And for our victuals, they were never scant,
For we found friends that did relieve our want:
Yet were abundance faint and Capon-hearted,
That from their business very basely started.
Of sixty proper Scholars that were found,
But six of sixty that would stand their ground;
Hearing great threats, the rest durst never stay,
But like right Cowards ran with speed away.
Had these been Marciall men, then Marciall law
Would sure have held them all in better awe,
They durst not then have run'd away at all,
For fear of hanging, that might after fall.
Thus were we six even left unto our selves,
By reason of those base white-liuerd Elues:
The residue like fools, and shallow-witted,
Went to their Master, and themselves submitted;
Because (indeed) their bumbs began to itch,
They all went crouching for to save their britch*
Thus they esteemed more their nether part,
The^ foul disgrace, which wounds some to t'hart*
Some carried tokens, bribes, and petty gifts,
To save their tails from heating by such shifts.
But all this while we very stout did stand
Unto the exploit that we took in hand;
Nor to our Master would we yield a jot,
Till a false pardon fondly we had got:
For he like to a false pernicious Wretch,
Did violate his word, and conscience stretch;
He vowed unto the Bishop and the Deane,
For that offense he would remit us clean:
But afterward (alas) too true we tried,
That he like a perfidious villane ly'd;
We one by one were brought a little space
Unto the woeful execution place.
Unto the Bishops Bach-house we were led,
Where they do use to make, and bake his bread*
Over that house there certain Chambers were,
Where we were brought the, with no little fear,
All intricate; and winding to and fro,
As if we in a Labyrinth did go.
When I came there, my heart began to fail,
To see such cost provided for my tail:
For he provision privily had got,
Which made my brich tosting, it was so hot;
There was prepared Rods a large^elne long, Scholar vvhipped, peppered, and
salted at Peterborovv.

Of tuffe-red-willowes binded very strong;
Pepper and salt he did together blend,
Full half a pecke he on our tails did spend:
Twixt every four yerkes, we a handful had
On our bare bumbs, which almost made us mad.
This Tyrant-part he played, and n'ere gave over,
Till he had given us lashes, four times four.
Thus he had seasoned well unto his thinking,
Our woeful tay les, to keep them all from stinking:
And sure (I think) that he did understand,
He Haunches had of Venison in hand;
For I Am persuaded, never man did know,
That ever Scholars tails were powderd so.
It was no boot for to resist at all,
Our strength (alas) and number was but small,
Our fellows did our fellowship forsake,
And on our Masters side they all did take;
We force and help, and weapons all did lack,
Which made our hinder-parts to go to wrack.
Whilst we to shut him out did undertake,
This Bach-house he a School-house then did make,
And so some fifty of them there he taught,
Where we to this sam doleful place were brought,
I would himself the cruel smart had felt,
Which by his deuillish savage hand was dealt,
Then should he know, that our so small a falting,
Never deserved peppering and salting.
For my own grief, to me it was best known,
I felt no bodies sorrow but my own;
I was in such a woeful case, I Am sure,
That in no certain place I could endure:
My tail did smart, I every where was flinging,
As if a swarm of Bees had there been stinging,
I could not sit, nor lie, nor stand, nor go,
The salt and pepper vildly plagued me so.
Thus have you heard a tail of lamentation,
Even of our tails great grief, and sore vexation;
As sure as I the Horn-booke first did know,
So surely is he named in this Roe.
This true we found to our great smart and pain:
Now to my Horn-booke I return again.
Young men and Maidens, when they first do wed,
And chastely enter in their nuptial bed,
Not suffering lust their bodies to beguile,
Nor marriage rites, to spot and to defile,
According to that solemn vow they make,
That they each other never shall forsake
Till death depart, come poverty, come wealth,
Come painful sickness, or come perfect health:
To these a worthy praise belongs to either,
When they in Matrimony join together
In a Conjunction Copplatiue most chaste,
And of their neighbors Commons make no waste.
To these the Horn-book proves not cross, but when
Women do teach it unto married men.
The filthy Leacher, that on drabs and queanes,
Consumes his flesh, his marrow, and his means,
Making his body to resemble most
A sink, then temple of the holy Ghost;
Who cannot be contented with a wife,
Nor yet live honest by a single life.
The married man may be compared (indeed)
To a rich thief which steals, yet stands no need,
And for so grievous and so great abuse,
With his best cunning cannot plead excuse
To save himself; Gods sacred Malestie
Did preordaine a means and remedy
Against fornication; and to hate that vice,
He honored Marriage first in Paradise;
To this intent, he did that honor give,
That all therein, might honorably live,
Without infringing of those nuptial bands,
By which united are both hearts and hands.
The Bridegroom with a Ring his Bride does wed,
In sign none should perticipate his bed:
And as a Ring that has no end but round,
So should no ending of their love be found*
But they which other women's kindness prove,
There is a breach of Wedlocks honest love.
These do even Hell for a just stipend earne,
And so (indeed) the Horn-booke backwards learn.
Both married wives, and maidens here may look,
With modest eyes upon my Horning-booke:
My Horne-bookes honesty will their's affront,
If that they can vouchsafe to look vpont;
If they be chaste, it chastetie imbraceth;
It taunteth vices, and true virtue graceth:
And though the Horn-book be my books right style,
Here Is no lascivious lines yet, to beguile
The ears of them that hear, or read the same,
Though unto some may harshly seem the name.
The Horn-booke, if it true be understood,
Contains nothing but is right and good.
Then wives and Maidens, this is my request,
Befriend the Horn-booke, for it is your best.
Young hopeful Gentlemen, that do resort
By Art and learning to the Inns of Court,
Which do through time and pains much understand
To grow great men, and Judges of the land:
All these I reverence with a due respect,
Whose labors turn unto a good effect,
(I hope) their splendent favors all will shine
Upon my Horn-booke; though that some repine
And Crittick-like, do my good meaning wrest
To the worst sense, though I conceive the best;
For (I protest) I think not an ill thought,
Though I do itterate the Horn-booke often;
My modest Muse like to a Maid would blush,
If unadvisedly I should but rush
Into a sentence sorded and unfit,
And check my Pen, to run before my wit. Hypocrosie.

That man whose heart and tongue do not agree,
Though pure his words, his thoughts pernicious be,
The glozing speeches which he does impart,
Are characters of his deceitful heart,
His double inside, out ward does appear
Like to the habit, that he best might wear,
As in a suit of Linsie-woolsie-stuff,
Of lace, called (lack of both-sides) for his Ruff;
His Cuffs about his wrests just of the same,
And Ambodexter, fitteth right his name.
Religion for a cloak he puts on
To hide his faults, when falsely he has don,
Unto the Church he goes most demure,
As if he was extreme devout and pure;
Under his arm, a Bible he does bear,
To make his lukewarm zeal more hot appear;
When he speaks fair, he then pretends most evil,
And Scripture falsely uses; like the devil,
Who in his Disputation went about
To tempt our Savior, like a Tempter stout.
From these more deuilish villainy proceed,
Then from those men that sinful seem (indeed.)
These be not Hel-black Devils, no, they are white,
Which do through holiness, in sin delight;
These learned the Horn-booke to a bad intent,
Their time of learning was but vainly spent.
And now (my Muse) I will not ouercharge,
I else could write of Pallaters at large,
Of Sumners, Baylifes and such knauish men,
But that with them I will not foil my pen;
Yet in their praises (thus much) I can tell,
Even in a word or two, and so farewell.
On the worlds stage, they do the devils part play,
Which up and down do range to seek their pray,
And daily hunt for booties where to speed
On poor men's purses most of all they feed,
In taking fees they simple men abuse
By vild extortion, which they often use,
For poor men they quite swagger and out swear,
Where they suppose that they can dominere;
These all are Lawyers factors, for to do
Such like employments as they put them to.
These from the Horn-books honest meaning swerue,
And in their places right like knaves do serve.
Now cease (my Muse) in quiet silence rest,
For of the Horn-booke thou have said thy best.
FINIS.

