In Homelye to be read in the time of pestylence, and a most present remedy
for the same.



(...) God. Honor the King, 1. Pet. 2.

To all Pastoures and Curates Within the Kings Majesty's Diocese of Worcester
and Gloucester.
EAuyn as we be blind and unthankeful for gods favorable mercies, where
with all he follows us in health, wealth and prosperity: So be we blind, and
insensible for his most just plages, where with all he persequuteth and
punishes us in sickness, scarsitie and troubles. And now amongst other
tokens of his displeasure and wroth, Ezechi. 14.
has sent us in diverse places one of the extremest plages (that ever he
devised to punish man withal in this life) the plage of pestilence. For as
mouche as he means thereby not only to kill and destroy the bodies of
souche, as by this plague he pourposeth to take out of this mortal lief: But
also, without repentance and tourning to his mercy in Christ before death,
the soul of souche as depart from hence, must neades perish by gods just
judgment: And not only this to be theande of souche as it pleases god to
strike to death, by this his servant and messanger the plage of pestilence.
But also the like danger of his displeasure remains to me, and to all other
that have the cure, and charge of the peoples soulles in this the kings
Majesty's host noble Realm: Over whom god and he has made us watch men and
overseers, Ezechi. 18.
too admonish and warn the people of all dangers, and plages that god shall
send for their punishmente: Incase we admonish not in time, the people
committed unto our charge of souche plages as for sin he pourposeth too
punysshe us wythall, their loss and dampnatyon shall be required at our hands.
For the dyscharge of my self, and alsoo for the beter instructyon of souche as
have cures within this Diocese of Worcester and Gloucester (and yet not best
hable too dystharge them), and farther more for the proffyte and salvation of
the people, emonges whom it may please God too send his fearful plague of
pestylence: I have thought it niy boundon duetye (seeing at all times I can not
comfort the sick my self) too collecte or gather intoo some short sermonde
or homelye a medycyne and most present healpe for all men against the plague
of pestylence: And in the same alsoo too provide some present remedy for
souche as shall be infected with that desease. And for the better understanding
of the medycyne, I will use this order, that all Physycyons learned do use in
their practyse of Phisycke. First, I will show the cheafeste cause of the
pestylence: And then what remeadye is best too be used against it, and to
heal it when it has infected any manne. And although I will speak herein
some what as other Physycyons have done: yet because they have spoken already
more then I can in the matter, though it be a great deal less then the
matter of the desease requires, (for none of them have showed any ascertayned
remeadye, be their reason never so good) I will breafelye as by the way
somewhat speak of this desease, as they do: But as a preacher of Gods
word, and as a Physycyon for the soul, rather then for the body, entreat
of the syckenesse and the remeadye thereof, aftherthe advise and counsel of
gods word. Whoo supplyeth all things omytted and not spoken of,
concerning this most daungerouse plagues by souche as have wroten, besides
the scripture of God, their mind touching the same. For in deed the chiefest
causes of all plagues and syckenesse, is sin: which remaining within all
men, works destructyon, not only of the body, but alsoo of the soul, if
remeadye be not found. Li i. de disse. feb. cap. 5.
And wheare as Galien says that Omnis pestilentia fit a putredme aeris: that
is too say, all pestylence comes by the corruptyon of the air, that both
beast and man drawing their breathes in the air corrupt, draws the
corruptyon thereof intoo them selves, he says well: yet not enough. He
says alsoo very naturally, Li i. de tempe, cap. 4.
that when the air is altered from his natural eaqualitye and temperature to
to mouche and intemperate heat and moisture, pestylence is like then too
raygne. For as he says in the same place, that heat and moisture
dystemperated be most daungerouse for the creatures of the world, yet that is
not enough. As Ezechiel says, cap. 14,
wheare as God sends all thies dystemperaunces, and yet if Noah, Daniel and
Job were in the myddeste of them, they shall be saufe. Eauyn so says David
alsoo Though they dye at the right hand ten thousand foulde, Psalm.
and dye at the left a thousand fould, the plage shall not touch him that
sytteth under the protection of the highest. And where as reason has many good
and probable arguments in this matter touching the cause of pestylence that
it should come some time by reason of souche humors as be in the body disposed
and apt to corrupt, then is the man quickelye (by drawing and breathyng as
well the corruption of him self, as ye infection of the air) infected. And
that souche humors as be gross and inclined to corruption, rises of yuell and
immoderat diet, and the infection takes his origynall and beginning from
souche beasts, carinnes, and other loathsome bodies that rotte upon the face of
the earth not buried: or else from moorishe standing, and dampyshe waters,
sinckes or other souche unwholesome moistures, so that toward the faull of the
leaf, both the air that man lives in, as alsoo man's body it self be more
apt and disposed to putrefaction more in ye time then in any other time for
diverse natural causes. These causes are to be considered as natural and
consonaunte to reason: yet there be reasones and causes of pestylence of more
weight, and more worthy of deape and aduysed considerations and
aduertisementes then thies be. And the more, because they lie within man (and
be marked but of very few) and hide them selves secretly till they have
poisoned the whole man both body and soul. For in deed phisicions that write,
meddle with no causes that hurt man, but such as come into man from with out,
as the humors (they say) take their infectyon from unwholesome meat and yuell
diet, or else from the corruption of the air with souche like. Math. 15.
But our sauyoure Christ shows that our corruptyon and syckenes rises from
within us, as I will declare hereafter in the causes that the scripture
teaches of pestylence and al other dyseases. Requyringe you diligently to
look upon the same, and to read it in your churches: that the people may
understand both the cause of this gods plage of pestylence, and how too use
them selves in the time of this sickness or any other that shall happen unto
them by gods appointmente. As god may be glorified in them, and you and I
discharged of our bounden duties: And they them selves that shall happen to be
infected with the plage of pestilence, and by the same be brought to death may
be assured through true and godly doctrine to dye in the Lord, and so be
eternallye blessed straighte way after their death, as Saint Jhon says.
Apoca. 14. Romans 14.
And incase god reserve them to longer lyef, they may live in truth and
vearitie unto him, with detestation and hatred of sin, the original cause
of man's miserye and wretchedness: and with the love of mercy and grace the
original and only workers of man's quyetnes and everlasting salvation given
unto us from god the father almightye, thorough Jesus Christ his only son
our Lord. To whom with the holy ghost be all honor and praise, world
without eande. So be it.

An homolie to be read in the time of pestilence, contayninge the true causes
of the same: And likewise a most present remedy for as many as be already,
or hereafter shall be infected with that disease: Gathered out of the holy
scripture, by John Hoper Busshoppe of Worcester and Gloucester. ANNO DOMINI.
1553.
Marci. i. Repent and believe the gospel.
IT is the desire of all sick men to know what medicine and remedy has
been known most to prevail, best too remove, and soonest to cure and make
whole the person dyseased. And the greater and more daungerouse the syckenes
is, the more circumspect and wise the sick man must be in knowledge and
choice of the medicine: Lest happily he seek a remedy inferior and to weak,
for the greatness and strength of his disease. The nature and condition therefore
of pestilence being so dangerous (as it is in deed) yt who so ever be infected
or attemted therwt al, has need to be well instructed, and thorughly persuaded
of a sufficient remedy, stronger then the sickness it self. Or else the
disease shall more hurt the sick pacyente, then the medicine can do him good:
The^ must needs follow the death, and ye destruction of the diseased person.
It behooves therefore all men that be mortal, to know the most general, and
most dangerous dyseases that mortality shall be troubled withal: And then, as
he sees his great and necessary adversaries and syckenes, to know also the
greatest and most necessary remedy and help against his diseases. And because
sin has so prevailed in us, that truth persuaded unto us by thexamples of
others, sooner instructs, and longer tarieth then any thing taught us by
doctrine or testimonye: I shall (before I enter into the causes of the
pestylence) show the strength, and nature of sickness from thexamples of
souche godly persons, as in the word of god are mentioned of, Psalm. 6.42.
for our instruction. King David (emonges other dyseases) fell intoo the
pestilence: The greatness and danger whereof passed all humane and worldly
healpes, as it appears by his lamentable cry and complaynte unto the Lord.
My soul (says he) is sore troubled: But how long Lord will thou differ thy
help: And the same cry and complainte he made unto the Lord when the plage of
pestilence had infected his whole Realm, Sam. 24
from Dan too Berzabe: And saw the remedy thereof to be only in god. Praying
him to command his Aingel to stryke the people no more. Esaias. 37.38
Ezechias the king saw, that besides god al meatsonnes and remedies were to
weak, and inferior for ye strength and power of the pestilence and sickness*
wherefore he turned him self to ye wall, and prayed god to do that for him that
no physic nor medicine washable to do. 2. Corin. 15
And saint Paul in his wonderful oratyon that he makes concerning the
ressurection of the dead, waigheth most deapely the nature and condition of
man's miserable estate in this lief: Bourdeinnyng him with such strong
adversaries, sickness and deseases both of body and soul, that every man may
see, how impossible it is for man to find deliverance from the tirannie, and
strength of syckenes, except only the mercy of god in Christ Jesu.
Nomberyng there, six and adversaries so strong, as the least of them (except
Christ help) is hable to destroy both body and soul. The first, is
corruption. The second, mortality. The third, sin. The fourth, the law:
condempning sin. The fifth, death The sixte, hell: necessary and indivisible
plagues and sickness of man in this lief. Against the which he finds no
remedy neither by Galien, nor Hipocrates, neither yet by thearth of para. Plin.
lib 2* cap. 96.
yt men say cures al wounds: But with great faith and confydence marketh and
weighs the strength of deseases (though they be never so strong) too be yet
inferior too the medsone and remedy, that god has provided for us only in
Christ. Therefore compares ye inferior strength of althose sickness, unto ye
sufficient remedy of god, through Christ: saying after this manner Thanks be
unto god which has given us victory thorough our Lord Jesus Christ. Whereby
it is evident and plain, that god is thonely remedy for all plages and
deseases. How be it, now I shall more specially open ye causes of the plage,
and the nature of the same: yt our sickness and the causes thereof may be more
known, and the better avoided.

Romans 5.
The principal cause of pestilence is opened by S. Paul by thies words. By
sin (says he) came death into ye world: and for the cause of sin, god
sends the plage of pestilence and all other diseases that punishes toward
death. Psalm, 42.
Asking David says, Thou do punish the childerin of men for sin. Moises
also plainly shows, that the principal and chyef cause of pestilence is not
in the corruption of the air, nor in the superfluous humors within man: Deuteronomy.
23.
But that sin and ye transgression of goods law is the very cause and chief
occasion of pestilence and of al other diseases. And ye experience thereof was
tried in the pestylence that reigned in king Dauides time for his sins, and
the sins of the people. 2. Sam, 24
So that al ye scripture of god manifestly declares that the contempt and
breach of gods laws, is the chief and principal cause of pestylence, and
of all other plages that he sends for our punishment. And from this cause
proceeds those causes (yt phisicions speak of) the corruption of the aier,
which is never corrupted nor can corrupt man or beast, except man (for whose
sake and comfort both air and all other beasts were made) be first corrupted
by sin and transgression of gods laws. Neither could man take any surfeit by
meats, nor any yuell humors could be engendered of any meats, were not ye
man that uses them corrupt and first infected with sin. But when the Lord
does see that the people forgeate or contempne his blessed commandments, and
that souche as be appointed to rebuke and punish such transgressors of gods
laws, suffer without punishment, ye glory of god, and his holy commandments
to be oppressed, and set at naught, as we se daily they be in deed: From these
causes our sin and abhominacion the Lord takes occasion to turn his good
creatures made for our lief, to be a means of our death: which never would
be, were not our hainouse dishonouring and contempt of God. For the Lords
creatures be perfectly good, Gene. 1.
and made al to comfort and rejoice, wholesome, clean and pure without all
infectyon. But saying that the contempt of god, and the filthiness of sin, is
nether by the Clergy opened, declared, ne detected, neither by the heads of
the country, and officers appointed under god and the king, punished. Except
therefore there should nothing else live in this world then sin abhominacion
and contempt of god: god is forced, for the taking away and destruction of
filthy lief, and filthy livers, to appoint an extra ordinary magistrate to
reform and punish the mother of all mischyef, sin, and contempt of gooddes
holy word. And so alters, not by chance, nor by the influence of
sterres, the holesomnes of the air intoo pestylente and contagyouse infectyon:
And the meat and drink with their nutrimente and foade intoo poison and
venom, that by their mean, sin and sinners might be slain and taken out
of this world, and no longer too blaspheme God. Thus does the word of god
declare theffectuouse and pryncypal cause of pestylence too be the contempt of
Gods word, that should keep men in order both too God and man. The
breaking whereof has always brought these plagues into Realms, Li. 7. cap.
1.
as profane writers also manifestly declare Orosius says, that the great
dearthe and famyne that came emonges the Romans, in the tune of Caesar
Augustus, was because Caius his neuewe contempned to honor the living god, as
he was taught at Jerusalem, when he passed into Siria. Wherefore it is
expedient, and before al things necessary (for as monthe as the plage is come
into soundry places about us) for every one to try him self, what just causes
of this pestylence each man has within him self. Every Christian man and
woman must search whether their religion and christianity be souche, as god
by his word does maintain to be good: for there is no greater occasyon of
pestilence, then superstycyon and false relygyon. The Busshoppe, Person, Uycare
and Curate, must examine them selves, what knowledge of gods word is in them,
and what dilygence they have taken too bring the people to a right knowledge,
and perfect honor of God: for there is no greater daungere of pestilence,
then where as the Clergy is either ignoraunte of gods word, or negligent
in teaching thereof. The Justices and gentlemen must look how they keep them
selves and the kings Majesty's people in ye true knowledge and obedience of
gods laws and the Kings: for nothing provoke the pestilence more
daungerously, then where as such as sit and be appointed to do justice, do
their own affections with contempt and injuries both to god and man, and the
plage of god will revenge it. All we therefore that be subjects and live under
one god and one king, must (now that god has sent us this pestilence) see
that we have true, loving, faithful, trusty and obedyent hearts with one hole
mind altogether to obey, reverence, love, healpe, succor, defend and uphold
with all our wits, gooddes, riches and strength this our only King, the
Magistrates and councillors that be appointed under his highness. Romans 13.
For as Saint Paul says, he that disobeieth and resists the higher
powers appointed by god, resist god, provoke the pestilence and vengeance of
god against us. 1. Io. 3.
And we must take heed also that we hate not one another: if we do, the plage
will not cease, and the places that yet be not infected, god shall infecte,
what so ever defense man makes against it. And although Galien of all
remedies says, to fly the air that is infected, is best: Yet I know that
Moses by the word of god, says. Flee whether thou will, in case you take
with the, the contempt of god, and breach of his commandment, god shall
find the out. Yea, and although many medicines be devised, and assures the
infected to be made whole: yet not wythstandyng, Deuteronomy. 28.
I know gods word says the contrary, that he will send unto insensible,
careless, and wilful sinners, souche a plage and incurable a pestilence, that
he shall not be delivered, but dye and perish by it. Therefore, forasmouche as
sin is thoccasion chiefly of pestilence, let every man eschew and avoid it
both spedelye and penitentlie, and then shall ye be preserved from the plage
sufficientlye, as ye shall perceive in the remedy of this dangerous plage, that
begins to reign emonges us. Lib. 1. cap. 96.
For doubtless, although we could fly to Locris or Crotone where as Pliny
says, the pestilence was never, Deuteronomy. 28.
yet god says incase we fear not him we shall surely be infected.

The remedy against the pestylence.
Look as the scripture of god only shows ye very cause of pestilence: so
does it the very true and only remedy against it. I do not dislike ye
remedies that natural physic has prescribed: yet I do not hable them as
sufficient remedies, for their imperfection sake. I would also they were used,
and the remedies prescribed in gods book not omitted. For I see all the
remedies that ever was devised by man, is not hable to remove assuredly the
pestylence from him that is infected there wythall, although they be never so
excellent and good. And I find the same concerning the preseruacyon from the
pestylence devised by man, alsoo insufficyente for man's preseruacyon, yet not
to be contempned: for the reason of their chiefest preseruacyon is very good
and allowable, and yet not sufficient: Which is, of all things chiefly to be
used against the pestilence, fleing and departure from the place wheare as the
air is corrupt. Wherefore for souche as may, nothing is better then too
flee, and except he do, he offers him self too a present danger of
death: But yet the word of God says plainelye, that flee whether we will,
if we forsake not sin, and serve the living god, the plage shall overtake
us. And this can not be a suffycyent remedy, for there be certain persons that
can not flee although they would: As the poorer sort of people that have no
friends nor place too flee unto, more then the poor house they dwell in. Like
wise there be souche offices of trust, as men for no cause may flee from it:
As the Busshoppe, Person, Uicare and Curate, who has the charge of those that
god pleases too infecte with the pestilence, Io. 10.
and if they forsake their people in this plague time, they be hirelinges and
no Pastoures, and they flee from gods people into gods high indignacio^. Such
alsoo as have places and offices of trust for the commune wealth, as the
Capitaines of soldiers in ye time of war, Judges and Justices in the time of
peace: Incase they should flee their countries or leave their wars for ye
plage of pestylence, they shall never be good soldiers, nor good Justices for
the commune wealth. And they shall be accompatable to almighty god for all the
hurt and detriment, that has happned unto the people in their absence.
Wherefore, seeing there is no certain remedy devised by man, neither for such as
can not flee, nor for the^ that may flee, we must seek another medicine and
healpe at gods hand: who can and will preserve those that be whole, and make
them whole that be sick, if it be expedyent for man, and most for his own
honor. The best preseruatyue therefore too keep men from the pestylence, Enod. 5.
is this that Moses speaks of: Let us do sacrifice unto the Lord, Numer. 14
least we be stricken with pestilence or swearde. And Josua and Caleb toulde the
people that a faithful trust in the Lord was the best remedy for them: which
if they contempned, they should find, that God there threatened speaking too
Moses: How long will this people be unfaithful: I will strike them with
pestilence, and consume the^. Also David knew that thonely remedy to keep
Jerusalem from the plage, was, 1. Sam. ult.
that god should turn his wrath from the City, for his sins, and the
sins of the people.

But now to bring the remedy the better to the understanding of the people, I
will show it by this place of Saint Mark. Repent ye and believe the gospel:
Cap. 1.
In ye which words is contained thonelie medicine against the pestilence, and
also al other diseases, if the text be well and advisedly considered, wherein
Christ uses a very natural order to heal all diseases. For as the remedy
naturallye of all deseases is taken from contrary conditions and qualities that
works and maintains ye sickness: So does Christ in these words declare
that the preseruacion and healpe of sin and wickedness (the cause of
pestylence) proceadeth from virtues and conditions contrary to the quallities
and nature of souche things as preserve and keep this wicked sin and sickness
in man. As when a man is faullen into sickness by reason of to mouche could
and moisture: the remedy must be gathered naturallye from the contrary,
heat and drouthe. For this is a commune and true principle contraries be
helped by their contraries: If nature wax too could, it must be helped with
heat. Galiende sempera.
If it be to hot it must be cooled. If it be to moist, it must be dried.
If it be to dry, it must be moysted. If it be to could and moist, it must be
heat and dried. If it be could and dry, it must be heat and moisted. If it be
to hot and moist, it must be cooled and dried. If it be hot and dry, it
must be cooled and moysted: These be veary natural remedies if they be well
used with true proporcion and conuenyente use after physic. And as these be
good and natural for the body wherein the pestilence dwells: Even so is
Christ's medicyne in the first of Saint Mark a more present and certain
remedy for the soul that keapeth the body in lief, to remove or to remedy
the sin of man, which is the cause of all plages and pestylence. Incase (too
remove sin the cause of syckenes) this medicyne of Christ be used, as
the other is used too remove theffecte of sin which is syckenes. As the body
that is fallen into syckenes by to much cold or moisture, either by nature
that orygynallye was corrupted by Adam, either by our own accustomed and
doing of sin, it must be made whole by the heat of repentance and true
faith in the merytes of Christ Jesus, who dyed for the sins of the world.
For this is a true and most certain principle of all relygyon, one contrary
must remedy the other, seeing Adam by his fault began our death by sin: it
must be cured by Christ that is without sin. And where as our own works
be sin and fylthynes, where with all god is dyspleased: we must desire the
works of Christ to work the good will and favor of our heavenly father again.
And where as by our own wits, wysedomes, religion and lerning we have
committed ydolatry and supersticion: we must now by gods wisdom, gods word
and his most true religion, amend our faults, and turn to true and godly
honoring of him. Farther, where as our own inuencyons has brought us from
the knowledge of god: the remedy is ye gods word must bring us to him
again. Psalm. 19.118 2. Timoth. 3.
For against all untruths brought in by man: the word of god is thonelye
remedy. The experience thereof we may have plainly in the scripture, where as
for the salvation of the world, god appointed Christ his only son to be
borne, Math. 1.2. Luc. 2. Ion. 1.
and also to be opened unto the world, that by him it might be healed of all
sickness and sin, as it appears by S. Matthew and other of the Evangelists.
Yet was the world so blind, and so corrupted with sin, that Christ was borne
and opened unto them, and they of the world nothing the better, Cap. 3.
as it appears in S. Matthew: Where as S. Jho^ ye Baptist in few words (which
be these: Repent ye, for the kingdom of god is at hand) shows the remedy
of all sins and syckenes, and the means how to receive and take the same
remedy. The remedy was only Christ, Joan. 1.3.
as he says in S. Jhon, and also in S. Mathewe: Math. 3.
And the means to come by the remedy was to repent, as ye shall know farther
hereafter when ye know what repentance is. Cap. 4.
The same may you also see in S. Jhon in the Dialoge between Christ and
Nicodemus: A man after the judgment of the world that knew lief and death,
sickness and health, the cause of the one, and also of the other, as well as any
learned man emonges all the congregation and church of the Jews: yet in deed
as ignorant of his own sickness, and also so far from ye true knowledge how
to come to health as an ignorant man might be. And the cause was that he
understood not the nature of sin, as it is esteemed by the word of god, neither
ye remedy thereof yt god has prescribed and appoincted. Wherefore Christ
told him by plain words, except he were helped and cured of his desease and
sickness by contrary remedies, he could never understand nor come by his health,
and no marvel: for he knew the sickness of sin no otherwise then his
forefathers and the worldly men knew sin. That is too say, knew such sins
as were known to reason, and done by the body and outward action of men: And
the same knowledge had he, and no more of the remedy against the syckenes of
sin. And as his fathers and the world thought (so did he) that the merits
of their sacrifices and the well doing of the^ selves, was a sufficient remedy
to heal them both in body and in soul. Where upon Christ most mercifully
pitieth ye poor man, and with contrary knowledge both of sickness, and ye
remedy thereof, shows that the desease man is infected with, goes farther
then reason and the utter action of the body, and occupyeth ye soul of man
with concupiscence, rebellion, frowardnes and contumacie against god:
Wherefore he calls all ye man has of him self but flesh. Joan. 3
And shows that the remedy against this sickness comes not of the
worthynes of any sacrifice or merytes of his, or any sinful man's works: But
that the remedy thereof depends only upon the merytes of his blood and
passion, and shows the same by the comparyson of the Brazen Serpente
appoyncted by Moises. And argues this way, as the people that were strong
with the Serpents in the wilderness were not made whole by their own works,
or for the dignitye or service of any sacryfyce that they offered, but by the
syghte of the Serpente that represented Christ too come: Even so Nicodemus
nor any other that is stong with the Serpents of sin, be made whole by
their own works or any sacrifyce they can offer, but only by the merits
of Christ. And even as the people could not come too the knowledge of this
remedy by ye serpent, thorough their fathers, or their own wisdom: no more
can Nicodemus or any man living come too the knowledge of the remedy, for
syckenes and sin, in our sauyoure Christ, Joan. 3.
except he learn it by the word of God thoroughe the instructyon of the
hoyle ghost. Marci. 1.
The same remeadye alsoo uses Christ in his words before rehearsed, repent
ye and believe the gospel: In the which words our savior Christ shows
all things to be considered in syn and in the remedy thereof. For in the
first part of his words he declares how that men should know ye causes of
sickness, and in the second part the remedy and help for the same. The cause of
sickness (as it appears by this word repent) is that men have by their own
folly turned them selves from the truth of God, to the error and fond
opinion of man: from true faith too uncertain fables: from verteous and
godly works, to vncleanlynes and corruption of life. Christ therefore seeing
the world how it is in danger by reason it has forsaken the wisdom and
rule of goods word, calls it home again too a better way, bidding it
repent: As though he had said, turn too a better mind, and leave the ways
accustomed, and learn to be wise, and walk in the ways and wisdom
appoyncted by God. Here appears alsoo, that the causes of all the dangers
that Christ wylled his audyence too repent for, was their sin and
iniquytye. The cause of sin, was infydelytye and accustomed doing of evil:
The cause of infidelity and accustomed doing of yuel, was ignorau^cie or
misunderstandynge of goods word. The cause of ignorance or
mysunderstandinge of gods word was Satan gods and man's enemy, and man's
willing consent to the devilish sophistry and false construinge of gods
word. And from these causes springs all deseases and sickness, Joan. 3.
death and everlasting dampnatio^: from the which Christ was sent (of gods
inestimable love toward us) to redeem and save us. Notwtstanding these
effects of pestilence, sickness, death and everlasting dampnation can not be
removed, except first the causes of them be eschued, wherefore learn ye and
teach other to know the causes above mentioned, and also how they may be
removed: For as long as they work their propre nature in manne, so long will
they bring forth their natural effects, sickness troubles, death and
dampnacyon. The original cause of all yuell was Satan, Genesis 3.
and the ungodly consent of our forefather Adam in Paradise, in crediting
more the devils sophistry and gloss, then the plain and manifest word of god.
And the remedy of this cause is god, that of love against Satan's hatred
promised in the seade of a woman, healpe again for man: Joan. 1.3.5.
And that every man ye believes the devil in evil, must repent and believe god
and his word in good.

Joan. 1.3.
Ignorancie and mistakyng of gods word, is the second cause of evil: The
remedy whereof is knowledge and right understanding of gods word.

Joan. 16.
Infidelity and accustomed doing of evil, be the third cause of evil: True
faith and accustomed doing of good, remedyeth them.

Sin and iniquity be the causes of sickness, death and dampnacio^: virtue and
godliness heals and remoueth, that they shall not bring man to everlasting
death, although sin and sickness be not clean taken from man, yet does god in
Christ take away the dampnation of sin, and suffers death to destroy by
sickness none other thing then the body of ye sinner, so that he use this
remedy (repent and believe ye gospel) and shall at length call ye body dead by
death, out of thearth: And place it alive with the soul in heaven.

But now to use this help and remedy against the pestilence: which Christ
calls, repent and believe the gospel.

The sick man must remember what the first word repent means, and how he
may come by it. Repentance that God requires, is the return of the sinner
from sin, intoo a new life in Christ. Which return is an innouacyon and
renouacyon of the mind of man by Gods spirit in Christ, with denial of
the former life, too begin a new and better life. And this repentance
spryngeth from the knowledge of sin by the law of God. From the knowledge of
sin, comes the hatred of sin: from the hatred of sin, proceadeth the
leaving and departure from sin. From ye departure from sin, comes by
faith thorough Christ's blood, remission of sin. From remission of sin,
comes our acceptatyon into gods favor: from our acceptatyon intoo Gods
favor, comes the gifts of the holy ghost to do, and work by verteouse
life, the will of God. From the doing in Christ the will of god, comes gods
defense and favor yt takes from us all plages and pestylence. From the
delyueraunce of plages and pestylence comes everlasting lief, Joan. 3.3.6.
as Christ says: And as this medicine called, repent ye, and believe the
gospel, declares. There be also many that be sick and in great danger and
peril by reason of sin, and yet feel not the sore and grief thereof.
Therefore they pass not whether they seek for any remedy or not: And for
lack of taking heed they fall daily to more wyckednes then other. Wherefore
it is every ministers office of the church diligently (and especially in the
time of pestylence and plages) to call upon the people for amendmente of life.
And too show them truly, diligently and plainly this medicine of repentance.
Which consists of these parts. First, in knowledge of sin, then in hatred
of sin. Thirdly, in forsakyng of sin. Fourthly, in beleuyng ye forgeuenes
of sins for Christ's sake: And fifthly to live in verteous and godly lief, to
honor god, and to show his obedience to gods law, that by sin is
transgressed. And these parts of penance (which be the very true and only
medicines against sickness and sin) be known only by gods laws. For by
the law of god, sin is known, detested and forsaken, if it be heard or
readen by men that pray unto god, they may understand it. Faith also that
believes, remission of sin is showed, opened and offered by the gospel:
wherein be contained gods merciful promises toward sinners. And those
promises sinners receive by faith, that believes what so ever god has promised
in Christ, he will perform it. Faith does credit and receive forgeuenes of
sins by the operacion of gods holy spirit in the poor sinner. The sinner
studyeth and lives a verteous life, being led by the holy ghost, and works
to serve god with souche works, as gods holy commandment commands
every true christian man too work and do. And for the better assurance and
farther stablishyng of repentance and acceptance into the favor of god by
beleuyng the gospel, the poor sinner uses and receives the holy sacrament
of Christ's precious body and blood, in remembrance that Christ died to be
his medicine against sin, and theffecte thereof. Wherefore, now that it
pleases god for our offenses to show by plages and sickness how he is
offended: Let us all that be ministers of the church, and ye watch men of the
people, call upon them diligently to repent and believe the gospel, and to live
a godly and verteous life that for Christ's sake he will turn mercifully his
plages from us: and give us his most gracious favor to preserve his universal
church, our most godly Sovereign Lord and King, King Edward the sixte,
his Majesty's most honorable Council, and the whole Realm. So be it.

18. May* 1553.

Imprinted at Worceter by Jhon Oswen, Prynter appointed by the Kings Majesty
for the principality of Wales and Marches of the same.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


