A godly Confession and Protestacion of the christian faith, made and set forth
by Ihon Hooper, wherein is declared what a christian manne is bound to believe of
God, his King, his neibour, and himself.

The heart believes to justice, confession by the mouth is to salvation.

Roma.x. To the Most virtuous and myghtie Prince, Edward the sixth our most
redoubted soueraygne Lord, King of England, France, and Ierland, defendour
of the faith, and in earth next and immediately under God, the supreme head
of the churches of England and Ierland: And also unto the most wise godly, and
honorable Lords, of his hyghnes priuye Counsel, and unto the rest of the
most wise godly and learned assembled of all the honourables, and other
appointed to be of his Majesty's most high and godly Court of Parliament, John
Hooper his most humble, loving, and obedient Subject, wysheth all grace and
peace from God, with long, godly and most prosperous raygne over us in all godly
knowledge, honor, health, and perpetual felicity.
THe wise manne Cicero (most gracious and myghtie Prince) says, Offici. lib. i.
that he does not only wrong, yt by violence oppresses wrongfully an other
man, but also he that defends not (if it lie in his power) the wrongs
offered and is in no less faultye then though he had forsaken parents,
fryndes, or country. The same doctrine practiced he in the defense and
propulsyng the injuries and wrongs at tempted wrongfully against Milo by the
fryndes of Clodius as it appears by his eloquente and ^acundious oration made
for that purpose in the senate of Rome. The same kind of injuries, other godly
men in the scryptures of God, have always according to the law eschued: for
it is written, if a man se his neighbors Ass fall under her but then, or his
Ox to go astraye, his neighbor is bound to help them both. Exodi. xxiii.
The Ass from burden, and the Ox from his straying. The same practiced
Abraham: Genesis xiiii.
when he perceived his neuewe Loath oppressed with the wars of the Infidelles,
propulsed, and revenged the injuries, and set his neuewe at large and liberty:
Even so be there two sorts of people, that two sundry ways do injuries and
wrongs unto the soul and conscience of men. The one of the^, by force or
subtlety defraudeth the^ from the truth and perfection of Gods word, as
heretical and supersticious mynisters: The other, at such time as they should
with prayer, diligence, and preaching, defend the people of GOD from such
injuries and wrongs: are negligent or du^me. The which kind of injury,
doubtless the Lord God almyghtie will at length grievously revenge. Therefore,
against this kind of iniurye, he spoke unto the Prophet Ezechyel: Ezechi.
iii. xxxiii.
It I purpose to send a Plague upon the people, and thou give them not
warning thereof, I will require their blo^de at thy hand. The same said he
unto Saint Peter: Feed my lambs, Iho. xxi, Marck. xvi.
fedemy sheep. And unto all the Apostles, he said: make ye all Gentyles my
disciples. And saint Paul fearyng to fall in the danger of the second kind
of doing wrouge, in saving the wrongs of false religion from the church of
Christ, i. Corin. ix.
laid: woo be unto me, if I preach not.

Upon the consideration of these premises, seeing al thing be written for our
doctrine, Roma. xv
have thought it good, to write and set forth this Confession, and protestation
of my faith: submyttyng my self, and my faith also most humbly to be judged
by your Majesty, your most honorable Counsel, with the godly assemblaunce of
your majesty's most high Court of Parliament, according to the word of god.
That by this means, I may avoid the pain, and danger dew unto all them that
neglect, or omyt the injuries and wro^ges that may happen and chance by
sinister report, and false slander of Gods word, to the conscience of any of
your majesty's subjects. For I am credibly infourmed that many false, and
erroneous opinions is entered into their hedes of me (god forgive the^ that has
been y^ occasion thereof) If any way these injuries and dangerous slanders,
may be help, I think this to be the way, to offer most humbly my self and
my faith to be known, and judged by your majesty, after the word of god. I
protest before god, and your majesty, I wryt not this confession for any
Apollogie or defense, to contend, or strive with any man, in any matter, nor
for any private affeccion, or displeasure I bear unto any man living, or for
any inordinate or percial love unto my self: but for the cause, and to the same
end, before rehearsed.

Likewise for three other great causes, that shall follow. The one touches God,
the other your majesty, the third your loving subjects. As concerning God,
seeing both his majesty, mine own conscience, and my audytory know, that I
have nether in doctrine, nether in manners, Matthew. x.
taught no other thing then I received of the Patryarches, Mark. viii.
Prophets, ^uke. xii.
and the Apostles, it were not only sin, but also the very part of a
myscreant, to deny or betraye the innocencye of that doctrine, or to be ashamed
to stand to the defense thereof, seeing all godly men have esteemed more the true
word of God, then their own mortal lives. The second cause, that touches
your Magestie, and your most honorable Counsel, is because upon credyte,
and good opinion, and partly by experience, that your majesty had both of my
true faith and godly zeal: appointed me (among other of your preachers) though
most unworthy, to teach your subjects their duty to God and man. What true
subject can hear and understand such untrue bruites of those that a Kings
majesty shall appoynte to preach, and would not be glad, both for Gods sake
and his kings, to remove such ungodly bruites, if he can, for the peace and
quietness of their subjects. As for the cause ye touches the people, it is no
less worthy then eternal damnation. In case he be worthy of judgment, Matthew.
v.
and in danger of hell fire yt is angry with his brother, and calls him fool:
how much more, if he call his brother heriticke* and a denyer of God? If the
first ^e worthy hell fire, much more the last* Therefore least my brother
should dye, Galathi. vi.
and then receive condign reward, Jacob. v.
dew for a slaunderer: what it lies in me, I do by this Protestation of my
faith, call him to repentance. And incase any man stand in doubt of mine
opinion and meaning in religion: Let him not damn me before time, but use the
means with me that the.x. Iosi. xxii.
Tribes of Israel used with the Tribe of Ruben, Gad, and half the tribe of
Manasses, that buy it at their return to their possessions, an altar upon the
borders of Iordane the which fact was like to have ingendered great wars. But
it was stayed by the means of consultation, and communication had with those
that builded it: and their minds known, the dissension was ended and
appeased. Even so I would desire my christ cou^treme^ to use me (for I have
built no aulters of ydolatry) if they be in doubt of me in any thing, and not
to kill by hearesay, nether before they have heard me speak. Thus I pray God,
both they and I may search always to live in his fear, to obeie our King,
and to be profitable, and true members of this Realm of England. So be it.
The.xx. day of December, in the year of our Lord God. a. M. D. and fifty.

To the Reader.
As Soon as I perused this confession, and protestation of my faith after the
prynt, I perceived words, and sillables evil placed. And in yt letter G. the
sixth face, and syxte line, both against my copye and the state and argumante of
my matter, there is printed Saint Paul confesses, for s. Paul confuteth, an
affirmative for a negative, as thou may understand by the place, how the
word prynted, seems to affirm, that the place denies. But such faults
escapes some times, contrary as well to the Printers as the authors mind. Thus
the Lord be with the and pardon al our faults, for the death of Christ.

At London the. xxvi December. An. M. D. l.
The Confession and protestacio^ of John hoopers Fayeth.
Math. iii. and. xxviii Zacary. iii
The father, the son, and tholygost. Not. iii. Gods, but one God, Things
with time, Gene. i.
and in time, be al things, that ever was, now is, or ever shall be created in
heaven or in yerth, vntly the day of the last general judgment, when as both
body and soul, shall begin together (for the soul ever lives) immortality
and joys without time, of such as be ordained by God to eternal salvation, and
of such as be appointed and have deserved it, to eternal damnacion, to begin
eternal pains, and so to endure without time.



I believe al things created by God as concerning their creacio^, to be perfect
and good: without hatred, displesure, grudge, co^tumacie, rebellion,
disobedience or pride against their maker.

Colossians. i
as the spirits, or angels, that never fell, nor hereafter shalfal, through
the means of Christ.

mortal pains, part unto both: as the devil, and manne, that fell into this
ruin, and perdicion of them selves, although diverse ways: To say the devil
by pride, and Arrogancye, whiles he would be like unto God. Psalm. v.
Man by ignorance, Ihon. vii^
and by craft of the devil deceived, and not by any imperfeccion of gods
party in their creacion, not by any force, compulsion or violence of gods
part, that compelled them to euel.

For I believe God to be the author of life, and salvation, and the will of the
devil, and of man, to be the occacion of both their loss.



The people of the Devil be those, that think, they worship, honor, reverence
fear, laud, or praise God, any other ways, besides, or contrary to the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.



therein, as well of his divine nature, as of the division of the persons, in
the deuyne essence, so that we be compelled by thaucthoritie of gods word, to
confess the plurality of persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost,
in the unity of one divine godhead and essence.





conditions, that the hollye scripture of God, or the decree, or doctrine of
any of the three former creades affirm:

and deceyte of the Devil: so is he and so shall all his posteritye be saved
by the mercy, and merits of Christ. The Devil and Adams will, wrought sin
and death: gods mercy, and Christ his merits, wroughte grace, and life.
The will of Eaue and Adam strayinge, and wandering abroad upon the fruit, an
obiecte, and matter forbidden of God, that they should not eat of, brought
them into death:

Jesus Christ the seade of the wom^^e applying both body and soul, to the
obedience of God, deserved life. As it is in the scriptures, and in the second
part of the common creed.

and ascended into heaven, and there sits on the right hand of God the
Father almyghtie. And from thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead

Iho. vi. xii.
the sins of al beleuers, Romans xv.
to be forgeuen without the merits and deserui^ges of Adams posterity. Ephe.
i. ii.
By Ada^ sin came into the world, Heb. ii. ix. x.
and by sin death: Col. i. ii.
Even so without all merits, respects, and worthynes of Adam, either of any
of his posterity, by Jesus Christ came remission of sin and life
everlasting. And even as I believe stedfastli, sin and death, by this means
to be overcome and destroyed, and ever lastyng life to follow it: so believe I
the son of God to be perfect God and man, according to the scriptures, and do
condemn the heresies of Arian and Mar^ian, with their accomplices and
adhere^tes, that wyckedly believed the contrary. And as I confess and believe
the measies of our salvation to be only Christ: so I condemn the Pelagian:
and all such other, as believed and taught, that they culd by their own powers,
strength and will, work their own salvation: which false opinion co^culcateth,
frustrateth, slandereth, condemns, and blasphemeth all the deservings of
Christ. Therefore the Pelagian is called worthyly the ennemy of grace.

Farther I be^eeue that the grace of God, deserved by the passion of Christ,
does not only freely, and without all merits of man, begin, teach, and
provoke manne to believe the promyses of God, and so to begin to work the will
of God: but also all the works, merits, deservings, doings, and obedience
of man, toward God, although they be done by the spirit of god, in the
grace of god, yet being thus done, be of no validitee, worthynes nor merit
before God, Luke. xvi Roma. xiiii.
except God by mercy and grace, account them worthy for the worthynes and
merits of Jesus Christ, that dyed under Poncius Pilatus. So that I believe
grace, not oneli to be the begynner of al good works, Esaias. lxiiii.
but that all good works done by man in the greattest perfeccion, Psalm. cxliii.
have need, and wants grace to pardon their imperfeccion.

Math. iii. and.xviii.
and false doctrines, Act. ii.
and teaches the communion ^f saints in all truth and verity: i. Corin. xii.
the which holy spirit, Ephe. ii. iii.
shall never forsake the holy church which is Christ his mystical body. Ihon.
xiiii.
Gala. iii.
Joel. ii.




This is my faith, (...).
and doctrine, concirnyng the Godhed and diversity of persons in the holy
Trinity, and also of the two natures in Christ, his godhed, and manhed.
Abhorring, and detesti^g the heresies of Samosa^enes. Arian, Nestor, Eutiches,
who were condemned by godly councils Nece, Co^sta^tinople, Ephesin, Calchedom,
and other, I detest and abhor the Martian and Man^che, that faineth to be two
gods, and both eternal: one good, and the other evil, always at debate among
them selus. I detest, and abor ye monsterous doctrine of the Valentines, and so
generally of all those that have denied to be any god, or would have many gods.
Also al those I detest that have erred, and in aintaine their error in any
thing concerning the essence of god, ordained the plurality of persons, as of
the father the son and the holy ghost, This is the faith of gods spirit, in
my conscience, which I have learned in his word, and have fayethfullye, and
r^lygyouslye preathed, and taught the same in all my sermons, as I will be
judged by onne audytory. Also the same doctrine. I have furthred and set forth
in all mi boks (...) writings, though sum Calu^niators and sclaunderers, wulde
gladly make pore the people believe the contrary. But I do decline and appeal
from such uncharitable spretes, unto the charitable reader and loving heart of
all them, that be endued with gods holy sprete for they will not constrayne,
nor force letter, syllable, word, or sentence, contrary to the mind of the
speaker, and writer, but will Judge, and search for judgment, in the processes
and circumstances of the writer, and content themselves with the writers mind,
rather than to bring their affection and corrupt minds, to make their own
imaginations and fantasies an other man's doctrine, as the Arrian, Pelagiane,
Anabaptist, Papist, and other do, and have done, bringing corrupt minds to
the lesson and readyng of Christ's testament, and would that their falls
heresies, and untrue imaginations, should be Christ his doctrine. Seeing both
gods laws, and man's laws suffers, and gives libertee to every man in a
cause of religion, to be interpretater of his own words, it were contrary to
justice, to put any man from it. For if the auctor, may not be the interpreter
of his own mind, what would not malice, envy, spite, and disdain gather of
works most truly, and faith fully mente and written. And seeing charitee and the
laws of this realm as it appears in an act of parliament made in y^ first
year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the syxte, gives
lybertee, and license to him that shall be accused for a matter of Religion, upon
malice, evil will, hatred disdayn, or be made and suborned records, to repel
and conuicte all such false records, and their accusers by other faithful
and indifferent Records. The which act of parliament God forbydde should be
denied to any of the kings Majesty's preachers: for if the testimonye of their
audientes, shall not quitte them from the spyte and calumniacion of malicious,
and uncharitable me^, they shall not long preach the truth. For either the
papists will accuse the^, because they wish the^ pope and al monumentes of
papistry to be taken out of the way: Either the carnal gospellar, that cannot
abide to hear his faults, and carnal life rebuked. And I think if the Kings
magestie, and his most honorable counsel prepare not the sooner a bridle and
correction for sin, the true preacher of God hereafter shall be more
persicuted for reprehendynge of sin and ungodly life, then ever yet hither
unto he has been persecuted by the papists. Thus I have declared my faith,
and belefe toward God, according to the Scriptures, in the which I trust to
co^tiune until death end this miserable, and w^fihed life.

Now I will declare also the same toward the church of Christ, what I
bele^e of the magistrates the mynisters of the wo^de, and the people I dwell
with al. And of these things I will speak according to the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. For many times as well heretofore, as in our days,
have been supersticious Hipocrites, and pha^tastical sprites, that have
neglected, and condemned the office of maiestrates, judgments, laws
punishments of evil, lawful dominion, rule, lawful wars, and such like:
without which a common wealth may not endure. They have condemned also the
ministry, and ministers of Christ's church: and as for christian society and
charitable love, they confound. They use the ministerye of the church so,
that it is out of al estimation, supposyng them selves to be of such
perfection, that they need neither the ministry of the word, nether the use of
Christ his holy Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

And the other they use with such deuilish disorder, that they would by a law,
make theyrs their neighbors and their neyghbors theyrs, confoundyng al
propriety and dominion of goods. Before our time the furye, and damnable
heresy of Marcian and the Ma^lchees against the maiestrates, troubled many a
year dangerousely both Asia, and Africa. And not yet.cccc. years sith a gone,
a sort of people called Flagelliferi did the same.

And now in our time to the great trouble and unquietness of mauy common
welthes, in Europe, the Anabaptists has resuscitated, and reuyued the same
errors. Which is an argument and token of the deuyls great indignation
against civil policy and order. for he knows where such er^ors and false
doctrines of political ordres be planted: two great evils necessarily must
needs follow, the one is sedition, that brings murders, bloudshedyng and
dissipations of realms: the other is blasphemy against Christ's precious
blood, for those sects think they be able to save them selves, of and by
the^ selves. Farther whereas the magistrates be cumbred with those dangerous
sort of people, the Devil knows theyshal have no leaser at will to take some
order by gods word, to oppress such false doctrine. But this we be taught
out of the scripture, that even as man is ordained to the order, chang, and
alteracyon of time, as thorder of the year appoints, now to be subject unto
summer, now unto winter, now to the spring, and now to the fall: so has
God ordained, and comau^ded man to be obedient to pollices, and orders were
soever he be, so they be not repngnau^t nor contrary to the word of God: As
Joseph in his heart, bore abroad whersoeuer he went, the true knowledge and
invocation of God, also of Christ to come, yet outwardly in courts, indgements,
contractes, and inpossessyon of gods he used the law of the Egiptia^s: even
so did Daniel in Babylon. Dan. iii.
There is no more to be taken head of, in laws, and civil policies but to se the
law repugne not the law of god: and that the law makers and those to whom
the execucion of the law is commended unto, have a special, and singular ^se
unto the effect and the meaning of the law, wher^ore it was made a law: the
which S. Paul wonderfully exhorts people to understand, Roma. xiii
saying of the law, Exodus ^xxii.
and magistrates: let them be a fear and terror to the evil doers, and a
praise, and commendacion to the welldoers. Neither forces it, though the
form and manner of laws, of judgments, of pains and punishments, be not
like in all places, as the laws of Feuderies ^ee not like in Italy, England,
France, Spain nor Germany. Yet should every nation be subject unto the laws of
his own realm, and civil policy: and in his doing. he shall offend God no
more, the^ the Englysh me^, that have longer days in the somer, shorter days
in winter: then those that dwell nere to the south. Or s. Paul that had longer
days at the Solsti^ium and pitch of the sun in Macedon* then Christ had at
Jerusalem. But eue^ as we be content with our measure and length of dai and
night and others be contented with theyrs: so must both they and we submit our
selves and be contented with the measure and order of our own laws. I do
therefore be wayle and lament, that the preachers in the church, and
scolemasters i^ their schools, the householder in his household, do know no
better what the dignity and honor of a cyuyl policy is: by whom it is
ordained, and by whom it is preserved, how dangerous and damnable a thing it
is before god and man, to trouble and disquiet it, by any furour and madness of
opinion, as the Marcion, Maniches, and Anabaptists do. I se and know by
experience, much trouble and danger to rise among the unlearned and ungodly
people, by ignorancy: for when they se such deformities, and co^fusio^s, rise
and chance, as we se manitimes, to happen in kingdo^s Cortes, indicials,
laws, gouernonres, that more fansy pryuate profytte, and syngularitye, then
the profytte of the hole common wealth, and indifferencye of all men, and all
causes indifferentelye: they suppose verelye, (for lack of knowledge in gods
word) that all orders, pollycyes, kingdoms, and domynyons, be no other thing,
the^ cruel Tirannie and oppression of the poor. And also to have their
beginning, and orygynall either of the Devil or of pride, Romay. xiii.
and covetousness of men. This same evil upon the same occasyon of ignorauncye,
caused natural wise me^, much to be troubled and vexed about the
consideracio^s of kingdoms, pollicyes, Rules, and dominions, because they
perceived all kingedomes to be subject unto troubles and alteracions and not
only that, but they perceived right well, no kyngedome too be perpetual, nor
for ever. And in deed, who so behouldeth the beginning, the contynuaunce and
end of the Empire of Rome, shall se right well, they* imaginations to be no
vayn things.

How much of herre own blood, and of strangers blood did Rome shed,
before, she came to the regiment and rule of all the world? When she was
aspyred thereunto, and was a fear to all the world, how much blood of her own
shed she, by civil wars and contencyons, the iestes and wrytinges that men
cioneth of Silla, Marius, Cinna, Cezar, Po^peius, Brutus, Anthonins August, and
other declares. Thus when the Lord God would take from Rome, for her sins,
the dominion of the world, he sent the Goths, Va^d^ls, H^ns, Arabies. and
Turks: that wasted not only Italy but also Egypt, Aphrica, and Asia, and so
brought the Empire of Rome to naught. As many times as I read and mark this
history and ^^her like it causes me to ^doke upon many evil English men as
Scipio looked upon the great city of Car^hage whiles it was a burning, saying
with a lamentable voice: the inconstancy of fortune in humain things is to be
lamented. Which voice sprang upon this occasion that Carthage being a cyty of
great ^eno^me, and dominion, was now become a pray unto ye fire, and deuolted
as wisdom always does, the consideracion of present euels, unto other yet
floryshynge in hault, and prosperous felycyty: and declared as a man seeing
before, the ruin and fall of things that stood, destinated the fall of Rome to
com, that should perish by like plage Even so when I behold the eu^l
pestiferous affected minds of english men, and perpend and wa^ the fru^ts of
such corrupt minds, contempt, hatred grudge and malice against their King
magistrates laws, orders and policies, d^^tles I can (...) other think, but
these men as much as is in the^, conspire and work the distruccion of this
realm: For it ca^no^ other wise be, but as contempt of godly laws, and
sedicion among the people* and subjects of what (...) they be, have wroughte
the desti^icyon of other realms: so must it: and can no otherwise do, unto
this realm. The chefest remedy agynst sedition.
(...) what realm or kingdom (...) avoid these eulls, (...) provide the word
of God to be truly and di^igently preached, and taught unto the subjects and
members thereof. The lack of (...) is the chief cause of sedition and (...),
Prove. xxvi.
as Solomon says. Where (...) ^^phecye wants, the people are dyscy^pated.
wherefore (...) not a little wonder at the opinion and doctrine of su^ly as say
a Sermon (...) in a weke, in a month, or in a quarter of a year is sufficient
for ye people. Truly it is injuriously (...) against yt glory of god, and
salvation of the people. But seeing they will not be in the whole, as good unto
god as before they have been unto the diuil, neither so glad to remove false
doctrine from the people, and to continue them in the true* where as they did
before occupi the most part of the for^^o^e, the most part of the after none,
yea, and a great part of the night, to keep the estimation and continuance of
dangerous, and vain supersticious, were it much now to occupy one hour in the
morning, and another hour toward night, to occupye the people with true and
ernest prayer unto GOD in Christ his blood, and in preaching the true doctrine
of Christ that they might know and continue in the ^ewe relygyon, and
faithful confydence of Christ Jesus.

Exercise; and dylygence brings* credit unto religion, whether it be true or
false. For it never takes place, nor cool in the people without diligence, as
it is to be perceived by the acts, and iestes, done in the^ me of Iero^oa^, and
Roboam, the king of Israel, and Judah. What brought the Mass and al other
Idolatry into estimacion, but dailye preaching and saying thereof, with such
laud and praise as every old wife knew what a mass was worth.

Fyftene Masses in a church dayelye were not to many for the priests of Baal,
and should one sermon every day be to much for a godly Bishop and Euangelical
preacher? I wonder how it may be to much opened, and declared unto the
people. If any man say, labor is left, and men's busynes lies undone by that
menes. Suerly it is ungodly spoken, for those that here the people in hand of
such a thing knows right well that there was nether labors, cares, needs,
necessity nor any things else, that heretofore could keep the^ from hearing
of Mass, though it had been said at.iiii. a, clock in the morning.

Therefore, as far as Ise, people were content to lose more labor, and spent
more time then to go to the Devil, the^ now to come to God: but my faith is
that both Master and servant shall find vauntage, and gain thereby at the years
end, though they hear morning Sermon and morning prayers every day of the
weak. For by this means they should learn, not only to know God, but also
their magestrates, and to put difference between the office, and the person
that is in office: and between the office, and the troubles, necessarily
annexed unto the office, which brings not only knowledge of office and
officer but also honor, and reverence unto the^ both, as. S. Paul that leued
the policy, laws, order, and wisdom of the Romans, yet dislyked very much
the vice and naughtines of Niro, unto who^ he submitted and willyngly bro^ght
into servitude both his body and his gods, and rebelled not though Nero was
a nought^ Emperor, for his office sake, which was the (...) of God. i. Reg.
xvi^.
So did Elias love the state, honor, and dignity of the kings fo Israel: yet
detested, and fell foul out with y^ fauts of Hachab. The same doctrine
teaches saint Peter unto al servants, commanding them to obey their
master, though they be evil, having a respect to the place they be in, which
is thorder of god and not unto the vice, and abuse of the person in gods order
Truly be the ruler of him self never so euel, yet the laws, judgments,
punyshme^tes and statutes, made for the punishment of evil, Deuteronomy. xvii.
and the defense of the good, be the very work of god, for the magistrates be
the kepers of discipline and peace. Therefore as ye motion of the heue^s the
fertilite of the earth be the works of god, and preserved by him: even so be
the governors and rulers of the earth, Ps. l. c. xliiii
as David says: he gives health to Princes as it was showed in him self,
Solomon, Iosophat, and others. The regimente and policy of king David was
troublous, and full of miseries, thereygne of king Salomo^ his son, peaceable
and quiet, the re^ygne of Joshua. victorious, and prosperous. The raygn of the
judges that followed so troublous and unquiet, as a more re^t and torn common
wealth, I have not read of: yet was the order of God all one, as well in the one
as in the other, and required as much love, assistence, and obedyence of the
people, to their king and magistrates in their trouble as in their quietness and
peace. So does Daniel y^ prophet most godli and wisely teach by his image that
he saw made of four ^undry metals, but he concludes whether the regiment,
and rege^twer gold, silver, copper or Iron, the people always obeyed. The same
teaches also the doctrine and example of John Baptyste, Christ, Saint
Stephen, and saint James, John's brother. For although the regymente were
neither so godly, nor so quiet in Herodes times, and Pontius Pilatus as it was
in Salomons time: yet gave they always like reverence, honor, and obedience
unto them, for their orders sake, as though they had been the verteousest
princes of the world as their doctrine tribute and blood records. For they
gave unto Caesar the things dew unto Caesar, as their boys, and their goods,
but their souls they owed to none, but unto God. And when diuersitye of
relygyon, and doctryn should be discussed and determined by their laws, they
declyned from their judgment. and appealed unto the word of god, to have al
controuersyes ended thereby. When that took place, they gave thanks to god:
when it did not, they were content patiently to bear whatsoever gods hand
would permyt the magystrates to say upon the^. Were these exa^pels known and
kept before men's eyes people would not for a faut or two that should happen in
the regyment, iritate and provoke the regentes, and Princes with contumacy, and
rebellion as it is seen commonly at this day, but rather follow the example of
the Jews that when they herd of the facts, and doi^gs of Ptolome Lathure, that
killed twenty thousand of their country me^ and caused those that he took
captive, to ear the fleashe of their own dead fathers, and brothers, yet
rebelled they not, but knew it was for their sin, and therefore exorted one y^
other to penance and amendme^t of life: the same self doctrine, teaches our
savior Christ in his holy Euangeliste Luke. Luke xiii
Thus I thought good, to put in my Creed for the declaracion of my faith,
toward civil magistrates, orders, and laws, and to open the difference
between thorders the person, and such troubles as be annexed unto thorder: lest
any man should, for troble and confusions sake, da^ne order, and regiment it
self: or else, by the means there of, to detract and forsake, to take pains i^
suh vocacion as the Epycures did, where as in deed, rule, and regiment,
themselves be the great benefits of god. And there fore row in the later time,
more to be pre^hed and taught to the people for diverse co^sideracio^s: the^
ever hertofore. Specially because co^te^pt of honesti, and laws, labors, and
godly exercises, rain more the^ ever they did. For at the beginning men so
obeyed reason and were ruled thereby, that they brought them selves into order
and policy. And for the maintenance thereof, sought out crafts and and arts
necessary for the preseruacion of policy and order, and so were glad rather
to be ruled by ^eson the^ by force and violence. This time being expired and
reso^ corrupt, asp^ri^g farther the^ reason by nature would, partly for tomuch
love of her self, partly to tame and kepein subieccio^ such as disordred al
good order, and rule: descended from ye regiment of reason, unto the force of
war, and marcial laws, The same semi^g good unto almighty god to tame, and
reclame man by force, that would not be ruled by reason But now are we fallen
into the last time and end of the world, wherifor reason rules lust, and for
just battle, rules immoderate concupiscence: for scarce is there one of a. C.
that love to seek for wysdo^ and knolege of reso^, and of arts, that other me^
found out and left unto us. And as for the pains and trauayls of war, let
^uery ma^iudge, and consider him self, whether our weak nature ca^ suffer as
much as David, Archilles, Cyrus, Alexander, Hanybal, Marcellus, Scipio, C,
Caesar, and other did: the^ shall we perceive, that nature now in man consumed,
effeminated, and worn out, is a thing most unable to do, that fore age has
done.

Therefore have these later days more need of much tcachyng, in cyuyle causes,
then the old age before us, why che better, and more modestlye, governed them
selfs, by only reason, then now we do by gods word, and reason.

And this is not known only by the holy scriptures, but also by profane
writers, that declare with the age of the world to increase miquytye. And our
experience may be a comentary in this behalf to gods laws, and man's laws:
for where as saint Paul declares the civil Magistrates, not only to be
ordained, but also preserved by god, and that al me^ should accept, and account
him to be the true Magistrate, that God had appointed, and not such a one as
y^ people and subjects appoi^t their selves. And eue^ as wise Cicero perceived
at the beginning of the mortal dissencion and debate between Pompeius, and
Julius Caesar, gave counsel according to the will of God, (declared unto him,
by the suffrages, and voices of the Romans) that Caesar should have been
cheyfe Ruler of the people: now for lack, and co^tempte of knowledge, both
say^te Paul, and Cicero be neglected. For either the people will have no
magistrate at al, or else suc^ a one, as it pleases them selves, and not him
that God has appointed. If this adventure take no place, they will change
(if they can) the state of the common wealth, that whereas one reigns, a
Monarche or king, they would change it into the regimente of many. And
whereas many reign (as me^ never contented with the state that God has
appointed) turn the regymente of many into the governance of few. Whose
nature Orace well declares.

Lib. Epist. Optat Ephippia bot. p^ger Optat, arare Caballus,

Against whose preposterous judgment and fickil minds, Romay. xiii.
saint Paul vehemently writes. The powers says he that be, ar ordained of
God, and not the powers that subjects shall chouse and make at their pleasures.
For no man of what degree, state, or authority soever he be being a private man,
(as al men be in a monarchy whereas one rules, in respect of the king that
rules) should meddle with the state of a realm. For it is god that ordained it,
Daniell. ii.
and he that dissolueth it. Psalm. cxxvi. Cxliii.
Neither should this fond opinion take any place in a christian ma^s head,
Prouer. xviii. Parap. ii. Esaye. i.
that any offices appointed by god, Psalm. viii
should cause the officers to be evil before god. For the lord gives the^
tytles and names of great honor and love, as gods, and such as serve and
please hi^, Psalm. lxxxii.
also the nurses of the church as the examples of Ada^, Esa. xlix.
Henoch, Noe, with other, Genesis. ix.
who were in those days very godly rulers, to maintain virtue and punish
vice. This saw not only the Patriarchs, and godly men of the scripture, but
also natural wise men, that saw and reverenced order and pollicye as Plato
writes, De legivus.
saying. As the Ox is not ruled by ye Ox, nor the goat by the goat, but by
a more pure nature, to say, by man so the nature of man: is more infyrme then
can rule it self, Therefore god appointed, not only me^ to rule, but also such
men as excelled in wit and wisdom, ii. Pa^ap. xx
adioined with the special and singular grace of God, and so says Plato de
legibus: vbi non deus sed mortalis aliquis dominatur, ib^ (...) dorum uel
erumnaru^ nullum esse effugiu^: whereas any mortal manne bears dominion, and
not god, there can be none escape of calamities, and miseries. Of the same
opinion is Homer the poet, who says that the gods appoynteth their shieldes
to defend princes, as Pallas defended Achi^les. That does Iosophat the king in
the plate before rehearsed, wonderfully declare. And whosoever will consider the
execucion and dew pains to wards euel doers, shall rightwel perceive that god
himself is i^ the magistrate, For Christ says: he that stryketh with the
swearde, shall perish with the sweard, And of the oppressoures it is spoken: woe
be unto the that spoyleste, Math. xxvi.
for thou shall be sp^iled So that we se god to defend civil justice upon the
earth, Esaias. xxxiii
Abraham, Job. xi.
Ieremye, Eccle. viii.
and saint Paul, Gene. i.
declares that the civil policy is the ordinance of God, Ierem. xxix.
i. Timo. ii.
by such prayer as they commanded the people to pray for it: and this prayer
for the maiestrates declares what diuersitye is between a magistrate
christened, and a Heathen. Wherein Cicero dyffereth from Esaias, and king David
from Julius Caesar. Cicero gave counsel, after reason and experience to rule the
common wealth, but many times it took not good effect for lack of the wysdom
of God, Esaias, and the rest of the prophets gave counsel not of them selus but
from god and what prince soever obeyed their counsel he prospered always and
had good succes. The same may you se in the fashyons, and manner of their
wars. Alexander thought him self strong enough by natural strength, to
conquer his enemies. King Dauyd added to his s^yage stones, i. Sam. xvi^
the prayer and help of gods name. Therefore if heath in mag^strates should
be obeyed, much more chrystian magystrates.

And in case the kings mayestye of England may find no less obedyence ^n
his subjects then Scip^o Alexander, and other found amongs theirs, England
shall be to strong, with gods help, for all the world. But Englysh men I speak
it with sorrow, and grief of heart, have learned of Cleon, a man that
Aristophanes writes of, that had one footein the senate, and the other in the
field: so have Englyshmen one hand at the plough, and the other against y^
magistrates. The ministers of the church, persons and vicares, one hand upon
the portesse, and the other to strike at the kings crown.

They do follow the Ape that Harmogenes fable speaks of, that would have had
other Apes to have builded houses, tounes, and cities to have defended them
selfs from the dominion of their Lord, and ruler man: ^ene. ii. (...), ix
and thought it not meet to live in the state that God had appointed them:
even so subjects, now a days, (God amend it) would make them selves
defenses, cities, castles, towns, tents, pauilions, to defend them against
their king, lord and magistrate, and will not be content to live in the state
that god appointed the^ unto. But it shall happen unto them, as it did unto the
Apes: their counsel and conspiracy shall never take place. Let us therefore
remember s. Paul that says: the powers that be, Romay. xiii.
be of God, and not such as we would make and let us be contented with them,
and obey them for conscience sake: for such as disobey and rebel against
superioure powers, rebel against god, and so god punishes it with eternal
damnacion. This is enough to keep every good man and true subject, in
obedience, to their hyer powers. If the reader of the scripture of god note the
first and the second chap. of Genesis he should perceive rule and policy or ever
man wist what sin menre: for the Lord gave the superiority and dominion to
Ada^ over al beasts. Of who^ now we may right well learn obedience if we were not
worse the^ bestes. Now a word or two of the magistrates duty: Aristotle calls
the Magistrate (...) A keeper of the law. Let him use it therefore indifferentlye
without respect of persons, ^eni. xxiiii.
in punishynge such as trouble by inordinate means, (...). xii. xviii
the common wealth: Psalm. ii.
and also such as blaspheme the living God, ^roue^. xxv
as godly kings and Rulars have done, Dauyd, Josias, Nabucodonozor,
Constantine, and other. For although a Eyuyl Law, and punishment can not
change the Herisies of the mind, neither the desire that men have to do
evil: yet when they break forth against the honor of GOD, and trouble the
common welthe, they should be punished.

For the maiestrat is, as one that has the two testaments tied at his neck,
and should defend them, as his own life: (...). xiii.
and therefore saint Paul calls him not only the revenger of evil, but the
mayntener of good, and Esaias the Prophet says the same.

Now I will declare my faith concerning the external, xvii.
and visible church of Christ, and of the ministers thereof. I call this
visible church a visible congregation of me^ and women that hear the gospel
of Christ and use his sacraments, as he has instituted them. In the which
congregatyon the spyryte of God works the salvation of al beleuers, as saint
Paul says: Romans i.
The gospel is the power of God, to the saluaryon of the beleuer. As though he
had said: the gospel of Christ, where it is heard and believed, the mind is
changed by the virtue of the holy ghost, from the love of sin, unto the love
of virtue. The will is wrought to consent, and the consent so assisted by the
holy ghooste, that says obteyneth the remission of fy^ne, and the beginning
of everlasting life. And these two marks, the true preachi^g of gods word and
right use of the sacraments declare what, and where the true church is* Unto
the which church, I would all Christian men should assosiate them selves,
although there may happen to be some things desired in manners and discipline.
For no church as touching this part, can be absolutely perfect. But where as
the doctrine is sound, and no Idolatry defended, that church is of God, as
far as mortal man can judge. And where as this doctrine and right use of
Sacraments be not, there is no church of Christ, though it seem never so holy.
For in the blessed virgins time, the Pharisees, and bishops, were accounted to
be the true church: yet by reason their doctrine was corrupt, the true Church
rested not in them, but in Simeon, Luke. i. ii.
zacharye, Elisabeth, the shepherdes and other. The same does saint Paul
teach us, Io. x.
that whatsoever he be that preaches other doctrine then the word of God is
not to be credited, Io. iii.
though i. Cor. i.
he were an Angel of heaven. Roma. x
Neither Ephe. ii. iiii.
will (...) as know God, Esa. viii. lix
harken unto the^: but will hear Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, and no
other. The other mark is the right use of sacraments, whereof were two in
noumber with the fathers, in the ministerye of the church, and so many yet be
with us in the ministry of the church, and have annexed unto them the
promise of eternal salvation, and also of eternal damnacion if they be
contemned, and may be lawfully had. In the law of Moses was Circumcision and
the Pascall Lamb: and in their places we have Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord diverse in external elements, and Ceremonies, but one ineffect mystery,
and thing it self, saving that their Sacraments showed the graces of God to
be given unto men, in Christ to come: and ours declare y^ graces of God to be
given in Christ that is alredye come: so that the Sacraments be not changed,
but rather the Elements of the Sacraments. And every of these Sacraments
have their peculier and proper promyses, unto the which they hang annexed, as
a seal unto the writynge. And there fore be called after Saint Paul, the
confirmations or seals of gods promises. Roma. iiii
They have peculier Elements, by the which they signify the heavenly
mysteries, that sacrame^tall^ they co^tain and be the thing in deed They are
called Sacraments. That is to say: visible signs of invisible grace. They
have their proper ceremonies, that testify unto us the obsignation, and
confirmation of Gods heavenly gifts.

The have also their proper commandment, because we should not change, add,
nor take, from them anything at our pleasures. Thus in general I think of all
gods Sacraments in the ministry of the church. And of Baptism because it is
a mark of our Christian church, Roma. iiii.
this I judge after the doctrine of Saint Paul, that it is a seal and
co^firmacion of justice, xviii.
either of our accepcion into the grace of God for Christ, for his innocencye
and justice by faith is ours, and our sins and injustice, by his obedience ar
his, whereof baptism is the sign, seal and co^firmatio^. For although freely
by the grace of god our sins be forgeuen: yet the same is declared by the
Gospel, received by faith and sealed by ye sacraments, which be the seals of
gods promises, as it is to be seen by the faith of the faithful Abraham. Mat.
xxviii.
Baptism has his promises as is a fore said his elemente, Mat. xvi.
the water: Act. viii.
his proper commandment, and his proper ceremonies, washi^g in ye water. As
for other men's opinions that say Circumsicion was the seal, not only of
Abraha^s acceptance freely into the grace of God by faith, but also of his
obedience and proper justice: I believe it not to be true, for. S. Paul
confuteth it, in the same place as an error, sayi^g Abraham had nothing whereof
he might glory before god. If he had nothing, god confirmed that he gave him,
and not that he found in him, for S. Paul says, that Circumcision was the
seal of the Justice that ca^ by faith, and not by works. They be out of the
way, that have the like opinion of baptism, for S. Paul disputes not in that
place, whether works plese god, Romans iiii. ix.
but shows that our salvation comes by grace, and not by works. There be
other that think Sacraments to be the co^firmatio^s, not only of our fre
acceptacyon into gods favor by faith, but also of our obedience toward God
hereafter. And because Infantes and young babes, cannot profess obedience, nor
put of the old man, nor put on the new, they would exempt and defraud the
young children of baptism. Saint Paul confesses also this opinion in the
same place. Genesis xvii.
Abraham says he, believed God, and it was acco^ted unto him for justice, and
says not Abraham professed obedience. Therefore God confirmed his own
infallible truth and promises to Abraham by circumcision, and not Abraham's
obedience. For if he had, he had confirmed the weke and uncertain infirmity of
man, and not his own infallible truth. For Abraham with all his obedience was
infyrme and imperfect without Christ, Yet was bound to work in a godly life. As
for those that say Circumcision and Baptism be like, and yet attribut the
remission of original sin to Baptysme, which was never given unto
Circumcision, they only destroy not the similitude and equality that should
be between them: but also take from Christ remission of sin, and translate
it into the water, and element of baptism.

As for the supper of the Lord, which is the other Sacrament, whereby the
church of Christ is known, I believe it is a remembrance of Christ's death, a
seal and confyrmation of his preciouse body given unto death, wherwyth we are
redeemed. It is a vysyble word, that precheth peace between God and man,
exhorts to mutual love, and godly life, teaches to contemn the world, for
the hope of the life to come, when as christ shall appear, and come down in
to the clouds, which now is in heaven as consernynge his humanytye, and no
where else, nor never shall be till the time of the general resurrection.

I be leave that this holy sacrament has his proper promises, Math. xxvi.
proper elements, Mark. xiiii.
proper commau^deme^t, Luke. xxii.
and proper Ceremonies. i. Corinth. xi
As concerning the ministers of the church, I believe that the church is bound
to no sort of people, or any ordinary succession of bishops, xx.
Cardinals or such like, but unto the only word of god, and none of the^ should
be believed but when they speak ye word of god. Although there be diversity of
gifts and knowledge among men, Ephes^. iiii.
some know more, and some know less. And if he that knows lest teach
Christ, Gala i
after the holy scriptures he is to be accepted, and he that knows most, and
teaches Christ contrary or and there ways, then the holy scryptures teach,
is to be refused. I am sorry therefore with all my heart to se the church of
Christ degenerated into a civil policy: for even as kings of the world
naturally by descent from their parents must solow in civil regiment, rule,
and law, as by right they ought: even so must such as succeed in the place of
Bishops and priests that dye, possess al gifts, and learning of the holly
ghost, to rule the church of Christ as his godly predecessor had: so that
tholy ghost must be captive and bondsman to bishops seas, and palacies. And
because the holy ghost was in saint Peter at Rome, and in mani other godly men
that have occupied bishopprickes and dioses, therefore the same gifts they sai
must needs follow in their successors, although in deed they be no more like
of zeal nor diligence, then Peter and Judas, Balaham and Jeremy, Anna and
Caiphas to John and James. But thus I conclude of the mynysters, of what degree
or dignity soever they be, they be no better the^ records and testymonyes,
mynysters and servants of gods word and gods sacraments. Unto the which
they should nether add, demynish, nor change any thing. And for their true
service and dylige^ce in this part, they should not be only reverenced of the
people, Ma. xxviii.
but also honored by the magistrates, i. Cor. iiii.
as the servants of god. ^er. i.
And I believe, Eze. ii.
that as many souls as perish by their negligence or contempt of gods word,
xxxiii.
shall be required at their hands. Of the people thus I believe: that they owe
their duty and obebience to god: to them king, and magistrates: unto their
neighbors: and unto them selves. Unto god they owe both body and soul, to
laud and praise him according to gods book. To call upon him in the days of
their trouble, ^. Cor. vi. x.
and upon none else, to conform both their doctrine and their lives, to promote
and set forth the glory of God.

Their duty to the kings majesty is their obedience to him, Romans xiii.
his laws, i. Timo. ii
and the Realm for conscience sake, i. Peter. ii.
and rather to lose both body an goods, the^ to offend his highness or his
laws, and whenever any subject be called to serve with body or goods, at
home or from home, willingly they must obei without question or farther
inquision to search whether the kings cause be right or wrong: for whether
it be, or be not, it makes the death of him that serves in this respect,
nether better nor worse. ii. pa^. xxxv.
For I believe such as obeyed king Josias and were slain in the battle
against the Egiptians were acceptable unto god in Christ, Matthew. v.
though king Josias Luke. vi.
had not y^ best quarrel. Iho. xv
In this case Roma. xiii.
the subject owes his body, Gala. v.
and goods unto this lawful magistrate, Ihon. ii. iii.
and may Exodus xiii.
deny him of none of them both. Deu. vi.
Unto Ephe. vi.
their neighbors they owe good will Collossi. i.
and charity, help, and preseruacyon of their bodies, souls, goods, and
fame, that none of all those peryshe, if they may preserve them. Thetowe unto
the^ felues, the s^udy and labor to read, and hear the scripture of God,
until such time as they have laid a true fou^dacio^ of faith in christ. When
yt is done, they be bound to the^ selves, to buyld upon that fou^datio^, al
charytable works, as well to god as to man, with innocency of life. After that
they ow to the^ selves, Psalm. C. xix.
study and dylygence to make defe^ces for their true relygyo^ against the
devil, i. Corin. iii.
y^ flesh, y^ world, syn: the wisdom of man and supersticyous hipocrites,
which cease not to pervert, and destroi in man y^ image and work of God. Away
away I pray you with this opynyo^, and thinks a man to owe no more unto him
self for relygyin, then to learn by rote the Creed.x. commandments, and
Pater noster. S. Paul rebukes that opynion, as it is to be seen in his
Epistle. We owe unto our selves, Psalm. Cxi^
dew labors in praying unto God daili for the necessities of both body and
soul, Ge^es.
and likewise to give him tha^ckes for all the goodness he has given unto us.
Also we owe unto our selves, the exchuing and a^oidi^g of Idleness, and ociuiti,
and the labors of our own hands, with the industrye and gift of reason,
learning and wit, to eat our own bread with the sweat and pain our own
bodies, according to the commau^deme^t of god. Thus I co^clud my faith, the
which being examined by the word of god, is catholyke and godli, who send us of
his grace to fear him, honor the king, and to love one the other, as Christ
loves us al. So be it.

The.xx. of Decembre Anno. M. D. and fiftye Lord bliss thy Church and save
our King.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day dwelling over Aldersgate beneth saint
Martyns, and are to be sold at his shop by the little conduit in Chepe side.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum

Per septennium.


