THE SOULS IMPLANTATION INTO THE NATURAL OLIVE.

By T.H.

Carefully corrected, and much enlarged, with a Table of the Contents prefixed.

JAMES 1.21. Receive with meekness the ingraffed Word, which is able to save
your souls.



LONDON, Printed by R. Young, and are to be sold by Fulke Clifton on
New-Fish-street-hill. 1640.

THE CONTENTS.
TWo ways God prepares the heart for Christ, Page 1 It is also prepared by
contrition and humiliation, 2 Doct. None but a broken heart is an house for
Christ, 3 Two lets of faith removed by brokennesse of heart, 6 By faith the
soul goes out to another for all-sufficiencie. 11 Use 1. Reproof to them
that would have comfort without brokennesse of heart, 15. and them that dislike
broken-heartednesse in others, 18 Use 2 To get comfort begin in sorrow, 22 Use
3 Comfort to the brokenhearted in two respects, 25 Doct. The heart must first
be prepared for Christ, 31 Preparation for Christ stands in three things, 35
Use 1. Those reproved who think to have mercy and heaven upon a sudden, 40
Use 2 A miserable estate to live in the old sins, 47 Use 3 Prepare for
Christ, or think not to enjoy him, 55 Motives to prepare for Christ, 56 Doct.
The Ministry a special means to prepare us for Christ, 68 A powerful
ministry consists in three things, 71 How a powerful Ministry works upon
the heart to prepare it for Christ, 79 Affliction prepares the heart for the
Word, the Word for God, 88 Use 1. Much fault in Ministers, that their peoples
hearts are not fitted for Christ, 84 Use 2 Fearful is their estate whom a
powerful Ministry works not upon, 88 Use 3 Let the Word be powerful to
prepare thy heart for Christ. 90 Two things keep from Christ, 95 What
ingraffing into Christ is, 99 Doct. Christ delays not to come into an humbled
heart, 106 Use 1. Great comfort to each humbled soul, 114 Use 2 They are of a
naughty spirit who endure not broken spirits, 118 Use 3 Choose the
brokenhearted for companions, 120 Use 4 Be thankful for this great respect
of Christ to thy poor soul, 122 Use 5 They that would have Christ dwell in
them, must be willing to be humbled, 125 Christ near the soul, yet not
discerned, for four reasons in us, 133. and for three reasons in Christ, 147
Doct. Christ takes possession of every humbled soul, 157 Three ways he
disposes the heart to himself, 168 Use 1. Reproof of them that keep Christ
out of possession, 171 Use 2 Give all to Christ, whose it is, 176 Doct. Love
and joy by the Spirit wrought in a broken heart, for embracing mercy as it
deserves, 180 The reason of Gods order in working these graces, 187 Gods
promise the ground of our love, and how, 195 His love to us begets love in us
toward him, and how, 201 Use 1. Nature breeds no love to Christ, 206 Saints
love not duly, because they rely not on the promise, 211 Use 2 Comfort to them
that love Christ, 213. and blessedness, 216 Notes of true love to Christ, 217
Use 3 Reproof of them that love not Christ in truth, 231. sorts of them, 238
Enmity against Christ showed three ways, 240 Glozing neuters described and
shamed, 243 Hypocrites enemies to Christ, four sorts of them, 246, 247, etc.
Discoveries of not loving Christ, 250 He thas wrangles against truth, never
loved Christ, 2. arg. 254 Expression of sorrow for sin limited, 258 Continual
sorrow as needful as continual believing, 261 Use 4 Love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, 272. means, 273 Three hindrances of loving Christ, ibid. 274
Three things in Christ to make us love him, 282 Three things done by Christ for
a sinner, though as yet he want assurance. 286 Two means to bring our hearts
and the promises together, 291 Doct. In greatest wants true Christians have
cause enough to rejoice in God, 300 Use 1. Retain comfort in God whatsoever
thou want, 302 Use 2 Reproof to them that grow uncomfortable for crosses,
304 Use 3 Make this sure, God is the God of my salvation, 305 Six means to
rejoice in evil times, ibid. Doct. The sorrowful seed-time of true Christians
(in the exercises of humiliation and mortification) yields them a rich and
joyful harvest, 312. 313 Causes of true joy assured by mourning, 314 Use 1.
Sharp Preachers make you gainers, ibid. and 315 Use 2 Enemies help the joy of
Christians, 315 Use 3 Esteem none by present grievances, 316 Use 4 Sow still,
though in tears, ibid. Use 5 Be patient in suffering for God, 317 Use 6
Comfort in death, our own or friends, 318 Use 7 Be painful in thy calling,
ibid. Use 8 Encouragement to repent of sin, and renew our repentance. 319
THE BROKEN HEART.
ESAIAS 57.15. For thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose Name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy place; that is, in heaven,
which is his throne: and I will dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the heart of the humble, and the heart of the contrite ones.


THere are two maine parts of the preparative work for Christ:

First, the manner of the work on Gods part: and this discovers it self in
these two particulars.

1. In proposing Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, as the most
beautiful object which the soul can view or affect; Psalm. 2.12. Cant. 5.9.
with 6.1.

2. That God does by an holy kind of violence pluck the sinner from sin to
himself; as in that place, John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him.

The second is on our part; a frame and temper of the heart that God works
upon us by this holy kind of violent drawing. This discovers it self in these
two particulars: 1 Contrition. 2 Humiliation.


For the handling of these two, we have chosen this place of Scripture. And I
intend not to trade with every particular in the Verse, but so much in it as
fitteth my intendment in hand.

Expos.
That which I aim at, is in the middle of the Verse: I dwell with him that is
of a broken heart. Give me leave to open the words. The great God of heaven,
that inhabiteth eternity in glory, for the comfort of every poor
brokenhearted sinner, Gods two houses.
says, he will dwell with him. The Lord has but two standing houses; the one
is in heaven in glory, the other is every broken heart, and every shivered
soul.

How he dwells in the heart.
Now how does God dwell in the heart of a poor sinner? The Apostle, Ephesians.
3.17. tells us, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: and it implies the
constant abode of Christ by his Spirit in the soul, being received, and
entertained by faith. So that first there must be a broken heart, before there
can be faith, or before Christ will dwell in our hearts to our comfort.
Consider what a kind of heart it must be wherein God will dwell. It must be an
humble and a shivered spirit. He dwells in heaven by his glory: yet, though
thou were as low as hell in thy self, God will come and take possession of thy
heart mavelous graciously.

In the words, so far as they concern my purpose, the thing mainly
observable is, the necessity, and excellency of this broken and humble soul.
It is the only receptacle of the Lord Jesus Christ. If you will have Christ and
grace to dwell in you, you must get humble spirits.

The soul must be broken and humbled, None but the broken heart is an house
for Christ.
before the Lord Jesus Christ can, or will dwell therein, and before faith can
be wrought therein. There must be contrition, before there will be an
inhabitation of Christ in the soul.

As men, specially great men, will have their houses ayred, before they come to
lie there; so this contrition is the ayring, or sweeping of the soul, that so
it may be inhabited. Foretold.
This was typified and foretold in the old law. When the people of Israel were
to go into the Land of Canaan (which shadowed the kingdom of grace here, and
of glory hereafter) they must go through the vast, terrible, troublesome, and
roaring wilderness, and through those streights and extreme hazzards, before
God brought them to the Land of Promise. Whereby the Lord typified thus much
unto us, that before the soul can be truly possessed of Christ, it must go
through these rockie ways of contrition and humiliation, Hos. 2.14. Therefore
behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, Ad aperiendam
spem. Hieron.
and speak comfortably to her. And in verse. 15. I will give her the valley of
Achor for the door of hope, and she shall sing there, as in the days of her
youth, and as in the days when she came out of Egypt. Compare that 15. verse
with Joshua 7.25. The sloodgate of sorrow, a door of hope.
The door of hope is nothing else, but the expectation of all good things from
God, which he has promised. And here remember the story of Achor: Achan had
stolen the wedge of gold, and the Babylonish garment, and therefore God
departed away from the Camp. Now the Lord pursued him, and caused the people
to stone him with stones; and they called the place, The Valley of Achor, to
this day,.i. The Valley of trouble and affliction. The Lord has reference to
his former dealing As he did before in the time of Joshua; he first subdued
Achan, and then he gave them success against all their adversaries: (As if he
had said, I will give them the Valley of contrition and humiliation for the
Gate to all comfort and sweet refreshing, here and hereafter:) So you must go
through the wilderness to this Valley of Achor, before you can come to this
door of hope, to this Land of Canaan: you must stone these corruptions of
yours, which have troubled the Spirit of God, and then there is a door of hope
set open for you.

And as it was foretold, so it was the end why the Lord Jesus Christ was sent:
as Isa. 61.12. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, (says Isaiah in the stead
of Christ,) because the Lord has anointed me to preach glad tidings unto the
meek, he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty
to the captives, and to comfort all that mourn. Nay, 2. Accomplished.
the Lord has not only sent Christ to this end, and promised this, but he
has done as he did promise. And this is the condition upon which he has
promised and given all comfort to his people: as in Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is
nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite
spirit. He is near them, to comfort them, and to assist them, and deliver
them: and thus the Saints of God have found it; as 2 Chronicles. 33.12. where the
Text says, that Manasses humbled himself mightily before the Lord, and he
found peace to his soul, and the Lord pardoned his sin. He was a mighty
sinner, and had mighty rebellions, and mighty pride of heart, and therefore the
Lord laid him as low as the dust, though he were a King. As he had been a
mighty sinner, so he was now a mighty pattern of humiliation, and the Lord
had mercy on him.

Two reasons of the point.
The reasons and grounds of Gods dispensation this way; are these two especially.

1 Whether we consider the receiving of faith, and Christ with it; or,

2 The keeping and maintaining of faith, being received. In both these it is
plain, that God will break our hearts, before he gives us Christ or faith. I
say, it is necessary in the way of his providence.

Two letts of faith removed by brokennesse of heart.
Now besides many other bolts and springs (as in a lock there are many springs
and little bolts, besides the maine bolt; so I say) there are two maine bolts
which make the soul incapable of faith, which being removed, faith will come
into the soul.

The first let which is an hinderance to the work of faith, is this: 1 Let.
To seek contentment in the natural condition.
there is a settled kind of contentment which the soul takes up in its own
estate: and the heart of a sinful creature sits down well apaid in that
sinful miserable condition wherein he is, and he desires no other; nay, he
would have no change in this kind. This is one maine bolt which stops the
way, and keeps faith from coming into the heart. This is the frame of every
man's heart naturally. So we see in Deuteronomy. 29.19. And if it come to pass, that
when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine own
heart, or add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but the
anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this book, shall fall upon him, and the Lord shall
blot his name from under heaven. People bless themselves in their condition,
notwithstanding all the promises of blessing, and threatening of judgment. If
any man have such a root of bitterness in him, and shall bless himself in
this condition, and say, I will promise my felfe an happy end, let Moses
threaten what he can: I tell thee, the wrath of the Lord shall smoke against
that man. See that notable place in Job 21.14. It imports so much: For they
said to God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways:
that is, we are as we would be. When wholesome counsels and exhortations are
ministered, namely, that they would take up a better course, and be more holy
before God, and yield obedience to him in his Word; and the Minister bids
them take a farewell of their pleasures and profits, and they think we invite
them to loss: now all the while that a poor sinner quiets his heart in this
condition, it is merely impossible, (in the course of providence,) nay, it is
a flat contradiction, that ever grace should be bestowed upon that soul, or
that ever faith should come there. For faith purges the heart, wheresoever it
comes: as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.17. All things are become new, all old
things are passed away. There must be a new frame of the heart, and a new
course of life and conversation. Now for the soul to approve of its condition,
and yet desire to go out of it, these two cannot stand together in reason; and
therefore know, that while people please themselves in this condition, and, let
the Minister say, what the will, and let God reveal what he will, still they
think they cannot be in a better estate: I say it is impossible, that ever,
upon these terms, faith should come into the heart: for faith will bring a
change. Therefore when the Lord will do good to a soul, he will make him see
his sins, and make him weary of them, and tire him with the sense of his
condition, and show him the necessity of faith, and that he must be a new man:
and then he is content to take that way, whereby he may be better disposed of
by the Spirit of God. In the Gospel the phrase is this, Mat. 9.12.
The whole need not the Physician. He thinks himself well, and therefore what
need he go to Physic? And it is so in common reason. No man can rear up a
new house, but he must first pull down the old. If a man be fish-whole, what
need does he see of Christ? as many people see no need of this humbling, and
this strictness, and they think they love God in their own apprehension, and
therefore they quiet themselves in that condition. But God will pluck down
this old frame, and then there is a way to build a new frame in the heart.
Before the heart is broken, the soul would not be otherwise, and therefore it
cannot be content to be under the power of faith, which would work a change of
the heart.

The second maine hinderance of faith is this: 2. Let. To seek a sufficiency
at home:
Suppose the soul were sensible of its condition, and were wounded and broken,
and could be content to have ease and relief: yet the soul seeks for
succor from its own sufficiency: and when as the Word has discovered our
condition unto us, and now we see we have need of relief, we have recourse to
some shift of our own. And this does wonderfully cross and oppose faith: nay,
faith cannot come into the soul, till the Lord undermine this corruption of
heart. This is a fruit of Adams rebellion; for when the Lord put into his hands
a stock of grace, that he was made perfectly happy and righteous, and able to
do whatsoever God commanded, while he continued in this estate of innocence,
he needed not to go out of himself to find succor and relief, he had no
need of Christ. This is the sinful temper that hangs upon all the posterity
of Adam, that (though fallen from God) we will scramble for our own comfort,
and do what we can by our own strength to procure comfort, and ease, and
shelter to our own souls in the day of distress. Happily God lays a man
upon his sick bed, and awakeneth his conscience; and in this condition men
will promise and resolve any thing, that, if God would spare them, they would
do any duty to get Gods favor toward them; and they think it is some
outward reformation of some ungodly practices that will give God contentment:
and so they rest in themselves still. And hence it is, that after a great deal
of horror of conscience, in conclusion they fall back to their old courses, or
else they content themselves with an outward and overly reformation of life,
and take up a calm civilized course, till they come to their deathbed, and
then their hearts fail them: and the reason is this, because the heart was
never thoroughly humbled. And it may be a man thinks, if he shall now pray, and
hear, and do some duties, then all will be well, never seeing an utter
insufficiency in himself, that he may receive mercy from the Lord. This is
the lowest and last hinderance of all, and there is nothing more cross to
faith than this. It is commonly the shift that Satan puts upon men in their
troubles, merely to make them do something out of their good parts, and good
gifts, and there to rest themselves, and so to sink down into the Pit before
they be aware. Now this crosses the work of faith: By faith the soul goes
out to another for all-sufficiencie.
for the nature of faith is this; it is the going out of the soul to another,
and to see all sufficiency in another, and to fetch all from another. To have
supply in a man's self, and to see all-sufficiencie in Christ, these two cannot
stand together. So that while the soul is thus possessed with his own
sufficiency to procure ease to himself, it is certain this stops the work
of faith, and hinders the pouring in of faith into the soul, whereby you
should go wholly out of your selves, and fetch all from Christ.

Therefore mark now what follows. As contrition took away the former
hinderance, so the Lord has this work of humiliation, whereby he shuts back
this bolt, and makes him to see an utter inabilitie in himself to procure or
receive any good. For there are many sins which formerly he has committed,
and many weaknesses and wants whereof he is guilty. Now when this is done, then
the bar is removed, and the lets taken away by these two, contrition and
humiliation. Consider that place 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man would be wise, he
must be a fool, that he may be wise: and if any man will be made rich, he
must see himself poor; and if any man will have succor in his misery, he
must see himself unable to relieve himself; and then the Lord will do it for
him. There cannot be faith in the soul, if either of these do remain in the
soul still. Now these being taken away, the soul is fit to receive the work
of faith. Simile.
As it is with a man that would take a graft from a tree, and graft it into a
new stock, first it must be cut off from the old, and then, secondly, be pared
and made fit for the other: so it is here; all the sinful sons of men grow
upon the root of Adams rebellion, and we prosper and thrive there. Adam was
the old and wild Olive, and Christ the true Vine, and the new Olive. Now before
we can be transplanted from the old Olive into the true Olive, God must first
cut us off from our old sins by contrition; and secondly, pare us and fit us
by humiliation: and then we are fit to be ingrafted into Christ. Where these
two graces are wrought, the soul cannot be void of faith: and as surely as God
is in heaven, he will undoubtedly pour faith into the soul.

So the substance is this: If by this brokennesse of heart, and this contrition
and humiliation of spirit, the two maine bars and lets of faith are removed,
then it is necessary that God work this in the soul. But the first part is
cleared, and mavelous plain, and therefore the other cannot be denied. If
you will be in your sins, and in yo^rselves, you cannot be in Christ: you
cannot be in your selves and in Christ too. This is enough for the first
argument, and it is the life of the point.

2. This brokennesse of heart is mavelous necessary, in need, will be
thankful for any mercy or favor: as in Psalm. 35.10. All my bones shall say,
Lord, who is like unto thee? Me thinks I see David in his distress, besieged
with many miseries: and when the Lord had eased him, and freed him, see how he
reasons with himself: O Lord, the heart that thou have healed, this broken
spirit that thou have bound up; nay, all these bones which were once shattered
all to pieces, thou have set them again, and they shall say, Lord, who is like
unto thee? As if he had said, Here is mercy indeed, for mine heart has found
it, and mine eye has seen it, and mine hands, and all my bones can say, Lord,
who is like unto thee? Before he was burdened with his sins, and now he
prizeth mercy wonderfully. One dram of faith is worth a hundred thousand
worlds to a weary burdened soul. As it was with the Jews, they had a year
of Iubilee, wherein every servant was set free, and every bondsman, and every
debtour set at liberty: this is nothing else but the year of the Gospel, The
acceptable year of the Lord, Esa. 91:2.
and the glad tidings of Salvation that is offered to all in the same. The
Master, or he that lent the money, cared not for this yerre; but the servant
and the borrowers, they only longed for that year, and for that day, that they
might be delivered. So it is here with a poor soul: he that never felt the
burden, nor the bondage of sin, cares not for the glad tidings of the
Gospel; but the poor oppressed creature, that has been in the house of
bondage by Satan tempting, and his own sinful heart plaguing him, when the
day of salvation is offered, he receives it thankfully. And, as the soul
prizeth grace, so it will hardly part with it, when it has it, because it was
got with so much difficulty. We use to say, Lightly come, lightly go: but when
the soul has gotten faith with so much difficulty, and had many troubles of
soul, before ever God gave an assured evidence of his love and favor, he
will not suffer sin or Satan to pluck it away. Oh, it cost him many a heavy
heart, and many a troublesome day, before he got a little mercy, and shall he
now part with it for a little pleasure or profit? that he will never do.

Then it is very reasonable, that God should wound a man, and break his heart
to make him taste his meat, and to relish mercy. Thus you see the heart must
be broken and humbled, before the Lord Christ will come to dwell therein.

Now what is the Use?

Of reproof to them that would have comfort without brokennesse of heart.
and it checks the opinion and practice of two sorts of people. If this be Gods
way, that before he will come into the soul, he must have the heart fitted and
prepared, the house must be ayred: then (I say) it confutes the conceits of a
company of carnal persons that be in the world.

1. The mere civil Professor, that would sleep in a whole skin: he could
be content to have heaven, and mercy, and he hops he is in the right way;
but this melting of the soul, and this bruising of the heart is more than God
requires, or more than God looks for: only he has invented a new way, and
a shorter cut to heaven than ever God revealed. He thinks some melancholy man
only may be troubled and perplexed; but otherwise it is not that which God
requires at the hands of men. And therefore after a sleepie kind of
profession, without any life, or power, or soundness, he goes on: Job 21.13.
They spend their days in ease, says the Text, and in a moment go down to
hell. There are a world of poor sinners that are thus deluded: and because God
has given them some restraining grace to keep them within compass, therefore
they go on in a kind of cheerful contentedness, and think that all is well.
And when they come to their sicke-beds, In sickness false comfort fails,
they have nothing to say for themselves; nay, we cannot force comfort upon
them, for then they fly out, and say it is not for them. And if we tell them
of what they have done, and that they have made a fair profession, and have
prayed, and done many duties, and been well accounted of, and so forth: see
what they answer: It is true, I have done this, or that, but this is only the
outside: but oh, this heart of mine was never broken truly; only I reformed
my self outwardly, and made a profession indeed, but the bottom was never
truly laid. As it is in sailing, so it is in living. Though a man have a fair
calm day, and see the Sun, yet this will not bring him to the haven: he must
have a wind to drive the ship. So it is with many a sinful creature in the
world: he puts forth to Sea, and he will needs go to heaven, and takes a
sweet kind of sleepie lazy course, and will reform himself outwardly, but
his heart was never broken nor humbled: he will never be landed, before he
was never tossed. Tossed he must be, and that with some violence too: but
this man that was never troubled, shall never be comforted. I have observed
it; as it was in the material Temple which Solomon built, all the stones were
hewed and polished before they were put in the building: so here Christ is the
Temple, and every true Christian is a stone for it, as the Apostle Peter says,
1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones be made a spiritual house. Will the stones
come close together in any building, except first they be hewed and fitted? or
will the heart ever come to close with God, except it be humbled and broken? so
those knotty proud hearts of yours must be planed and hewed, before you will
rest upon God for mercy, or yield obedience to him. How far God breaks and
humbles, we will show afterward.

2. Those reproved, who dislike brokennesse of heart in others.
2. This may fall heavy upon the brave Spirits, and boon Gallants of the
world, that are not able to see and approve this brokennesse of heart in
others; they count it a womanish and weak kind of disposition, and make a
mock of this humility of heart; and when God has wounded, and humbled a poor
sinner, they tread upon him, and follow him with desperate disgraces,
reproaches, and discouragements. I need not mention their language in this
case, I wish we were freed from them. What say they? And are you one of these
broken hearts and tender consciences? Take heed how you sin: for if you do,
you must weep out your eyes, and mope out your days in a corner, even for
ever. Good Lord, is it possible that ever there should rest such inhumane,
desperate, divellish prophannesse in the heart of any man upon earth? Let me
press a passage or two to this end, that such as are guilty of this sin,
may take notice of it; as there are too many of them in this age. This argues a
man almost forsaken of God, and (I had almost said) reserved to everlasting
destruction. There is no greater token, that God never purposes any good to
that man. Consider that place in Psalm. 69.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The holy
Prophet makes many fearful imprecations, as though he would pluck justice from
heaven: Let their eyes be darkened that they see not; and make their loins
continually to shake. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy
wrathful anger take hold upon them. Oh what a strange passage is this, that a
man that was inward with God, should rend the heavens to pull down vengeance
thence for such men! Who are all these? Surely they were some Devils incarnate,
and no men, that Gods Prophet would pray against: Let their habitation be
desolate, and no man to dwell in their tents. Why? what is the matter? For they
persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the grief of those
whom thou have wounded. Lord (says he) add iniquity to their iniquity, and
let them not come into thy righteousness. You that are guilty of this,
consider it. Me-thinkes it might make the soul of a sinful man to shake at the
hearing of it. When God has wounded the heart, and awakened the conscience,
and the Lord has spoken bitter things to his heart, will thou grieve those
that God has smitten? It is an argument of a man whom God has devoted to
destruction. Were a man's eyes opened, and his conscience awakened, it would
make him tremble. Thou that have bin an enemy to the Saints of God, and because
the Saints of God cry mightily, and dare not do as they have done, to join
with thee in thy wicked courses; will thou (I say) reproach them, and lay more
burden upon them, and say, What, you have had Sermons enough? Now you are
wounded, and you must mourn, and you must be holy. The God of heaven has
spoken this by his holy Prophet David, who knew those wicked wretches. Though I
know none such (it may be) for the while, yet no question there be such in the
Congregation. He that now makes a mock of contrition, shall break for ever;
and he that will not now be broken, shall have the wrath of God to burn in his
heart for ever in hell. The Lord in mercy break the hearts of such men, and
make them to say, Good Lord, is this the brand of a reprobate? and what? shall
my name be blotted out of the book of life? I have persecuted such and such a
man, and such a woman: the Lord grieved him, and I grieved him too. His was the
sorrow, but mine was the sin, and shall be my shame for ever, for ought I know.

Another passage is, Deu. 25.17, 18, 19. When the people of Israel came from
Egypt, Amalek took advantage against them when they were weak. Remember
(says the Text) what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when you came forth of
Egypt; How he smote thee when thou were faint and weary. Therefore it shall be
when the Lord thy God shall give thee rest from all thine enemies, that thou
shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven. And 1 Samuel 15.2.3.
seventy years after, the Lord remembered that. For the Text says, I remember
what Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way when he came
out of Egypt. Now therefore go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that
they have, both infants and sucklings, and oxen, and the like. What this Amalek
did, even so do these wicked men. When a poor soul is humbled, and will
forsake his sins and his wicked ways, and he grows faint and
feeble-hearted, and wonderful heavy burdened, will thou now turn Amalek?
Will thou kill him that is now burdened under the heavy wrath of God? and
will thou now rail upon him? Curse Amalek. I will remember him, says God.
Take heed lest God remember thee, and root out thee and thy posterity from
under heaven. Nay, the Lord himself, and all the Saints do rejoice in the
ruin and destruction of an ungodly wretch: as in the example of Doeg, Psalm
52.3, 4, 5. Thou love evil more than good, and lying rather then to speak
righteousness. Selah. Thou love all devouring words, O thou false tongue God
shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling place. Selah. Thou love grieving words. Well: God will
serve thee in thy kind; and when thou art in hell, the righteous shall rejoice
over thee, and say, Lord, this is he that grieved the hearts of such as were
humbled: this is he that had a proud herrt, and scorned to be humbled, and
therefore shall everlastingly de damned. The Devils themselves will rejoice in
thy torments, and say, What, are you become like to us? This is the man that
scorned to be humbled, and to have his heart broken: what, is he come down
to hell now? The hearts of the damned shall be enlarged to glory in thy
confusion. Indeed if a poor soul feel any weight of sin upon him, then all
the Town is up in arms against him. Oh see your sin, and go and break
your hearts for this sin. Dislike not in others, what yourselves are bound to
be, and to do. This of the first Use.

2. To get comfort, begin in sorrow.
It is a word of direction and instruction, how to get this grace at the hands
of God; go Gods way, and go the ready way. If ever thou will receive grace
from God, do that which God does: as Hosea 2.14. Behold, I will allure her,
and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her. Be thoroughly
wounded first, and then look for comfort and ease. Simile.
As it was in the Sacrifices of the law, they did first kill the Sacrifice,
before they did offer it, and first they did pound the incense, then burn it:
so your souls must be broken by true contrition, before you can receive any
comfort: as in Joel 2. Rent your hearts, Joel 2.13.
and not your garments, and then turn to the Lord. First rent the heart, and
then offer the heart in sacrifice to God. We use first to burn the wax, and
then seal with it. As it is with vessels that are old and bruised, a little
washing and mending will not serve the turn, but they must be all taken in
pieces, and made up new: so we are all vessels of wrath by nature, and a
little patching will not serve the turn. It is not enough for a man to say he
is sorry for his sins, but his heart must be thoroughly humbled and broken;
then he is fit to be made a vessel of grace here, and of glory hereafter. Of
all things in the heart, God cannot endure this patching in the work of grace,
to sow grace and sin together. As in Daniels Image, which was partly clay,
and partly iron, and partly brass, so it is in a Christian course, a man may
easily be an Image of a Christian, but not a sound Christian: he will not have
an heart humbled and broken before God easily. Therefore in vain they worship
God, and labor to approve their hearts to God, that think to come to
salvation, and yet in the mean time this brokennesse of heart will not down
with them, And the reason why so many men fall back from a good course, and
come to such desperate discouragements, is, because they do not walk in Gods
way. When a man will rear up a frame of grace in his fancy, as he that set up
a brave house in the sand; when the winds blow, and the storms come, it
falls by and by: so when you rear up frames of grace in your imaginations,
and think you are holy, and shall have Christ, but yet you never felt this
powerful work of grace; if any temptations come, or any thunderbolt from the
Word, this shakes all in pieces. Dig deeper therefore, and labor for this
humbled and broken heart, and build upon that, and then the heavens shall
sooner fail than this shall come to nothing.

This also may be a word of advice to the Ministers of God, to teach us to
begin as God begins; not to press faith upon them presently. No, no: lay down
these proud hearts, and let all these mountains be laid low, and these crooked
thoughts be made straight, and then all flesh shall see the salvation of our
God. This only is, not to heal and daube with untempered mortar. Let us walk
with God in his way, and follow his course, for the good of others, and for the
furthering of our own account in the day of the Lord Jesus. And, you people
must not think, that we must always speak that which will please you. There
is a wholesome severitie and sharpness. The Surgion helps by lancing and
applying corrosives, as well as by gentle salves.

3. Comfort to the brokenhearted.
This is for comfort to all that have entered into this condition; that they may
continue and carry themselves boldly therein. If thou can say God has truly
broken and humbled thee, do not labor to free thy self from this, and to
find an healing from hence, but labor first to comfort thy self in respect of
thine own present condition: secondly, in regard of the reproaches, and
disgraces of wicked men.

1. 1. In respect of their present heaviness.
In regard of the misery that such poor souls are in. Though the burden be
heavy, yet it is the way of comfort. When the reed is bruised, it is farthest
off from breaking. If thou have an heart broken with the burden of thy sins,
and smoking with any poor desires toward God, comfort thy self: though the
way be tedious, yet the end will be comfortable; for God is now making way for
himself to come and dwell with thee, and for thee with him.

Object. Oh but, will some say, the wrath of God is mavelous fearful, and
woundrous heavy.

Answ. I answer, it is so; yet Gods anger is like the thunderbolt, that melts
the sword, yet hurts not the scabbard. The wrath of the Lord, if it comes
against a proud rebellious sinner, will break him in pieces: but if the soul
tremble at Gods wrath, and has an heart to yield in obedience, the Lord will
never hurt that man; and he never wounds him so far, but that he may heal
him. Who would not be cut, that he might be cured? What though we have our
hearts broken, and our consciences wounded? Now the house is ayred, God will
come anon. Now the gold is melting, God will make it a vessel of glory anon;
and therefore cheer up your selves in this kind, It is a foolish fear that
the child has: the child sees his father pressing the grapes, and thinks he
will spoil them: and so, when he sees the gold melting. If thou have a wife
perplexed, and burdened for her sins, comfort thy self, and let it not grieve
thee, God is now pressing the grape, and melting the gold, that he may make
good wine, and pure gold; he is humbling thy heart thereby, that he may bring
thee in obedience to him, that so thou may receive mercy from him for ever.
Who would not go on in sackcloth awhile, that he might wear silk for ever?
Who would not be humbled, that he may be for ever comforted? as Esaias 61.3. God
has appointed comfort for them that mourn, to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness. If you have the spirit of heaviness upon you, and there are many
miseries threatened, and many corruptions burthening of you; well, go your
ways cheered, you shall have a suite of joy and gladness put upon you, and
then you will never repent you of all the sorrows, and burdens that you have
undergone. When God shall give you the assurance of his love, it will never
repent you in the day of your death, when all your tears shall be requited
with abundance of joy and comfort: therefore herein be comforted, and know
that God intends good to thee by this dealing of his. They that sow in tears,
shall reap in joy.

2. As to comfort your selves in regard of your present heaviness, 2. In
respect of evil men discountenancing.
so also in regard of the disgraces and reproaches which are cast upon you:
when your neigbours grow strange, and look afar off, let this be your
comfort, God is near to such as are of a broken heart. It may be, thy husband
or thy wife are gone, and are weary of thy company; let this comfort thee, God
will not be weary of thy company. Though there is malice near to pursue thee,
yet there is mercy near to comfort thee; and God will dwell in thee, though it
may be thy neighbors will not dwell by thee. Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifice of a
broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. There the Prophet
David says, that the Lord preferres this Sacrifice before others. What though
men distaste thee, if the Lord accept and regard thee? What if men refuse and
despise thee, if the Lord love thee, and delight in thee? Therefore all you
brokenhearted sinners take this word of comfort, go on, and go cheerily, and
the God of heaven be with you. Though you be poor in the world, and live in
a smoakie cottage, yet the Lord will dwell with you in that poor cottage, and
in that poor family of yours, and he will revive that poor heart of yours.
Where the King is, the Court must be prepared for; and when the Lord Jesus
Christ comes to dwell in the heart of a poor sinner, he will comfort him. He
that sits in heaven, and has ten thousand thousand of Angels to minister
unto him, has but two Thrones, the highest heavens, and the lowest heart. What
a consolation is this to thee? Go your way therefore, and cheer up your
hearts with this, and say, I thank God, I have now an humble and broken heart,
I hope comfort is coming.

THE PREPARING OF THE HEART FOR TO RECEIVE CHRIST.
Luke 1.17, To make ready a people prepared for the Lord.


BEfore the soul of a man can share in the merits of Christ Jesus, and receive
benefit thereby, and comfort therefrom; before it can be made partaker of
those spiritual benefits which God has promised to bestow upon his own, two
things are required: first, there must be a preparation of the soul to receive
and entertain the Lord Jesus Christ; and secondly, there must be an
implantation of the soul into Christ: and then being thus ingrafted into
Christ, it has a title to all those good things which he has purchased for
his Elect. For the conclusion of Saint John is peremptory in this kind, John
3.36.
He that has the Son (says he) has life; and he that has not the Son
has not life. As if he should say, There is no hope of receiving any good
from the stock, unless the graft be implanted into the stock: before the
foul be cut off from the rebellion of Adam, it cannot be implanted into
Christ, and unless it be ingrafted into Christ, it can have no comfort from
him. But if we can once get into Christ, we shall have the participation of all
spiritual things which he has prepared for his chosen. But it is impossible
for flesh and blood thus to enter into Christ, and be implanted into him: and
therefore that we maybe implanted into him, we must be prepared. First, there
must be a preparation of the soul to be in Christ, before it can be made
partaker of Christ and his benefits. This preparation is the fitting of a
sinner, for his being in Christ.

The Lord Christ being to come in person, and to take upon him the ministry of
the Gospel, he sent John the Baptist as his Harbinger to prepare his ways,
and therefore he was endued with all gifts this way: He had the spirit of
thunder, he was endued with the spirit and power of Elias, to make the way
plain for the Lord Christ Jesus: and in that spirit he came and preached to
ungodly men, and taught them repentance: he came to level mountains, and make
crookked things straight: to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people
prepared for the Lord. This was Saint John's task, to prepare men's hearts for
the receiving and entertaining of Christ when he should come. The point of
Doctrine to be observed from hence is this:

the soul of a poor sinner must be prepared for Christ, The heart must first
be prepared for Christ.
before he can have any heart to entertain him.

This is the maine scope of the Text, the maine drift of John Baptist his
ministry: The hearts of men were not fitted for Christ, and therefore he was
sent before Christ Jesus, to make way for him, and to make peoples hearts fit
to receive Christ, that when the Lord Jesus came, he might take place in his,
and work effectually in the souls of his, to their everlasting peace. For the
proof of the Doctrine, it is that which was prophesied before, Mal. 3.1. for
this Prophet was the last of the Prophets: for John the Baptists was a kind of
intermingled ministry, it was neither Prophetical, nor Apostolical
properly. Mark what Malachy speaks there of him; Mal. 3.1.
Behold (says he) I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me, and the Lord whom you seek shall suddenly come to his Temple. It is
plain to be observed, that John the Baptist is there prophesied of. The Jews
sought for a Messiah, and for comfort through Christ; now John the Baptist was
to make way for Christ; and when the way was prepared, then the Lord would stay
no longer, Mal. 3.1.
but would suddenly come into his Temple (says the Text) that is, into the
souls of his children that were willing to receive him upon such terms as he
offered himself. And as this was prophesied of John the Baptist, so it was
also performed by the ministry of John, Luke 3.4. The voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths strait. That
which Malachy foretold of John, is done: he comes according to the Prophecy,
and fulfills what God intended he should do, and what he was sent for to do.

Simile.
Kings when they go to any place, send messengers and harbingers before them,
to make all things ready for their entertainment when they come. Now Christ is
a great King, Christ is at King spiritually.
not temporally to be considered, but he is a spiritual King, and rules in the
hearts of all those that belong to his election of grace: and for his enemies,
if they will not be ruled by his golden rod, with his iron rod he will break
them in pieces. Now as with great Kings there must be a preparation that all
things may be ready to receive them, so it must be with our Savior Christ: he
never comes into the soul of any unawares, or on the sudden, but he sends
his messengers before him, his Ministers to prepare them for the receiving of
him, to humble men's souls, to make mountains low, to make crooked things
strait, to pull down every thing that exalts it self against God: and when
the heart is thus fitted and prepared, then Christ sends his Spirit to take
possession of it, and rule in it, and be a direction of it in the way of life
and happiness. And the preparation for him is spiritual.
That this preparation is spiritually to be understood, is clear, Mat. 3.12.
In those days (says the Text) came John preaching, and saying, Repent ye,
for the kingdom of God is at hand. Here John proclaims the coming of
Christ, and labors to prepare all things fitting for him: so then the heart
of a poor sinner, is the highway wherein Christ walks. This way of it self
is unfitting for Christ, but this preaching of the Gospel does fit and prepare
it, and then the Lord Christ comes, and takes possession of, and rules in
that soul to whom he comes. In the material Temple, when it was to be
built, there was a caveat given, that there must be no hammer heard, but that
all the stones should be fitted and hewn, ere they were brought thither. When
Christ came into his Temple he found money changers, John 2.15.
and the Text says, he made a whip, and whipped them out, and flung down
their provision. As it was with the material Temple, so it is with the
spiritual Temple. The soul of a poor sinner is like unto this material
Temple, whereof this was a type: 1 Cor. 3.16.
for, says the Apostle, You are the Temple of the living God: You are that
which the Temple signified, that is, as God did show himself marvellously in
his Temple, so he will in the souls of his people; he will dwell with them,
and assist them in every good work. Now before we can be fitted to be the
Temple of the Lord, before Christ will come into our souls, he will whip out
all distempered affections; and when these are removed, he will make himself
known to be the King of his servants, and provide all things for their comfort
and consolation.

And thus we see the truth of the point, that the soul of a sinner must be
prepared for Christ, before it can receive and entertain him.

For the opening of the point two things must be considered: first, how we may
conceive and understand the compass of this preparation, that we may see how
far it reaches, and know wherein this preparation of the soul discovers
it self; and then, secondly, we must know the reason why the heart must be
prepared for the Lord Jesus, before he will take possession of it. And when
these two things be opened, the point will be plain.

Preparation of the heart for Christ stands in three things.
which makes it self known in three particulars. We will speak of
preparation only in general here; for we shall come to the particulars of it
hereafter.

The first of the three passages wherein this general preparation consists, is
this; 1. In breaking off the league with old sins.
The soul of a sinner breaks that league which sometime it had with former
lusts and corruptions: there is a separation made between the soul and those
darling sins which it before so much delighted in; and the heart begins to
rebel against those base tyrants which before usurped authority over it,
whether they be corruptions, or profits, or pleasures, that before bore a great
sway in the soul, the league is broken, there is a secret kind of mutiny
which the soul sets up against those distempers: in so much that the
separation being made, and the soul having cast off the yoke of her
corruptions, the heart reserves it self for the Lord Christ Jesus. And observe
it, always there is a separation of the soul from sin, before there be a
reservation made for Christ. It is with the soul, as it is with a wife that is
an adulteress, and has gotten her self a base name, and an evil report by
her lewd and wicked courses; after the Lord has opened her eyes, and
discovered to her the baseness of her practice, then she comes to detest
all her former courses, and abandoneth all her former wicked companions; and
though she be laid at continually by them, and importuned upon every occasion,
yet she never hearkeneth unto them, but looks only unto her husband: and if
he will but receive her, and entertain her again, then she will keep close
unto him, and show more love unto him than ever she did before: so the soul
of a poor sinner was created for God, and it ought to have been married to
God: the end of our creation and redemption was, that we might have communion
with God; but all of us have played the adulteresses, we have had our wicked
lovers. The heart that will have the world, the profits, and pleasures, and
vanities thereof, will be married to lusts and corruptions; every man does
bestow his soul upon these wicked practices.

But then the eyes of the soul are opened, when the Lord discovers unto it,
that loose practices will bring the soul to everlasting confusion and
destruction: the soul then does stand at a maze, it trades no more with those
beloved lusts and corruptions, it breaks the league with all former sins and
distempers, with pride, and covetousness, with malice and envy, with the
world, with the profits and pleasures thereof, and sits as a widow divorced
from all these, and waits for the Lord Christ Jesus alone: then the soul
says to her self, Oh if Christ would come to me, and speak to me again,
then I will give him better entertainment than ever I did before. The
ungracious heart, however it has gone from the Lord, yet if it has got any
hope to receive Christ again, then the soul will say, I was not borne to
sin, sin shall be my husband no more; but if the Lord will show any favor
toward me, then I will reserve my self for him alone: for it was better with
me formerly, than now. And this the Scripture speaks of Hos. 14, 3.8. see
what the Church says there in the third verse, Ashur shall not save us, we
will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, Ye are our gods: for with thee the fatherless finds mercy. And in
the eighth verse, Ephraim shall say, What have I to do with Idols? Every man
naturally has his gods, his god pride, his god covetousness, his god malice,
his god envy: now when the soul is divorced from these, then it returns
this answer, We will pray no more to our gods, we will not submit our selves to
any, as unto a god, but only unto the Father of lights. Ephraim shall say,
What have I to do with Idols? He was before addicted to Idolatry, yet now his
eyes being opened, and his soul converted, he says, What have I to do with
Idols any more? and the drunkard says, What have I to do with drunkenness
any more? and the proud man says, What have I to do with pride any more? nay,
What have I to do with any unlawful practice? but I will reserve my self
wholly for the Lord Jesus Christ: so in Psalm. 45, 10, 11. there is a marriage
between Christ and his Church: for the Text says, Hearken (O daughter) and
consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thy own people, and thy fathers
house. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him. Take notice, there must be a forgetting of the fathers house;
that is, of all lusts, sins and corruptions, profits and pleasures; all must
be forgotten and forsaken. Simile.
A woman when she is married unto a husband, must not think always to be at
home, and to live in her fathers house: so we, when we are married to the Lord
Christ Jesus, must leave all our darling sins, and forsake all our beloved
lusts, and reserve our selves wholly for our husband.

So that then the heart is prepared for Christ, when all is laid aside, when
all former wicked courses are forgotten, so far as to love them, as to
remember to hate them, that so the soul may be ready, and the heart fitted to
receive and entertain Christ Jesus when he comes. And this is the rule which
Christ himself gives to any which will be his Disciple. Mat. 10.37. He that
loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: that is, he is not
fitted and prepared to receive me. He that is not content to part with all
profits, pleasures, and delights, for the Lords sake, he is not fit to receive
the Lord Jesus Christ: that soul is not yet prepared to entertain him, and to
give any welcome to him. So that this is the first passage; there must be
nothing between Christ and the soul, he must lie next the heart: as there
must none lie in the Privy Chamber but the King, so there must nothing but
Christ lie next the heart.

The second thing wherein this preparation discovers it self, is this, 2. In
giving way to Jesus Christ.
As the soul must reserve itself only for Christ, so the soul in the second
place must be willing to give way to Christ Jesus. For howsoever the soul in
the very point and instant of preparation has no more power, or grace, or
strength, to get dominion over sin than it had before, yet it is willingly
content that Jesus Christ should come into it, and overthrow all that opposes
him: it is content to join sides with Christ, it goes along with him: it is
content that Christ should do what pleases him in the soul; if there be any
corruption that the soul cannot get mastery of, it wishes, Oh that Christ
would come and remoove this corruption. Thus the soul is content to have
Christ make havoc of all, and set up his kingdom in it, and do whatsoever
pleases him.

The soul that is prepared for Christ, how soever it has not grace, and
power, and strength, in the particular moment of preparation: though it has
not attained that power to kill and crucify all corruptions, yet it is
willingly content that Christ should come and take all the keys of the house;
it is willing to open the gates of the City unto him, and let him do what he
will therein: it is content that the Lord Jesus should every way overthrow the
power that comes against him, and dispose of all things to his own glory and
honor. In Esaias 26.13. There is a pretty passage: says the Text, Other Lords
besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention
of thy Name. The people of the Jews here would not bear the Lords yoke, and
therefore they had hard taskmasters: and when they saw enemies on the one side,
and enemies on the other, then they complained, Many vexations have we found at
the hands of unreasonable tyrants, but now we will remember thy Name only; that
is, if our God will now come and rule over us, we would rebel against our
other lords, and let God be Lord only over us, and do what he will unto us.
In 2 Kings 10.3.4. when Iehu had overcome two Kings, he sends messengers to
the people of Israel to choose a King, and set him up over them. But (says the
Text) behold two Kings stood not before him: how then shall we stand? But in
the fifth verse they sent word unto Iehu, and said, We are thy servants, and
will do what thou would have us to do, we will not not make any King: do
what is good in thine own eyes, This is the frame of the heart prepared for the
Lord Jesus. When Christ comes against a soul, and says, You have set up
your corruptions to be your gods, you have cast away my Commandments, defend
therefore your selves, and know that God is angry with you, and I am coming
against you to take vengeance, if the soul now submits it self, and says,
Lord do what thou will, and what is good in thine own eyes, our humors shall
not be followed any more we will not follow our own minds and affections, but
we will do what thou command us: do Lord even what is good in thine eyes:
if a soul be thus disposed, then it is prepared for the Lord Jesus. The
prodigal son, Luke 15. when he saw that poverty pinched him, and that he must
come home by weeping cross, when by woeful experience he saw that want befell
him, and that famine came close unto him, then he confessed, What a wretch am
I? there are they in my fathers house, yea the servants, there have bread
enough; but I starve here for hunger: upon this he resolves to go to his
father, he does not stand upon terms with him, and say, I will be so and so
advanced; but he says, Luke 15.18.19
Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants.

Now if he can come within his fathers doors, he cares not; he will stoop
and be conformable in every case. So it is with the soul prepared for Christ:
those that have stubborn hearts, they will not obey the Lord, but they will be
gone, as the prodigal son did; yet they will one day be found when misery
has seized upon their souls, and then they will say, Oh happy are those that
live under the ministry of the Word: If the Lord would but once receive me to
mercy again, then I would obey every command, and stoop to every word of the
Lord, then I would willingly give place ever to the Lord.

And this is the second thing, wherein this preparation manifests it self;
when the soul of a poor sinner is willing thus to give way to Christ, and to
let him take possession of it, to overthrow whatsoever hinders and opposes
him, and to dispose of all things to his own good pleasure.

Thirdly, 3. In giving up all the room unto Christ.
when the soul does rebel against her former sins, and is reserved only for
Christ, and is content thus to receive God, and is willing that Christ should
overthrow whatsoever opposes him, and do whatsoever pleases him, then in the
third place this is only observable, the manner how the soul prepared gives
way unto God. It gives the Lord way in the whole ability of it, that God in
all things may rule in it: it does not give God place in some things only, and
say, God shall rule in mine eye, but not in my hand; God shall rule in my hand,
but not in my tongue; God shall rule in my tongue, but not in my heart: but the
soul gives way to Christ in all things whatsoever. Simile.
A great man that is to entertain his Prince and Sovereign, does not put him
into a corner of his house, but he gives him all the room, and shifts out
all his servants, and puts out every one, both friend and foe: every place he
shows him, and gives him all the keys, and lets him dispose of all things.
So a soul that is prepared for the Lord Jesus, does not crowd him into a
corner, and say, I must have one corner for a covetous heart, another corner
for a proud heart: no, no, but a prepared heart gives up all to God, it
reserveth no privy corner in this kind, but ability, faculty, and whatsoever
it is, the soul gives up all to God, that he may dispose of all. A sinful
soul that is prepared, is not perfectly able of it self thus to overruled his
heart: but, as it is with a man, when he gives up his house for the
entertainment of the King, do what he can there will be some base fellows
peeping in; but he is not pleased with it, it is against his mind that they
should so do, and he would with all his heart have his Majesty use some means
for the restraining of them: so it is with a soul prepared for the Lord, it
resignes all unto him, hand, eye, and tongue, and heart, and practice; but yet
there will be some base lusts and sinful corruptions, there will be
hypocrisy, and pride, and self-love, peeping into his heart: but it is
against the mind of a prepared sinner, it is his mind that God should root out
all those, and order all to his own glory.

And this is the third passage: so that the soul which has broken the league
with all corruptions, and reserveth it self for Christ; the soul that is
willing to give way to Christ and let him overthrow all whatsoever opposes
him, and do whatsoever pleases him; that soul I say which does not thrust
Christ into a corner, but gives up all unto him, that soul is prepared for the
Lord Jesus Christ.

The next thing to be considered for the opening of the point, 2. Reason why
the heart must be so prepared for Christ.
is the reason why Christ requires this preparation of the heart: and this will
cut the throat of abundance of carnal conceits and imaginations. Men think
that Christ will come suddenly from heaven into their hearts, at a beck; they
think that, Lord have mercy upon me, will fecth him. No, no, Christ will have
the soul prepared before he will come and take possession of it; and the reason
is, because it cannot stand with the all-soveraigne holiness of Christ to come
there. It Is so in common sense, there cannot be two Kings in one Throne, Non
capit regnum duos.
there cannot be two Suns in one Firmament, there cannot be two Gods in one
heart, we cannot serve God and Mammon. Some would have their souls divided;
and have God to be King, and reign therein to day, and their sins and lusts
to morrow; or else they will have Christ reign in one corner of their hearts,
and their sins and lusts in another: but God will have all, or none at all,
in this case either no God, or one God in thy heart. Our Savior Christ, Math.
12.29. disputes, How can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his
goods, unless he first bind the strong man, and then spoil his goods? The
strong man is sin and Satan, and the house is the heart; now Christ cannot
go into the heart, and exercise authority there, until he has wrought a
separation between the soul and these, and has thrown out this god, and
then the God of heaven and earth takes possession of the heart. First sin and
Satan must be thrown out of the soul, before the Lord will take possession.
He that takes possession of a house, if there be any in the house besides
himself, it is not good in law: if there be any take possession of the heart,
and bear sway there, Christ will bear no rule: for it cannot stand with the
holiness of Christ to have any competitor, to have another bear rule with
himself: and Christ himself plainly determines this, Matthew. 6.24. Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon. You think you may have the Devil rule in you one fit,
and God another; but you cannot serve God and Mammon: one Master must be
renounced, before another can be received. This is the argument, You cannot
have two Gods in the heart, therefore the soul must be severed from sin and
Satan, and the lusts of the flesh, before it can be prepared for the Lord
Jesus Christ, before he will come in and take place in it.

The Use of the point is threefold. Those reproved, who think to have mercy
and heaven all on the sudden.
The truth being granted, and the doctrine cleared, the first Use is a Use of
reproof. We may here discover, and also condemn the fond dreams, and vain
imaginations of many poor, sinful, ignorant creatures, who have invented a
new way, a back door to carry themselves to heaven, more than ever the Word
revealed, and it is this; Men think that they may have Christ, and mercy at
command, and that they may catch at, and obtain blessedness and happiness at
unawares, and on the sudden, and yet notwithstanding live in sin, and
continue in sin, and approve of sin, and addict themselves thereunto; and
then when sickness comes, if they can but say, Lord have mercy on me, they
must go to heaven all on the sudden. Be persuaded at length to see the folly
and sottishness of this conceit: this is not the way which the Word reveals
Christ by, it makes no such agreement with us; unless a poor sinner think
that Christ will carry him to heaven with his uncleanness and abominable
sins, when as he has said, that no unclean thing shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

No, no, if the harbenger goes not before, the King will not come: where there
goes no preparation before, there can be no receiving of Christ. He that will
receive Christ, and benefit by him, and comfort and salvation from him, must
receive him at those terms whereupon he has offered himself, or else he shall
never receive him. 2 Cor. 6.17. the text there says, Come out from among them,
and be separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will
receive you. Mark here the agreement that God makes: thou must first come out
from among them, yea, come out from thy sins; thou must come out of thy lusts
and corruptions, before the Lord will come in. Can any man put good gold into a
purse that is filled with stones before? can the soul of a sinner entertain
Christ Jesus when it is full of lusts, and they do altogether possess it? No,
no, Come out, says Christ, and touch no unclean thing; that is, be not
married unto it, (for that is the meaning of the words:) let thy affections, be
removed from all lusts and corruptions, and then I will come and dwell with
thee, and walk with thee; that is, I will bountifully provide for thee, for
the consolation of thy soul here and hereafter. It was the order of God, Luke
3.5. when John the Baptist was to make way for Christ: mark here how he was
levelling and undermining, Every mountain and hill shall be brought low,
every valley shall be filled, and the rough ways made plain, and the crooked
things strait: And then all flesh shall see the salvation of the Lord. If you
will have a mountain before your salvation, or go into a ditch, you shall
never see salvation soundly and surely: but if you purpose to see salvation,
down with those mountains of pride; you must lay them flat to the ground, you
must be teachable, stoop, and be conformable; you must not lift up your
selves against Christ, you must not walk in your own ways. No, no, down
with those mountains, down with those stubborn and disobedient hearts: for
you shall never see salvation as long as these mountains remain; but your
souls must be made pliable to Christ, and then you shall see the day of
comfort approaching, and drawing nigh unto you. Do you think it is fit if a
man were to entertain the King, to put his servants in the chief room, and
afford the King some out-roomes only, and let him be as a servant to his
servants? What a base and absurd thing is this, that Christ should come into
thy soul to be a servant, as it were, to thy base lusts? They that have made
their base, lewd, and wicked courses, their gods, one man in one kind, and
another in another kind, let them as they love their own souls, be persuaded
to consider of this. They that have thus set up any thing above God, and before
him, when God at the great and dreadful day of judgment shall come in flames
of fire (as the Apostle has it, 2 These. 1.8.) to take account of them, whom
they have served; God will then send you home to your gods: he will say, Go
to your gods that you have served, the Devil and sin, and not me; you have
cast off my yoke, you have broken my law, and transgressed my statutes: go
then to your lusts and your sins you have so much hunted after, let them save
you now, and show mercy toward you; for they were your gods, and they shall
save you if ever you have salvation. Think of this, and be thoroughly
persuaded of this, and cut off that sinful conceit, that Christ and corruption
will stand together, and come on the sudden with one word speaking: think not
if you can say, Lord have mercy upon me, and receive the Sacrament from the
hand of some factious Minister, then Christ will presently come to your hearts.
No, no, you must have your hearts prepared, before Christ Jesus will come into
your souls: the the heart must be broken, and the soul severed from sin
and corruption, before Christ will come and take possession of it. Take heed of
this foolish and sottish conceit, that Christ will come into your hearts all on
the sudden.

A miserable estate, to live in the old sins.
It is a glory that men take unto themselves, they are no changelings. Oh poor
fools, they must become changelings if ever they look to be saved. They glory
in this, what they were they are, where you left them one year you may find
them the next. But mark what we may conclude: here the condition of the man is
mavelous miserable that never had his heart prepared, never humbled, never
changed, never fitted for the Lord Jesus: for Christ will never come into that
soul that is most certain. You that content your selves with this, I never
knew what it was to be humbled: the precise Ministers indeed talk of
preparation, but I never knew what it meant: Oh poor creatures, they know now
not what belongs to the Ministry of God in this kind, but in the mean time be
sure of this, that if thou have not the former, thou can not expect the
latter: if thy heart be not prepared for Christ, there can be no receiving of
Christ. Salvation is far from the wicked, because they keep not thy laws,
says the Prophet David, Thou that have no care to walk with God, do thou
dream of salvation? Alas, alas, it never came near thy heart, it is a hundred
thousand miles of from thee, it is not near thy habitation, thou art not
prepared to entertain the Lord Jesus, and therefore thou can not expect
Christ and salvation by him. Appeal to your own consciences in this kind; If
a man should go to a great house, and see the best part of it stuffed with
ordinary commodities, and a great deal of it with base baggage and filthy
trash, he will presently conclude, the King will not come here: and why?
because there is no preparation for him, there is therefore no expectation of
his Majesty in this place. And it is a good argument, when a man shall see the
hearts and lives of men stuffed not only with a great deal of ordinary trash,
but full of worldly affections, full of the world in their hearts, lives, and
conversations: yea, when a man shall see every place full in this kind: as when
the whole man is full of sin, and of base corruptions, will any think that
this man shall be saved? Can any man in common sense imagine that Christ will
come; into that man's soul where there is no preparation for him? Mountains
must be levelled, crooked things made straight, and the rough ways made
smooth, and all to make way for Christ, before he will come: and therefore
surely where there is no fitting of the heart this way, there is no hope, no
expectation, that Christ Jesus will come in thither. Men prepare for the world
continually, and prepare only how they may may shut out Christ Jesus. One man
prepares honors, and his person, that must have preferment, another man
provides for his ease, and therefore he will make any shift, that he may not
endanger himself, he will be content to make any show of reason, rather than he
will come into office whereby his ease may be hindered: another man will provide
for his family, that that may be comforted and sustained; and though religion
and a good conscience be shaken, he cares not, he must make preparation for
the maintenance of his family, oh what will become of that! He cares not what
become of Christ: though the word be opposed, though he takes rebellious
courses, and throws out Christ, he cares not. Is this to make preparation for
Christ, or to make opposition against Christ? Nay, when men come to faires and
markets, oh what preparation is there then for covetousness on every side!
Some prepare false weights, others false measures. The seller says, It is
exceeding good, when it is stark naught. The buyer says, It is naught, it is
naught, when it is good: and so both dishonor God Nay, (which is most
lamentable) men prepare for drunkenness: Oh, say they, at such a fair we will
be merry: then every Alehouse is full of bad company: they resolve to sit at
the pot from morning till night, until they go reeling about the streets.
There is great preparation in this kind: Nay men will remove some sins, that
others may come in their rooms, and they will perform some good duties, to make
them free for sin: this is a very cunning trick. You shall see a man that will
read, and pray and hear Sermons, and make a great profession; and what is his
purpose herein? namely, that he may have praise or profit thereby, that he may
get the better custom to his shop, that he may cheat without controlment,
that he may cosen without division or distraction. I beseech you think of
these things: If it be so that Christ must be thus prepared for before he will
come, then examine your own souls, and reason with your selves thus, what
have I done? have I sold, my soul to do evil? I have dreamed that I might
have Christ at a beck; and not be prepared for him. and therefore it is I
that have not received him. Will any man sow his seed before the ground be
plowed? Will any man build before the foundation be laid? Do we think that
the Lord will rear up the building of grace in our hearts before the foundation
be laid? Will he sow the seed of grace in our hearts before our fallow grounds
be plowed up? Do we think that Christ will come and take possession of our
hearts, before our sins and lusts be removed and abandoned? Do we think our
souls can receive and entertain the Lord Jesus before they be prepared for
him? Impossible.

Prepare for Christ, or think not to enjoy him. Mat. 3.3.
that you would suffer the voice of exhortation, even the voice of John Baptist
to sound in your ears, Prepare ye the way of the Lord make his paths
straight. If ever you think to share in the salvation that Christ has
purchased with his own blood, if ever you think to partake of any thing that
Christ has wrought; if you would have him, dwell with with you, and do good
to you, either prepare for him, or else never expect him. And here, that you
may deal wisely, consider the hindrances, and obstacles that keep Christ
from coming. Are your hearts prepared? Christ is mavelous ready to come,
only he watches the time till your hearts be ready to receive and entertain
him. Mark that phrase, Mal. 3.1. it is mavelous comfortable: there the Text
says The Lord whom ye seek, will suddenly come to his Temple. Do but get
hearts fitted and souls prepared; for Christ does but wait for a message. If
the soul be but broken and humbled, he will come presently, and not break an
hair with you. Truly this preparation is the very entrance into salvation:
and therefore take notice of it. Men are loath to leave all for Christ in this
case, they are loath to lose their profits and pleasures, their lusts and
corruptions: they are like Inne-keepers, they are loath to thrust their
profitable guests out of their houses, they would be loath to hinder
themselves that way, yea and though the King were to come thither, they would
secretly wish that his Majesty would turn another way: so it is a hard matter
for men to dis-lodge all profits and pleasures, and to vomit up those sweet
morsels and beloved corruptions, that Christ might come into their souls. Some
poor soul may speak to me as the Devil did to Christ, Why art thou come to
torment me before my time? so many men will be ready to say, Why does the Lord
Jesus come to torment us before our times? What, must we now abandon all our
profits and pleasures if we will receive Christ? They could secretly wish that
Christ would go another way, It is a very hard thing to bring the soul thus
to be divorced from corruptions: it is very hard when a man must give a bill of
divorcement, and never see the face of his corruptions more this is very hard
with a poor sinner. Motives to prepare for Christ.


And therefore the Arguments to move us hereunto had need be forcible, and
maybe taken from two grounds: first, from the consideration who we are that
must receive Christ: secondly, who Christ is that is to be received.

First, let us consider our selves, 1. We are unworthy to receive such a guest.
a company of poor, sinful, wretched, miserable, and damned creatures,
sinful dust and ashes, dead dogs. Consider this, and think with thy self,
Will the Lord of heaven come down? Will Christ dwell in my heart? Will he
vouchsafe to look in, yea, to call as he goes by the soul of me such a
sinful creature? And let this move thee to prepare for his coming. If a King
will but call at a poor man's window as he rides by, he will count it a great
favor: much more it is for the great God of heaven and earth but to look in,
and reveal himself unto the heart of a poor sinful creature. We are not
worthy that the Lord should come under our roof. 1 Kings 8.27. there Solomon
says, Will God indeed dwell on the earth? will he dwell in a house made with
hands? As if he should say, Is it possible? can it be imagined, that thou Lord
being the great God of heaven, whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain,
should once vouchsafe to dwell in a house made with hands, in the Temple
which I have builded? And what may we say? Is it so? can it be, shall it be,
that God will come and dwell under our roof? that he will come and dwell in
our rotten and sinful hearts? that he will dwell in our wretched and sinful
souls? Why he will, he has said it, he has promised it, he will perform it:
and therefore let us consider our own unworthiness to receive Christ, as a
motive to stir us up to make preparation for him. For the baser the place is
that should entertain him, the greater the preparation ought to be. We ought
to wonder that the Lord will vouchsafe to come into our sinful souls, and
therefore we had need to prepare the more for his coming. The Lord has
promised to come into our souls if we humble them, and make them fitting to
receive his Majesty: and therefore sweep your hearts, and cleanse those rooms,
cleanse every sink, brush down every cobweb, and make room for Christ: for if
thy heart be prepared, and divorced from all corruptions, then Christ will come
into thy soul, and take possession of it. Remove therefore all corruptions out
of thy heart. And when thou have swept every corner of thy house, do not leave
the dust behind the door, for that is a fluts trick: do not remove sin out
of thy tongue, and out of thy eye, and out of thy hand, and leave it in thy
heart. No, no, out with all, let every chamber be dressed up, let every part
and faculty be right disposed, that the Lord may come and dwell in thy soul.

The second motive that may stir us up to prepare for the Lord Jesus, 2.
Christ is most worthy, for whom we should prepare.
is his transcendent worthiness, in regard of which all preparation may seem
too little. You are not to entertain an ordinary person: it is not a man, it
is not a King, it is not a Monarch; but it is a King of Kings, that will come
into your souls to comfort them, yea, his holy and blessed Spirit will remain
with you for ever. Therefore do all that possibly may be done, to prepare for
his coming, and for the entertainment and welcomming of him when he comes. In
Psalm. 24.7. David calls upon his own soul, and other of Gods people (for so
the words are to be expounded:) there he says, Lift up your heads, O ye
Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors: and the King of glory shall
come in. As who should say, Be enlarged, love, joy, hope, set open, give way,
for the Lord is coming. But who is the Lord? It is the Lord of hosts, the
Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle, ver. 8. And with that he
knockes again, Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors: for the King of glory shall come in, ver. 9. As if he
should say, What, shall the Lord knock? shall the King of glory stand? Open
suddenly, and make all preparation. Did David do thus? Why, do you so then.
Christ knockes by promises, he knockes by judgments, he knockes by threats,
yea, he speaks this day unto your souls, and labors this day to make way
for himself: make therefore all preparation, let nothing be wanting, that when
he comes, he may take possession of your souls, Particulars.
and be a God unto you for ever.

Zacheus, Luke 19.5, 8, 9. when he went up into a Sycamore tree to see him,
Make haste, and come down Zacheus (says he) for I must abide with thee in thy
house. Zacheus made no cavilling, but made haste and came down, and received
him joyfully. And mark what Christ says unto him, This day salvation is come
into thine house. So likewise it shall be with you, when Christ comes,
salvation comes with him; when he comes, everlasting happiness and
salvation comes; when Christ comes, go home and witness against all your
carnal neighbors, that they that refuse Christ, and do not make preparation
for him, refuse salvation and everlasting happiness that is offered unto them.

Amos 4.12. when the Lord had sent a great plague, and a heavy judgment upon
Jerusalem, he says, Thus will I do unto thee, Oh Israel: and because I will
do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. I will do thus unto
thee, O Israel, that is, I will send mildewes, plagues, and pestilence, and
famine; I will draw you out with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hookes.
And what follows? Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. If God come against us
to plague us, we must prepare to meet him. Reason now with your own souls
upon strong grounds, to your everlasting comfort. Should the Lord come in
judgment to torment us, should the Lord come to scourge and punish us; if we
must then prepare to meet him, then what preparation ought we to make for his
coming, when he shall not come thus in judgment, to condemn us, but in his
mercy to save us, in his goodness to enrich us, in his compassion to comfort
us? then now if ever prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Let every heart
persuade it self of this particular; and reason and consider with your own
souls in this case: Is Christ so gracious, and so merciful? does he send
down from heaven unto us, and say, he will come? if any man keep my
Commandments I stand at the door and knock; Rev. 3.20.
if any man will open, my Father and I will come in, and sup, and dwell with
him. Why, where is the heart in the mean time? And if ever, now prepare to
meet the Lord.

But if neither the judgments of God will persuade us, nor the mercies of God
allure us, yet let the complaints and moanes of Christ Jesus prevail with you
to prepare for him. Consider our Savior Christ has taken a great journey from
heaven to earth to save us miserable, wretched, and sinful creatures: conceive
you saw those streams of blood trickling down his cheeks: conceive you saw
him upon the cross with his hands thrust through with nails, and his side
pierced with a spear, enduring the wrath of God for our sins; and behold now
he stands at the door, and says with the Church, Lam. 1.12. It is nothing
to you, have you no regard, O ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow, etc. Imagine you heard Christ say, I have
suffered these, and these things for you; these hands of mine were nailed, this
side of mine was pierced, this heart of mine was melted with anguish of spirit.
Imagine you saw Christ standing and knocking at the door of your hearts, as
indeed he does, and say, Hoe all you within there, hoe all you proud hearts,
hoe all you covetous and malicious hearts, have you no regard of a poor
Savior? have you no regard of a crucified Savior? he that died for you, even
the bitter death upon the cross for you, and now labors to do good unto
you? Would not this move you to prepare your your hearts for him, and to let
him in? Nay, mark what Christ says to the Church, Cant. 5.2. Open to me, my
sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my
locks with the drops of the night. As if he should say, I have had an ill
journey, a bad way, and unkind entertainment, and therefore come away my love,
my dove, my undefiled, and open unto me. So he says to every one of our
souls, This day I have traveled a great way for you, and have had a very hard
journey; I have suffered many crosses and afflictions, many mockes and scoffs;
many buffets, yea, even death it self, for you: will you now suffer the Lord
Jesus, wearied and perplexed, to stand knocking and calling, and weeping, and
saying as he said to Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. Oh that thou had known, even
thou at least in this thy day, the things belonging to thy peace: but now they
are hid from thine eyes? Will you suffer Christ in this plight, thus saying
unto you, as he did to Jerusalem, to stand knocking at the door of your
hearts, and your souls?

Take heed of this, Christ knocks this day at your hearts; if you now give
him his last answer, and shut the door against him, it may prove to be the
last knocking, you may hap never to see him more. The Church in the place
before named, Cant. 5. ver. 3. shifted off Christ, and would not let him in
when she heard him knock: I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? But after she rose to open to
her beloved, and her hands dropped myrrh, and her fingers sweet smelling
myrrh, upon the handles of the lock, ver 5. And then she opened to her
beloved, but he had withdrawn himself, and was gone: and then she sought him
with many troubles and knockes before she found him: The watchmen found her,
and wounded her, the keepers of the walls took her veil from her. If you put
of Christ, and give him delays when he knocks at the doors of your hearts,
then perhaps he may never knock more, and then you may seek him, and desire
him earnestly, and perhaps never find him more, or receive comfort from him,
and salvation by him. Oh therefore take heed how you drive away your crucified
Savior; but even now make all preparations for his entertainment, and for
receiving of him, that you may receive everlasting life, and salvation from
him. In Ier. 2.12. the Prophet says, Be astonished, O ye heavens, be ye
horribly afraid, be ye desolate, says the Lord. What is the reason of this?
It is in the 11. and 13. verses: The Heathen have not changed their gods, which
are no gods, but my people have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and
hewn out to themselves cisternes even broken cisterns that can hold no water:
they have changed their glory for that which profits not. Be astonished at
this, O ye heavens. Turks have their gods, and Infidels have their gods, and
what care have they to obey them, when as yet their gods are no gods? And shall
a Christian have a Savior to save him, and to redeem him, and show mercy upon
him, and then shut him out in this kind? Remember what the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 132.4, 5. I will give no sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine
eyelids, until I have prepared a place, an habitation for the God of Jacob:
and if he had said, I have houses, and I have palaces, and Gods honor lies
in the dust; no more sleep, no more rest, no more content, until I have
prepared an habitation for the God of Jacob. What David did, that do you.
There is no material Temple to be prepared; but we are the Temple, and the
Church of God, prepare therefore an habitation, an heart for the Lord Jesus
Christ. And every soul that has heretofore cast out the Lord Jesus Christ,
and given him no entertainment, let him now resolve to do it, and let every
one say to their husbands and friends, We have this, and we have that, this
blessing, that benefit: but the Lord has come often and asked a room for
himself: O let us not sleep, nor give rest unto our hearts, nor contentation
to our souls, until we have prepared an habitation, until we have prepared
an heart fit for the entertainment of the mighty God of Jacob. If thou do not
now prepare for him as a Savior to save thee hereafter, thou must receive him
as a Judge to condemn thee: and therefore delay no longer, but every night,
and every morning call upon one another to prepare for the Lord Jesus.



What profit then will those things do you, Rom 9.21.
whereof you are now ashamed? What? will you now swear, and profane Gods name?
Oh then you shall see the baseness and vileness of those things; then the
drunkard will wish he had never taken cup in his hand; then the swearer will
wish he had never swore oath, nor ever took Gods name in vain; then the
covetous wretch will wish he had never been so greedy of his gain, and in the
mean while neglected his salvation. Consider this; that God one day will make
those things seem vile in our eyes, one day it shall come to pass that we
would give a world for a Savior, one day Christ will be welcome unto us, if he
would come. When you come to the last period of your lives, then (in your last
wills, and testaments) you commit your body to the ground, and your soul into
the hands of God. Yea, but it is a question whether Christ will then take it:
therefore prepare to entertain and receive him now that he may receive you
then at that day. Has he prepared heaven for thee, and will thou not prepare a
heart to receive him? Therefore remove, renounce, abandon all profits, all
pleasures, sins, lusts, and corruptions, that you may be fitted to entertain
and welcome the Lord Jesus, that Christ may dwell in your souls, and give you
the consolation of his spirit.

But you will say, expectation of his coming? This is a hard task. How then
may we prepare for him? by what means may our hearts be fitted and disposed
to receive Christ Jesus?

The Ministry a special means to prepare us for Christ.
which is the second doctrine which arises out of the Text, and it is a point
worth the while.

Object. But you will say, How do you gather the doctrine out of the Text?
what ground have you for the doctrine out of the words of the Text?

Answ. Yes, it is one of the maine passages of the Text; it was the scope, and
purpose, and sending of John the Baptist: for the Text says, He shall go
before him in the spirit and power of Elias. Who shall go before Jesus Christ?
John the Baptist. How shall he be fitted? He shall have the spirit and power
of Elias. And what shall he do? He shall go before him in the spirit and
power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord, Luke 1.17. The Lord prepares a fit workman for this work. John was to
prepare a people for the Lord, and therefore he comes in the spirit and power
of Elias: That is, he had a wonderful ability bestowed upon him by God,
whereby he might deliver the Word of God to men's hearts so powerfully, as
thereby he might fit and prepare them for the receiving of the Lord Jesus; and
he made a company of desperate sinners to quake, yea, he made Herod, who was
a sinful wretch, to stand in fear of him. So then we see God fitted John with
a powerful ministry, with the spirit and power of Elias: and being so fitted
of God, he was sent for the purpose to prepare men's hearts for the receiving
of the Lord Jesus. And therefore this must be a special means soundly to
prepare men's hearts for the entertaining of the Lord Jesus Christ. So the
doctrine is clear and plain out of the Text.

Ier. ^3.29. the Lord there speaking of his Word, compares it to fire: in the
28. verse the Lord was speaking of dreamers; There are a company of dreamers,
says he, but let him that has a dream, tell a dream; and he that has my
Word, let him speak my word faithfully. Is not my word like fire? ver. 29.
there is the power of the Word. Simile.
Look as it is with the Gold smith, his metal is full of dross, and he
must try it, and cleanse it, and purify it in the fire, before it be fit to
make a vessel of: so it is with the drossie souls of sinners; every heart
has abundance of dross, for many sinful abominations harbor in the poor
soul of a man. It must be a powerful ministry that is able by the power of
the Lord to set fire on the hearts of men, to melt their souls, to pull down
their haughty spirits, thereby to fit and prepare their souls for the
receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ, that so they might receive comfort and
consolation from him.

In Hosea 6.5. it is a phrase we shall meet withal: for there the Text says,
I have hewn them by my Prophets. The Church is compared to a Vineyard, the
godly to the Branches, the Word to the pruning and cutting of these Branches.
As it was with the building of the material Temple of Solomon, there were many
sturdy Oaks and tall Cedars that were to be hewn and fashioned before they
would be fit for the building: so it must be here with the trees of
righteousness, our sinful souls: some of us have sturdy hearts like Oaks,
and some have proud and lofty hearts like the tall Cedars of Lebanon: these
stout hearts and lofty spirits must be cut down by the axe of Gods word, and
levelled and fitted to lay hold upon, and be settled unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. Every man's soul, especially those souls that belong to the election
of grace, are ground that must be tilled and plowed by the word of God; their
fallow grounds must be broken up, before any seed of grace can be cast into
their souls. 1 Cor. 3 9. there the Apostle says, You are Gods husbandry; and
therefore God by his word must plow up the weeds of sin and corruption which
are in you, before he can sow the graces of his holy Spirit in your hearts. And
that place, Acts 2.37. will make the Doctrine clear and evident: Saint Peter
was a man of a stout and courageous spirit, and he spoke home unto the Jews,
he tells them that God has made that Jesus, whom they crucified, the Lord and
Christ. And when they heard these things (says the Text) that is, the word
powerfully delivered and brought home to their souls, they were pricked in
their hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Now they were
prepared in some measure to seek after salvation.

For the better understanding of this point, two things are to be considered:
first, what a powerful ministry is, and wherein the power and efficacy of
it consists: secondly, how this powerful ministry does work upon the soul
to prepare it for Christ.

First, what is this powerful ministry? 1. A powerful Ministry consists
in 3. things.
wherein does the power of the ministry, and of Elias consist? It is
discovered in three particulars:

First, in a particular application of the truth to the souls of men, with
courage. When a faithful Minister out of undauntednesse of spirit does in a
special and particular manner apply the Word unto the souls of them, over
whom he is set: this is a powerful min^stery. 1 Kings 18.21. there the
ministry of Elias is mentioned: for the Text says, Elias came unto all the
people, and said, How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him; but if Baal be God, follow him. It was in a time when people had
departed from the Lord. Elias at this time did not come to one man alone in a
corner, and say, You should do well to consider of the case, how it stands; it
is very desperate, I would wish you to return unto the Lord, it will be your
best course: he does not do thus, but he came to all the people: and mark
how he speaks, If Baal be God, follow him; if the Lord be God, follow him.
Away with this halting: what? neither hot nor cold? A man cannot tell where to
have you: intend one thing or other: if Baal be God, why so if the Lord be
God, so: make something of it in this case: thus he spoke to all the people,
says the Text. And we shall observe the same in John Baptist, that had the
power and spirit of Elias, Matthew. 3.7. he did not go there behind the door
to speak, but he spoke to the Pharisees and Sadduces after this manner, O ye
generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the wrath to come?
As if he had said, You are they that opposed Christ, and set your selves
against the Gospel, you have hardened your hearts, you will not enter into
heaven your selves, not suffer others to enter in. Why who has forewarned you
to flee from the wrath to come? Neither is this a strange course or
unprofitable: for our Savior Christ himself uses it, in Mat, 23.23. from
thence to the end of the chapter, the phrase goes thus, Woe unto you Scribes,
and Pharisees, Hypocrites. Our Savior Christ has given us this pattern. The
explication of the point is nothing else but the drawing out of a sword: and
the particular application of it to the hearts of the people is like the
striking of the blow. The word is compared to a sword: as, if a man should draw
a sword and flourish it about, and should not strike a blow with it, it will
do no harm: even so it is here with the Ministers, little good will they do
if they do only explicate, if they do only draw out the sword of the
Spirit: for unless they apply it unto the peoples hearts particularly, little
good may the people expect, little good shall the Minister do. A common kind
of teaching when the Minister does speak only hoveringly, and in the
general, and never applies the word of God particularly, may be compared to
the confused noise that was in the ship wherein Jonah was, when the winds blew,
and the sea raged, and a great storm began to arise. The poor Mariners
strove with might and maine, and they did endeavor by all means possible to
bring the ship to the shore: every one cried unto his god, and cast their wares
in to the sea, and all this while Jonas was fast asleep in the ship, but when
the Mariners came down, and plucked him up, and said Arise thou sleeper, and
asked him, Who art thou? whence art thou? what is thy name? call upon thy God,
lest we perish. When they thus behaved themselves toward Jonah, then he was
awakened and rowsed out of his sleep. The common delivery of the word is like
that confused noise: there is matter of heaven, of hell, of grace, of sin
spoken of, there is a common noise, and all this while men sit and sleep
carelessly, and never look about them, but rest secure: but when particular
application comes, that shakes a sinner, as the Pilot did Jonah, and asks him,
What assurance of Gods mercy have thou? what hope of pardon of sins, of life,
and happiness hereafter? You are baptized, and so were many that are in hell:
you come to Church, and so did many that are in hell: but what is your
conversation in the mean time? Is that holy in the sight of God and man? When
the Ministers of God shake men, and take them up on this fashion then they
begin to stir up themselves, Simile.
and to consider of their estates. This general and common kind of teaching is
like an enditement without a name: if a man should come to the assizes, and
make a great exclamation and have no name to his enditement, alas, no man is
troubled with it, no man fears it, no man shall receive any punishment by
reason of it. So it is with this common kind of preaching, it is an enditement
without a name. We arrest none before we particularly arraigne them before the
tribunal of the Lord, and show them these and these are their sins, and that
unless they repent and forsake them, they shall be damned: for then this would
stir them up, and make them seek to the Lord for mercy; this would rowse
them out of their security, and awaken them, and make them say as the Jews did
to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do to
be saved? Acts 2.37,

The second thing wherein this powerful ministry discovers and manifests it
self, is, when the Ministers of God out of soundness of argument, and plain
evidence of the will of God, and the spirit of God, make truth known to the
spirits of men: when a man's doctrine goes so guarded and confirmed with
Scripture, and sound and plain demonstration of argument, that they stand as
Mount Sion, and are undeniable. This is the second thing wherein the powerful
delivery of the Ministry consists; and this is Saint Paul's meaning, when he
says, The kingdom of God consists not in words, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20.
The kingdom of God, that is, the Gospel of the kingdom whereby God rules in
the hearts of his chosen. Now this consists not in words only, nor in a
company of fine gilded sentences, where there is nothing but a jingling and a
tinkling, nothing but a sound of words; there is no kingdom all this while, no
power all this while in such a kind of preaching: this will not work
effectually in the hearts and consciences of men. It is with this kind of
preaching as it is with rotten buildings, which are all painted over, but have
scarce a sound beam, or any other timber to bear up the house: so it is in
this case, all this jingling and tinkling of words may delight the ears of the
hearers, but the power is wanting that should drive men to a stand.

Thirdly, a powerful ministry appears in this, when there is a kind of
spiritual heat in the heart, when there are holy affections, Si vis meflere
dolendum est primum ipsi tibi.
and the heart of the Minister is answerable to that he communicates and
delivers unto the people. Look what those truths be which he communicates to
others, his own soul should be affected with them before, and at the time of
delivery of them, that so he may speak home to the hearts of the people: Mat.
12.34.
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: says our Savior.
So that the foundations and pillars of a man's speech are not in the tongue, but
they proceed out of the heart. When the speech is raised out of the several
affections, we use to say, Gracious speeches, merciful speeches: the meaning
is, words arising out of grace, and words arising out of mercy. When the heart
of a minister goes home with his words, then he delivers the word powerfully
and profitably to the hearers. He that mourns for sin when he speaks of it,
will make others mourn also: he that carries a holy indignation against sin,
he stirs up the same indignation in the man that hears him, And observe that
when a man speaks from the heart, he speaks to the heart: and when a man
speaks from the head only, and from the teeth outward, (as we use to say) he
speaks to the ear only, he speaks to the conceit only. We lose the the
greatest part of our speech, and the strength of our speech unless we speak
out of the abundance of our souls. When a man speaks against sin, he should
speak with a holy hatred of it from his very heart. When a man speaks of the
misery of poor creatures that are in the gall of bitterness, and under the
power of Satan, he should mourn for the judgment that God has appointed for
them: and if men would do thus, they would make others mourn also. It was an
observation of a holy man upon this place, We have piped but ye have not
danced: we have mourned, but ye have not weeped: That he that would affect
others with any thing, must first be affected withal himself, he must
mourn before others will sorrow: his heart must be affected with the truth
that he delivers to others, before he can make others to be affected with it. I
compare a man's word and the delivery of it to an arrow: draw it up to the head
in a bow, and then it will both carry level, hit sure, and fasten to the mark
the word we speak is the arrow, the delivery of it coldly, like the shooting
of the arrow with a small strength; but the delivery of it with true and hearty
affection, is the drawing it up to the head, and then somewhat will be done,
then we shall shoot home into the hearts and consciences of men, and make them
at a stand. It was a speech of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Let my doctrine drop as the dew, as the rain upon the grass. Moses his
doctrine is compared to dew and to rain, now if there come a great rain, and
a mighty wind with it, especially a whirlewind, it carries all before it;
sometimes it breaks up the foundations of houses, and sometimes rends up trees
by the roots, and overturnes all things with the violence of it. The Doctrine
and truth which the Ministers of God deliver, is as the rain: now the holy
affection wherewith it is delivered, is like the whirlewind. When the truth of
God is delivered with a holy violence, and hearty affection by Gods servants,
evermore it makes way, it beats down, and breaks all before it, it wets more
and sinkes more and far deeper, then any kind of other teaching.

So then he particularly and soundly applies the word of God to men's hearts
and consciences, that evidently by Scriptures and strong arguments convinces
others with an holy and hearty affection, this man performs the ministry of
God powerfully.

How a powerful Ministry works upon the heart to prepare it for Christ.
to fit and prepare him for Christ Jesus.

And first, this kind of preaching does discover the very secrets of a man's
soul, together with the vileness and wickedness that is in the heart: so that
the soul sees that it never saw before, and apprehends that which before it
never conceived. The soul of a poor sinner that before lay under a lazy
ministry, when it comes to be under a powerful ministry, and sees things
particularly applied and followed, oh, how then it begins to be at a stand!
Heb. 4.12. there the Text says, The word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two edged sword piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul, and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. When a man preaches powerfully, he preaches
as if he were in the bosom of a man: he may tell him things in his ear which
he thinks no man knows of, Therefore, says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4.1.2, seeing
we have this ministry, as we have received mercy we faint not. But have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, not
handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. As if he
should say, We do not set another color upon the word of God: as (the word
implies being taken from tradesmen that would set a fair color and gloss
upon their wares, and make them seem otherwise than they are:) we do not do
thus, says the Apostle: but our word goes home unto your consciences, and
discovers what is in your hearts.

Secondly, as the word powerfully preached does discover what is in a man's
heart, and drives his soul to an amazement by reason of the sin that is in
it: so also it drives the soul into an awe of sin, so that it dares not meddle
with sin as it did before; it overpoureth the soul of a poor sinner, and
makes him afraid of sin; and nothing but the word can do it, nothing but the
powerful delivery of the word will do it. Luke 3.9, 10. when John preached the
word powerfully, the people came to him, and asked him, saying, What shall we
do? Then came the Publicans (which were ranked among the worst company) to be
baptized, and said unto him, Master what shall we do? And the soldiers asked
him, What shall we do? So that all came under the powerful ministry of S.
John. So Matthew. 7.29. where the Text says, Christ taught as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes and Pharisees: what is the meaning of this?
The meaning is, he taught as he would command men's consciences: not that he
converted all he preached unto (for it is probable that Saint Peter converted
more than ever Christ did:) but he did command the consciences of men, he made
men either yield to his doctrine, and be humbled, or else he made them know,
that they should be condemned by his word for ever. Our Savior did not preach
as the Scribes and Pharisees, that made a lazy tale to the people, and when he
was gone, no man was affected with it. No, no, Christ commands the consciences
of men, and either made them seal to his truth, or else sealed them up to
condemnation. His doctrine drove the souls of his hearers to a stand, he did
convince their consciences that that which he taught was true, they could not
deny it. And this is to teach with authority, this is the nature of the work
of the Lord in the ministry of the word when it comes with power: so that it
is plain, that a powerful ministry, which with a particular application
courageously applies the word of God to men's souls, and with soundness of
argument conuinceth, and with zealous and fervent affection is delivered, will
both discover sin, and overpower sin in the hearts of men, and so fit and
prepare them for the receiving, entertaining, and welcomming of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Reasons of the point. The Reasons of the point are two:



Ob. I but (some may say) corrections and afflictions prepare men for the Lord;
how then is a powerful ministry the only means to do it?

Ans. I answer, Affliction prepares the heart for the word, the word for God.
that afflictions may prepare men's hearts for the word, but not immediately for
God: that is, these, if they be blessed unto men, go thus far, they open the
eyes of a man in so much that he is willing to hear and attend unto the word,
and be informed by it, and is content to take the counsel of God: but the word
is that, which immediately prepares men's hearts for the Lord. These crosses and
afflictions may make a man to think and consider of himself and of his sins;
yea they may make him think of a better estate, and to desire the word, and
send for a faithful minister, and hear him: but the word, that must work
beyond afflictions, to prepare men for the Lord.

Ob. But some may object again, that the word of God does sometimes harden
men, how does it then alone prepare men's hearts for the Lord?

Answ. I answer, that the word of God is but an instrument: now the Lord is a
free-worker, a voluntary agent, as we use to say; he may do what he will, and
when he will with his instrument, A powerful ministry is the only ordinary
means to prepare men's hearts for Christ: but God works with this means where
he will, and upon whom he will. And as he may prepare a man for himself by
this means, so he may harden him by it: the word is able to prepare a man, but
God works with it, upon whom he will, and how he will, as it pleases him.

Much fault in Ministers, that their peoples hearts are not fitted for Christ.
then from hence the Ministers of God may see the reason of the little good
they do in that course and place wherein God has set them: here lies the
ground of it, we preach and take pains, but the work of God prospers not in
our hands; after many years hewing there is not one mountain levelled, scarce
one sinner brought home to the Lord Jesus, and truly prepared for him. What is
the reason of this? Surely leaving secrets and times unto God, (for God may
convert when he will, and there are seasons wherein God will not vouchsafe any
saving grace unto men: but leaving these things to God,) this we know in
general, that God is as powerful as ever he was, the ministry is as
effectual as ever it was, if it be performed in a right manner. We need not
complain as Elisha did, Where is the God of Elijah,? He is not wanting: but if
the spirit and power of Elias be wanting in us, the fault is ours. For the
sword of the spirit is as powerful as ever it was. If the ministry of God
were dispensed as it should, it would be as effectual as ever it was, it would
work to salvation. But where lies the fault? Alas that lies in the ministers
of God, who do not perform the work of the ministry as it should and with
that power they ought. A sword in a child's hand, though never so sharp, will
do no harm: but if it be put into a strong man's hand, he will make it cut
deeply. Too many of Gods Ministers have weak hearts, little affection have they
to the people of God, little labor is there in their hearts to pluck men unto
heaven, they do not strive with souls as they ought to do, they do not
struggle with the hearts of men: if they have their profits and liberties, they
care not. And hence it is that little good is done by them, they do so
marvellously fail in the former particulars. Where is that particular and
courageous applying of the truth to men's fowls and consciences? Alas, what
coverings they have friends, they must not be displeased: and great men they
are afraid they should be offended. It is pity but their tongues should
cleave to the roofes of their mouths, if they speak any thing the less for
these base and by respects than God reveals and requires of them. Their
slighting and passing by is the reason that men profit so little by their
ministry: they are ashamed to tell, and afraid to speak to the hearts of men,
and reprove them for those sins which they are not ashamed or afraid to do
in the face of the world. They convince not so soundly as they ought to do,
they do not gather in those arguments which may make those truths undeniable,
and men's consciences at a stand. If they can but carelessly, and idely talk out
the hour, what becomes of the seed, what becomes of the word, what becomes of
men's souls they care not: again they want that holy spiritual affection
which they should deliver Gods word withal unto his people. This is the sum
of all, Ministers do not deliver the word with a heavenly, hearty, and violent
affection, they do not speak out of the abundance of their affections. If
they would speak against sin with a holy indignation, it would make men stand
in awe of sin, they talk of it overly, and say, It is not good to profane Gods
Name and his Sabbaths, and to live an ungodly life: but they do not speak
from their hearts in this kind. A sturdy messenger,, if he come to a man's
house, to speak with him, he will not be put off, he will take no denial, but
he will speak with him, if it be possible, before he goes away: but send a
child of a message to a man, if a servant do but tell him his master is not
at leisure, or that he may speak with him another time, he will easily be put
off, and go away before he has delivered his message. So it is with a
Minister that performs his office with a hearty affection. For when a man
speaks from his heart (in this case) he will have no answer, he will not be
dallied withal, he will take no denial, but will have that he came for. If a
man should say, he is not at leisure to speak with him, or to hear him now,
he will speak with him another time; he will not go away with this answer,
but he will tell him, I came to speak with your hearts, and I will speak with
your hearts: he will say to the people, Tell your hearts you that love the
world, and the profits and pleasures thereof (and my heart tells you) did you
but know the good things that are in Christ Jesus, did you but know what a
happy thing it is to have the assurance of Gods mercy, you would never love
sin, or delight in wickedness as you have done heretofore I came to speak
with your hearts, and will speak with them before we part. Grieve no more for
the things of this world, but for your sins. The day is coming when the
heavens shall melt with fire, and ye shall hear the voice of the Arch-angell,
saying arise ye dead, and appear before the judgment seat of God; where you
shall hear that woeful and bitter sentence, Away from me all ye workers of
iniquity, I know you not. Mat. 7, 23:
Oh this may be one day your case.

And we that are Ministers of God, do mourn for you, and tell your souls,
we must have sorrow from you: we came to speak to your hearts, we came for
hearts, and we will have hearts before we go. And this is the first use of the
point, to discover unto us what is the reason that the Ministers of God do so
little good in their places; it is because this power is wanting in them.

Fearful is their estate, whom a powerful Ministry works not upon.
The second use discovers unto us the fearful estate and miserable condition
of those that have lived a long time under a powerful ministry, and yet have
not found their souls fitted and prepared for the Lord by the same; it is a
fearful suspicion that God will never confer any good to that soul: he
that has lived under a powerful ministry many years, and yet is not wrought
upon and framed to the truth o^ God, it cannot be certainly concluded, but it
is greatly to be suspected, that the means will never profit that man, Look
as it is with the Master Carpenter, Simile.
when he has turned every piece of timber, and taken what he will for his
turn, he tells them that be under him, Let this be hewed, and this be framed
and made fit for the building; afterward he finds one piece broken, and another
cracked, and another knottie: Why what? says he, here is no squaring of it,
these pieces are fit for nothing but for the burning, they are fit for no place
in the building. Oh take heed, when Gods ministers have been cutting and
hewing, now exhorting, now persuading, now cutting the heart with reproves,
and yet find here a cracked heart, and there a stubborn soul, that will not
be squared to the Word, least then the Lord should say; These will never be
fitted and prepared for me, they are fit for nothing but for the fire. Oh take
heed of it, he that will not be fitted for grace shall be made a fire brand in
hell for ever: and therefore go home you that have lived under a powerful
ministry, and are not yet prepared, go home, I say, and reason with your own
souls, and plead with your own hearts, and say, Lord, why am not I yet humbled
and prepared? shall I stand at this hacking and hewing, and never be framed?
Such a man, and such a man, that was stubborn, was wrought upon, the Lord has
brought him upon his knees: there was another drunkard so wicked, and so
profane, that all the world gave him for lost many days a gone, and yet the
Lord has brought him home, and he is become a broken hearted Christian. Nay,
if the Devil himself had had those means that I have had, and any hope of
mercy, he would have been bettered by it; those reproves, those instructions,
those admonitions which I have had, would have done the Devil himself good.
But what shall I think that am not fitted and prepared for Christ by this great
means? Alas, thou may justly suspect that God never intends good to thy
soul: it is no absolute conclusion, but it is a great suspicion, that those
which have lived under a powerful ministry half a dozen years or longer, and
have got no good, nor profited under the same, it is a shrewd suspicion, I say,
that God will send them down to hell: therefore suspect thy own soul, and
say, Lord, will exhortations ever prevail? will instructions do me any good?
will terrors and reproves ever strike my heart? Why, I have heard Sermons
that would have shaken the very stones I trod upon, that would have moved the
very seat I sat upon, the very fire of hell has flashed in my face, I have
seen even the plagues of hell, and if terrors can do me good, why not then
those exhortations, instructions, admonitions, and reproofs; that I have often
had? I have had as powerful means as may be, which yet never did me any
good. The Lord be merciful to such a poor soul. The Lord turn the heart of
such a poor sinner, that he may lay hold of mercy in due time.

Let the word be powerful to prepare thy heart for Christ.
The third use is a use of exhortation. Is it so that a powerful ministry is
able to prepare the soul of a poor sinner for the Lord Jesus? Why then when
you hear the word of God powerfully preached, labor that the word may be so
to you, as it is in it self: it is a preparing word, labor you that it may
prepare your hearts to receive Christ. You that be hearers every one labor to
save the soul of another: let the father speak concerning his children, and
the husband concerning his wife and his family, and the wise concerning her
husband, Oh when will it once be, when will the time come that my child may be
fitted for the Lord, when will it be that my poor family, my poor wife, my
poor husband shall be prepared for the Lord? the Lord grant that he may be
prepared, if not this sunday, yet on another; if not at this Sermon, then at
the next. Lord humble your hearts, and give way to the word of God, and suffer
your souls to be wrought upon by it: for the word of God is powerful to
prepare you for the Lord; but the Minister must hew your hearts, and hack them,
he must frame and fashion your souls before they can be prepared. Give up your
souls therefore to the word, and come unto it with holy dispositions: let the
Ministers of God cut and hew you, let them do any thing that may do you good,
let the word of God fall upon you and fashion you, and frame and prepare you
for the Lord Jesus. As it is with men, when they set Carpenters on work to
build an house, then they come every day, Simile.
and ask them, How does the work go on? how does the building go forward?
When you go home, so do you reason with your selves, and ask your own
hearts how the work of the Lord goes forward in you? Is my heart yet humbled?
am I yet fitted and prepared for Christ? I thank God I am in some measure
fitted and humbled, and therefore I hope the building will go forward. Thus try
and examine your hearts whether they be fitted and prepared to receive the
Lord Jesus.

THE SOULS INGRAFTING INTO CHRIST.
Mal. 3.1. And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come into his Temple.


THE last day (as you remember) I finished the doctrine of humiliation of
soul, whereby the heart is prepared, and the soul is emptied of it self, and
of all carnal confidence in any outward excellency, and so is contented to
be at the dispose of the Lord Jesus Christ. But before I come to that which is
to follow, give me leave to preface for my self, that the order of the work
may be more better and clearly conceived, and that the weak may be helped in
their condition, and have their hearts enlarged to seek unto God. Now in the
way of preface let me show how far we have gone: secondly, let me show you
how I mean to go on in this work, if God give leave and liberty. For the
first: I told you that the maine which we aimed at, is, to take notice how the
soul may come to have an interest and a title to Christ, and how to come to be
possessed of him, and of all that great redemption which he has wrought. Now
the application of this discovers it self in two things: first, there must be
a preparation: secondly, there must be an ingrafting of the soul into Christ
before the heart can come to be partaker of that sap, or of that saving grace
which is in Christ, and which will flow from him to all that have any interest
in him through faith.

There must be a preparation, before the sinner can come to receive Christ. For
as before conversion he wanted grace, so he is not capable in the next passive
power to receive grace. For as the Apostle says, the carnal man is not
subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be; for the natural man perceives
not the things of the Spirit of God, nay, 1 Cor. 2, 14.
he cannot receive them, because they are foolishness to him. So that there
must be a preparation of the soul, before Christ will come and take possession
of it: and an emptying of the soul, before Christ will fill it.

Now this preparation made it self known, Preparation for Christ, stands in
two things.
(as you remember) in two particulars: No man can come to the Son, except the
Father draw him, John 6.44. Two things keep from Christ.


These were not things of mere complement, but of necessity required, as we
have disputed: and it is requisite, that the soul have both the works of
contrition, and of humilation. For there are two maine hindrances which keep
the soul off from Christ: as first, security in his own estate, whereby the
heart is blinded and deluded, and sets up his stand, and is at rest and quiet
in his condition, and he sees no need of any better: and from hence natural
men think it needless for Ministers to disquiet them; and they say, What
would you have done by us? And they think it a matter of curiosity, either to
have their hearts changed, or their lives reformed.

Now therefore the Lord sends in this work of contrition, and pierces the
heart through, and lets in the horror of his vengeance, and makes the soul see
that if he will have his sin, he must have his damnation too: and by this time
the soul comes to see need of a change: and he sees if he continue thus, he
is an undone man, and shall be damned for ever. Thus the Lord pluckes away the
soul from that security wherein naturally it is settled. thousands of souls
perish, resting merely in the husk and shell of their prayers and hearing,
which in themselves are good and commendable, but they are no Mediators or
Saviors to us. Therefore, that the Lord may pluck the soul from this carnal
confidence, he sends out another great work of humiliation, and makes the
soul see the weakness, and emptiness of its duties, and that there is enough
in its best services to condemn him, and for which the Lords wrath may
confound him for ever. And now the soul sees that notwithstanding all his
prayers and hearings, yet his sin remains, yea remains unpardoned, his
corruptions are not subdued, his conscience not quieted: and therefore
despairing of all help in himself, or in the creature, he falls down at the
foot of the Lord, and is content to be at Gods dispose: and when the soul is
thus fitted, then it is prepared to go out of it self, and to lay hold upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, and upon the fountain of all that good that works all
good in him. This humiliation works, and this is the fitting of the soul for
Christ.

Thus far we have gone: all this while the poor sinner is like the children
of Israel traveling in the wilderness, partly in the valley of tears, and
partly in the vast wilderness; they did not immediately come into the Land of
Canaan, but were wandering under the hands of Moses, which was a type of the
Law, and Joshua a type of Jesus Christ, and Egypt the resemblance of a man's
misery under sin and Satan; and their wandering in the wilderness was like the
humbling and breaking of the soul, that the Lord may do it good. Now we are
just upon the coasts of Canaan, and hard by all those spiritual good things
that Christ has purchased for us: and when the soul is thus fitted and
prepared, there is nothing to be done but to go into the good land and take
possession: I mean when the heart is thus rent from himself and his
corruption, then he must lay hold upon Christ, and enter into the good Land:
but before we go, we must have the command of our spiritual Joshua to set us
in possession of it.

Thus you see the soul is like a graft cut off from the old stock by
contrition, and also pared and fitted by humiliation, in regard of any
selfe-sufficiency.

Now the nex part that we are to handle, is the ingraffing of the soul into
Christ: and I will do two things in the handling of this great work of
ingraffing. First, I will discover the general nature of this work, leaving
all the difficulties and particulars of it till afterward, See it in the 2.
Doctrine.
if God give liberty: secondly, I will show you how the soul is ingraffed into
Christ.

1. What this ingraffing is. What ingraffing into Christ is.
This being in Christ, may be thus described to you: It is a work of the
Spirit of God, whereby the humbled sinner stands possessed of Christ, and all
the good that is in Christ. In this description you may take notice of three
things, which are the special guides to you for the understanding of that
which we will treat of.

First, that the humbled sinner stands possessed of Christ: for he that is not
humbled and broken hearted, has nothing to do with Christ, nor comfort
coming from him. I use this phrase, He stands possessed of Christ, rather then
that, He possesses Christ; because the work lies on Christ's part. The Spirit
of the Lord Jesus takes possession of and humbled sinner, and makes him part of
his care; and he comes by that means to be interessed into the care of
Christ: Christ possesses him, and by this means he comes to be possessed of
Christ: so that all he has, is merely the work of the Spirit of God upon
him: as the Apostle says Gal. 4.9, But now that you have known God, or rather
are known of God. It is not what we conceive, or what we know, but what he
knows and conceives: and in Phil. 3.14. Saint Paul strove hard, If that I may
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of him. He does not say that he
is able to apprehend God, but that God comprehends him: As it is with a little
child, that is not able to go of it self, the father takes the child in his
hand and then it is able to go. The child holds the father, not because it has
any power of it self, but because the father holds him: so we hold the Lord
Jesus Christ, because we are holden of him: for the humbled soul stands
possessed of Christ, because Christ makes him his care, and his charge, and
takes possession of him, and therefore he comes to have an interest in Christ.

Secondly, as he stands possessed of Christ, so he is made partaker of all the
spiritual good things that are in Christ: still the action lies chiefly upon
Christ, and we so move, as we are first moved by him; and we so work as we are
wrought upon by him: He is made partaker of all the good in Christ, not because
he can challenge it, but because the Lord will convey and communicate it to
him. These two things you shall observe to be general operations, and to go
through all the works of application of Christ: as in vocation, the Lord by his
Spirit does draw the soul after him; there is the possession of Christ, and
then the soul follows Christ, and comes to him: and in justification, Christ
undertakes for the sinner, and lays down the payment of the debt for him, and
then he freeth the sinner from the debt: thus the soul is nearer still: and in
adoption, God the Father takes him in the room and right of a son, and then
he stands further possessed of grace; and withal the Lord estates him in all
the privileges of grace, in meekness, and holiness, and he sets his seal to
him, and gives him his mark: and withal, he is free from the power and
dominion of his corruptions. So that these two are general things, and have a
kind of conveyance of themselves over all the whole work of application of
Christ.



Now for the following discourse, we have chosen these words of the Prophet
Malachy, from which we will take only so much as will serve our turn for that
we have to speak.

These words are nothing else but a Prophecy of the ministry of John Baptist,
and in them two things principally considerable:

First, the work of the ministry of John Baptist, Mal. 3.1. Behold, I send my
messenger to prepare my way before me.

Secondly, The consequent good that flows from this, And the Lord whom ye
seek shall suddenly come into his Temple.

As great men have their harbingers to make ready their way before them, and to
make preparation for them before they come to any place; so it is with the Lord
of life, he is the great Commander of the world, it is he that takes
possession of the hearts of all that belong to life and happiness: but before
he comes to take possession, he sends John Baptist to prepare the heart and
when it is fitted, then he comes suddenly into his Temple.

Here consider, First, What the Temple is.

Secondly, What it is to come into his Temple, and how Christ comes into it.

This word Temple, besides the natural and literal sense of it, wherein it
aims at the material Temple of Jerusalem, which we will not meddle with,
Christ's temple is spiritual.
is taken spiritually, and so it is to be conceived here: and then it implies
the Church of Christ in the number of the faithful. You shall see the phrase
of Scripture to intimate so much, 1 Pet. 4.17. If judgment begin at the house
of God, what shall the end of the ungodly be, that obey not the Gospel of God?
There the house of God is opposed to them that obey not the truth of God, so
that they that obey the truth, that are willing to be at the dispose of God,
and reform their lives after his will and word: they are the house and temple
of Christ. As in general, all the people of God, thus obeying the word of God:
so in particular, every Christian man and woman is the Temple of Christ. As the
Apostle says, You are the Temples of the living God. 2 Cor. 6 16;
As it was in the material Temple in Jerusalem, the glory of the Lord filled
it, and the Lord said he would dwell in it for ever: so the heart truly
prepared is the Temple of the Lord, and the Lord Christ takes possession, and
rules in it, and fills it with all grace. This is the meaning of the first word.
It is plain by force of argument: The word Temple is to be taken in the same
sense in which the way to the temple is taken: As also the way to the Temple.
but the way to the Temple is the fitting of the soul and the heart for
Christ; for so all the Evangelists express it: John says, Repent ye for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.2. Isa. 40.3.
Also Isaiah says Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. So
that the preparation of the way to the Lord is nothing else but for people to
repent of their sins. Repenting and preparing are both one. But more especially
that place of Saint Luke, chapter 1. ver. 15.17. where speaking of John Baptist, he
says, He shall be full of the holy Ghost: nay, He shall come in the spirit
and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for
the Lord: The way is in the heart of a man, and this preparation is the turning
of their hearts to the way of the just men. And that other place in Luke 3.5.6
can admit of no other sense, Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain
and hill shall be brought low: And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.
These words cannot be literally understood, for there was no mountains to be
removed, nor no valleys to be filled up, for Christ was no temporal King: but
the meaning is, a removeall of all those mountains and impediments that stood
between Christ and the soul. Thus you see the Temple prepared is nothing, but
the heart truly broken and humbled.

Secondly, let us see what it is to come into this Temple. And Christ's coming
to it.
As the way and the Temple was, so the coming into this Temple is to be
spiritually understood, and that is, when the Lord Jesus Christ comes to take
possession of him: but consider this, he comes like a King, and therefore he
has John Baptist to make way for him, The coming of a King discovers it self
in two things: first the King takes the Sovereign command of the place where
he is, and if there be any guests there, they must be gone, and resign up all
the house to him: so the Lord Jesus comes to take sovereign possession of the
soul. Secondly, the King brings all his provision with him so the Lord Christ
brings all provision for the soul with him.

So then the meaning is this; When John Baptist by the power of the word has
wrovght upon the soul, and made it humble and low, and willing to be at the
Lords dispose: when the broken heart seeks for a Savior, then the Lord comes
suddenly, and like a King. You humble souls consider this he will take
possession of those humble broken hearts of yours, and he will bring his own
provision with him; he cares for nothing but a vessel emptied, and a heart
thus fitted and prepared: he will bring provision enough, of comfort, of
vocation, of adoption, of sanctification, and the like.

In this part of the verse thus opened we have two doctrines: first, that the
Lord Jesus Christ will not delay to come into the heart that is truly humbled
and broken. Who is the Lord? Christ. What is the Temple? The heart truly
humbled. And when comes he? Suddenly: this is the ground of the doctrine. The
second is; the Lord Jesus takes possession of the soul humbled, and provides
for it as his own: he comes like a King, as I said before. This is the ground
of the second point, which discovers the nature of the implantation: the first
discouers the appurtenances of it.

Christ delays not to come into an humbled heart.
For the first.

The Lord Jesus will not delay to come into the heart truly humbled: as I may
say, he lays all other works aside, as if he did look for none but this,
how he may come home to the heart truly humbled. The Lord will not come at a
proud worldly minded man: No, the Lord leaves all; yea heaven and all the
world, and only looks after, and loves to live with the humble broken heart.

For proof of the point. This is the reason why the Scripture does not content
it self to show the mavelous delight that God has in such a spirit. See how
plenteous the Scripture is to show how ready the Lord is to call in at the
heart of the humbled soul, and to rise, and lie, and rest, to eat, and drink,
and sleep with the humble heart: nay when he is come, he will not away again,
as we may see in that example of the lost son, Luke 15.20. He said, I will
arise and go to my father, and say, Father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hired servants. As soon as ever he resolved of the work, mark how the father
behaues himself toward him, though he were base and beggarly in his
condition. He might have said, Let thy Harlots and thy Queanes help thee: But
he saw him a far off, and ran to meet him, and fell upon his neck, and kissed
him. Though he were a wretched creature yet now he because the father saw him
humble, he remembers not that he had been with Harlots, all was forgotten; the
father saw him afar off, before the child could spy him; he pitied him
before he could confess his sin: he was more ready to meet him than he was to
come, and he kissed him before he could receive any acknowledgement from him.
This is the mavelous enlargement of the Lord to receive an humble broken
heart And when he had kissed him, Luk 15.21, 22
the lost child said, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his
servants Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring upon his
hand, and so forth: as if he had said, It is no matter what thou have bin now
thou art come home, and have humbled thy self, I am glad of it: Thus he
passes by all the former misdemenours. And so it is in the same Chapter, ver,
4.5.6. If a man have an hundred sheep, and lose one, will he not leave the
ninety nine, and seek that which was lost? And when he has found it, he
lays it on his shoulders rejoicing. And when he comes home, he calls
together his friends, and says, Rejoice with me, for I have found my lost
sheep.

The meaning is this: The lost sheep is the lost sinner that is wandered from
the Lord Jesus Christ. The soul, that after all the mercies and favors that
God has showed to allure him, he goes away from God, and then one drops in a
ditch, and another is lost in the wilderness or Forest: yet he leaves all to
seek the lost sheep, and leaves not seeking till he finds it, and if he
has found it he rejoices. For the Lord will leave all to seek a poor lost
sinner, and the more need thou have, and the more lost thou art in thy self,
the more labor will the Lord take to find thee out: and though thou can not
go the Lord will carry thee upon his shoulders; and when thou art come home,
he rejoices exceedingly. This shows the mavelous bounty of the Lord to
poor sinners: it is the scope of the Parable concerning the Pearl, Matthew.
13.45.46. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a wise Merchant man, who having
found one Pearl of great Price, went and sold all that he had to buy it. The
pearl is nothing else but that rich mercy of God in his son Christ, and Christ
in the promise is the Pearl, and the Merchant-man is every Christian man that
wants mercy and comfort to relieve him; for he says, What is all the world to
me if my soul wants mercy? Well he knows where the Pearl is. What Is the
price of it? Sell all. Selling of all is nothing but this when a man is content
to part with sin and all carnal confidence in himself, and he sees himself
miserable because of sin, and utterly unable to succor himself, and is
content to part with wit, or parts, or gifts, and all that he has for the
Lord Jesus Christ then suddenly he has the Pearl. If it be so says the Lord,
that nothing will quiet thee but the Lord Christ, and mercy from him, then take
mercy. If chapmen bid roundly, you shall not need to stand higling for it.
Would you have Christ to comfort you, and pardon you? then lay away all your
lusts and corruptions, and the world, and all the haunts of your hearts, and
all the distempers that are in them. Do this, and the Lord will give you the
Pearl, he will give you Christ, and mercy from him.

The Reasons why the Lord will not delay to come to the humbled soul, are
three:

Reason 1. The Lord Jesus Christ was sent for this very end by God the Father,
as Mat. 15.24, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And not only so, but Christ came for that end: as Luke 19.10. The Son of man
is come to seek, and to save that which was lost: the end of God the fathers
sending of him, and the maine scope of his coming was, to seek and save that
which was lost, that is, that is lost in the sight and sense of his own misery,
and lost in regard of his own insufficiency to help himself; for the lost
man is willing to be guided by another. If you should find a man in the
wilderness, and say, Friend, this is not the way, would not he be contented to
hear and to yield to it? So if thou be lost, if thou see thy own misery for
sin, and that if thou lie in this estate thou art a damned man, and if thou see
thy self lost in regard of thy own insufficiency to help thy self, and that
thou art not able to get out of this condition and misery, wherein thou art
willing to be reformed, and to be disposed of: then know that the Son of
man, the Lord Christ Jesus, came to seek and save such lost sinners; and when
he has found them, he will not leave them in this lost estate, but will save
them. If this be then the end of God the Fathers sending him, and the scope of
Christ's coming to save the lost sinner, then certainly above all he will be
faithful in that for which he came, he will undoubtedly save those that are
lost.

Reason 2. Because the humbled broken hearted sinner is the fittest subject to
set out these praises of this glorious work of our redemption; he is the
fittest for God to work upon, and for the Lord Christ to dwell in, and he is
the fittest to set out the praise of that rich grace in Christ, as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things according to the counsel of his
own will. Why? That we should be to the praise of his glorious grace.
Therefore now consider it; there is no soul so fitting to set forth the
glorious grace of Christ, and the great work of our redempption; as the poor
humbled selfe-denying heart: for the humbled soul waits for all grace from
God, and is willing to return all to God again; and he says, I am not
worthy of the least mercy I need; and therefore he is contented that God deny
him any thing. This man is the fittest to set forth the great work of God, and
to further the aim of God in setting forth the riches of his glorious grace:
it is all grace from the beginning to the end, as Zechariah has it, chap. 4.7.
Grace laid the first stone, and grace laid the last stone, and all the people
cried, saying, Grace, Grace, so the humbled soul sets forth the praise of God,
and says, I deserve nothing but hell, and whatsoever I have more than hell, it
is all from the Lord and all glory is due to him: it is grace that I live, and
it is grace that I persevere; it is all grace, from election to glorification:
whereas the proud heart spoils all the work of God. And it is no wonder though
God will not dwell with a proud heart. The proud heart, for what he has, and
for what he can do, gives all to himself: where is grace now? The humble
heart is like a great shop, where the great frame of man's salvation may best be
seen: (for there are many dark shops that deceive the buyer, and mar the
wares too): for the humbled heart says, The work of the Lord is mavelous in
our eyes and ought to be mavelous in our hearts. No man will dwell in a
house, but where his credit may be maintained, and for his convenience: if
either of these may be hindered by it, he will not dwell in that house. Its no
wonder then though the Lord Jesus come to dwell in the heart of an humbled
soul. Christ would work, and the humbled soul is contented with it; and
Christ would have all the glory from the humbled soul, and he is well
contented to give all the glory to God. We use to say in the schools, If any
man have disposed of his dwelling, and framed the building, and fitted it, he
will set it up except he either want wisdom, and knows not how to do it; or
else power, and is not able to perfect that work which he has begun. These
cannot befall God. A wise efficient cause never framed any matter, but he
brings in the frame, and sets it up. He that has fitted and framed all the
materials of his building, if he will not make up the frame for himself, it is
either because he wants power and cannot do it, or else wants wisdom and
knows not how to do it; but the Lord that has fitted the heart for himself,
that all may be done by him, and all the glory of the work come to him again,
he neither wants power nor wisdom to finish the work; he has begun, and
therefore he will not defer, but will come suddenly and take possession of
him.

Reason 3. Lastly, the Lord will not defer to come to dwell in an humbled
heart, because all hindrances are now taken away, and therefore the place is
ready to receive him, and he ready to come, certainly he will come without
delay. If there be any hindderances to keep out Christ it must be either on
Christ's part, or on our parts: but in the humble heart there is nothing to
hinder it, If any thing keep us off from Christ, it is either because we love
our selves, or our corruptions. Now the humble heart has renounced both of
these, and the humble soul says, My sin shall not rule me, and, my self
cannot save me, therefore let the Lord Jesus Christ come and take possession of
my heart. The humble heart has renounced sin and himself, and now he would
have the Lord Jesus Christ to be his King and Savior. Now all the hindrances
must be on Christ's part: and that cannot be granted for Christ is so far
from being unwilling that he desires to come in: for he has knocked at many a
proud heart: Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice,
and open unto me, I will come into him and will sup with him, and he with me,
Rev. 3.20. And in other places he says, Forsake thy sins and corruptions, and
receive thy own salvation and be not under the rule of sin and those base
lusts. Cant. 5.2.
Open my love, my dove, my undefiled. Surely if the door were open he would
come in: nay himself says so professedly, as in that place aforenamed. Oh he
has knocked many a time at the heart of a poor wretch, and said, If any man
will open to me, I will come in. If any; He that promises to come in if the
door were open, there is no unwillingnesse on his part: but in the humbled
soul there are no more lets, for he has thrown away sin in himself, and
said, I love you not, I regard you not, let the Lord Jesus come and rule in
this same broken heart of mine.

Thus gather up all: If it be the end of God the Fathers sending Christ, and
the scope of Christ's coming, and if the glory of his grace be much more
advanced this way, and if there be no hindrances, then immediately expect him,
he comes suddenly.

Great comfort to each humbled soul.
Use 1. The uses are manifold: First, it is a ground of mavelous comfort to
every humbled soul: let not stubborn and rebellious wretches that say, We
will not have this man rule over us; let not such, I say, meddle with this
comfort. To you I have nothing to say now, hereafter I shall say something to
you to your cost. But all you souls that are willing to give way to Christ
Jesus, and to break open door for Christ, and all you that have any evidence
of this work, I say all you broken hearts go your way with comfort, Christ
will comfort you, nay, he will meet you at home Me thinks this is enough to
comfort the heart of any in the world. Then let what can befall us, the Lord
Christ will come suddenly.

But some will say,

come and rise up in arms against thee, the Lord Christ will come suddenly,
and then mercy will come to pardon, and grace will come to succor thee against
thy sin.

Apoc. 3.2. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man will hear and
open: he does not say, I stand at the door of a Nobleman, but at every base
adultererer and drunken wretch. If the drunkard and the adulterer will open the
Lord will come in and sanctify him, and take possession of him, and rule in
him, and cleanse him from all his lusts and corruptions. Though thy lusts and
abominations be many, that will not hinder him.

And as there is admirable comfort against sin, so there is admirable comfort
against all misery. He knows nothing that knows not that all the Christian
world is in an uprore, and that the enemy does work abroad. But though you do
not see these, you may see the world opposing, and the Devil temptting, and
the wicked casting reproach upon all hands, and your hearts begin to be
daunted, and say, I would profess Religion, but my father would be
discontented, and shame, and disgrace will come in amain, and misery and
persecution will come, notwithstanding the Lord Jesus Christ is coming into
those souls of ^ours. For if you be soundly humbled, Christ comes suddenly,
and then come what can come, in all troubles Christ will comfort you, and in
all weaknesses Christ will strengthen you, yea, he will let the spirit of glory
rest upon you here, and glorify you with himself for ever hereafter. In all
wants there is comfort: though friends, and means, and all go, yet Christ
comes: and the further thy friends go from thee, the nearer will Christ come to
thee. Eccles. 10.19
Let your souls be herein refreshed for ever. Money, as the Proverb is, answers
all. A man will change honor, and leave his place for money: and we use to
say, Money will do it. If you want honor money will buy it, and whatsoever
the world can do, money can do. And hereupon it is that the rich man says, I
have it by me: if he wants a house, he has money that will buy it. You that
are humbled go your ways, and eat your meat with glad hearts the Lord accept
of you, the God of comfort refresh your hearts yet more against these
troublesome times. Luke 12.32.
It is the speech of Christ to his disciples, Fear not little flock, it is
your fathers will to give you a kingdom. If a broken and humbled soul go
into prison, Christ will go to all the prisons in Christendom but he will find
him out, and there he will comfort him. If the humbled soul go into the
Indies, Christ will be there with him: nay, if it were possible for the
humbled soul to go down to hell, the Lord Christ would come into him: for
wheresoever he is, Christ will be. Fear not, be not dismayed, Christ is thine,
you have not only a Kingdom but a Christ, and he answers to all. Christ is
the God of all comfort, and the father of all mercy: thou have many wants and
weaknesses, and Christ is the God of all mercies; from him comes every good and
perfect gift, and he will comfort thee. Wheresoever thou art, Christ will look
in: if thou art banished, he will wander up and down all wildernesses but he
will find thee, and save thee for ever. If we be not comforted, it is a shame
for us, considering what wonderful privileges we have in Christ.

Use 2. The second use is for examination and trial. They are of a naughty
spirit, who endure not broken spirits.
Does Christ come suddenly into the heart truly humbled and prepared? Let us
try then, and take a taste of the spirits of such men that are not able to
bear nor endure the presence of poor broken hearted sinners. If the servant
will not lie for the masters advantage, and if the child leave his base
courses, and will not give a carnal father content according to his mind,
mark how their spirits rise against such men, their hearts rise with
mavelous desperate indignation against such men, they cannot think of them
with any quiet, they cannot brook the sight of them: if it be a servant never
so loose and vile, he is regarded; but the humble child is trampled upon, and
they say to him, You had best go to your holy brethren, and to the company of
such and such precise ones. This is the undoubted argument of a graceless
spirit: either Christ erres, or else thou art out of the way; either Christ is
to be blamed for his practice, or thou. Does he come to such as are humbled and
art thou weary of them? Thou art a graceless soul, and an enemy to the Lord
of life, When the people of Israel began to speak of going into the
wilderness to sacrifice to the Lord their God, they did stink, and were
abominable in the eyes of Pharaoh and the Egyptians: indeed the Egyptians did
always dislike them, Exodus 5.21.
but now they were an abomination to them, This was nothing else but a type:
Pharaoh is the Devil, and this Egyptian servitude is our spiritual bondage
under sin. How does thy heart stand toward these poor souls? Art thou
carried with indignation against them? It is an argument of a heart void of
grace, and that thou art an Egyptian to this day, therefore the Lord will
requite thee in thy own kind: and that thou art now weary of their society,
and art not able to live with them, and art loath to be seen amongst them, and
dare not show thy self to come within the compass of a broken heart, lest
thy drunkken companions revile thee for the same, and say, art turned a Puritan
now? will you be of their company? and then thou swearest thou know them
not. This is a shrewd sign thou shall never enjoy the company of those poor
Saints in glory.

Choose the brokenhearted for companions.
Learn of our Savior, the broken hearted sinners, are the best for society in
the world, and therefore rejoice thou in their company. Let us not think much
to come to such, as Christ comes to: let us not think that the baseness of
their persons, or the meannesse of their estates, will be any cause for us why
we should discard or disdain their company. Be sure that thy soul be far
from this carnal distemper.

Happily thy carnal friend will say, Thou will disgrace thy person to keep
company with such as those are. Make answer for thy self, and against their
face, and say, They are my betters: yea the Lord Jesus Christ blessed for ever,
keeps company with them, and shall not I do it too? The Lord Jesus desires no
better company, and shall I go any further? If he be a sound broken hearted
sinner, its no matter what his condition be. As the Apostle Saint John says,
That you also may have fellowship with us, 1 John 1.3, Why, (may some say) what
great matter is that? The Apostle says, our fellowship is no small matter: for
it is with God the Father, and with Jesus Christ. There is never a poor soul,
though he go barely, and fare meanly, but if his heart be truly humbled,
his fellowship is with Jesus Christ which is no little matter. Zech. 8.23. when
the Lord had honored the Jews there came many citizens to them, and took hold
of the skirt of a Jew, and said, We will go with you: for we have heard that
God is with you. So do thou. Do thou see a broken hearted man, lay hold on
his skirts, dwell in that house if thou can, and say, I will live with thee
for ever. God is with thee: nay, the Lord is in thee: yea, the company of an
humbled soul is even a corner of heaven here upon earth. It is so in truth,
and therefore let it be so in your judgments. What is it to be in heaven? We
shall be ever with the Lord: this is to be in heaven, 1 These. 4.17. Is this to
be in heaven? Then wheresoever thou art, thou art with Christ, thou art in
heaven. Whenever thou art in the company of a broken hearted sinner, thou art
with Christ, and therefore in heaven: and whenever thou come into their
company, Christ Jesus will give thee the meeting. Your fashionmungers count it
a matter of credit to have Court fashions: this is the Court fashion, and the
Court is where Christ our Lord and King is: Christ dwells in such a house, and
in such a heart; and therefore as thou do hope to be with Christ for ever,
rejoice to be with such persons: this is the only way that a man must take to
choose his company. Do good to all neighbors, and all Christians, and hope
well of all, but rejoice especially in those whose hearts are truly broken in
the sight and presence of the Lord.

Be thankful for this great respect of Christ to thy poor soul.
Thus you ought to have your hearts stored with thankfulness: nay, to stand
and wonder at the goodness and kindness of God, I would have a man spend all
his time this way. When the Lord Jesus has gone through many Countries; and
passed by many rich, and honorable, and great ones of the world, and that he
should look in at a poor family, and knock at a poor man's door, and that
he should look in at a poor wretched heart of a wife or of a child, this is
mavelous mercy. If a great person, especially a Prince or Monarch, did look
into a poor man's house, or come to visit a man in prison, what would the world
say? Oh, the like was never heard of, the King himself in his own person
lighted there, and staid there, and went into the dungeon, and conferred with
him a great while, Men would be besides themselves if they had this favor
from the King. In Luke 1.43. when Mary was with child of the Lord, and came to
visit Elizabeth she said to Mary, Whence is this to me that the mother of my
Lord should come to me? I see no ground nor reason for this, there is no worth
on my part that I should look for such favor. Now if she were so ravished
with the presence of Mary the mother of Christ, what may thou be then in
regard of the presence of Christ himself that is come to lodge in thy heart?
Thou have cause to be ravished with admiration, and to say, Whence is it that
not only the mother of my Savior, but even my Savior himself, should come
to me? What to visit me that opposed him? and to visit me that have preferred
my base lusts before the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ? Whence comes this? It
was that which Solomon took notice of in the first of Kings c. 8. v. 28. for
when he had built the Temple, and the Lord had engaged himself by promise to
come and dwell in the same, he said, Is it true that the Lord will come to
dwell upon the earth? Behold the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him,
much less this House that I have made. As it was in the material Temple, so
much more in the spiritual Temple: for thy heart is his Temple. Therefore thou
may reason thus with thy self, and say, Is it true? will the Lord dwell upon
the earth? the heaven of heavens cannot contain him; and shall this earththen
mud wall, this earthly Tabernacle, and this sinful wretched heart? Oh that the
Lord should come to dwell in such a soul! this is a mirror of mercy. Do you
humble souls as the Centurion did when Christ was come into his house. I am
not worthy (says he) that thou should come under my roof; but speak the
word only, and my servant shall be whole. So say thou Lord I am not worthy
that thou should come under the roof of this sinful wretched heart, only
send thy Angels to visit me, and thy word to comfort me: but for to come in thy
own person from heaven to such a poor creature as I am; the Angels must come
from heaven to wonder at this mercy, and to magnify the Lord for it: therefore
as you have received Christ, walk worthy of him and be thankful to the Lord
for the same.

for the conveyance of grace, They that would have Christ dwell in them must be
willing to be humbled.
and mercy to you, nay, that Christ himself may take possession of you, and it
is the way and means that will never deceive you. Would you have Christ to
dwell in you? then be humbled, and be not wanting to your selves, and then
Christ will never be wanting to you: labor to get this humiliation, and
Christ will come immediately into your souls. Have a heart but rightly
disposed, and without all question Christ will come to comfort and refresh thee
upon all occasions. You see the way to get a Savior to come and dwell in you,
then walk in that way, and give no rest to thine eyes, or any quiet to thy
heart, before thou have gotten this frame of heart. Take heed of all
distempers, do not think the time long, and say, I have waited long, and many
a year, and I have looked many a wishly long look and yet I cannot hear of
the Lord Jesus to visit this poor perplexed heart of mine. If the Lord seem
to delay in the performance of his promise, say as David did, Ah, when will thou comfort me? Psalm. 119.82. Nay, lay the blame where the blame is, and
consider thy own sturdinesse and vileness: it is thy own fault why Christ
comes not: thou will not open, and therefore Christ is not come: thou do not
prepare for him, and for this cause it is that thou do not enjoy the company
of such a blessed Savior: at St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.^. The Lord is no^
slack, as some men count slacknesse, but the Lord takes the be^ season, and is
long suffering toward us. When the season is, we shall have it; for it is not
his slacknesse. The time is not long, do not think so, he has not forgotten
to be gracious to a poor humbled soul: but l^oke into thy own heart and way
and see thy own folly there Have thou p^epared often, and waited long, and yet
thou hear no news of a Christ, and of mercy? Ah go to thine own heart,
and say, Surely I am in fault, the wound is in my self: others have received a
Christ, and he would have come into my heart too for ought know. Nay, he is as
willing to come to thee as to any, but thy own hasty heart shuts the door
against him: therefore be a based kindly, and the Lord will come, and not
tarry. Did you ever account of the coming of ^hrists presence to you? Was the
presence of Christ ever worth the having? and would you not have him to come
into your hearts, that will bring grace and glory, and mercy, when he comes? as
L^ke 19.9. when Christ was come in^o the house of Zacheus, he said, This da^ is
salvation come to thy house. So that when Christ comes, mercy and all comfort
comes. Is not Christ, and salvation by him worth the having? If ever you hope
for Christ, whip out all buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and then you
shall hear news of a Savior to take possession of you.

I have spoken of the means how to get an humble heart; now let me give you
two motives to provoke you to it.

of my soul, and he would have brought glory, and salvation, and comfort. Ah
woe to me that ever I was borne, that I would not part with base lusts, and
with wealth, but that I was content rather to part with Christ Jesus, than to
forgo these corruptions. What an unreasonable thing is this? he will curse
himself one day for it.

2 As it is unreasonable, so in the second place what an uncomfortable thing
will it be: Ah think of it in time: for the time will come, at the great day
of account, when we shall need a Savior and crave his presence, and be forced
to desire Christ to come to us, What a cut to our hearts will it then be, that
we have shut our hearts against him? When the sins of thy youth shall seize
upon thee, and thou shall see hell gaping ready to swallow thee up, and
destruction ready to take possession of thee, and Satan shall lay grievous
accusations against thee; and time (I say) shall then come that thou will say,
Ah that Christ would come to save and help me a poor forlorn wretch! Will it
not then be a gall to a man's heart to think of it? It will make him say, With
what heart can I look for grace or mercy from Christ, before whom I have
preferred the world, and my base lusts, and the delusions of the world? and
when the Lord Jesus Christ by his mercy did labor to allure me, and said
openly to me, My sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, I would none of him:
it is that Christ whom my heart rejected, and whose blood I trampled under my
feet, and shall I now come to him for mercy? Nay, how justly may the Lord
answer me as he did those people in Jeremy? Ier. 2.27. who in the time of their
trouble did say, to the Lord, Arise and help us: but the Lord made them
answer, and said, Where are the Gods that thou have made thee? let them arise
if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for according to the number
of thy Cities are thy gods, O Jacob. So will it be with you: you must away one
day, and go before the Lord Jesus: die you must, and to judgment you must
come, to give an account for all. Can you answer one of a thousand? can you
stand against the fiercenes of his wrath: Ah, how will those wounded souls be
helped? Only by a Christ. Then Christ and grace will be worth something. When
you lie looking every hour for the last gasp, then you will cry for mercy,
and Christ, and would give a world for him: but Christ will make you answer,
and say, Remember the time wherein thou would not have me to rule, or right
that heart of thine: thou would not have me to sanctify thee, and would
thou have me to save thee now? No, no: let thy base lusts and corrupt
companions save and succor thee, and procure consolation to thy soul, woeful
comforters are they all: you will then think it a terrible thing that this
Christ Jesus (which now you will not have your Savior to purge and sanctify
you) shall then be your Judge, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. The Lord Jesus shall come in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance to all that know him not. Thou that wilt not
have Christ to take away all thy sin, and to rule in thee, and thou that have
thrust Christ out of thy heart, and from thy house, thou will wish that thou
might never come to judgment: but Christ will come to thy cost. Thou
would not have Christ to rule in thy heart: therefore he will come in
vengeance to execute upon thee all those plagus threatened, and which thou have
deserved; and then stop him in judgment, if thou can. Now the way is
ready, and the means set fair before your eyes: take the right course, and
the Lord Jesus will not defer to come suddenly, do you what you should, and
Christ will do what you desire.

Ob. Ah, says one, it is mavelous hard to bid adieu to all lusts and
corruptions, and to cut off the right hand, and to cast away the right eye, and
to part with every darling distemper. Ah, says the covetous man, if I could
have Christ and the world too then I could be contented to have Christ: and the
Adulterer says, If I could have Christ, and my Queanes, and my lusts: and the
Hypocrite says, If I might have Christ and my secret haunts of heart, then I
would be willing to yield; but if all those corruptions must be sacrificed, and
if Christ must take away all my corruptions from me, and work all in me,
this will be tedious.

Answ. It will be bitter and tedious at first, but it will quit all cost in the
end, and it will never repent you then of all your tears that you have shed,
nor of all the anguish of heart which you have had, when you shall have mercy
and be for ever comforted thereby, and by this means have a way made to
everlasting life. I would have the heart of a poor Christian do as Shechem
says the heart of Hamor did when he would marry Dinah Genesis 34.22.23. Come let
us be circumcised as they are. Shall not their cattle, and their substance,
and every beast of theirs be ours? Their herds are great and their wealth is
mighty, and all this shall be ours. Thus he persuades the hearts of the people
to yield to him in it only, but through the desire of their goods. Let me
plead so with the soul of an humble sinner in this kind: thou must think of
humiliation as the Shechemite did of circumcision; I must never see the face of
drunkenness more, I must bid adieu to all carnal profits and pleasures: Ah
this goes to my heart, this pinches indeed, this strikes to the quick. They
would be circumcised though it were painful: how much more may thou reason
with thy own heart, and say, It is tedious and irksome, but it will be
comfortable hereafter. Let us be circumcised and bid adieu to all our lusts,
shall not all the substance of Christ Jesus be ours? Let us forsake the world
to have Christ, and not only mercy shall be ours, but even every grace and
comfort shall be ours, as the Apostle says, The God of all comfort and
consolation is ours. If thou will be humbled, and part with the world, and cut
away every lust, and throw away all whatsoever, then all the pleasures of his
right hand shall be ours: and all the happiness of heaven shall be ours; nay,
all the fatness of the earth shall be ours: Suppose I must part with these,
Affatim dives est, qui cum Christo pauper est, Hieron.
I shall have Christ for my riches; and if I part with friends, I shall have
Christ to stand by me, and if I part with honor here, I shall have Christ to
honor me; and if I part with joy here, I shall have those joys which are not
conceived by the heart of man. You fathers speak of it to your children, and
you husbands speak of it to yourwives; let every soul be humbled, and take all
mercy. Shall not all be ours? Fathers advise your little ones, and friends
advise one another.

Ob. But the poor soul says, I confess nothing should be hard, and nothing
should be dear, and I hope nothing shall be too hard for me, so that I may
gain a Lord Jesus Christ, if I know mine own heart, and if I know it not, let
the Lord make it known to me. I see no sufficiency in my self, over my sin
to succor me, and I have had a care to be burdened, and yet I see not a
Savior.

Answ. I answer to this; Is this true? and is thy heart humbled as thou say?
then I say, the Lord Jesus Christ is come, and has come many a day though thou
perceivest it not. So soon as thy soul is thus disposed, the Lord Jesus
comes, and that suddenly too, though thou know not at what time. As when
Jacob fell asleep upon the stone, and the Lord had made known himself to him,
he said, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I was not aware of it. So I
say, thou have been truly humbled, and the Lord Christ is truly come, and
thou know it not.

Ob. But can this be that the soul should be possessed of Christ, and not
apprehend a Christ?

Answ. Yes, it is not only possible, but it is too ordinary: and the reasons
why it is so, and the hindrances which keep a soul from seeing, they are
these four in particular: for there be four lets on our part.

1. First, Christ may come into thy soul, and thou do not know him. As one
man comes to another man's house, and happily one that he has loved and desired
too yet his guess is such, and the distance of the time so long since he saw
him, that he may be there and his friend never the wiser; so thou may
complain that the Lord Christ is not in thy soul, and yet know not when he
is there: this is the ordinary mistake in the soul, as it is in the sight.
Mat. 14.25, 26.27. Christ comes to his Disciples walking upon the sea, and they
were all afraid, because they had thought they had seen a Spirit, and they
cried out for fear: but Christ said, Be not afraid, it is I. Christ was then
most near to comfort them, when they had thought it had bin a Spirit to
affright them: and the fault was in their understanding, they could not
discern him. As it was in the bodily sight, so it is in the spiritual eye:
thou say, it is many a day since the Lord Jesus did open mine eyes, and
burden my soul, and made me weary, and made my sins loathsome to my self,
and I could even be content to be rid of my self, to be rid of my sin. Whence
comes it that thou art content to see thy sin? and whence is it that thou art
burdened with it, and that thou art content to be rid of thy self, and sin,
and all? Is it not from Christ thy Savior? whence is it that thou art content
to lie under the word of God, and to be disposed by it? Is it not from Christ?
Did you never hear of a poor countryman that went to the King in his hunting,
and asked him where the King was? It has been so in many dear saints of God;
as John 20.13.14, etc. after the death and resurrection of Christ, Mary went to
look for him, and the Angel said, Why weepest thou? and whom seek thou?
Oh, says she, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid him. Her soul did yerne after Christ, and she enquires of Christ,
for Christ, and thought him to be the Gardener. Christ said to her, Mary why
weepest thou? then she turned her self, and said, Rabboni, that is, Master.
Mary loved Christ and was acquainted with a Savior; yet now because of the
suddenness of it, she understood him not, and therefore she asked him for a
Savior. So I may say to thee poor humbled soul, Why weepest thou? and thou
say, Oh, I seek a Savior, if you can tell me the way whereby mercy may be
derived from him to my soul, I beseech you advise me of it; if you know the
way how I may carry my self before the Lord, that I may find mercy in his
sight let me know it. The truth is Christ is there, it is he that makes thee
look after a Christ, and it is Christ that makes thee seek unto him for
mercy; thou seek to a Christ for a Christ.

Secondly, as the soul of a poor sinner knows not Christ though he meet him
in his way, and out of the weakness of his judgment, and by reason of his
ignorance, he knows not his presence: so in the second place thou attendest
not to the Lord Jesus when he is come: therefore he comes meekly, and quietly,
and calmely and spiritually, notwithstanding thou regardest him not. Christ
came into the midst of his Disciples when all the doors were shut, and they
attended not to him: so thou know not of a Christ, because thou attendest
not to him and his coming. Consider this well: the maine hinderance is this,
when the heart of a poor Christian is marvellously taken aside with his own
weakness, and distempers, and troubles, and his mind is all upon them, Christ
passes by and he regards not: as Luke 24.5. when Mary came to seek for
Christ, the Angel said to her, Why seek you the living among the dead? So
this hinders an humble soul from the knowledge of Christ: we look upon our
corruptions and rebellions, and rub the sore daily, and we think thus, can
grace be in such a heart as this? and will the Lord dwell in such a heart as
this, thus vile, and thus pestered with many base corruptions? Thou can never
see him there. Why seek thou a Christ to comfort thee, amongst thy own
corruptions, that would hinder thee from seeing him, and from receiving mercy
from him? It was not for want of eyes that Hagar did not see the well, but
because she did not search for the Well: so it is with a poor soul.

The well of life is in Christ, there is the fountain of all grace and mercy;
the well is hard by us, nay it is within us: but alas we sit like Hagars, and
thus we lie and perish in our discouragements. Simile.
If a man prepare for some great person, happily some King or dear friend, and
one that he has long looked for: if he comes not, then he gets him into a
close walk, and there he sits sighing and mourning for his abscence; and
while he sits thus, the man is come and has been long in the house before he
thinks of any such matter; and when he comes in, he begins to ask if the King
or his friend be come. Oh, say they, he is come long ago: where have you bin?
we wondered what was become of you. Just so it is here: for when we are weldred
in our own sorrow, and think thus, Oh, when will it once be? The soul looks
long for Christ to comfort him, and because he receives not comfort, he goes
into the dungeon of desperate discouragements: and then the Lord Jesus comes to
refresh that soul, though he perceives it not. Simile.
A man may sit long in a dark cellar or dungeon before he can see when the Sun
comes into the house and shines there: but let him come from the cellar, and
then he shall see the Sun shine clearly. So when the Son of righteousness
shines into a man, and reveals himself, he gets him down into his
distempers, and will not look to a Savior; the Son of righteousness is come
and shines, and he perceiues it not. And as Phillip said, John 14.8. Show us
the Father and it suffices. Then Jesus says unto him, have I been so long
a-time with you, and yet have thou not known me? he that has seen me, has
seen the Father: he desires to see the Father, and yet when he sees Christ,
he sees the Father. So it is with this blessed frame of soul: for when a
poor soul mourns under the burden of sin, and desires that the word of God
may prevail with it, and take all away, then he desires to see Christ: this
is the Spirit of Christ humbling, and breaking, and waking: it is the Spirit of
Christ that makes you willing to part with sin. Has Christ been so long
with you, and do you not know him?

Gideon; for the spirit of Christ, came to him, and said, The Lord is with he,
thou mighty man of valor. And Gideon said, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us,
why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles that our
Fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? but now
the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites
Judges 6.12.13. The Angel knew what he said: but mark what he replies; And
he would not be persuaded that the Lord was there, because the enemy had the
upper hand: he thought God was not present with them, because the enemies were
vexing them, and prevayling against them: but the argument was naught, for the
Angel was certain of that which he spoke. Just so it is for all the world
with the poor brokenhearted sinner that now is oppressed with many
corruptions. Sometimes when the faithful ministers speak to them and say, Go
in peace you brokenhearted sinners, the Lord is with you; Oh, say they, if the
Lord were with us, why does all this befall us? Why are our minds so ignorant,
and our hearts so vile and sinful? and why are our corruptions so violent. Can
the Lord be here and so many weaknesses too? The Lord has done great matters
for them, that he has done good too, and they have rejoiced with joy
unspeakable and glorious: the Saints of God have been more then conquerours
through him that loved them, and have subdued their corruptions: but yet we are
under the power of our sinful, poysonfull, venomous hearts still. Can the Lord
be with us, and all these abominations not only press in upon us, but even
captive us? Yes, you mistake the presence of Christ, he is as well with you in
the opposing of sin, as in the over-comming thereof: therefore the argument is
false. The same Apostle that was sometimes more then a conqueror, was
sometimes led captive, as Romans 7.23. and he that did walk after the spirit of
Christ, had the Flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, Gal. 5.17. This is your imagination, that if once the King come to your
house, and keep court, no Traitor must come there: yes, Traitors are ever
where the court is, they follow the court; for there they think to accomplish
their villainy. And you think if the King come to your house, he must hug you
in his arms, and presently promote you to all honors: so the soul says, If
Christ were with me, I should have ability to do my duty, and I should have
more power against corruption. Though wheresoever Christ is, there is sight of
sin; yet this extraordinary sweetness does not follow: but because they have
not this, they think they have not Christ. It is just with the soul in this
case, as if some Gentleman should receive the King into his house, Simile.
and yet he would not be persuaded the King was come, because he did not
presently send for him into the presence chamber, and advance him to some great
place of honor: he is there, though he will not presently send for you. This
was the fault of Thomas, John 20.25. he would have tied the certainty of
Christ's resurrection to his own sense, and if he could not do this, and
that, he would not believe that Christ was risen: for so the Text says, the
Disciples all saw it, and did witness it, but he confines all to the compass
of his own sense; except he could see in his hands the print of the nails,
and thrust his hand into his side, he would not believe Just so it is for all
the world with the poor humbled, broken soul: When a man depends upon sense
and some stirring apprehension: Oh, says he, if I could see that evidence of
Gods love, and had that assurance, and if my heart could thus break for my
sin, and if I had this ability with all care and cheerfulness to all holy
duties, then I could believe that Christ were come: this I told you before, you
will not believe that the King is come to your house, except he will send for
you presently into his privy chamber, and make you the favorite of the
Kingdom. And therefore it befalls the soul of a poor sinner as it did good
old Jacob, Genesis 45.26. his sons told him that his son Joseph was alive, but
his heart did faint, for he could not believe it: but when he saw the Chariots
that his son had sent for him, his spirit revived within him, and he said, It
is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, etc. Thus it is with us, we have the
messengers of God, and the testimony of Scripture to confirm the presence of
Christ; but we will not believe except we be charioted with that power and
ability, and that feeling; and except you have your hearts fully satisfied
according to your own imaginations, you will not be persuaded that Christ is
come into your hearts.

Emmaus, Luke 24.16. for when Christ came and joined sides with them in their
travels, and went with them, the Text says, that their eyes were holden that
they should not know him. See the ground of the holding of their eyes: Christ
presented himself in his own proportion; therefore the fault was not in the
substance that they did see. The fault was not in the ear, for that was not
hindered in any measure; neither did Christ blind their eyes any way, for their
eyes were thus far opened, as to see the way, and walk cheerfully in it.
What did hold their eyes then? leaving extraordinary things to God: it was
this, their thoughts were so busied about the death of Christ, and his
resurrection, that they did not know Christ though he were with them and
therefore Christ asked them this question; Luke 24.17. etc.
What manner of communication is this that you have one to another, and are thus
sad? And the one of them said to him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem,
and have not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?
And he said unto them, What things? And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus
of Nazereth, which was a Prophet, mighty in deed, and word, before God, and all
the people. We trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel:
and beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were done, and
whether he be risen again we know not. We find this by common experience, a
man that has his mind possessed with some sad meditation, though his familiar
friend be near him, yet he discernes him not: so the Disciples saw not a
Savior though he were in their presence: therefore in the 32. verse, when
Christ had opened the Scripture, and revealed himself to them, see what they
said, Did not our hearts burn within us, when he talked with us? As if they
should say, We had pregnant testimony enough of the divine presence, but we
had no eyes to see it: the burning of our hearts was argument enough that it
was Christ that spoke to us. So when the soul of a poor brokenhearted sinner
is taken up partly with the hurry of imaginations, partly with the violence of
some temptation, and partly in regard of some worldly misery that falls upon
it, it is so taken up with it, that it cannot see the Lord Jesus Christ, though
he has sensible experience of Christ, and the heart burns in love to Christ.
This is the reason why many a poor soul, when Satan lets fly at him, and
some heavy temptation presses in upon him, reveal never so many comfortable
promises, yet by reason thereof we find it by experience, that always those
distressed spirits forget whatsoever is spoken, and all their mind and talk is
upon the evil, and the violence of the temptation, and they attend not to the
comfort, and to the promises revealed to them: their eyes are held in this
manner, that though they are near to Christ, and even in the privy chamber,
yet they will not take notice of Christ, because their hearts are thus held off
from the apprehension of his presence. In Psalm 73.23. when the Prophet David
was fallen into a desperate perplexity, because of the prosperity of the
wicked, so that he began to question his own condition, at last he said,
Nevertheless, I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my right
hand. He could not see Gods providence over him, and his presence with him,
because his mind was so taken up with the prosperity of the ungodly: he saw
all their pomp, and their glory, and how their eyes stood out with fatness,
and that he was beaten every night: by reason hereof (I say) he saw not God
upholding of him, and going with him.

So gather up the former passages; partly through ignorance, because we know
not Christ when we see him, and partly through carelessness, because we attend
not to him when he is come, and partly because we misjudge the presence of
Christ upon false grounds, and partly the eyes are hid by the hurry of some
temptation, or some wordly extremity, that we cannot see Christ though he be
with us: these be the first hindrances on our parts.

And as it is thus with us, And for three reasons in Christ.
so there are other hindrances which let us that we cannot apprehend a Christ;
and they are these.

First, in general; as we deprive our selves of consolation in Christ, so the
Lord Jesus through our just deserving does withdraw himself from us: As in
Esaias 18.7. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of
Jacob, and I will look for him. And in Psalm 31.22. I said in my have, I am
cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplication, when I cried unto thee. Both these places do make it clear,
that many times though the Lord Jesus is near the soul, yet he apprehends it
not.

Now the Lord Jesus hides himself upon three causes especially.

them: he is with them while they are with him. No longer, no further does
Christ engage himself to be with us, but upon these terms. John 14.21. He
that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he
that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest
my self to him, The Lord will manifest himself to us: upon what grounds? If
we will love him and keep his Commandments. But if we break the condition
on our parts, and falsify that we have promised to do, no wonder though the
Lord withdraw himself from us. You see it is the tenor upon which he
promises his presence. Now if the Saints of God fall scandalously, and be
overtaken with some gross sin, this builds up the partition wall, that Christ
cannot be discerned: as it was with David, Psalm. 51.10. where he says, Create
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me: he was even
to begin the world new again. And it is Gods wise dealing with his own
servants: for God will not brook sin in his own servants: and they must
know, if they will have him to dwell in them, they must not give way to any
base sin, if they do, he will withdraw himself from them: not that God
forsakes finally whom he loved once, but he will take away the sense and
apprehension of his presence; that though he is there, yet the soul shall not
see it. And also when they give way to some secret distemper, and are at truce
with some infirmity, and they will be parlying with it, and meddle too much
with it, it is just with the Lord, and ordinary, to withdraw the presence of
his grace from such a man's soul. If a Christian be overtaken somewhat more
than ordinary, with a peevish spirit, or if he be something too eager for the
world, so that he grow cold in holy duties, and is in danger to lie and
dissemble for his gain, it is just with God, that this man should scramble for
his comfort, and welter up and down without any evidence of Gods love, And
also though a Christian commit not sin outwardly, yet if he give leave to
any sin, and beat truce with it, though they seem to hate it, and yet let
their meditations run upon it, and parley with some secret imagination, etc.
it is just with God to hide himself from them. And others there are that live
with men, and see their evils, and yet will not reprove them. I have known
many of those to have gone out all their days without any comfort. And it is
no marvel though they cannot see Christ, because they themselves build up the
partition wall between Christ and them: the Lord Jesus Christ is not able to
brook it, that he is thus slighted and neglected, and that any sinful base
distemper should be attended to, to keep company with it rather than with
Christ: Christ Jesus distastes it infinitely, and therefore withdrawes the
apprehension of his presence from such a person.

The second cause why the Lord hides himself, is, when the faithful servants
of God begin to grow careless and luskish to holy duties; and because God has
made known his good will to them, therefore they begin to grow careless and
secure. When the Lord sees this, that they do abuse his favor, so that now
they begin to grow secure and heartlesse, and to slag, and to grow sluggish, it
is just with the Lord to e^strange himself from that soul, and it is just
that that soul should find himself lost, that he may quicken up himself.
When Christians grow cold in prayer, and careless in holy duties, the Lord
takes away the light of his favor, and he leaves those sluggish hearts to
themselves: nay, God is forced even against his will and mind, even for the
good of those Christians, to take away the comfort of his presence: so that now
they begin to think they never had grace. If the Lord did not thus, they would
never mend their pace, nor quicken up themselves to any holy duties. And this
is the reason why many lie down in sorrow, and think they never had any grace
at all: the Lord sees it, and perceives it, that unless he should bring them
to this extreme hazard, they would never be drawn out from that desperate
security: but by this means in the end God makes them find their hearts and
tongues again, and makes them consider from whence they are fallen. Oh, says
the Lord, mercy is as good when you have it, as when you want it; the time was,
when you filled heaven and earth with your prayers, and you could pray
earnestly, and you could give the Lord no rest; you prized opportunities, and
now you have many opportunities and slight them. It is just with God, when we
begin to be thus tongue-tied, and to be secure, and to think all is well (now
the Lord has humbled our souls, and pardoned our sins, and showed us his
favor) for a time to leave those souls of yours, though he save you in the
end: to send you a hell upon earth, that so you may strive to receive that
mercy and comfort which formerly you had, and now have slighted. Thus he
dealt with the Church in Cant. 5.2, 3. when Christ knocked at the door, and
said, Open to me, my sister my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night: she made answer in
this manner, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I defile them? Now when Christ withdrew himself, then she
found her feet again, and followed Christ with much labor from place to
place, and could not be content till she had found him. And so it was with the
holy Prophet, Psalm. 30.6.
I said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed: but when he saw God going
away from him, see how he bestirres himself: 2 Samuel 22.7.
Oh, says he, I cried to thee, O Lord, in the time of my trouble. Then he
could pray, and hear again, and recount Gods former goodness, and perform
his former duties. Simile.
I have seen the father deal so with the child; when the father is going on
in his journey, if the child will not go on, but stands gaping upon vanity,
and when the father calls, he comes not, the only way is this, the father
steps aside behind a bush, and then the child runs and cries, and if he gets
his father again, he forsakes all his trifles, and walks on faster, and more
cheerfully with his father than ever. So when the Lord Jesus Christ sometimes
makes known himself to us, and would carry us on in a Christian course
cheerfully, we are playing with trifles, and grow careless, and cold, and
worldly, and remiss in prayer, and dead-hearted; the only way to quicken us
up, is, to hide himself, and to make us give our selves for lost; and then
they that could scarcely pray once a week, now will pray three or four times
aday.

Thirdly and lastly, the Lord does hide himself in his infinite wisdom and
fatherly care by way of prevention, that his servants and children might not
fall into some evil. He will not bestow the sense and sweetness of his
favor upon them, lest they should be proud thereof, and pranke up themselves
in regard of their privileges, and be carried with contempt of the weakness
of their fellow brethren: nay, if they had that which they desired, there were
no living with them: therefore the Lord in his care and goodness is feign to
hold them to hard-meat, and to keep them to a spare diet. He sees it suits
best with the hearts of wayward sinners; only he lets in some incklings of
his favor and grace, and upholds the heart with so much mercy as may bear it
up, and yet but with so much. Thus the Lord deals with us as a wise father
does with his child, Simile.
he sees if he had his portion in his hands, he would be riotous and
careless, and therefore it is wisdom not to trust him with his estate, but
to keep him low, and to keep him upon dependence, that he may have better
subjection from his hands. So it is with the Lord, he sees that we have
unruly hearts, and that if we had that evidence of Gods mercy made known to
us that we would have, we would be so proud, and so haughty, and so full of
contempt, and so censorious, that there were no living with us: therefore the
Lord keeps us short, and holds such souls low, and keeps us only in some
hope, to hold up our souls: and the more dependence the soul has, the more
observance has the Lord from us. Experience proves it true, I have many
things to write unto you; but you are not able to bear them now; you are not
capable of them yet. As it is with a little bark, Simile.
if it should have a great maine mast, and broad sail clothes, then in stead
of carrying it, it would be overthrown by them: therefore men proportion
their mast according to their ship or bark; and if it have skillful
Mariners, they strike sail when they come into the shallow or narrow Seas.
This is the reason why the Lord deals so with us: the soul is like the ship,
and the sense of Gods love and mercy is like the sail that carries us on in a
Christian course: and if we get but a little sail of mercy and favor, we go
on sweetly and comfortably; but if God give us abundance of assurance, our
cursed rotten hearts, would overturne, and in stead of quickening of us, it
would overthrow us: so that though God does it the fault is in our selves. That
I take to be the ground, why many a poor Saint of God has smoaked out his
days in doubting and making question of Gods mercy and goodness and at the
hour of death God has given them a full assurance of mercy, Note.
and so carried them full sail to heaven: they were not able to bear this
before. As a faithful Minister of God once said to a poor woman that had
been long time questioning her self, and doubting of her salvation, when at
last the Lord made it good unto her soul that Christ was her own, then the
Minister said to her, The Lord will not always give his children a cordial,
but he has it ready for them when they are fainting. The comfort of Gods
spirit is better then wine, Cant 1.2. Now when a man has a proud, haughty,
selfe-conceited heart, if he had much of this cordial, he would forget
himself, and trample upon every one; and therefore the Lord reserues this
great mercy to the last: this deprives a Christian of abundance of sweetness,
that otherwise God would bestow upon him. Let every man therefore go to his
own heart, and examine it; if while God is pleased to keep us under hatches,
and to knock off our wheels, and leave us in the dust, if yet in the meanest
degree we can snarle with Gods providence, and say, Why do I pray, and God
answers not? others cry, and God hears them, and why does he not hear me?
If when we are under we do thus, then what would we do if we might have what
we would? we would say as the people in Ieremies time, We will come no more at
thee, we are Lords, Jeremy 2.31. Therefore that the Lord may prevent this proud
spirit of ours, and that we may walk in humility before him, it is just with
God to withdraw his Spirit from us; if you have not comfort, thank your selves
for it.

So then, gather up all, and the sum is this; If we have not the
apprehension of Christ's presence with us, though he is there, then either it
is because of our own ignorance or carelessness we know him not, or attend
not when he comes; or else we mis-judge the presence of Christ; and only
esteem of his favor and presence according to the extraordinary sweetness
that we would have, and that we imagine should accompany the presence of
Christ; or else because our eyes are held with the hurry of some temptation,
and some worldly inconvenience, that we cannot see the Lord Christ though he
be within us; or else the Lord justly hides himself from us, because we are
fallen into some gross sin, or else parley with some private infirmities, and
do not labor to humble our selves mightily for them, and strive against them;
or else we do abuse the favor of God; or else we have proud hearts, that we
are not able to bea^e that comfort that we would have: therefore (I say) the
Lord hides himself from us to prevent evil in us. This I take to be the
answer to the question in hand.

Come into his Temple. Here is a word that gives us foot-hold for the second
Doctrine: into his Temple. This is a word of propriety; as in that place when
Christ came into the Temple, and saw those that bought and sold in it, He made
a scourge of small cords, and drove them all out of the Temple, and the sheep,
and the oxen, and cast out the changers of money, and overthrew the Tables,
John 2.15. and he claimed the house for his own, saying, My house shall be
called a house of prayer, Mat. 21, 13. This word (I say) is a word of
propriety. He comes not like a stranger, or like a forreiner, but like a King
to his Palace, to take possession of it. So the Doctrine is this:

Doct. 2. Christ takes possession of every humbled soul.
When the Lord Jesus comes to a soul truly humbled, he takes possession of
it as his own; he comes into his Temple. This is the scope of the comparison:
he comes as a King to his Throne where he sits, and to the Kingdom where he
rules. I told you before that the ingraffing of the soul into Christ, is
nothing else, but when the Lord by his Spirit comes to take possession of the
humbled soul: so that the soul stands possessed of Christ, and is made
partaker of all those spiritual good things that are in Christ. This is
general to all the works of application of Christ, and the footsteps are to
be seen in all the works of of vocation, justification, adoption,
sanctification, and the like: the Lord Jesus gets ground in the heart by all
these. As, in vocation, the Lord draws the soul to himself, and the soul
follows him; in justification the Lord undertakes for the sinner, and unites
the soul to himself, and makes it one with himself; in adoption the Lord
makes him a son, and in sanctification he sets a stamp upon him: but in all
see and consider there is possession, so that this work of possessing the
soul is general to all, and so is fit for this place. See how fitly it suits
to the work of preparation: the sinner resignes himself into the hands of the
Lord, and he falls down before his footstool, and lets the Lord do what he
will with him; and when the soul is come to this, the Lord Christ comes
immediately and takes possession of him, and does engage himself to provide
for him. This is the scope of that place, Ezekiel. 16.8. the Lord Christ saw the
Church in her blood, and took charge of her, and says, Thou becamest mine:
and then follow all the works of justification, as in the 9.10.11. Verses:
where the Lord entered into a covenant with the Church, and took a charge of
her: as if he should have said, Art thou content to be at my dispose? then I
will take thee to my self, and dispose of thee as may be for my own glory.
Romans 11.28. speaking of the Gentiles that were ingraffed into Christ and the
Jews that were cut off, that he might crush the proud hearts of the Gentiles,
that they might not be high minded, there he says, Thou bear not the
root, but the root bears thee: the root is the Lord Jesus Christ. For so it
follows Verse 17. If some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
Olive tree art graffed in amongst them. Every man naturally is a branch of the
wild Olive tree, and the root that he must be planted into, is the Lord Jesus,
and this plant must grow no more upon the old root: therefore the Lord Jesus
must in mercy take that soul, and by the power of his might bear up the
soul; and as the root feeds the branches, and gives fatness and strength
to them, so whenever the soul is truly severed from sin, the Lord Christ
takes it to himself, and bears it up, and provides for it as his own.

Quest. But some will say, Wherein does this possession stand?

Ans. This supreme possession of the soul does discover it self in two
particulars, and those will give the reason of it. First, the Lord Jesus
undertakes for the soul truly humbled: secondly, he disposes of the soul
so far as may make for his own glory.

the Umpire, and says I will take all, and pay all, and stand between all the
hazard that can befall the soul in this case: as if a house be sequestered,
the man stands to see if any will take possession of it, and be the Protector
of it: so Christ takes it upon him, and resolves to stand between the soul,
and all the misery that can befall the soul. Simile.
And as it is in other countries (and as it has been the state of the
Low Countries) if they be oppressed with some potent enemy that is too great
and mighty for them, they seek to some foreign Prince, and yield to him, that
he may lay what tribute he will upon them, provided that he will take the
protection of them: When they had rebelled from under the King of Spain,
Queen Elizabeth took the protection of them: So it is in the heart that is
thus oppressed and besieged with the sin that lies heavy upon it, and with
many plagues that are set so close against him: What does the heart do in this
case? it falls at the feet of Jesus Christ, and is content that he shall do
what he will with it; only he beseeches the Lord Christ, that he would become
Lord Protector of his poor broken battered soul. Now the Lord Christ becomes
Protector of him, and takes a charge of him, and will free and deliver him from
that evil which it is oppressed withal, and from which it cannot save it
self. In Number. 25.11.12.13. when any person had slain a man unawares, he might
fly to the City of Refuge, that he might be free from the hand of the Avenger:
the Lord Jesus Christ, is this City of Refuge, and the manslayer is every poor
sinner, that is beset with his sin, and burdened with misery by reason of it;
he submits to the Lord Jesus Christ, and the mercy of Christ gives
entertainment to him, and rescueth him from the evil which he feared. There
are three dangers upon which the broken heart lies, and from which the Lord
Jesus Christ undertakes to free him. Against 3. dangers Christ undertaks for
us.


that it shall not execute wrath upon thee, and I will answer Satan's
accusations against thee, and I will subdue all thy sins that they shall not
prevail against thee to thy destruction, but thou shall be delivered. First,
for divine justice: the soul sees a holy God, that will not put up the wrong
that has been done against him, but will have his glory here in his
humiliation, or else in his confusion hereafter. Now when divine justice makes
out against a poor sinner, the Lord Jesus Christ comes in and puts in bail
for him: Simile.
As it is with a man that is arrested, by the Sergeant, he may have this
liberty, to put in a bail; so when the wrath of the Almighty drinks up a man's
spirits, and dragges down his soul to hell in his own apprehension, then the
Lord promises the poor soul to see all satisfied. Comfort your selves you
broken hearts, the Lord Christ's bail will be taken for more debts then you
owe: nay, the Father desires no better surety; as he himself says, Mat.
3.13. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: he does not say
with whom I am well pleased, but in whom, that is, in him, and all that come to
God the father in his name. Thus the Lord Jesus Christ does, and so a sinner is
freed from that wrath of the Almighty. Secondly, the power of Satan is crushed,
so that he shall never more be able to be Lord and Ruler over the soul
truly humbled: but wheresoever the Lord Jesus Christ comes, Satan gives way to
the supreme authority of the Lord Christ; and the Lord Jesus makes all to
vanish, and no more to appear or have any thing to do in the heart: as he
himself says in Rev. 1.18. I have the keys of Hell and of death. You know that
he that has the keys does all, he opens and shuts, he lets in and puts out
whom he will: so the Lord Christ has the supreme command over hell and death,
and he can unlocke hell gates and bring out from the gates of death any poor
sinner that is wronged by Satan: and therefore when the Lord Jesus Christ arose
he led captivity captive, as a valiant triumphant Conqueror leads a company
of poor captives. Now then Christ having conquered hell and death, wheresoever
he comes, Satan gives way, and dares not meddle there any more: Therefore
Christ says in Luke 10.11. I saw Satan fall down from heaven like lightning,
that is, when the Scepter of Christ was set up in the Gospel, then the Devil
that cruel tyrant fell down on a sudden, and was feign to give way, and not to
lay claim to the heart. Thus sin is shaken off, and comes to be casheered
from that soul for whom Christ has undertaken. Sin as it were challenges
prescription to the soul; but Christ having taken possession, he satisfies
all quarrels and bears all the charges of whatsoever sin makes against the
soul; and when sin says I have had a possession of his soul from his very
birth to this day, and why should I go out now? then the Lord Jesus says, the
issue is out: and thus sin challenges a right to the heart, but Christ says
it is forgiven. And therefore though sin be never so violent, yet the Lord
Jesus says, that soul is mine, and was created by me for my own glory; and
howsoever sin has crept in, yet now depart, I am come to take possession of
it, Romans 8.3. there the Apostle says, What the Law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: The phrase that fits
our purpose, is this, the Lord Christ condemned sin. The judgment of Mr
Calvin is this, To condemn sin in the flesh is nothing else but thus; as it
is with a man that is in law, when the cause goes against a man, and he is
cast in that he laid claim to, we use to say he is condemned. Sin lays a
kind of claim to the soul of a poor sinner, and claims a kind of right,
upon these grounds: Every son of Adam is a child of disobedience, and so the
child of wrath: But that man is a child of Adam, and therefore the child of
disobedience, and consequently death and damnation is due to that man, and
hereupon he is mine. Now Christ answers all these pleas of sin, and makes
sin fall off from the cause, and says, It is true that those that are charged
with the sin of Adam, and are under the power of that corruption which they
receive from Adam, they are the children of disobedience, and so no wonder
though they are subject to wrath. He grants all this, but yet says he, They
for whom the sin of Adam has bin satisfied, and from whom the guilt of it
removed, and they for whom Christ has conquered sin, they ought not to be
condemned, for they are delivered from this wrath: but such is this humble
soul for whom I have undertaken. Is the sin of Adam imputed? I have
satisfied for it: does the sin of Adam prevail against him? by my death I
have overcome sin and hell, and he shall have the benefit of my victory.
Now sin falls off from the claim and loses the day. If the first Adam has
sinned against God, the second Adam has suffered: if the first Adam has
polluted the sons of men, the Lord Jesus by the power of quickening, has
subdued the power of corruption, so that neither the guilt of sin can be
imputed, nor the power of sin prevail against the poor sinner for whom
Christ undertaketh.

So then it is plain that the Lord Jesus undertakes for the soul, and
provides for it, as in all the three particulars: this is the first particular
of the possession.

Ier. 4.3. Break up the fallow grounds of your hearts, and sow not among
thorns: for the soul naturally being ruled by sin, is overspread with
thorns, and is altogether corrupt and detestable, and Satan and sin rule in
the heart and affections: so that now the whole frame of the soul brings out
fruits of darkness to Satan. And hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans
6.20. When ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness;
that is, when ye were under the power of sin, ye did not work for God, ye
did all to satisfy your own lusts: the drunkard is free from the power of
sobriety, and the thief is free from the power of justice, and so the graces
of Gods Spirit rule not in a man. But now when the Lord has (by the power of
his grace) bound the strong man, and cast him out by contrition and
humiliation, then he takes the soul, and it is in the hands of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and he disposes of it, so as may be for the comfort of the soul,
and for the furtherance of the glory of his rich grace. In Matthew. 20.15. when
the servants began to quarrel, because they had but every man a penny, the
Master said, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? so when
the Lord has cast out corruption, and says, This heart, and this hand, and
this tongue is mine, is it not lawful for me to do what I will with them?
This tongue shall praise my name, and shall never speak vainly and foolishly,
and this heart shall love me, and this hand shall work for me, I will dispose
of all for the advantage of my great name.

Three ways Christ disposes the heart to himself.
This the Lord makes known in three particulars; for we keep our selves to
the general, that we may not incroach upon those particular works which are
to follow: I say, there are three particular acts upon the soul.

First, the Lord Jesus fits the soul for his service, which otherwise is
altogether unfit for any spiritual service; the Lord Jesus puts those
spiritual abilities into the soul, which may make it fit for Gods turn, so
that it is now a fit pattern to express the riches of his grace in Christ
Jesus: As it is with a man that has passed over some part of his possession
into the hands of some prodigal son, Simile.
or some naughty tenant, and the land is out of heart; when he takes
possession of it again, he will be sure to order it that it may be fit for
use; he will dig and dung and manure it, that so he may expect some fruit
from it: just so it is with every sinner, he lies lay, and that wretched heart
of his never desired any good, and his loose tongue never spoke any good, it
lay fallow, and it brought forth nothing but base practices, but when sin and
Satan has driven the soul out of heart, that it has no power to do any
good, then the Lord Christ comes and takes possession of the heart, he takes
it in from the common of the world, and he manureth it with the grace of his
spirit, as it is in that phrase, Romans 11.16, Thou art partaker of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree. Though it were a barren mind, and a sinful and
corrupt heart, and a wanton eye the Lord has taken these parts of the body and
soul, and mannured them, and convaieth such fatnes and grace, that the soul
becomes fit to do him honor, and to receive comfort from him.

Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup, thou
maintainest my lot. The Lord Jesus allows a portion of grace to every soul
that he comes in, and he maintains that grace.

Adam: the first Adam had grace, but he neither kept it nor improved it
aright, he did not improve that wisdom which God had given him to repel the
temptations of Satan and he did not improve his strength and ability to keep
him from falling from God but when the Lord Jesus comes to take possession of a
poor soul, he will not only keep and maintain the grace that he has
given him, but he will quicken it, and provoke that soul to do what he
should do in all obedience, and to receive what comfort the Lord has in store
for him. See this in some passages of Scripture: Ioh. 15. 1, 2. I am the true
vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me, that bears not
fruit, he takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that
it may bring forth more fruit. Every poor Christian, every poor woman, and
every poor Apprentice and little child, whom God has called, shall bear
fruit, he purges them, and so the Lord receives some improvement of his
graces, that he gives to those that he takes possession of.

So then, let us gather up all; If the Lord Jesus undertakes for the soul, so
that justice cannot proceed against him; and if he does dispose of the soul,
and fit it for his service, and maintain that fitness, and improve it for his
glory; then certainly he does take supreme possession of the soul: and he
that undertakes for the soul takes possession of the heart.

Use 1. Reproof of them that keep Christ out of possession.
I cannot tell whether we have matter of lamentation or reproof. How few have
given entertainment to the Lord Jesus Christ! have we not cause to lament our
condition, that the Lord Jesus has passed by all our coasts, and is not
regarded? How often has he come to thy bedside, and besought thee to receive
favor, and to be reconciled to God, and receive pardon from him? how often
has he entreated thee to consider of that which was for thy peace? how often
has he said, Come to me you rebellious children? and, Ah, every one that
will, come, and take of the water of life freely, and live for ever? Where is
the man that can say, Christ is come, and that he has given entertainment to
him? as the man, when he had found the evidence of Gods love, after much
doubting, Mr. Glove^ Martyr.
said, He is come, He is come. Where shall a man find the Lord Jesus Christ?
If a man should go from house to house, and from heart to heart, who keeps
possession? does Christ dwell in that heart, and does he rule in that soul?
Oh, woe to us, that we have suffered the Lord Jesus Christ to desire
entertainment, and yet would not receive him: we have taken notice of him, but
we would none of him. Who rules in that heart? The old Tyrant, the old lust
and corruption, as pride and covetousness these bear rule every where, both
in the closet and at the table: the husband and the wife, and all are proud;
these will not out but retain their hold there still. And profanenes, and
contempt of God and his ordinances, this is the tyrant that rules in many
families, and in every coast in our land. The father swears, and the child
swears; the master reviles Gods Ministers, and the servant knows the length of
his Masters foot, and he railes too, and the child hears it and follows the
same course. If these bear rule in you, the Lord Jesus Christ is far from
you. May I not complain as sometime Jeremiah did? Ier. 17.13. when the Lord
was going from the people, the holy prophet looks longly after him, and says,
O Lord the hope of Israel, why art thou as a waifairing man? So may we not
justly complain and say, Oh that Christ should come and offer himself and not
be regarded? When the Devil shall drag down your souls to hell and
destruction, then you will cry after him, and say, Oh thou the hope of Israel,
why do thou depart. In Genesis 19.2. when the two Angels came to Lot in Sodom
(the one was Christ) Lot compelled them to go in. Christ is not now unwilling,
but he knockes and calls, and says, Open to me my love, my dove my undefiled:
he entreats the loose person to forsake his base practices, and the covetous
person to leave his oppression, and to receive mercy: but you suffer Christ to
lie in the street; and despise that word of his, and will be at your own
carving. This especially falls foul upon two sorts of persons.

condemnation is just, says the Apostle? No, you are deceived, you shall not
have Christ a servant to carry your lusts and pleasures to heaven with you. The
truth is, the Lord Jesus will never bring comfort nor consolation to thee, that
wilt not be possessed of him, either have both or neither, choose whether you
will.

Simile.
upon this condition, that he may have them when he lists. You willl pray
against sin, provided that now and then Christ will give you leave to
practice it; and you will cry out against it, provided that you may have a
privy seal, or some secret license for it; and you will profess bitterly
against base courses, so you may have some back door and inward lust still.
The Lord Jesus does not share with any man: can he have a part and the Devil a
part? nay, he will have either all or none. It was the trick of an adulterous
heart: for when there was contention for the children, the harlot said, 1 King
3.26.
Let it be neither thine nor mine, but divide it: Nay says the mother, let her
have all. She was the harlot,, that would have the child divided.

So it is with an adulterous and dissembling heart, that says, Let Christ have
a part, and the world a part; let lusts and pomp have a part, and Christ a
part, this is dissimulation with GOD, and shall receive condemnation: there
must be no sharing. If your hearts be guilty of this I charge you in the name
of the Lord Jesus consider it, the Lord never came into your souls: you must
resign all to him, and then he will save all: he will pardon all sin, and give
power against it. What a fearful thing were it, if the Lord should deal with
you as you deal with him? Suppose thou could be half damned; would thou
be content to have thy heart go to hell, and thine eye to heaven, or thy body
to hell, and thy soul to heaven? therefore that thy body and soul may both be
saved, resign up up all into the hands of thy Savior, and let him dispose of
all here in the kingdom of grace, and then he will take all to himself in
glory for ever.

Use 2. If the Lord Jesus be the possessor of all the house, then let every one
have his own, Give all to Christ whose it is.
do not with draw from Christ that which is his. Whose image and
superscription has the soul? Christ Jesus has the protection of it,
therefore let him have all. Let thine eye see his works and wonder and admire
at them: let thy mind know Jesus Christ, whom to know is eternal life; but do
not withdraw any thing from the true owner thereof, that has purchased it full
dear. 1 Cor. 5.15. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an harlot? God forbid. Thine eye, and thy tongue, and thy hand, and
thy heart, they are all Christ's members, he has bought all with his blood and
thou have nothing to do with that which Christ has bought: therefore
whenever thy corruptions stir, and Satan tempts and begges for the use of
thy mind or heart make answer and say: Shall I take that heart that is Christ's,
and think basely? God forbid: Shall I take the hand of Christ, and work
wickedness with it? The holy Apostle is mavelous peremptory in this case: as
1 Cor. 6.19. Glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are Gods, and
he has bought you with a price: your bodies and souls are the Lords, he
undertakes for both, therefore glorify God in both. If a man did come to your
house, and take the meat and drink that you have provided, and rob you of your
money, you would take it very hardly, and say, It is my own: So, you are not
your own. Therefore if the Devil or the world would prevail with you, and
enter into the use of your heart or mind, tell him they are not thy own, they
are the Lords: JESUS CHRIST has come into thy heart and mind in mercy, and
therefore say it is the Lords, let him do what he will with it. *

SPIRITVALL LOVE AND JOY.
Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, goodness, faith, etc.


THE sure mercies of David, which faith believes, love embraces. And who so
gets this field and treasure, must needs go away rejoicing in so good a
bargain.

All this and all other graces and comforts works one and the same Spirit:
directing the heart to God, uniting it unto Christ, and thereby comforting it
abundantly. All is his fruit in us. At this time of love and joy.

The point of Doctrine is this.

Love and joy by the spirit wrought in a broken heart, for embracing mercy as
it deserves.
Doct. The Spirit of the Father kindles in the soul of a sinner, truly humbled
and enlightened, love and joy, to entertain and rejoice in the riches of his
mercy, so as beseemes the worth of it. There are three passages considerable,
that we may know the meaning of this Doctrine.

only in a heart humbled and enlightened: For unless the heart be humbled, it
sees no need of this grace and mercy, and therefore despises it, and is
rather carried with a hatred against that grace and mercy that would purge him;
and troubled with a kind of weariness of the power of that grace that would
reform his life and conversation. And though he were humbled, yet if he were
not enlightened to see this mercy and goodness of God, he cannot delight in it.
I know there is wild love and joy enough in the world, as there is wild Thyme
and other herbs, but we would have garden-love and garden-joy, of Gods own
planting: for such hypocritical love and joy we will not meddle with here.

by the Spirit of the Father; for the Father learnes us the lecture, and (as I
told you before of the mind enlightened) kindles this holy fire, which is
rightly compared to the fire of the Sanctuary, as in Lev. 9.24 There came a
fire from before the Lord, and consumed upon the Altar the burnt offering; even
those sparks of the pillar of fire which did typifie Christ to them. But
whether this be so or no, I will not now dispute, for as the Lord provided the
sacrifice, so the Lord caused the fire to come down from heaven: and hence it
was that when Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, the Lord consumed them,
Lev. 10.1, 2. so it is in this holy fire of love and joy, we may strike and
endeavor, but our steel and our flint will not work this endeavor, nor strike
this fire of love and joy. It is Jesus Christ from whence all spiritual
sparks of grace do come, and amongst the rest these of love and joy; all
other love and joy, that is not wrought by the Spirit of the Father, must be
casheered and abandoned, it cannot reach to God, nor be pleasing unto him: It
is that which the Apostle inferres in the general, Romans 8.8. They that are in
the flesh, cannot please God; but it must be joy of the spirit, which must
please him. Now though the soul truly humbled and broken, that heretofore
has felt the weight and burden of his sins, and is now separated from them,
so that he dares not meddle with them, he dares as well take a Bear by the
tooth, and fall quick into hell, as take up those courses again, yet he has
not power of himself to be enlarged in any love to entertain Christ, or
spiritually to joy in him, further than the power of the Lord Jesus in the
promise shall enable him thereto. Suffer me to enlarge my self thus: The soul
is like an empty vessel, it stands not at the dispose of sin, or it self,
but it is at the Lords disposition; if the Lord will kindle any love and joy,
so it is, for of himself he cannot do it. As it is with some Gentleman in
the Country, Simile.
he will be content to let the King have the use of his house for a while, but
he is not able to provide necessaries for him, because he is a mean man,
therefore the King sends his provision before, and then comes himself: Just so
it is here with a poor humble brokenhearted sinner; the poor soul is
mavelous well content that the Lord should come and dwell in him, and dispose
of him, but he is not able to give him any entertainment: he has not any heat
of holy affections, or love, or desire, to welcome the Lord as becomes so great
a Majesty: therefore the Lord is feign to infuse love and joy, that by them he
may be welcomed into the soul of the humbled sinner. Now when the soul is
come to this degree of sanctification, then it can work by it self. Or thus:
Simile.
It is with a brokenhearted sinner, as with a burning glass; take such a
glass, it will burn any thing by the heat of the Sun, yet it has no heat
in it self, but receives it from the Sunbeams, by virtue whereof it burns
whatsoever is before it: Just so it is with a brokenhearted sinner. But all
stubborn sinners are like water, that will not burn at all. I will go no
further than the work of preparation. It is neither sin nor self shall have
power over me, sin shall not, and self cannot rule me: therefore I will
wait till the Sun of righteousness will shine forth from heaven, from the
beavtie of his sanctuary; and having received the beams of Gods love and
favor effectually upon my soul, and being warmed by the Sun of
righteousness, I shall be able to return the heat of love to God again. Thus
the Spirit of the Father kindles love and joy in a heart humbled and enlightened.

that they may entertain and rejoice in the riches of Gods mercy, in the worth
of it. This last clause is added to discover the distinct nature of this love
and joy, from all the fained love and joy, that all carnal and hypocritical
wretches pretend to have to Jesus Christ; there is a kind of loving and joying
in the hearts of hypocrites, as afterward you shall hear: So says Judas,
Hail Master; so the Pharisees and the people cut down branches of the trees
to welcome Christ, and crid, Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord. And in Matthew. 8.19. A certain Scribe came, and said unto him,
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. And so the stony ground,
Matthew. 13.20. did hear the Word with joy; and so love and joy go together:
But it is not that kind of love which came down from Heaven, nor that which
will ever carry your selves as beseeming the mercy of God in Christ; for he
that said, Hail Master, betrayed his Master with a kiss: and Christ might
have said, Is this thy love and joy wherewith thou welcommest me? And the
Scribes and Pharisees follow Christ a while, and then forsake him; and so they
that before cried, Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
within a while after they cry, Crucify, crucify him; and the stony ground
received the Word with joy, and a while after came to nothing. This is
wildfire, and foolish fire, as the Philosopher says, it is bred and hammered
out by our own ends and aims; but they do not carry themselves beseeming
the riches of Gods free grace in Jesus Christ: that is thus; An heart thus
kindled, bestows the best love and joy upon the Lord Jesus Christ, because he
is the best good. This is the meaning of that phrase so often intimated,
Whosoever loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. He that
prizeth any thing more in love, or delights in any thing more with joy, than in
Christ, is not worthy of Christ: So then, whosoever bestows love or joy upon
any carnal contents, more than upon Christ, his love and joy is not brought
from Heaven, it is a false love that will fade, and will not bring him that
comfort which he looks to receive from it. This love is called the spiritual
love, 2 Timothy 1.7. For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power,
of love, and of a sound mind: we have not received the spirit of bondage that
is in preparation, but the spirit of love that is in vocation. It is called
spiritual love, because the Spirit of God in the promise kindles it, and joy
goes with it, as you shall hear anon: and it is that affection also, in the
example of Zacheus, Luke 19.6. he had a months mind to see Christ, and (as
the learned well interpret it) he had a blind desire, but well set on by
Christ; and therefore see how he labors to preventall opportunities and
occasions: he runs before the croude, and gets up into a tree, and when he
was there Christ saw him, and said, Come down quickly, for I must dine at thy
house. Here was the voice of Christ, and the kindness of Christ too, and this
kindled the fire, and wrought love and joy, for these two go together; and
therefore the Text says, He came down and received him joyfully. This seems
to me to be the reason and meaning, why sometimes in the phrase of Scripture,
love is put for believing, as in Ioh. 3.18, 19. He that believes is not
condemned, but he that believes not is condemned already, because he
believes not in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more
than light. The Text says, He that believes not, or he that receives not,
for they are both one: he proves this, that a man not believing shall be
damned: why? for this is the great condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men love darkness more than light: because he will not love Christ,
and will not receive him, he receives darkness, and loves darkness more than
Christ, intimating the near combination between these two, and the working
and acting of them. There are many other places that speak of love and joy,
but none that fits this place of vocation.

Now to make this good, there are two things necessary to be propounded and
handled:

First, to show the reason of the order of Gods work, why after hope and
desire there comes this love and joy.

Secondly, the ground of this love, and what it is in the promise, that will
kindle and strike fire upon these two affections, and bring them home to the
Lord; this being cleared, it will then appear, how the Spirit of God in the
promise does kindle this love and joy.

Why after hope and desire God works love and joy in the soul.
why comes love and joy next after hope and desire? I answer; There are but two
affections, and there need no more (God being perfectly wise has appointed it)
whereby the soul should send to meet with any good that is absent: if the good
be absent, then the understanding says, that is a good to be desired, and very
comfortable, oh that I had it: then it sends out hope, and that waits for that
good, and stays till it can: see it: and if that good come not, then desire
has another proper work, it goes up and down wandering, and seeking, and
suing for Jesus Christ, and this desire goes from place to place, from East to
West, from North to South, and says, When shall I, and how may I come to the
sight of Jesus Christ? As the Spouse in the Canticles sought to the watchmen
to enquire after Christ, so desire wanders up and down. For so I told you, it
is the wandering of the heart, and it never cease going and enquiring, if it
can gain any intelligence of Jesus Christ. It goes to prayer, to see if it can
speak with Christ there; and from thence it goes to the Word, to see if that
will reveal Christ; and to conference, if that will mention it, and says, See
you the Lord Jesus Christ? The hungry soul comes to the Church, to see if it
can hear any news of Christ: And thus it continues, till at last the Lord
Jesus Christ is pleased to come himself, after the soul has hungered for him,
and sought for him, as Marie said: Oh if you can, tell me where my Lord is: So
the soul goes from one place to another, from Prayer to the Word, and from the
Sacrament to Fasting, and asks of the ordinances, Where is my Savior? and
says, If you know where he is, tell me of him, that I may be possessed of
him. After this, the Lord Jesus Christ is pleased to come himself into the
view of the heart, which longs thus after him, and says as the Prophet,
Behold, thy King comes: So he says, Oh thou poor brokenhearted sinner,
here is thy Savior, he is come down from Heaven this day to speak peace and
comfort to thee, and thou that have so long time prayed; to thee he says, Here
I am, and all my merits are now become thine, and to thee that do thus
hunger and desire Christ, he is now come to comfort thee. Now when the Lord
Jesus Christ is come within thy view, and thy desire has met with him, then
there comes the other two affections: he is come within sight, and now there
are other affections stirred up, and sent out by the Spirit of the Lord to give
entertainment to Christ Jesus. Love leads him into the soul, and tells the will
of him, and says; Lo here is Jesus Christ, the Messiah, that has ordered
these great things for his Saints and people; and Joy is the attendant to wait
upon him, when he is come. Suffer me to express my self thus in this manner,
because I would show the guise of the frame of the heart in this work.

It is with a poor humbled sinner, Simile.
as it is with a malefactor or traitor, who is pursued with a Pursuivant, that
has laid wait for him as far as the Sea, and at last he is resolved to
yield and come in. He has offended his Sovereign, and he is driven to a
stand, he cannot procure a pardon, nor he cannot escape; therefore he is
content to come in, and yield his neck to the block, that as he has
offended, so he may receive his punishment accordingly. Now as he is going, he
hears an inckling that there is some hope of a pardon, and thereupon the poor
man begins to rejoice, in hope that he may be pardoned; and then hears other
news, which says, if he will but be humbled before his Majesty, and come
to the Court, and importune him for pardon, it is likely that he may be
pardoned, nay it shall be so. Marry (says he) that I will with all my heart;
and so he sets forward, and comes to the Court: his desire carries him
thither. Thus it is (I say) with a poor sinner: he is brought home to the
Court, and about the Court he attends, and asks for every man that comes
forth, Did you not hear the King speak of me? and, What do you think of my
case? At last some of the bedchamber say to him, The King hears that you are
mightily humbled, and earnestly desire his favor, you shall hear more from
him ere long. At last, the King himself looks out at a window, and says, Is
this the Traitor? Yes, this is he that has been humbled, and lies at your
mercy. Then the King calls out and says, His pardon is drawing, and it is
coming by and by, and so the King smiles on him. Oh then his heart leapes in
his breast, and he says, The Lord preserve your Grace, I think there was
never such a merciful Prince known in the world. This is the love and delight
that is stirred up. Now when the Pardon is sealed and granted, then you shall
see the work of faith. A poor humbled sinner is this malefactor, that has
committed high Treason against the God of heaven (for every sinner has
rebelled against the God of grace.) The stubborn rebellious heart has stood
out against the Lord God, which is high Treason, though you little think it,
when you go on wilfully, and say, This man shall not rule over me. Well, be
humbled now in time, while you have mercy offered: for if you be not humbled,
the Lord shall send a ^aylor to take and throw you down to Hell, and therefore
you had better hear of it now than hereafter, when there is no remedy.
Perhaps the Lord now pursues a man with his heavy indignation, and lets fly
at him, and sets conscience on work to follow him, and to dog him, saying,
This is thy sin, and hell is thy portion, to hell thou must. Now the soul
being beset with Gods wrath, in conclusion sees he cannot escape the Lords
hands; and how to purchase mercy he knows not, nor is it possible otherwise
for him to escape, and yet he has nothing to purchase mercy withal;
therefore he is content to lie down before God, saying, I confess I have
sinned, Oh Lord be thou glorified, though I be damned for ever, my sins are
so many and so vile, I cannot almost desire mercy, but if the Lord will, who
can let him? Now when the heart is thus humbled, then there comes a noise a
great way off in the Ministry of the Gospel, and that says, Thy sins are
all pardonable: so he looks up, and hope says, Lord it may be a damned
creature may be recovered, a dead dog may be restored to life, and a Traitor
may be pardoned and received. Then the Lord sends another comfortable message,
namely, That if thou can but see a need of mercy, and look out and wait for
him, thou shall be pardoned: hereupon the penitent goes to the Court gate, that
is, he comes mourning to the Word, and says, Oh ye faithful Ministers of
God, you are of the bedchamber, and you know Gods mind, I pray what does God
intend toward me? Hereupon we that are the Ministers of God, we tell him, your
case is right, and happily if you attend upon God, you may hear more of him
hereafter: for the Lord hears that you lie at the Court gate, and that you are
exceedingly humbled; and thus far desire goes. At last the Lord Jesus Christ
shows and presents himself to the sinner, and speaks with him in the
Ministry of the Word, and says, That fainting, weary, laden heart of thine
shall be refreshed, and then gives him a look of mercy, so that his heart
danceth within him. (Still you must understand, that the Lord always speaks
by the Ministry of the Word, and therefore look for no strange dreams and
visions) while the Lord says, Thou art he that longs for my salvation, go
thy way, I have heard thy prayers, thy pardon is granted and drawn, it shall
be delivered to thee afterward. Now when a poor sinner finds some chearing of
heart, he may say, The Lord spoke to me, its done in heaven, mercy is coming
toward me, the pardon is now granted, and is in drawing, and shall be
delivered to me in due time: now again his heart leapeth within him, and he
says, Bless the Lord, O my soul, who ever heard of such mercy? what? my
sins be pardoned? and is the pardon granted and drawn? if I never hear more
of it, and if I go down to hell, it is enough, that God has once smiled upon
me in his love, it is enough though I have the pains, of hell upon me for
ever for it. Esa 40.12. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned. So the Lord says to poor
sinners, after they have waited long enough, and God has seen their desires
to be sound, the Lord, I say, says, Tell that poor man from heaven, and from
the Lord Christ, and under the hand of the Spirit, that his sins are
pardoned, and he shall be received to mercy. Esa. 66.1, 2, 3. The Lord looks
to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his word. The
poor creature comes and trembles at every truth; and when he hears of mercy,
he says, Oh that is sweet mercy indeed, but it is not mine, and he shakes in
the consideration of mercy, that he should hear of it, and not receive it. The
Lord looks to him, that is, he casts a sweet look upon him, and lets in some
sweet intimation of mercy, and says to the poor creature, I have an eye to
thee, and my love is unto thee in the Lord Jesus Christ; and with that his
heart leapes in his bosom. Of this kind I take that to be, Ier. 31.18, 19, 20.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning and lamenting himself thus (there is a
heart humbled, broken, and thirsting) thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall
be turned, thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned I
repented: and after that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed,
yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Here you
see Ephraim bemoaning himself, as if he had said, I am the man that have
enjoyed all the means in abundant plenty, and yet never profited; the Lord
has corrected me, and I was not humbled, Oh turn thou me then, O Lord, for
there is no ability in me. Now I see the sins that before I could not see,
and the baseness of my evil courses, and I am even ashamed of the former
abuse of Gods graces, and the many abominations harbored and liked. Now mark
what God answers in that place, Verse 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a
pleasant child? as if the Lord had said, Since I spoke to him, I still remember
him; all the while that the Lord let in the fierceness of his wrath into his
soul he earnestly remembered him. I saw all his desires, and I observed all his
tears, and my bowels are toward that poor hungry and longing sinner, that
longs for my goodness in Jesus Christ, and I will show mercy to him. This is the
behavior of the Lord to the soul, and of the soul to the Lord again. Thus
you see the reason of the order of Gods work; love is like the Host that
welcomes the guest, and delight and joy, is like the Chamberlain that waits
upon the guest. This is the very guise of the heart.

Gods promise the ground of our love: and how.
whereby the promise comes to work this. First, what is it in the promise?
Secondly, how comes the promise to work this in the hear^, and then we have the
whole frame of the work opened. I answer; for the opening of the point, and
the discovery of the truth in hand, consider thus much.

It is when the spirit of God in the promise lets in some intimation of Gods
love into the soul. The weight lies upon these two words, Lets in; lets in (I
say) and conveyes some relish of the love of God into the heart, when the Lord
does express any love, and favor, and goodness, in that powerful manner to
the heart humbled, and longing for his favor, so that it does prevail with
the soul, and makes the soul to be affected with that relish of his favor;
This is the ground of love, the certainty of a good stirs up hope, and the
excellency of that good quickens up desire, and the presence of this good
kindles love: there is a fullness that takes up all the whole frame of the work
upon all the affections of the soul, In Psalm. 42.8. it is said, Psalm, 42.8.
expounded.
The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time: what is that? it
is a phrase taken from kings and princes, and great Commanders in the field,
whose words of command stand for laws; so the Lord shall send out his loving
kindness, and say, Go out my everlasting love and and kindness, take a
commission from me, and go to that humble, thirsty and hunger-bitten sinner,
and go and prosper, and prevail, and settle my love effectually upon him, and
fasten my mercy upon him, I command my loving kindness, to do it. The Lord
does put a Commission into the hands of his loving kindness, that it shall do
good to the poor soul, yea, though he withdraw his soul, saying, what I
mercy? will Jesus Christ accept of me? No, no, there is no hope of mcrcy for
me: Indeed if I could pray thus, and hear thus, and perform duties with that
enlargement, and had those parts and abilities, then there were some comfort,
but now there is no hope of mercy for me. We demand, Is this your case? is it
thus and thus? Yes: you are thus humbled, and have thus longed for the riches
of his mercy in Christ, have you not? Yes. Then (say we) grace and mercy is
yours. I cannot think it, says he; what? such a wretch as I go to Heaven!
no, no, Heaven would rather fall then such a sinner as I should come to be
received there. Thus he puts off mercy, and shuts the door against it; and at
the last cast, when carnal reason builds up forts against mercy, and sets up
strong holds against comfort and consolation, and neither Word nor Minister can
comfort them, then the Lord (I say) is feign to put a commission into the hands
of his loving kindness: when the poor sinner has bin sighing, and longing,
and nothing will content him but Christ, the^, then the Lord gives out the
commission, and says, Go home to that poor soul, and break open the doors
upon that weary weltering heart, and knock off all those bolts, and rend off
that veil of ignorance, and carnal reason, and all base arguments; go (I
say) to that soul, and cheer it, and warm it, and tell him from me, that
his sins are pardoned, and his soul shall be saved, and his sighs, and his
prayers are heard in Heaven: and I charge you do the work before you come
again.

Here is the goodness of God, to express himself thus mercifully in his Word
to the soul: if it were in man's power, no comfort should ever come to the
soul; but the Lord (blessed be his Name for it) he commands his loving
kindness to break in upon him. As it is with an High Sheriff, when a man
will not deliver up quiet possession to the owner, he comes with his men, and
breaks open all before him, and will estate the man into his possession: so
this loving kindness is the Lords High Sheriff, and when a company of
Rake-shames of carnal reason would keep out mercy, the Lord is feign to send
his loving kindness with a commission to seize upon the heart.

Now take notice of this, the ground of a man's love is any good which
expresses his presence to him: as a good to come was the ground of hope, and
the necessity and excellency of that good, makes the soul to long after it;
so now, when a good is not only present, but expresses his presence, and
leaves a kind of remembrance upon the soul, that stirs up love continually:
but this must be done before love will come. As it is with the natural body,
if that which lies upon a man, carries some weight with it, then it is easily
felt: but if it be mavelous light, it may lie upon us, and we not perceive
it, as a feather, a fly, or the like; and if there comes any weight that
affects the hand, either wet, or cold, or warmth, then he feels it; but if it
be light he perceives it not, as a mote may be on the face, and not be felt
nor seen: so love in the soul is like this touching of the body.

Now when loving kindness is not set on upon the soul, and when it leaves no
expression in the soul, the heart cannot be affected with it, nor return that
joy and delight that otherwise it would do: so that there must be a present
good, and a good expressing it self to the heart, and affecting the heart
therewith, and then this love comes to God again, Gods love affecting the
heart, and settled upon it, it breeds a love to God again, that is the ground
which S. John speaks of, 1 Ioh. 4, 19. We love him because he loved us
first. As I told you in the example of the burning-glasse, it must receive the
heat of the beams of the Sun, before it can burn any thing, so there must
be a beam of Gods love to fall upon the soul, before it can love God again;
as in Hosea 11.4. I drew them with the cords of a man, even with the bands of
love. God lets in the cords of love into the soul, and that draws love again
to God. But above all, that place Cant. 2.4. (mark the manner how Gods Spirit
expresses himself to the soul) He brought me into the banqueting house,
Cant. 2.4. opened.
and his banner over me was love; stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love. And so when the banner of Christ's love is
spread over the soul, the soul comes to be sick in love to Christ. As it is
in war, when the Commander displayes the banner, these three things are
signified by it; First, that there is the presence of the Commander: Secondly,
the displaying of the banner commands all to come to it: Thirdly, while it is
held out, all keep to it.

Now see the excellency of the Spirit of God in the Scripture. The Church was
then in some trouble, but the Lord Christ brings the Spouse into his chamber,
nay, into the wine-celler, and the banner that was displayed over her was love:
and first Christ came as a Commander to redeem her, and to save her from all
troubles and afflictions. Secondly, it commands the soul to come to the
banner. Thirdly, when God displayes his love in the beauty of it, in any
measure, then all the company of poor sinners come in unto it; and so they
love the Lord, because the Lord has loved them.

This love of God does beget our loves in three particulars. First, Gods love
to us, begets love in us toward him: and how?
there is a sweetness, and a relish which Gods love lets into the soul, and
warmes the heart with: you shall see how the fire is kindled by and by. As when
a man is fainting, we give him Aqua-vitae; so a fainting sinner is cold at the
heart, and therefore the lets in a drop of his loving kindness, and this
warmes the heart, and the soul is even filled with the sappinesse of the mercy
of God: as Cant. 1.1, 2. where the Spouse says, Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth, for his love is better than wine. The poor soul, though
he drink water, yet he drinks better wine than any carnal man under Heaven:
the kisses of his mouth are the comforts of his Word and Spirit. The soul
says, Oh let the Lord refresh me with the kisses of his mouth, that is, of his
Word and Spirit; let the Lord speak comfort to the heart, and this is better
than wine. (For the Lord must do it, before he can be apprehensive of his
love:) yea, let the Lord express the comfort of his precious promises in Jesus
Christ to me. And again in the second verse, Because of the savor of thy
garments, thy name is as an ointment poured forth; therefore the virgins love
thee. Christ was the ointment, Christ's ointment is his graces; and the savor
or the communication of this, is the expression of his love to the soul: the
virgins are the souls truly humbled that love the Lord.

Romans 5 8. see how God sets out his love to us, Seeing (says the Apostle) that
while we were sinners Christ died for us. This commends the love of God, the
Lord sends to poor, miserable, sinful, brokenhearted sinners, and says,
Commend my mercy to such a one, and tell him, that though he has been an
enemy to me, yet I am a friend to him; and though he have been rebellious
against me, yet I am a God and a Father to him; and let him not think, that
because he has offended me, therefore he shall not receive mercy from me:
but here is my love, and it is worth the commendation. Christ died for poor
sinners, when they were enemies; therefore if God so loved us as to dye for us,
when we were sinners and enemies, how ought we then to love one another? But
much more how ought we to love the Lord? What was it that kindled that frozen,
and vile, and stubborn, and wicked heart of wretched Saul, who had a heart as
hard as ice? 1 Samuel 24.19. when David had him upon the hippe, and might have
slain him, but would not, even this wrought upon the heart of Saul, and
kindled a fire of affections of love toward him, and made him say, Come again
my son David, Thou art more righteous than I; for thou have rewarded me good,
whereas I have rewarded thee evil. And thou have showed me this day, how that
thou have dealt well with me: forasmuch as when the Lord has delivered me
into thine hand, thou killedst me not. For who ever slew not his enemy, when
he found him at such an advantage? wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that
which thou have done unto me this day. Saul's heart is all on fire with this
kindness. So when the poor sinner considers this with himself, and says, Is
the Lord so merciful to me? who ever thus found his enemy, and slew him not?
I that loved my sins and continued in them, had it not been just that I should
have perished in them? But will the Lord not only not slay his enemy, but give
his Son for me? Oh let my soul for ever rejoice in this unconceivable
goodness of God! Be thy heart never so hard, if it have but the sense of
this, it cannot but stir thee to humiliation.

heart, enflames it. This sweetness warmes the heart, this freeness kindles
the fire; and when the greatness of the sweetness comes to be valued, this
sets the heart all upon a fire. In Ephesians. 3.17, 18. the Apostle desires that
Christ might dwell in their hearts, and that they might be rooted in love; but
how shall we come to this, that we may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of God in
Christ? As if the Apostle had said, If I once come to see the unmeasurablenesse
of Gods mercy, this will blow up the soul, and inflame the heart with
admirable love again to the Lord, and make the soul say, I that have done all
that I could against the good God, it breaks my heart to think it: there was
no name under Heaven that I did more blaspheme, and tear in pieces more than
this: I have despised no command so much, as the command of God, and of Christ,
and I have grieved no spirit so much, as the good Spirit of the Lord, against
those sweet motions that God has let into my soul, and struggled with me, to
pluck me from my company, and to contend with me. I have taken up arms
against Almighty God. If I had but gone to the top of Hell, it had been
infinite mercy, and if I had been in a dungeon all my days, and had another
world to live, and lived it all in misery, it had been infinite mercy for
the Lord to send down Christ, to look upon me a poor wretch in the dungeon,
and to speak to me out of the gates of hell, and to tell me of this mercy, oh
it had been an infinite mercy: but to send a Son to save me, it is
incomparable; I could not conceive to do so much evil against him, as he has
done good to me: oh the breadth of that mercy beyond all limits, oh the length
of that mercy beyond all time, oh the depth of that mercy below a man's
misery, oh the height of that mercy above the height of mine understanding! If
mine hands were all of love, that I could work nothing but love, and if mine
eyes were able to see nothing but love, and my mind think of nothing but love,
and if I had a thousand bodies, it were all too little to love that God, that
has unmeasurably loved me a poor sinful hel-hound: Psalm. 18.1. I will love
thee dearly, O Lord my strength. Oh have I gotten the Lord Jesus Christ to be
my comfort, my buckler, my shield? If I have any good, he gives it, and if any
good be continued, it is he that does it, and if I have any comfort in it, it
is he that blesses it to me; therefore I will love thee dearly, Oh Lord my
strength. Thus the point is clear, and stands upon his right bottom.

Now I come to the Application of it, that we may reap some good and comfort
to our own souls. And the use of the point is fourefold: for Instruction, for
Consolation, Nature breeds no love to Christ.
for Reprehension, for Exhortation.

Use 1. First, for Instruction, which I desire a little to commend to you,
because it is seasonable. Is it so that the Spirit of the Father kindles this
love in the heart truly humbled and enlightened, etc? then conclude this
undeniably, That there is no power in nature, or in a natural heart, I say,
there is no sufficiency in the power of nature, to be carried to any love
toward Christ: we have not this before God gives it, nay, we cannot move our
selves in love to God, before the Lord let in the sparks of love into our
souls. True it is, we find it by woeful experience, it is in our power to love
the world, and to delight in base lusts, and being but natural men, it cannot
be but that we should love our selves, and the things of this world: there is
enough of these wild fires, and of this base worldly lust in every natural
soul to express it self; but to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to have a
heart enlarged toward him, it is a work of grace that grows not in our
hearts; I say there is not one spark of holy love, and of this holy fire of
love in our hearts at any time, neither can we buy or borrow it at the hands of
any under heaven, further than the Spirit of the Lord is pleased to kindle it,
and to inflame this grace of love to the Lord Jesus, and further than the Lord
by the power of his merits is pleased to feed this in our souls. It is an
unconceiveable misery, that any man should be so far deluded, as to think
that he can do it by his own strength and power: Saint Paul expresses it in
discovering the vileness of himself by nature, and the freeness of Gods
grace: 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. I was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, but I
obtained mercy: I wronged Jesus Christ, and was malicious against him, and
opposed against his children: Paul could do this of himself; so thou can be
malicious against the Lord, and against the power of his grace and truth, this
a natural man can do; but for him to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to
believe in him, how came Saint Paul by that? Why the grace of God was exceeding
abundant toward me, with faith and love, which is in Jesus Christ. As if he
had said, it was abundant grace that over-powred my unfaithful heart, and made
me believe; and it was abundant grace that over-powred my injurious heart, and
made me love Christ. But how was this? it was by the grace of Christ, from
Christ this faith was wrought, and in Christ this love was kindled. As if he
had said, I thought to cast off the Lord and his grace, I was a persecuter and
a villain indeed; but that I should believe the Lord, and love him, this was
from Christ, it was in grace, and not in Paul. The ball must first fall to the
ground, before it can rebound back again; so the Lord Jesus must first dart
in his love into the soul, before the soul can rebound in love and joy to him
again; we must receive from grace, before we can rebound back any love to
God: as 1 Timothy 1.7. God has not given us the spirit of bondage, but of power,
of love, and of a sound mind. See what the Lord spoke in some case of the
Jews, John 5.40, 42. (speaking home to their hearts) he says, I know you,
that ye have not the love of God in you. Verse 40. he says, Ye will not come
to me: and in the 42. verse I know you, that ye have not the love of God in
you. As if he had said, I know it, you know it not your selves, and though you
think you have this love to me, yet you are deceived, you know not what you
are, nor what you know, but I know: and it is as true of every corrupt heart
under heaven, the love of God cannot be in the heart of any natural man
whatsoever.

The reason why I press this point so much, is this; it is for these two ends,
you shall see a double benefit by it. Carnal men conceive no difficulty, to
love Christ.


First, this confutes and overthrowes the conceits of a company of carnal
Gospellers that say, they fast not, nor pray not, nor profess not so much as
such and such, but for the truth of their love to Christ they defy all the
world, they find no difficulty in the matter, and they make no doubt thereof;
and therefore if any Christian man, or any faithful Minister of God, shall
begin to challenge them with the want of love to Christ and grace, they will
answer, What? not love the Lord Jesus? it is pity that ever that man should
live; they have loved him, and will love him for ever, and all the world shall
not persuade them to the contrary. Oh poor deluded creatures! it is an
undoubted argument that thou never had the love of God in thee, because thou
think it such an easy matter to love him. Many men make nothing of it, they
make it but an holy day task, and say, Who cannot love Christ? I say, neither
thou nor I can do it by any power or virtue in our selves; nay I say thou art
as able to save thy own soul, and to redeem thy self without Christ; as
thou art able to love Christ, unless he by the power of his spiritenable thee
to do it. Nay, you that make nothing of it, to love Christ, mark what I say:
If a man might have happiness in hand, and heaven laid down upon the nail,
if he could love the Lord Jesus of himself, I say, if he had no more but
nature, he would never go to heaven, nor never be happy: Nay, it will cost
more than so, it will cost time and pains, and many tears and prayers; you
must have the Father come down from heaven to teach you, and you must go to
another school than ever you were at yet, before you can learn it: and
unless the Father make you able to love Christ, you can never do it. It is
true, if it were nothing but prattling and professing, and yet to stand in open
opposition to the power of grace and the spirit, this cannot be: for to
welcome a Savior, to receive Christ answerable to the worth of him, a man
cannot do it by the mere power of nature, it is the work of the Lord, as the
Apostle Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkness:
and Ephesians, 5.8. You were darkness: God is nothing but holiness, and you are
nothing but darkness. Now you know darkness can oppose light, and wickedness
can oppose holiness, but never give way to it nor receive it: This is thy
nature and condition, thou have an ignorant dark heart of thine own, but the
Lord is altogether holiness and light, and thou can not receive it, nor will thou receive him. As 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. they would not receive the truth of God in
the love of it: the truth of God makes love to thy carnal heart, and would
pluck thee from thy base lusts and corruptions, and would woo and win thy
soul, that it might take place in thy heart, the world will not receive it.
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, but the world would not
receive him, so far were they from seeking to a Savior; that they would not
receive him though he came to offer himself to them; thou have a heart that
hate Jesus Christ, and cannot love him; and thou have a heart that can oppose
him and his grace, but can not take contentment in that grace and rich mercy
of his: if thou have not grace and mercy, thou have but what thou would have,
and therefore it is just thou should never have it.

The second cause, Saints Jove not as they might and should because they rely
not on the promise.
why I press this instruction, is this, To show the disorderly proceedings of
many poor Saints, that labor extremely to work their own souls, and to
bring their hearts to love Christ, that they even fall out with themselves, and
curse their base hearts, that can love the world, and cannot love Jesus Christ:
they labor much, and would bring their hearts to love him, but they cannot do
it, because they go to work the contrary way, they would bring love to the
promise, and not receive love from the promise, as if a man should bring water
to the sea, or light to the sun. It is as if he would have a sun of his own:
and yet there is but one sun of righteousness, that can kindle this love of
Jesus Christ, to carry it self worthy of him. Therefore be wise herein, and
think not to bring love to the promise, but come to the promise for it, and
go to the sea for water, and look up to the sun of Gods love, and be under
the beams of Gods mercy, and look not down into that dead frozen heart, of
thine own: for if thou would never so feign, thou can not receive one
sparkle of this love from thy own abilities. See his love therein, and be
thereby drawn to love him again, and see the fullness of those pleasures at
his right hand which endure for ever: Ioh. 16.14. the Lord Christ says, He
shall send the Spirit the Comforter, and he shall take of mine, that is, take
of Christ's. All spiritual graces are Christ's, therefore go thou thy way, and
tell the Lord thus much saying, In truth Lord I have not a heart to love thee,
it is thine own work, and thou have said that thy spirit shall take of thine
and give it to thy servants that thy servants may also give thee of thine own
again: that love; and that delight is thine to give, that we may give thee of
thine own, as David spoke of the building of the Temple. Thus much of the use
of instruction.

Use 2. Comfort to them that love Christ.
In the second place here is a strong consolation to sustain and refresh the
hearts of those that have received this gracious work: though they have some
small weaknesses, it skills not, be the work sound it is enough; thy soul may
be comforted that the Lord has enlarged himself to thee in this gracious
work; I say it is a ground of admirable sweet refreshing of soul to any that
find this gracious love unto Christ. A man by nature cannot have this,
therefore have thou this by grace. Go thy way, as he that has found a
treasury, and make much of it, and say, and know, thou have something more than
all carnal wretches can have, and thou have more than all the cunning
close-hearted hypocrites under heaven can have, let them pretend, and fain, and
flatter what they will. Me thinks this should wonderfully refresh the hope of
you poor ones: for though many times other things go not well with you, yet
this is enough to cheer up your hearts for ever. You know a child will love
his father, though he can do little for him: he is a child, and therefore
though he can do little for his father, yet if he love his father, he is
contented: so they that have little means, and small sufficiencies toward any
servants of God, and it may be their understandings are not so deep as others
be, and their tongues run not so glib as such and such, and they cannot talk
so freely of the things of grace and salvation; and thou have meaner parts, and
can not enlarge thy self in holy duties, and holy services (though this is
commendable where it is) and thou can not dispute for a Savior, and perform
such duties as others can do, yet thou can love Jesus Christ, and rejoice in
him. Methinkes there is many a poor soul would say, I bless the name of the
Lord, that is all that I have; the Lord knows that all the friends I have, and
parts, and means, and abilities in the world, they are but as dung and dross
in comparison of Christ: Oh it were the comfort of my soul, if I might be ever
with him. Go thy way, and the God of heaven go with thee, this is a work of
God that will never leave thee, and it is a badge and a proper livery that the
Lord Jesus gives only to his Saints: never a mere professor under heaven ever
wore it, nay there was never any hipocrite under heaven to whom God did intend
it, but only those whom he has effectually called, and whom he will save:
therefore though thou want all, thou have all to comfort thee in the want of
all, and thou may say, I can say little for Christ, my tongue falters, and my
memory is weak, yet the Lord knows I love the Lord Jesus, 1 Ioh. 4.7. it is
the encouragement that the Apostle gives, saying, Love one another, for love
comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God.

Indeed he presses it in regard of the love to the brethren: but the arguments
serve for our purpose; for if the love of the brethren come from God, then the
love of God is a more special work of God. Therefore can you plead thus with
your hearts, and say The time was, Lord, that this wretched sinful carnal
heart of mine, could find no relish in the promises of grace, and I could not
bring this base heart to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and the promise was
wearisome to me; but now I thank God I can do that which before I could not
do, I thank God that the promise of life, and the light of Gods countenance
is more to me now than all the contentments of the world: surely I love the
Lord Jesus Christ. And is not this of God? Yes, I warrant theee: it is not of
thy self, thou have been taught from heaven; it was not the school of the
flesh and the world, that taught thee this lecture, it is from heaven, and the
Spirit of the Father has over-shadowed thee in his promise, and has kindled
this sparkle of love in thee, and thou have that which is sound and true:
therefore be comforted and rejoice in it, thou can say, more than any man
under heaven can say, that has not this sound love in his heart.

And likewise blessedness.
And as this is a ground of comfort, so also it is a ground of blessedness,
Romans 8.28. All things work for the b^st to those that love God. Me-thinkes the
Apostle speaks of such a love as is wrought by the Spirit of the Father in our
vocation: they work for the best to those that are called according to his
purpose: he minded well toward them, and called them from the love of the
world. And therefore since nothing can harm thee, go thy way, and let nothing
dismay thee, nor discourage thee; nay, go away ever cheered I charge you.
David desired no more but what God was wont to do to his children that loved
his name. Do to me (says the Text) as thou usest to do to those that love
and fear thy Name. Psalm. 119.132. I know thou love them that love thee, and
wilt save and glorify them in the end. I desire no more but this, Do as thou
usest to do to those that love thy Name. Be quieted with thy child's part; thy
lot is fallen into a mavelous fair ground; David a King desired no more, and
if thou have so much as he had, it is enough.

Ob. Oh, but, some will say, this is all the difficulty, if a man had this love
which came from God effectually calling him, it were enough, and a man might
have comfort in it, but there is a great deal of false love and false joy in
the world; therefore how shall I know, whether mine be any otherwise than
theirs, that I may not be deceived as they are? How may I know if this be of
the right stamp? For if it be right love, God will own it.

Answ. Notes of true love to Christ
Now for the answer to this question: let every man put his love upon the
trial, and we will say no more then that which we have ground for from the
doctrine delivered. Therefore examine thy love and thy joy thus; Whether do
thou welcome Christ and grace according to the worth of them? Now mark this,
if I prove I love God, then there will be joy there too, for they both grow
upon one root, only this joy has a little more of the sweetness of Gods love
in it. Now whether we welcome Christ according to the worth of it, it will
appear by these five particulars:

First, observe the root and rise from whence thy love came; 1. Trial.
consider this and weigh it sadly, for it is of great difficulty, yet it is
never failing, and it is the narrowest search that I know of: therefore look
well to it; if it come from the right mint, it is current. You know it is the
privilege of Kings and Princes, Simile.
that all the coin that comes from his Mint and is coined with his stamp, is
warrantable: but if there be any other Mint, the King will not allow of it,
but rather punish him that did it, lust so it is with this love, it is the
privilege of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Gods love, to mint and to
coin love that may be current love indeed, that he may take for good
payment. Therefore does thy love come from the Spirit of the Father? then it is
only fit to close with a Savior, with the Father, and the Spirit, and so
consequently the Father allows it. Great men must be entertained answerable
to their persons: Another.
for such a man to have poor and lean diet, it is not meet for him; the
greatest delicates that can be, do beseem such men of place. So this lean,
and earthly, and natural love, that grows only out of thy own parts and
abilities, or whatsoever it is, it is but lean love, and poor provision, and
suites not with God the Father, nor Jesus Christ. Base love and base things for
base men, and mean love for mean things, and natural love for natural
things: but would you entertain the Father from heaven, and a spiritual
Savior? then you must let your love be spiritual, to welcome a blessed
Savior. This besuits him, Simile.
and otherwise he will not be entertained. As it is with flowers, the flowers
that are of special planting, (as Jeremy speaks of the Jews) and the flowers
that are inoculated by the hand of the cunning Gardener, as the Provice Rose,
or the like, there is much care and pains about them; but your ordinary hedge
row Roses, there is no care taken for them. Just so it is with the work of
Gods grace, and all other common graces in the world, there is a provice love
and joy, that is a love that comes from the planting, and a joy that comes from
the inoculating of the spirit. This provice love and joy is wrought by the
Spirit of God, and this makes a sweet savor in the nostrils of Almighty God,
and of the Lord Jesus Christ; and the Lord Christ will say, Oh that love
pleases me. They cannot welcome the Lord better than with this love; but the
other love and joy pleases him not. Can thou say, I love the Lord, because
he has loved me? then thy love is of a right metal; and know it for ever,
that that God which cannot but love himself, he cannot but like that love
which came from himself, who is the God of all love, and which comes from his
own divine nature. Is thy soul affected and enlarged in love to the Lord,
because thou have felt and received the relish and sweetness of his grace?
Do thou love and joy in God upon this ground, namely upon a grounded
affection of Gods love to thee, settled and sealed to thy self? so that thou
can say, The Lord, has let in the glimpse of his favor, and the Lord has
said it in his truth, he looks to him that trembles at his word: the Minister
said it, and the Spirit says it, that my mercy is registered in heaven, and my
desires are received and granted. Oh how shall I love the Lord? My sins are
many which I have bewailed, and my sighs and sobs I have put up to heaven, and
at last the Lord has given me a gracious answer. O how may I love the Lord my
strength dearly! Lord thou have looked down from heaven in love and mercy upon
me, and therefore my soul shall ever look up to heaven to thee in love. If it
be thus with thee, thy love is sound, and will never fail thee: but if any
man's love comes from himself, and therefore loves God, that love will only
bring all to himself, and there is the end of it. A man has a love to his
parts and abilities, and prayer, and preaching and reading and conference, and
understanding, and policy; he loves these, and therefore he would fain be
beholden to Jesus Christ, to help him to honor and to glorify these parts of
his. This love was from his parts, and brought to his parts, and in the mean
time the Lord Jesus lay in the dust, and his glory was not regarded: whereas
the love that is wrought by God, it always does draw the love of the soul
again to God, and so love from him draws love to him. This is the excellency
of this love, and this is love of the right kind. But if the love of parts and
profits draw me to honor and glorify parts and profits, then I love my
profits and not Christ. Think of this often, this is certain, this will be
the mainest difference between all the love of carnal hypocrites, and of the
Saints of God. I would express my self to you thus: As it is with meat which
a man takes down inwardly and digests it, this breeds good blood; but that
meat which a man eats and spits out again, and tarries not long with him,
this breeds no blood at all: So it is in the heart of a poor humbled sinner
truly wrought upon to receive Christ in the worth of him, and with the
hypocrite. A heart truly wrought upon by Gods Spirit, it takes down the
promise and feeds upon it, and it breeds good blood and complexion. True love
is like this good blood, and true joy is like this complexion. Mark this, the
promise of God settled upon the heart nourishes and feeds the heart, and it
breeds good blood: but the foolish hypocrite, that has a kind of flattering
sweetness, this tickles the heart with vain conceits, but they never go down.
And hence it is, that that love which comes from hence, it is but a fading
love, and there is no good blood, nor no good complexion comes from it, but
rather corruptions and overture.

Secondly, 2. Trial.
as the root of this love must be from the kindling of the Spirit; so if thou
entertain thy Savior as it beseemes him, True love of Christ, entertains him
as a King.
thou must entertain him as a King, and that is thus, give up all to him, and
entertain none with him upon terms of honor, but such as retain to him, or
be attendants unto him: this is the manner of receiving great Princes. Love all
in a Christ, and for a Christ, but express thy love and thy joy to a Christ
above all: he is as the King, and all the rest are but as retainers, and all
his servants are as servants to him. He that loves any thing equal with a
Christ, it is certain he did never love a Christ: but he that sets up any
thing cheek by joll with Christ, he despises him, and never receives him. It
is all one as if a man did put a slave into the same chamber with the King,
which is all one as to drive him away. So if thou do set up any thing with
Christ, thou do drive him away with such base behavior. As in James 4.4. O
ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is an
enemy of God. A man cannot retain fellowship with Christ Jesus and with the
world too upon point of honor; Simile.
As the woman that loves her husband, she loves other men as friends and
neighbors, and will give them very courteous entertainment, and welcome them
kindly: but if they come to claim the love of a wife, she abhorres and detests
them. So a loving heart that loves Jesus Christ as the Bridegroom, he loves
Christ only, and all for Christ, and the rest as friends, etc. The soul will
love honors, or profits, or credit, or parts and privileges, that they may be
friends to speak for a man, and to give a man occasion to speak with a
Savior: as the wife loves the husband firstly, and all the rest she regards
only as they may further the match this way; so the Lord Christ and his grace
is chief to the soul, but the world, and ease, and credit, these are merely
as friends to lead him to a Savior, and make him acquainted with a Savior.
The soul loves the word, and prayer, and all Gods ordinances, to speak a good
word to a Savior for him, but all the rest are despised by him; and if any of
them come to claim the love of a soul from a Christ, it hates them deadly: as
Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not father and mother in
comparison of me, he is not worthy of me: that is if father and mother stand
between thee and Christ, and would have thy soul married to them again, the
soul hates them. This is a plain difference between a sound heart and a
false heart; in the receiving of Christ the sound heart receives him as a
favorite receives a Prince, he gives up all to him, Simile.
and lets him have the command of all: (but now an Inne-keeper entertains him
that comes next to him; he will take any man's money, and will give welcome to
any man, if it be the best man that comes he cares not, he loves gain in and
above all.) So a good heart resignes up all to a Christ, and whatsoever is
pleasing to a Christ he will do it, and whatsoever comes from a Christ is
welcome: but if any man be an enemy against his Majesty, and would do any
violence against him, he cannot endure it. But the hypocrite receives Christ as
the Inne-keeper does his guest, if the world come it shall be served, and if
honor come it is welcome, if he may have gain from them they are all welcome,
and therefore all is welcome because he may have gain by all; and so he loves
himself in all, and not Christ.

3. Trial. It avoydes matter of grief and displeasure.
Thirdly, the soul that thus entertaines Christ, and studies wholly to give
contentment to him, he is mavelous wary and watchful that he may not sad
that good spirit of God, and grieve him, and cause him to go away as
displeased, or to take away the sweetness of it for the present; the penitent
fears lest there be any thing that may cause this because he entertains him as
a mavelous loving friend: and therefore if he should do any thing to grieve
him, it would vex him to the heart. See this, Cant. 3.4.5. the Spouse sought
long for her beloved, and at last brought him home; and when she had welcomed
him, she gives charge to all the house not to stir nor awaken her love till
he please. When a Prince comes into the house of a great man, what charge is
there given to make no noise in the night, lest such or such a man be awakened
before his time? (And were it not a baseness in us, if we should have our
hearts more in love with any thing than the service of Christ?) The soul also
when it has received the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, gives a peremptory
charge to keep watch and ward, and gives a charge to hope, and desire, and
love, and joy, and the mind, and all, not to grieve nor molest the good spirit
of the Lord; let there be no motion but entertain it, no advice but receive
it, and do nothing that may work the least kind of dislike. In Genesis 19.5, 6,
7, 8. when Lot had received the 2 Angels into his house, the cursed Sodomites
came about the house to abuse them; but see how Lot pleads with those base
wicked people; I pray you, my brethren, do not so wickedly: Behold now I have
two daughters which have not known man, them will I bring forth unto you, and
do unto them as seems good unto you, only to these men do nothing, for
therefore are they come under the shadow of my roof. This is kind and
honorable entertainment indeed; he would rather suffer himself than they: so
a loving heart will do with Christ; he says, Let my soul be wounded, and my
honor lie in the dust, that Gods name may be honored; let persecution, and
shame, and disgrace, and any thing come to me, I am willing to endure all: but
I will do nothing against Jesus Christ, nor against the credit of the Gospel,
nor speak evil of Gods name, no nor dishonor the work of his grace,
whatsoever befall me. Simile.
As one that loves a friend, will ask his servants what does your Master like
best? and what does he desire to eat? because he would prevent him with
kindness, so mavelous careful is he to avoid whatsoever may displease him.
So a soul truly humbled is not content unless God may have his will, and
therefore it comes to the faithful Ministers of God, and says, How may I
please God better? and how may I come to entertain the motions of his spirit
better? show me what duties must be done, and what sins must be avoided. You
know Christ's will, and what will please him; I beseech you advise me, that I
may hear, and pray and walk, and approve my heart so to him, that nothing may
displease him. This I take to be the maine difference between a good heart,
and a false hypocritical one. Simile.
For look what difference there is between a man that takes a servant into his
family, and a Nobleman that receives a Prince, so much difference there is
between a good heart, and a false hypocritical heart: Now a man entertaines a
serva^t into his house, to the end he may serve and please himself, and that
the servant may give contentment to him, because he is wise, and able to
dispatch his occasions, and likewise diligent to look thoroughly to all: and
therefore it is that the servant is entertained, not for the servants sake, but
that he may content his master. But he that does receive a Nobleman into his
house, he labors to give him all the content that may be, he lays by all, and
attends only upon him: and though he be a man of great state; and has many
to attend on him, yet all the servants are charged to see that nothing be
wanting to his guest; nay, he will rather discontent himself than him: because
he comes out of an honorable respect to visit him, therefore he will receive
him as beseemes his state and person. Just so it is with a faithful soul,
that receives Christ in the worth of him, and one that receives him for gain
only: the one receives Christ as a servant into his family; and so all the
while that the Gospel, and the profession of it, and the Lord Jesus, may
promote his ease, and honor, and credit, then welcome Gospel; but if his
profits, and honor, and credit, and the Gospel cannot agree together, he
turns all out of doors, and of a professor he proves a loather of Jesus
Christ, because he received him to content himself withal: But he that
receives Christ in the worth of him, will not please himself, and his lusts,
and his pride, and vainglory, but though they that are his nearest friends
call him, and say, they must have his company and his attendance, yet he
replies, No, he cannot, the Lord Jesus Christ must be attended; and when the
old haunts of heart, and old lewd courses that have had inward league with the
poor sinner, come and crave, and plead for acceptance, he regards them not;
nay, an humbled soul will rather displease all the great men in the world,
yea, the nearest man that he depends upon, and all that glory and pomp, than
Jesus Christ.

4 Trial. It rejoices most to see Christ honored.
4 Fourthly, he that loves any thing in the worth of it, it is his good and
happiness to see the good and happiness of that thing which he loves: this is
an undoubted argument of sound affection, that that which he loves should have
all good, though he miss it; If any good befall that thing which he loves,
he thinks himself happy, and had rather see that honored than himself: this
is true love, and a mavelous sweet passage of a loving heart, yea, it is the
very picture of true love. 1 Samuel 23.17. When Saul had made a cunning search
for David, and he was fled, Jonathan comes to him, and chears him, saying, I
know that my father shall not prevail against thee, but that thou shall be
King over Israel, and I shall be next thee. Jonathan was Saul's Son, and he
might have said, I am my fathers heir, and why may not I be his successor in
the kingdom? but he loved David, and rejoiced in his good, and therefore he
said, Thou shall be King over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee: As if he
should say, I am more glad that the Crown shall be set upon thy head, than if
it were set upon mine own; for my soul is thereby comforted and refreshed. So
it is with a good heart that loves Jesus Christ, and his grace, and his Gospel
in truth; the happiness, glory and the honor of the Lord Jesus is the
greatest good that can befall him; wherefore he says, If the Lord may be
honored, though I am disgraced I care not; it is enough to me if may stand to
behold and see it, Ioh. 3.26.29. When the Lord Christ began to set forth the
frame and glory of the Gospel, and to baptize, the Disciples of John came to
their Master, and said, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom
thou barest witness, behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to him: they
began to be troubled because the Lord Jesus baptized, and the praise went from
them: as if they had said, There is one come that carries the hearts of all
men after him. Now mark what John answered, He that has the Bride is the
Bridegroom; as if he should say, The Lord Christ is the Bridegroom, and I
am only the friend of the Bridegroom: all my care was to prepare hearts for
him; and has he now gotten those hearts? and has he prosperity? then have I
enough: if I hear that the case goes well with him, I have enough; let the
Lord have the praise that is due to him, and let me have whatsoever is due to
me. 2 Samuel 19.30. when Mephibosheth had been wrongfully accused to David, and
David had taken away the inheritance from him, and was returned in safety, so
that he saw the Kings face again, David began to comfort him, saying, Thou and
Siba divide the land; but mark how he replies, Yea (says he) let him take
all, for as much as my Lord the King is come again in peace. It matters not
for the inheritance; and for my self, and my life I pass not, fith the King
is returned in peace: it is enough that I enjoy thy presence, which is better
to me than goods, life, and liberty. So it is with a kinde-loving heart, when
he is not able to endure to see Christ's honor and glory lie in the dust, but
if his praise be advanced, then he is glad; this is a good and loving heart
indeed which says, Lord I have enough that Christ is mine, and that his honor
and glory is magnified: Let the world take all, if I may have Christ, and see
him praised and magnified. Labor to bring thy soul to this pitch: a minister
in his place, and the master in his place, and every Christian in his place;
let it be all our care, not only to honor God our selves, but let it be our
comfort if God may be better honored by others than by our selves. This is our
baseness of spirit; we can be content to lift up Christ upon our shoulders,
that we may lift up our selves by it: this too much prevails amongst all men.
But be content to lie in the dust, that the Lord may be praised, though thou be
disgraced; And though every man's heart go opposite against thee, yet let this
content thee, if the Lord Jesus may thrive and prosper; yea if any of Gods
people thrive and prosper more than thou, let that be thy only joy.

5. Trial. More and more it desires union with Christ
Lastly, it is the nature of sound love to covet a near union with the thing
that is loved, and to have a kind of impatiency, and to be restless till it
do attain the greatest measure thereof. This flows directly from the nature
of love, especially of this love to Christ, who is the greatest good: love is
of a linking and glewing nature, and will carry the soul with some kind of
strength and earnestness to enjoy full possession and fellowship of the thing
that is loved; it cannot have enough of it, and it is not satisfied with it
upon any occasion. As it is (in reason) with a child, Simile.
happily when the father entertaines him at the table, he gives him a little
sweet-meat, as some Conserve, or the like, which is so sweet that he can taste
nothing but that, and his mind is still upon it, that he may receive more of
it: the father commends this and that, and praises a third, and extols a
fourth dish, but yet the child cries, More of this, because he felt the
sweetness of it: So it is with a soul that truly loves Christ; when it has
tasted how good the Lord is, and has had a good look from heaven, it covets
union, not so much with any thing as with that; riches, honors, profits, seem
as irksome as may be, in regard of that, and the soul desires nothing so much
as this, and craves more of Christ, more of that mercy, and holiness, and
grace, and love that is in him: let the wicked talk what they will of the
world, if he have that he has enough. Psalm. 73.25. when David had been doting
upon the world, and the vanities of it, see what he says; Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and whom on earth in comparison of thee? and then see what
follows, he bids adieu to the world, and says in the last verse, It is good
for me to draw near unto God: as if he had said, Let the ambitious belly-gods
have their pleasure, and drink, and swill, and go down to hell: But oh let
me have that mercy, and that good which God has provided for, and will bestow
upon those that love him. You shall observe it, Joh. 20.15, 16, 17. Mary was a
mavelous loving woman, and therefore when Christ said to her, Woman, why
weepest thou? whom seek thou? she supposing him to be the Gardener, says
unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him,
and I will take him away: She would be content to have the dead body of her
Savior rather than none at all. But when the Lord Jesus had revealed himself
to her in the 16 verse, she said, Rabboni; and when she saw it was he, she
flies upon him, and with mavelous violence embraces him (for so the text is
to be conceived) though he forbad her to touch him, because he was not yet
ascended: saying, Do I once possess thee again? I will never part with thee
any more; thus she held him by the feet, till he checked her, because she
depended too much upon his outward presence. Touch me not (says the Text) for
I am not yet ascended: thou shall enjoy my presence before I part with thee;
but as yet be not so earnest: so it is expressed, 1 Cor. 7.1. This is a lively
expression of that love and joy which many poor souls are possessed withal,
after they have waited long for mercy, and God is pleased to refresh them
therewith: many times they begin to lose their sleep, and meat, and begin to
be lightened by it, because they are ever holding of it, till they almost
overthrow themselves with it. Simile.
As it is with parties that have lived long together in one house, whose
affections are linked together in the way of marriage, they will ever desire to
be talking together, and ever to be drawing on to the marriage: So it is with
the soul that loves the Lord Jesus, and has this holy affection kindled, and
his spirit enlarged therein; when the Lord has let in some glimpse of his
love, he thinks the hour sweet when he prays to the Lord Christ, and has a
great deal of sweet conference with his Savior; he thinks that Lords day
mavelous sweet, wherein God reveals, by the power of his holy ordinance,
any of that rich grace and mercy of his. It is admirable to see how the heart
will be delighted to reckon the time, and place, and means, when and where the
Lord did reveal it: and the soul says, Oh this is good, oh that I might ever
be thus cheared and refreshed; it cannot have enough of this if it might have
what it would, but, as David Ps. 84.2, 3. says, My soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God. Yea the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her
self, where she may lay her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King
and my God; as if he had said, Go you blessed birds, you may build your nests
by the Altar of my God, and come into his house; Lord, am not I as good as
birds? His heart was marvellously inflamed with the want of that which he
loved. Nay, in Luke 2.29. good old Simeon had his heart so enlarged to Christ,
that he could have been content to depart this life, so he might have his
fill of Christ. The spouse that is contracted, thinks every day a year till
she enjoy her beloved. Oh, says she, would that day were come that I might
enjoy him, and take full satisfaction to my soul in him: so it is with a
loving soul, that has been truly humbled and enlightened, is now contracted to
Jesus Christ, how it longs after him! Oh when will that day be (says it) that
I shall ever be with him who is best of all? it takes hold of every word it
hears, every promise that reveals any thing of Christ; but oh, when will that
day be that I shall ever be with Christ? This is the highest pitch of Saint
Paul's speech, Phil. 1.23. For I am in a straight between two, having a desire
to depart and to be with Christ, which is best of all: as if he had said,
that I may ever be with that mercy, and grace, and spirit that is in Christ,
and be filled with his fullness for ever and ever.

This is the frame of the soul that is in love with Christ, yea this is the
strong and glewing nature of love, that it will make a man desire to be with
the thing loved, though he must undergo never so great misery to obtain it:
as Genesis 37.35. when Jacobs sons brought the party-colored coat to their
father, he said, It is my sons coat, an evil beast has devoured him: and he
rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son
many days. And all his sonns, and all his daughters rose up to comfort him,
but he refused to be comforted: and he said, For I will go down into the
grave unto my son mourning: he had rather be in the grave, than not to be
with his son Joseph. If a woman's husband be in prison, it is her wonderful
grief that it is so, but most of all that she may not be with him there; Thus
also is it with the soul that entirely loves Christ, it is content to go to
the prison with him, and says, Let me be with Christ though he be
persecuted. It is his grief that Christ is persecuted, but it is a greater
grief that he may not be with him in persecution. As the Spouse, Cantic.
2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his; and as the wife says, Husband, let the
world do and say what they will, thou art mine, and I am thine: So the soul
says, mercy is mine, and Christ is mine, if I may have that, I have enough,
but without it I cannot be quieted.

Secondly, there is an holy impatience, and restlessenesse of spirit, when it
cannot come to close with Christ. Oh it is good to express the earnest desire
of the soul to Christ, though he seem to hide his face away, and to forbid
the banes of asking. Thus it appears what it is to love the Lord Jesus.

Use 3. Now the pill is sugered, Reproof of them that love not Christ in truth.
it will go down the better, therefore now let us come to the use of reproof;
and this is as a swift witness to accuse, and as a Judge to condemn many in
the world: this is sufficient to shake the heart, and to make the hearts of
most that live in the bosom of the Church, to sink at the very sight of their
woeful condition, in whose heart this blessed grace of God was never yet
received; I mean, that never loved the Lord Jesus; woe to their souls: yea,
this is the greatest part of their woe, that though they do not love Christ,
yet they do not think so; nay, they will not be persuaded to it. This is the
cunning that the Devil uses to deceive poor souls withal, because these
affections are secret and inward, neither discover themselves evidently to the
heart, further than practice goes: therefore they think others know them not,
and here they rest: they lean upon a company of sottish delusions which will
fail them; thus they and their hopes perish for ever. Wicked men cannot but
confess their own vileness, that their communications are vain, and their
fall scandalous; but this is that which salves all, they say, their lives are
so indeed, but they love the Lord Jesus with all their hearts. When these
wretches have sworn by their Savior, and have torn his sacred body in sunder
with their oaths and blasphemies, yet they love Christ with their souls: poor
deluded sinful men!

Now for the better convincing of these men, first let me make it good, that
most men have not this love of Christ, and so lay the indictment Secondly, let
me plead the indictment, and show who they are that have it not.

Most in the Church love not Christ.
First, most that are in the world, yea that live in the bosom of the Church,
have not their hearts carried in love to God, but in a hatred and desperate
opposition to the Lord Jesus: as in Joh. 1.3, 4. In him was life, and the life
was the light of the world. The Lord Jesus was the life and light of the
promise, and that promise of life was a way to lead men on to eternal
happiness; this light shines to the dark world, but they comprehend it not:
as it is in verse. 11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
His own, by reason of their privileges, and the badge of the ordinances; his
own, because they by profession took his name upon them, as the Churches of
the Gentiles are Gods own by the outward, not the inward covenant of
Sanctification, or in the aim of Election. We take up the profession of his
Gospel, and yet we will not take up the Lord Jesus Christ, that he may make us
Christians. His own received him not; those that were baptized, and had
received the Sacrament. The Lord Jesus comes and knockes at each man's door,
but few entertain him: Nay, I would not outspeake the truth, (for they are the
words of sobriety, and it grieveth me to speak it) The most men upon earth
hate Christ more than sin: I had almost said it, and yet I had almost thought
it unfit to be spoken, though they are the words of our Savior: Wicked men
hate the Lord Jesus more than either sin, or the Devil himself. Good Lord be
merciful to us! what a misery is this, that ever any man should be created by
him, and receive mercy from him, and yet love the Devil and sin more than him.

But some will say, as Hazael did to the Prophet, 2 King. 8.12. Do you think
we are such dogs, that having received such mercy from the Lord Jesus, we
should do so? Yes for so says Elisha to him, I know the evil that thou will
do to the children of Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and
their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children,
and rip up their women with child. So, I say, and the Spirit knows it is so in
the hearts of most men this day. You know it not, you think it not; but your
hearts are more vile than you can imagine. We know the greatest evil of all
is sin, for the Devil himself is not to be loathed but for sin, and for
it only: This is the condemnation (says our Savior in John 3.19.) that light
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because
their deeds were evil. That men loved darkness more than light, and more than
Christ, nay, more than mercy and grace that was tendered, the case is clear;
it was so, and is so, and will be so: I say it is most certain, that they love
their lusts and corruptions more then Christ, and the temptations and delusions
of Satan, more than the good motions of the Spirit. Now we have laid the
indictment, therefore in the second place let us plead it.

And the several sorts of them.
2. Secondly, who are they that hate Christ? We must name the men; therefore we
refer them to three ranks: First, all open enemies to Christ: Secondly, all
glozing Neuters of the world: Thirdly, all fawning hypocrites.

1. First, the open enemies of Christ; and they are many, such as Saint Steven
spoke of Act. 7.51. saying, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart, and
cares, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye.
They that set their mouths against heaven, and stand in open defiance against
the Lord Jesus, and the power of his grace, may be referred to two heads:
First, those whom our Savior mentions, Mat. 21.34. speaking of the Vineyard:
Open enemies of Christ's two sorts.
When the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen,
that they might receive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his
servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another. But last of
all, he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son. But when
the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir,
come, let us kill him. This is an intimation of the Scribes and Pharisees. The
Church was the vineyard, the servants sent out were the Ministers and Prophets,
and the Son is Christ Jesus: now when Christ came, they said with one consent
and voice, This is the heir, come, let us kill him. Do you think that these
kind of men are all dead that have such a kind of spirit? Surely, no, there are
many Leaders of the Devils camp, as well Ministers as others. But if you ask me
what entertainment their lusts have; I say they have all the welcome that can
be: occasions come not, corruptions within their hearts stir not, and the
Devils temptations allure not so soon, but these miserable sinful wretches
give all the kind welcome that can be unto them: nay, they invite their
villainies, they provide for them, yea, and seek for all occasions that they
may sin: the Adulterer loves the twilight, and the coveteous man his money,
their minds are ever puffing, and their affections laboring to contrive all
occasions that may give all possible contentment to their vile corruptions: and
it is no marvel though they have so long continued in their sins seeing they
give such good entertainment to them. But if you ask me how they entertain
Christ, Enmity against Christ showed three ways.
let me show it by two things; you shall see them up in arms, and at deadly
hate with him: Luke 19.27. Bring hither those mine enemies, that would not have
me rule over them, and slay them before my face. They oppose themselves against
that truth that would pluck the cup from the Drunkards mouth, and the whore
from the Adulterers arms: their hearts swell for anger, and they scorn to be
under the power thereof. Nay, they not only withdraw themselves from yielding
obedience to the holiness of the word, but they will not so much as
acknowledge the truth of it, which the Devils themselves did, Act. 16.16, 17.
when Paul and Silas were preaching the word of truth, the Devils said, These
men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation. The Devils could do all this, yet these men will neither be
informed nor convinced, that the duties that God commands, are, To be holy as
he is holy, and pure as he is pure, and not only to make conscience of outward
abominations, but of inward corruptions: But they fly out, and say, I will
never believe it, and, I will not be of that opinion. The Devils could say,
These are the servants of the living God, and, this is the way of life, and,
these are the services commanded. Lord be merciful to us, what hearts have
these men, that go not so far as the Devils themselves! Secondly, see how
they behave themselves when they come into the presence of Jesus Christ; if the
Lord comes amongst them by the presence of his children, their hearts are
desperately carried against all the appearance of grace in them; now they that
hate poor Christians for their grace which they have received from Christ,
hate Christ and holiness more. That which I have to say to these men, is this;
that they would not suffer themselves to be so deluded, but would go home, and
reason with themselves in this manner, and say; the truth is, I have heretofore
deceived my self, and might have been damned, had not the Lord been
merciful to me: I pretended to hate them for their dissembling, but it was for
their grace and holiness. If any man hates the picture of a man, surely he
hates the man himself much more; so if they hate the show of holiness, much
more do they hate the power and virtue of it. Do I love the beams of the
Sun? then I love the Sun much more; and if I hate a poor Christian,
because God has brought him home, then I hate Jesus Christ, and his grace much
more: if I hate the lantern for the lights sake, then I hate the light much
more. A poor Saint has a little rush candle of holiness and purity, of grace
and meekness, and he carries this before a company of base drunkards, and
filthy adulterers, that the country cries shame of; now if these hate the man
that bears the light, will they not much more the light it self? Again, of
this rank of open opposers, are all simple and ignorant creatures, that know
nothing of grace nor holiness; who though they can say nothing either against
the truth, or the people of God, yet they will commend what the wicked
commends, and join side with them: they not only approve what these do, but in
their hearts and hands are the very same: The Scribes and Pharisees sent to
take Christ, and the people cried, Crucify him, Crucify him: they did it not,
yet they gave their voices; and therefore the Apostle Peter says, Ye are they
that have crucified the Lord of life. By this you know what will become of your
husbands, wives, and friends. Mat. 23.29. your forefathers slew the Prophets,
and the Scribes and Pharisees builded their Sepulchers, that is, approved of
what they did And as it is in a Camp, some are Captains, and Leaders, and
Commanders, and some attend upon the carriage; now though all be not Captains
and Leaders, yet all are of the same Camp: so there are some Leaders and
Commanders, and gross persecuters of Christ, which the people of God find
hard measure from; but the poor carnal Gospellers, they follow after, they
are but the tail of the Devils army, yet they are of it; they are all young
Devils, only their teeth are not so sharp, nor their claws so long as
others; they have not learned that skill, to make a prey of a poor Christian.

2. Glozing neuters described and shamed.
The second rank are the glozing Neuters of the world; these also love their
sins more than Christ, nay they love not him at all in truth; these are they
that halt between two opinions, your fair fools, that would harm no man; so
no man would harm them: the highest pitch that these come to, is this, that
they may get respect and credit among the best, and they say, He that meddles
least is happiest: these are pretty good civil neighbors, and will sometimes
do a man a good turn, provided that they may not hurt themselves: they will
be of all strains; if a wretched man come, they will be like him, and now and
then strew forth faith and troth: they will not reprove others, because they
shall not censure them. And, as they will gloze with them, so sometimes they
will invite a Minister to their house, and now and then get him to preach, and
sometimes strain hard for a little good conference; but above all, those
Ministers please them best, that will not meddle with any personal sins. If
the Minister will be only general, they commend him highly, and say, Oh he
is a very wise discreet man, and knows how to carry himself; yes, and he
knows not how to meddle with them, you must mark that: and if he will preach
Doctrinall things, and take five or six Doctrines in a Sermon, oh then he is a
judicious man, and takes the very cream of the Scriptures; but if he come to
discover their baseness, and to meddle with their corruptions, Oh then they
fall to reading that they may not hear, and wish that the man would keep him
to his text. These men do as it were entrench upon the articles of agreement
between the Lord Jesus Christ and the Gospel; they covenant that they will not
trouble nor persecute the Gospel, and they would not have the Gospel to
trouble them. And if the Minister come to touch upon any particular sins, and
labors to bring them a step higher, Oh then they are weary, and think a mean
between both is best; they account zeal in a good course like the hot fit of a
fever, very dangerous, and therefore they like best of a cold lukewarm
temper in their profession, for those spirits are admirable wholesome. They eat
out the power of Religion in this manner, and they love not the Lord Christ:
These men do with profession as the Neutrall cities do in other countries,
they will not join with the one side nor with the other, but do any thing
that they may not be controlled: yet if the stronger side begin to take up
Arms against them, and labor to bring them in subjection, they then will side
for their advantage: This is the true picture of formal Neutralists in a
Christian course, they will fasten themselves to the world, that the world may
not distaste them; and to the better side, that they may not distrust them. He
will pray in his family, only that he may cousen in his shop. He that is a
formal Neutralist, will have two or three good servants to entertain such as
are good; but he will have a knave and a drunkard also, to close with such as
are bad; and thus he plays with both hands: But if the powerful preaching of
the Word come to close with him, and say he must leave all his base ends and
aims, and lay down himself and his base courses, Oh then he turns against
the Gospel, and he is not able to stoop to it, nor to be framed by it. These
men deal with Christ as men that entertain a neighbor liberally, to this end,
that he will look to his own grounds only, and not entrench upon his; for to
have him a Landlord or Commander over him, and to be in dependence upon him,
this he cannot bear: But the Saints of God do the second, they entertain
Christ as a Landlord, but the other only as a neighbor. Let these men know,
that all those that are not with Christ, are against him: though a man stand
still and do nothing, and love not war, because he would be in peace, let
him (I say) know that all the wrong that is done by others, if he be not a
helper against it, the Lord will require it at his hands, as if he had done it
himself, as in that place, Curse ye Merosh, Judge 5.23.
because she came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty: as if a man
did say, I am loath to meddle before I am called to it. But I say thou art
called; the Gospel was persecuted, and thou would not stir; therefore the
Lord will deal with thee as he did with that lukewarm Church in the
Revelation, the Lord will spue thee out of his mouth: luke-warmnesse is
loathsome to the stomach; therefore appear in your colors what you are, that
you may be known either a Saint or a Devil: lukewarm water goes against the
stomach, and the Lord abhors such lukewarm tame fools.

Hypocrites, enemies of Christ.
3. The third rank of those that love not Christ, are the fawning hypocrites,
that will fawn upon the Lord Jesus, that make admirable fair weather, and
profess mavelous affectionate love unto him; and will speak for a good
cause and hazard himself in it, and when all is done, he is an inward hater
of Christ. Of this sort I take Saul to be, 1 Samuel 15.13. the Lord gave a
commandment to go and kill all the Amalekites; who, when he saw Samuel coming
toward him, says, Blessed be thou of the Lord (here mark the trick of an
hypocrite) I have performed the commandment of the Lord, and therefore blessed
be God that I see thee, that I may give up my account unto thee: But, says he,
What means then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of
the oxen which I hear? I need not speak, for the bleatings of the sheep show
that Saul is an hypocrite. These men may be discovered by these two passages:
They do not desire to give contentment to Jesus Christ, but to themselves; and
withal, they lift up their own glory with Christ. Four sorts of hypocrites.
Of this rank there are four sorts; The wrangling hypocrite, The whining
hypocrite, The vainglorious hypocrite, The presumptuous hypocrite.

The first sort is the wrangling hypocrite: I know many men that will profess
they are at your command, to serve you, and to do what they shall be
commanded, and, they shall think themselves happy to be employed by you, and
yet in conclusion they intend no such matter. They desire to live no longer and
to do nothing but that which may promote the honor of the Lord Jesus, and if
they did not think to honor him by this or that, they would not do it: but if
it come to this, that a man must leave his profits, or livings, or honors for
Christ, he will not say expressly he will not do it, and that he will not
part with his honors and profits for Christ, but yet he will stand to
quarrel, and say, It is not fit to do it, and, there is no command for it. It
is admirable to see and to conceive the vileness and baseness that is in the
spirits of these men; for when the duty is revealed and enjoined, they will
search far and near to make it no duty, they will rake the Devils skull, and
invent some new shifts to prove that it is not needful to be done, that so
they may avoid the doing of it: as it is amongst some that follow the fashions
of the times, though they pretend to do things comely, and to keep close to
the Word, yet if a new fashion come up, though never so absurd, they will
forget their promise and plead for it, not questioning what is lawful, but
what most pleases their humor. But observe this in thy own soul, do not
think to quarrel with thy self about duties which the Lord requires at thy
hands: But art thou in good earnest content that the Word should be true as God
would have it, and to have that accounted naught which God says is naught? It
is certain many will say it for shame, but they have an inward league between
them and some sin, they will not have that lawful that they may not do, and
they will not have that to be sin which God says is sin, that they may
commit it with quiet, ease, and liberty, striving more to content their own
hearts, and the fashion, then Christ. They must content their liberty, they
will not be imprisoned, and therefore will give full content to a spirit that
desires freedom. These never had this fire of love to Christ kindled in their
hearts.

Now before I come to the next, give me leave to unmaske this hypocrite, and to
dog him to his own door: and for this end, First, I will show what this
pretense of love to Christ is: Secondly, I will show the prankes that he has
to cover his hypocrisy withal; and when both these are opened, it will
appear that he only intends to wrangle, and that he has not this true love
of Jesus Christ. For first, he will join side with Christ in the general, and
in the common; nay when it co^es to the particular case, wherein his heart
withdrawes, yet therein also he will vow openly, that he does nothing but what
his conscience tells him is fit to be done, and that which his judgment is
fully satisfied in. Alas poor conscience! he has couzened thee before, or
else curbed and charmed thee by saying, I am resolved that it is not so, and
therefore conscience you must be of my side; yet conscience replies, You should
not do this or that; let the Lord have the glory, and take you the shame, that
all may be warned for ever. Thus it was with the old Prophet, 1 Ki. 13.18. when
he came to cousen the young Prophet, he said, I am a Prophet also as thou art,
and an Angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, bring him back with
thee into thine house. And thus it is with this wretched hypocrite in his
pretense of love unto Christ, it is clear in his conscience, he dares not do
any thing against the Lord Jesus, and in his judgment and in his conscience he
thinks so, and so he has peace at home: but let him go with his peace.
Again, he will talk marvellously of Gods honor, and of the promoting of the
Gospel, and the public affairs, and they are of great force to make him do
any thing: and this is ever in his mouth, that the general good may go on;
and, if good may be done to the Church, that's all he cares for. The bottom of
the business is this, there is a good living that he must keep, and a private
good that he aims at; he pretends a general good, but he aims at his own
good: Wretch that he is, he labors only to give contentment to his honors,
and ease, and credit, but he gives no contentment to the Lord Jesus. In 1 Samuel
15.21. Saul comes to meet Samuel, and says, I have performed the commandment
of the Lord, Have thou? No, God had thee kill the Amalekites, and thou have not
done it: Oh, says he, The people spared the best of the sheep, and of the
oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God: he would pretend to do God a
courtesy; He does not pretend his own good and benefit, but the public good,
the worship and service of God; and therefore he says, They have saved them
for to sacrifice to the Lord; and in the mean time he wrongs God, and
neglects his service. As some great Courtier will do with a plain
Countryman, he uses him very lovingly, pretends great kindnesses, till at
last he so deludes him, that he thinks he does him a great favor not to do
the thing which he asks at his hands: so the hypocrite thinks with himself,
what great honor God may receive, and what good the people of God may have
from him; but that is not the thing he looks after, he would make God and
Christ believe he does them a courtesy, not to do the duty they require of
him: But the Lord Jesus is wiser than to be thus couzened by a wretch, and
therefore Samuel says verse. 22. Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken then the fat of rams: so when a wretch says, What great good may Gods
people have by this? and what glory may come to God? etc. the Lord Jesus will
say to all such, No no, have I so much delight in sacrifice? cannot I promote
my glory without your lie? take your lies and your sins, and go down to hell
together.

Discoveries of not loving Christ.
Secondly, observe the prankes whereby he discovers himself to have no love to
the Lord Jesus; and they are three.

multiplicities of opinions he will be sure to join with that side that may
make for his own ends, though he know not the men that hold it: he says, many
men many minds, therefore I think as such and such think; his meaning is
this, he is resolved to do that which he thinks may be most beneficial to
him, and therefore it is enough that any man does as he would have him,
because he would do so, though he had no ground for it.

Ahab, the wretched sottish king was not willing to hear Michaiah speak, for
he knew what he would say; for when Jehosaphat said, Is there not here a
Prophet of the Lord besides, that we might enquire of him? Yes, says he, there
is one Michaiah, but I hate him, for he never prophecies good to me, 1 King.
22.7, 8. Thus the young man, Matthew. 19. when he heard that which was contrary
to him, went away sorrowful; whereas a good heart would have come sorrowful,
and said, I bless the Lord for this mercy that I may live to hear of the
hypocrisy of my heart: Lord I desire a better opportunity to hear more of
this matter, my heart is worse than I imagined. This hypocrite cannot endure to
hear of that ear: and if he be in the company, he is weary of the speech, and
says, There is better communication, and more useful than this; but the
reason is, he would not be troubled in his way.

Act. 23.15. see what those wicked people said, Ye with the Council signify
unto the chief Captain that he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though
ye would enquire some thing more perfectly concerning him, and we, or ever he
come near, are ready to kill him: Here they pretended a fair equal hearing,
and yet they intended another matter. Such a course this hypocrite takes up
against the truth of Christ; he will talk and inquire of this and the other,
as if he would know more of Gods will; and read this and that book, and enquire
of this Minister and that Christian, but he is resolved never to be persuaded
nor convinced of the truth of it: Thus they break the neck of the truth, and
shall break their own necks in hell too. In Acts 4.16. there is a great work
done; that cannot be denied, but let us take heed that it go no further. It
is with these hypocrites, as it was with the Scribes and Pharisees, who, though
the glory of the truth shone upon them, yet would they stop it, and, that it
might get no hold upon them, knock off the fingers of it. It is admirable to
observe this hypocrites guise, if there be any man that will but say any thing
that may tend to his way, he applauds that man, and delights much in him, and,
though he know no reason for it in his conscience, yet he contents and
satisfies himself: but if there be never so good arguments to the contrary,
never so many reasons that cannot be gaine-sayd, yet he is not satisfied,
neither can he be persuaded by all these arguments; The reason is, he is
resolved to do whatsoever he has purposed for his honor and safety, and
therefore it must be lawful that he may do that which he has purposed:
Let there be but some frothy Minister, or some foolish man or woman, that will
commend fashionablenesse, the fashion-monger will hug him in his arms, and
say, He spoke mavelous wisely to the point, and very judiciously, though he
had not one argument; and whatsoever is spoken to the contrary, he will not
believe it: but the Scripture has no such thing; for where are those words of
yellow starch, bands, and the like? Well, it is sufficient that he is
fashionable to the world: the issue is this, he is contented to give himself
honor, and ease, and liberty, but he will not content the Lord Jesus Christ;
and therefore I say he never had this love of God, nor this saving grace in his
heart. Romans 2.8. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness; not those that are contentious with their
neighbors, but against Gods truth: What of them? why, to them shall be
indignation and wrath. Such were they 1 Timothy 6.4. He is proud, knowing
nothing. When a man should come and join side with the word of truth, he is
puffed up in his vain mind, and has no sound work of grace in his heart: He
that wrangles against truth, never loved Christ:
I do not say that he which is ignorant in any truth of Christ, but he that
thus wrangles with any truth of Christ, that man cannot have any sound evidence
of Gods love in this blessed work of grace: and this I prove thus.

2. arguments.
First, he that will have this evidence of Gods love, must entertain the truth
aright, that is, in the love of it, not for his own private ends and aims, not
because it is profitable or honorable, but because it is true; and he that
entertaines one truth in the love of it, will entertain every truth so far as
it is revealed: but this hypocrite does not entertain the truth in the love of
it, and therefore he cannot have any sound evidence of Gods love.

Secondly, never any man had, as yet, this work of true grace, that is not yet
come from under the power of sin and Satan: for no man is come from under the
power of sin, or the dominion of Satan, that will join side with sin and
Satan against the truth; but this man does join side with sin and Satan
against the truth of God, and therefore was never come from under the power of
sin, and so consequently never had this work of grace. I compare this
wrangling wretch to the Merchant, that will trade with other Princes, but not
submit to them as King: so this man will trade with the Gospel, but not subject
himself unto it; and therefore he is but a hang by and a retainer, and one that
makes a booty of the Gospel. Thus much of the wrangling hypocrite.

The second sort is the whining hypocrite, who will continue daily to abuse the
Gospel, and to grieve the Lord Christ, and he thinks to make up his wrongs, by
laying open his sorrow that he has done so, and thus he thinks to be friends
with him again. As it is with some servant, whom the Master will neither let
go, nor yet use as a servant: so it is with these whining hypocrites; they
have great need of the power of the Gospel, and yet they are not willing to be
under the power of it; however they keep it in, and fawningly flatter it, and
if they come and say, they are sorry for this and that, then all shall be well,
and they entreat the Lord not to take it ill at their hands, they will mend it,
etc. so that in truth they love not the power of the Gospel, but only to make
gain of it to themselves. Simile.
As it is with some whining debtor, that partly out of covetousness would not,
and partly through indigencie cannot pay, he will come and complain of his
hard peny-worth, and desire some respite, not that he may give content to the
Creditor, but to himself: So it is with this whining hypocrite, he will ever
be complaining, but never amending. I speak not against sorrow and
complaining, as though they should be altogether quit of the body of death, and
of distempers, and of their cursed lusts and corruptions; (for if a man love
Jesus Christ as much as ever any mortal man did, yet he shall never be quit of
this body of death so long as he is here) but I speak against those that are
still complaining and vexing themselves in the outward appearance, who have
tears at command, because of some violent passion, or for some discredit to
the Gospel, or some disgrace to themselves, and yet stand just at the same
stay. Oh varlets, that confess their sin to Christ, and yet forsake it not,
that they may love him! that thus they may fawn upon Christ, making their
sorrows a plea for their sin, and think to cry and whine it out, and yet
return to their old courses again! Thus it was with Ahab, 1 King. 21.15. who
killed Naboth for the vineyard, and in the 27 verse, hearing Eliah denounce
such heavy threatenings against him, and knowing himself to be guilty of that
sin, he fasted, and prayed, and rent his clothes, yea prayed in print, as the
proverb is, but yet he returns to his old byas again, for in the next
chapter he hated Michaiah still. This is but the bathing of a man's sins, not
the drowning of them: he thinks to please Christ, and to keep Christ with him,
because he cannot be without him; and though he sin against him, yet he
thinks to make all whole with complaining. This is too ordinary in the world.
The rebellious hearted sinner, that is cross and peevish, and froward, he will
be a professor in a high strain, and pretend great love to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and complain of his froward heart, but yet he falls into passion upon
every occasion, and he to, by his complaints, thinks to make all whole
again. This is base false hypocritical love, and not the love of the Father
that will enable a man to give content in those things that he may easily do.
I can hire these men from their passion for money, and scare them from it by
the Magistrate; And shall a reward hire thee, or a Magistrate scare thee, and
shall the Lord Jesus have no power over thee to cause thee to do it? Go thy
way, thy heart is naught: if thy love were sound, it would work more than all
this comes to; that is not love at all, that is not able to do so much as this
for Jesus Christ: the like I may say of the untoward doggednesse of some
husbands and masters; it is their life to fret and talk like madmen; and thus
the cunning chapman will cheat you to day, and whine to morrow, and he thinks
this pleases the Lord Jesus very well. She is not accounted a loving wife,
but an adulteress, that when she has played the harlot, will come and whine
to her husband, and yet go to it again; no, if she had a true heart to her
husband, and sought for peace, she would not have returned to her vile courses
again: So it is with the soul, it is adulterous and base love, and not the
love of the Spouse of Christ, to confess and bewail sin, and yet to commit
it. That sorrow which loosens the heart from sin, and makes it come nearer to
God, and so to be rid of corruption; that sorrow, I say, gives content to
Christ; but that sorrow which indeed does encourage a man, and rather give way
to the commission of sin, than loosen the heart from it, gives no content to
the Lord Jesus, but to thy self; and stands not with the allegiance of him,
but of sin: but yet if thou can say so, and sorrow so, as to be loosened from
thy sin, then thou contentest the Lord Jesus; but if thou think thou have
a warrant, or a privy seal for thy sinful practices, because thou have
sorrowed, this argues little love to Jesus Christ.

Object. But some will say, May not a man make his moan, and express his
grief for sin?

Expression of sorrow for sin, limited.
Answ. I answer, Yes, it is fitting and necessary; yet consider these two rules.





A third sort is a new upstart hypocrite, that is newly come up; many of them
are in other parts, and some near unto our own selves: they are such as are
full of carnal confidence, and are proud of their believing; but faith shuts
out boasting. They are as full of hypocrisy as an egg is full of meat, or a
toad full of poison. Such an hypocrite I will discover to you thus. He is a
man that has long professed the truth, and has seen his sin, and been
awakened to his own sense, and has had a kind of attendance to the Gospel,
and a kind of brainish acquaintance with the promise in Jesus Christ, so that
now he is fully persuaded that Jesus Christ is his, and he is Christ's. And yet
after all this, when he is come thus far, he looks no more after himself,
but looks all to the Lord Jesus Christ, insomuch that the Lord Jesus becomes a
drudge to him. Now the guise of this man is this, he casts away all sorrow, and
reasons thus: For me to see my vileness, and to be sensible of the body of
death, and to bleed inwardly, and mourn daily for my wickedness, I think is
needless: these are past with him, for he says, I have mourned before this
day, and now I have gotten Jesus Christ: thus he thinks he needs not be
afflicted with his sins, nor mourn for his many failings; but the Lord Jesus,
who he thinks is at his command, must do all, and thus he surfets on his
sins still. This is the root of the doctrine of the Familists, that cursed,
hellish, and unconceiveable baseness that is in them. I have heard of many of
them, that after long profession and much zeal and exactness in a Christian
course, have fallen unto this strain, and come to just nothing. A poor
sinful deluded Sot thou art, thou poor creature; do thou entertain the
Lord Christ as a Commander, when thou will not have him so much as to dispose
of thee, but as thy drudge, that thou may take what mercy thou will, and
leave what thou will? They will have Christ to pardon their sin, but not to
make them mourn for it, as if (in truth) they meant that he should stand at
their beck. They rest upon their faith, and will not have themselves and their
faith to rest upon Christ: for this is their conceit, they apprehend they do
believe, and there they rest, and so in conclusion they never go to Christ to
have their hearts humbled and brought under; as if a man should go and graspe
with his hand, and take no hold of the rock, he neither finds strength to
himself, nor any hold to his hand: so they rest upon their faith, and neither
they nor their faith upon their Savior. Thou sinful deluded hypocrite, the
Lord Jesus will make thee come under, and stoop, and force thee and thy
carnal confidence to lie in the dust, and beg for mercy. Can any man in
reason judge this to be love, which in deed is nothing but a mavelous cursed
distemper? They say, the law has nothing to do with them, and they live by
the law of love; and yet they have not any love to the Lord Jesus. Must the
Lord Jesus Christ pardon thy sins, and thou remain in them? Must the Lord
Jesus seal to thy soul the forgiveness of thine iniquities, and thou dally
with it? No, the Love of the Lord Christ will compel thee to do any thing to
give contentment to the Lord Jesus. Esa. 57.15. Psalm. 51.17.
An humble heart is the only house where Christ dwells, and the only
sacrifice that he accepts of, and the only guise of spirit that Jesus Christ
looks to: and if thou love the Lord Jesus, thou must be sure to provide this
dainty dish for him.

Ob. But some will say, What need have I of this sorrow, seeing Christ Jesus
must do all?

Ans. I answer, What need then have thou of faith, for Christ must in that do
all for thee? Though I do not say thou have as much need of sorrow and
brokennesse of heart, as of faith, Continual sorrow as needful, as continual
believing.
yet there is a kind of proportionable need of a continual sorrow, as well as
of continual believing; and that upon these grounds.

First, thy sorrow helps on thy faith, that it may be more strongly carried to
Jesus Christ; for the more weight and burden of thy sins thou feel, the
more need thou will see of Christ. As it is with a sharp sauce, though it
breed not a stomach, Simile.
yet it stirs up a stomach; so this godly sorrow, though it is not the work
of believing, yet it stirs up the stomach (of faith) to go go to the Lord
Jesus: for faith is the going out of the soul to Christ, and he that finds
the burden of his sin, will be the more ready to go out to Christ.

Joh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: he speaks there of
them that now had faith, and yet shows that before the Lord would seal to the
man that has faith, the assurance of the pardon of his sins, he will make
him humble, and cry, and sorrow for them, and as to live comfortably, so
sorrowfully too: as 1 King. 8.38. 2 Chronicles. 6.36. If the people return to thee
in the land of their captivity, and pray unto thee saying, We have sinned, we
have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly; then hear thou in heaven, etc. When
the Lord sees their hearts humbled for their sins, and sorrowful for them,
then he seals up the pardon of them. So then the way to have this assurance,
is to have this frame of spirit here spoken of.

sorrow for the wrong and dishonor done to God by other sinful men: as David,
Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not
thy law. EZech. 9.4. The Lord said to the Angel, Go and set a mark upon the
foreheads of all the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that
be done in the midst thereof. Now how can a man mourn for the abominations of
others, when he has not the heart to mourn for it in his own soul?

Ob. But some will say, Must we never rejoice in the Lord?

Ans. I answer, Yes. I say, sorrow daily for thy sins, and yet daily rejoice
in thy Savior; and the more thy heart is broken for the one, the more thou will be comforted by the other. Thou that make no matter of being sensible of
the body of death that hangs upon thee, and have no care to be sensible of thy
own failings, take heed that the Lord give thee not up for ever to thy own
baseness, to be rushed headlong into some vile scandalous courses, and so thou
perish for ever; as we find by experience, many, by this means, have grown
the most profane creatures that ever lived: And this is the damnable heresy of
the Familists.

The fourth sort is the vainglorious hypocrite; and he is mavelous zealous
for God and his truth in outward appearance. That God may be honored, and his
Gospel advanced, it is admirable what he will do; he will hazard himself, his
life, his estate and all, nay be content not to live, if he may but leave a
little vain breath after him. We know what vainglory does amongst the
Papists, who, that they may be canonized for Saints, will endure any thing, and
suffer death it self: this vainglory is above life and all. Simile.
As some great Courtiers will do by a man that they mean to make a booty of,
they make him their only favorite, and express a great deal of kindness to
him, that he may help them to more honor and glory: So this wretch does lift
up the Gospel, that the Gospel may advance him, and fill his sails full of
wind: therefore he will do great matters for this end, that he may receive
glory from it. Even as the Stage Player that sets up a great stage that he may
be above the people; Another.
so it is with a vainglorious wretch; prayer is a good stage, and fasting, and
hearing, and preaching are very fine stages for him, upon which he acts his
part, that others may see him, that glory may come to him, and not that the
glory and grace of Christ may be extolled: he would lift up himself to
heaven, and cast down Christ to hell. Such an one was Saul: when Samuel gave
him the left hand, and would not go with him into the City, 1 Samuel 15.30. He
said, I have sinned, yet honor me I pray thee before the people, and turn
again with me, that I may worship the Lord thy God: Walk with me, and then the
people will say, Oh what good friends they be! surely he is a good man, the
Prophet goes with him. It is a great honor to those that are wise, because
they are willing to join side with those that are holy and gracious; so Saul
will honor Samuel, that Samuel may honor him, and that he may stand upon his
shoulders, as it were, that the people may say, See how inward they are, and
what a good man he is, the Prophet goes on with him: but the turn and the
issue of the hypocrite is this, it is merely for himself; which will appear
thus: If once the wind begin to turn, and the gale of honor grow somewhat
cold, and other men are a little lifted up, so that he may not be in the
forefront; or if his profession will not carry him out with honor, but his
credit is laid in the dust, and he sees he cannot get honor, his heart dies
in him, and he says, It is as good to leave off all: and if he cannot get
glory from the Gospel, either he will grow desperately wicked and oppose the
Gospel, and join side with the wicked, and help them; or else he will flagge
and die in a base carnal course, and come to nothing; and that's the best of
him. This has been the bane of many men, who, when they have missed of the
glory that they looked for from the Gospel, they have become persecuters: These
men deal with Christ as the Inne-keeper does with his guests; If a man will pay
the Ordinary, Simile.
he is welcome, but if once his money fail, he turns him out of doors: so
if Christ will pay his Ordinary, and if he may have credit and honor, so as
men may say he has good parts, and that he fasts more than the world knows; I
say, if the Gospel will give him this Ordinary, it is welcome, and he is
carried on cheerfully: but if Christ and the Gospel will not give him that
which he would have, he turns his back upon it. The Lord Jesus convince
your hearts of it. I take this to be the state of a great many: but a gracious
heart is of another strain or temper. Happily God has given a man parts, and
gifts, and credit, and yet if the Lord withdraw himself, a good soul says as
John did, Joh. 3.40. He must increase, I must decrease; so a good heart says,
If another man deserve and have more than I, yet let this proud heart lick the
dust, and never lift up it self; if the Lord Jesus may increase, and have his
honor and glory, let me be trodden in the dust: this is a heart worth gold.
When a man entertaines the King, he is content, though the King put him out of
his own house, to be his servant for the while; and if his Majesty may be
contented, he cares not: so it is with a gracious humble heart, if the Lord
will blast a man's parts and comforts, and take all from him, and give him
Christ naked, and only that honor that is in him, he is contented: This
heart is right, and he will say, It is Gods will to take away these parts,
honors, credit, etc. and if the Lord Jesus say, I will not assist nor comfort
thy soul, he lies down and says not a word, but this, Let the Lord be
honored though I be as the dung in the streets; whatsoever become of me,
though I be damned, so the Lords glory may be advanced, I am content. Suppose
this should be (which indeed cannot be) that a man were left destitute of al
comfort, friends, and means, and all that he has loved heretofore, and in
stead of honor were to have shame; and imprisonment for liberty; and want and
dishonor in stead of friends: the soul says, It is Gods will to do so, and
to take away honor and parts, who must order the business but he only? Does
it please the Lord Jesus to do so? blessed be his name for it, I shall now be
contented, let me lie at his feet; though I go down to hell let me wait on
him, and let him do what he will.

Now all you that are of any of these sorts, to you is the Word of the Lord
spoken this day, and I beseech you in the name of Christ, take it in love, and
as spoken out of indignation to your sins: to you, I say, the Minister and
the Word says, The Lord be merciful to you, you are haters of the Lord
Jesus, there is none of the love of God in the hearts of any of this generation
to this day. Now do not go away and say, Let the Minister say what he will,
for he must say something to hold out the hour: What? will thou show thy
self to be a most notorious wrangling hypocrite? Conscience, speak, is not
thy heart met withal, as in all the former particulars? Conscience says so,
and the Lord says so; Oh be persuaded therefore, and yield the bucklers, and
say, Now I see it is not in truth, all that I have done is wrong and false; Oh
that I could once at last fall upon the right way! The Lord persuade your
hearts to conceive of it, and to say, I am still a hater of Christ, I am yet an
enemy; Do I yet live to be saved by Christ, and do I hate him? think of thy
sin, and consider thy sorrow.

1. Think thus much with thy self, This sin of all other is most
unconceivable, and not to be named, much less to be practiced and retained.
Oh that ever any wretch that has received so much from Christ, should still
hate him! Good Lord, that ever there should be such a wretch upon the earth!
and yet Lord I am the man, I am he that have approved of the practices of the
wicked: thou art an open enemy to the Lord Jesus, and therefore think what
thou have done all this while. Romans 1.19, 20. That which may be known of God,
is manifest in the creatures. But in the mean time think but what thy sin
is, that thou have not only the creatures to preach to thee, but the Lord
Jesus who came down from heaven: It is a wonder that ever he came for such
wretches as we are; he has torn his bowels in pieces for thee, and entreated
thee to bathe thy soul in his death, and be saved for ever; Luke 19.42.
yea, he has wept over thee, and said, Oh that thou had known, even thou
at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace, yet thou
regardest not. Oh thou poor ignorant profane carnal wretch! nay the blood of
Christ, and his tears, and the offer of his mercies, and his spirit, speak to
thee, and entreat thee to believe in him and live for ever, and yet thou
continuest an infidel. You know the spirit of love has met you in your
Churches, and in your houses, and walked with you in your journeies, and said,
Now open, the Lord Jesus calls and tenders mercy, and you have snubbed it. Good
Lord, is it possible that the blood of Jesus Christ should speak to us, and
that a company of wretched creatures should trample upon that blood, and grieve
that spirit, rather then forsake their lusts and corruptions! You children tell
your fathers of this, and you wives your husbands, and say, Is it possible that
we have done this, and yet live still? it is a wonder. Therefore reason thus
with your selves, and say, If a heathen shall be condemned that had but trees
preaching to him, and his conscience open; then what shall become of me, that
have had Christ and his blood to preach to me? what will become of me? what sin
is mine? it is a scarlet sin, it has in it all abominations.

2. Secondly, think of thy sorrow, how will the Lord Jesus be revenged on
thee! Do thou say, Oh he is merciful, and will forgive all? What will the
Lord suffer his son to be trampled upon will God the Father suffer this?
think what will be the end of it; Oh thy judgment is intolerable and
unrecoverable, continuing as thou art. Consider the heaviness of thy plagues:
1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ; let him be had in
execration, or be accursed, or be made Maranatha; that is, All the curses of
heaven and earth, and all the curses of the world, to the highest strain of
cursing: as if he should say, All you Churches on earth, and all you Angels in
heaven, curse ye that man, and all ye Devils in hell torment that man, nay, let
him be accursed for ever; and then, blessed Redeemer, take this man into thy
own hands, and let him be accursed for ever: As in Jude 14. And Enoch also the
seventh from Adam, prohecied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him. You think it is nothing to speak against the Lord Jesus;
thousands of Angels shall minister to him, and ten thousands shall go before
him, and say, The Lord is coming to execute judgment upon all that work
wickedness, and upon those that have spoken against him. So that when the
Church of Christ, and the Angels in heaven, and the Devils in hell have
conspired to torment a man, then also the Lord Jesus will come to torment him.
Oh that my heart could bleed, and if it were possible, break in sunder for the
misery in which you are: in that day the Lord Jesus will say to such, as he
does Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither and slay them before me: He will say, Bring hither that
enemy of mine, he has opposed me, and grieved my spirit, and slighted my
mercy; bring my enemies hither, not the Heathens or Pagans, I regard not them
so much, but him that has been a hater of me and of my Gospel; and then shall
thou see the intolerablenesse and unavoydablenesse of thy punishment. Oh poor
soul, what will thou say or do when thou art put to such a plunge; (as
Joseph's bowels did earne within him when he talked with his brethren, that he
could forbear no longer, I wish that I had a heart to mourn in secret for
thee) I say, what will become of thee, poor wretch? Happily thou will say,
there is mercy: It Is true, but thou have hated that mercy, which should save
thee: or, will thou think that the blood and merits of the Lord Jesus will
save thee, thou have trodden upon them. Will thou say, The good spirit of the
Lord will prevail with this wretched heart of mine? with what heart can thou
crave aid from the spirit, when thy own conscience can say, I have hated that
good spirit of the Lord, and that mercy which should save me? And when all is
done and thou art come to the period, go your way home to your husbands and
wives and mourn for them, for there is neither mercy nor Christ for them, for
they also have hated him. And when this is done, imagine thou did see the
heavens opened, and the fire melting round about thee, and the Lord Christ
coming in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to all that obey not the Gospel,
lay thy hand upon thy breast and say, that is I Lord, that is my husband, or my
child, he is come against us, to render vengeance to them that have lived with
me, and have opposed the Gospel, and the riches of grace and of mercy in Jesus
Christ. Think of these in Gods name and labor to prevent them here, that thou
may be freed from the punishment of them hereafter.

Love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.
Use 4. The last use is for Exhortation; Oh that God would please to work our
souls to this duty, which the Saints take up, and all of us ought to labor
after! You hear how the Lord works in the hearts of his, and how they which
are truly called of God, have this love kindled in their hearts; Oh therefore
what remains, but only this, be exhorted, since you see the way, to walk in
it; and since we see what the Saints of God have and do, let us labor to
express this frame of heart, that so the Lord Jesus may make us partakers of
their hapnesse: I say, let us labor after it, and when we have it, express
our loves to the Lord Jesus Christ as we ought: It was that which took up the
heart of David, Psalm. 18.1.
when he says, I will love thee dearly O Lord my strength. As it is with a
woman with child, though the infant in the womb have life, yet the mothers
love is not so great toward it till it be borne; but then she clasps her
arms about it with much tenderness; so he says, I will embrace the Lord
with much love, I will love him; as if he had said, All the world shall not
hinder me but I will love him, though I love not my self: and he persuades
all the Saints of God to do the like, Psa. 31. 23. saying, Love the Lord all ye
his Saints; who will you love if you love not him? Oh you poor ones, love you
the Lord, for you have need of him; and all you rich ones love you the Lord,
for you have cause to do it; and you little ones too (if there be any such in
the congregation) he knockes at every man's door, and persuades every man's
heart, and he deals faithfully with his Saints: therefore if you have but this
grace, it is an undoubted argument, that you are the Saints of God: nay, though
out of thy blindness thou could never know the way to Christ, and out of thy
weakness thou could never close with Christ, yet if thou will but love him,
thou shall know him, and be with him for ever: 1 John 4 12.16. No man has
seen God at any time: God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in
God, and God in him. If thy heart be persuaded to continue in God, and to be
with God for ever, then love him, and he will dwell in thee, for he is love it
self; for so says the Apostle, Love is of God.

Ob. Oh but some will say, it is true, we know it is fitting, and we ought to
do it, but it is a difficult thing, and we are unable to do it, though we
know it is requisite to be done. To love the Lord Jesus we find is a difficult
work, and hard, although the world think it not so.

Ans. I would to God you did find it difficult: and mark what I say, that man
never loved Christ aright, who found it not difficult. He that says, Oh such
an one as will not love the Lord Jesus, it is pity he should live: it is to be
feared he did never love Jesus Christ aright: Poor silly deluded creature, it
will cost thee hot water before that day; yet when thou have it, it will quit
all thy cost and labor.

Oh but some will say, Means to love Christ.
what are the means to prevail with us? and how may we draw our sturdy
rebellious waiward hearts to this love of Jesus Christ? I refer the means to
these three heads.

1. First, there are some hindrances to be removed.

2. Secondly, labor to see the beauty and excellency of Jesus Christ in the
promise.

3. Thirdly, when the promise is come near, and the heart made empty, then
learn the skill to make the soul and the promise meet.

Means, 1.
First, that you may love the Lord Christ, there are some hindrances which lie
upon the heart, which are mavelous causes of dissension between Jesus Christ
and the soul, and these must be taken away. Now the hindrances of this sort
are these three.

Hinderance, 1.
The first is this, To take off the soul from the love of these base things
here below. I beseech you observe it, be mavelous wise that you lavish not
out your souls upon these lying vanities: for as it is with a stream, Simile.
if the bank be cut, and all the stream run that way then the proper channel
must needs lie dry, because all the stream runs another way; so is it with the
stream of a man's affections, if the stream of love and joy be let out upon
profits, or pleasures, or honors, you cannot have and spend, you cannot have
your affections still, when you have spent them upon other things; therefore
be sure to knock them off from the world, that you may give them wholly to
the Lord. 1 John 2 15. Little children love not the world. What if we do, may
some say: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. You
must not think to have heaven and hell too, to have Christ and the world too:
It is impossible in reason, that a wise should have a true affection of love to
her husband, and an adulterous affection to her filthy mates too; the mate must
be abandoned before the husband can be loved as he ought to be. Jam. 4.4 Ye
adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God? This is meant of spiritual adulterers and adulteresses, those
that withdraw their hearts from the Lord, and have their back-doores for the
world; O ye adulterers (says he) know ye not that he that loves the world
cannot love God? These two cannot stand together; either make these two at ods,
or else there can be no love to Jesus Christ. Another.
As it is with the body of a man, when the heart is hot, the heat of the sun
draws all the heat outward, and leaves the stomach cold, insomuch that many
times he swelters away; so when the profits and pleasures of the world come
mavelous strongly in a good booty or bargain, and shine hotly upon your
fouls, and draws out your hearts to that, then they are cold to grace, and
Christ, and the promise, as if you were dead men; nay, many a man has died and
perished everlastingly by this way and means. When a Gentleman has stockt his
man with money, Simile.
and sent him to the market for such things as he has need of, he will not
lay out his money upon bables and rattles, because the more he lays out, the
less he has for his market; but he will keep his money together: so when the
Lord has stockt your souls with strength of grace, so that now you have very
violent affections of love and joy, if you lay out these affections upon
profits and honors, when you come to provide for Christ, all is already spent.
One man lays out his love upon his lusts, and another upon his chambering, and
when they come to Christ and grace, then their hearts are dead, and loose, and
adulterous, and have spent all. Therefore in a word, when the world, and
profits, and honors come and say, Let us have so much love, and keep so much
for Christ; tell the world thus, and say, Nay, we must keep our choice
affections for the best things, we must love Christ, and therefore let the
world stay, and let its better be served first. This is the first hinderance.

Hinderance 2.
2 Secondly, take heed, and cast off those vain and groundless surmises and
suspicions, which either Satan casts in, or thy own heart breeds against the
Lord Jesus and his goodness. There is a cavilling jealousy which is in every
man's heart by nature, whereby we are subject to think hardly, or at least to
surmise sinfully against the Lord and his dealings with us; look how thou do
suspect God to be unto thee, Simile.
so art thou unto him: As it is with two friends, if they once begin to be
jealous of one another love, and if I once surmise in my heart that he has
some ill will toward me, this is the next way to breed in my heart an ill will
toward him: therefore be sure to quit thy heart of these. A loving conceit
makes the thing lovely that we meddle withal, but a groundless suspicion
turns all another way, and also makes us think ill of the Lord; it takes all
with the wrong hand; for, if a man have the blessings of this world, then the
soul says, It is true indeed, God has given me these, but it is as a hook,
the Lord makes my table my snare, and only fits me for the slaughter: For when
the Lord lets in the horror of his wrath into the soul, all those blessings
come to nothing, and are forgotten, because the heart has God in a jealousy,
and thinks that God only fats him to the slaughter, and to ruinate him for
ever, whereas the Lord could as well destroy him presently as bear ill will
toward him. Again on the other side, if the Lord gives but a small pittance
and allowance, then the soul says, The Lord loves not me, how straight-handed
is he toward me! if he did love me, it would be otherwise. As the naughty
stomach turns the best diet into ill humors, and as the green glass makes
all seem green to him that has it; so it is with the heart that is
uncharitably conceited toward the Lord, for we, notwithstanding all his loving
kindness, still think we have him upon the worst hand, and are provoked in our
hearts against him. Therefore take heed of harboring any ill thoughts, or
groundless suspicious jealousies against the God of heaven; this is ordinary,
yea, too ordinary with our base hearts, a vile heart is a breed-bate, between
the Lord and us; for it accuses God to the soul, and then the soul to God:
and therefore when happily we labor to bring a poor sinner to look toward
God, and to consider of Gods goodness to him, No, no, (says he) It is true, I
confess God is very gracious, and it is his goodness that I have the means
of salvation, but I shall one day perish, and God only serves his turn of me,
the Lord never gave me that assurance of his love that such and such have, God
will one day leave me in the lurch. And then the heart is transported with a
secret dislike of the Lord Jesus. Wretches that we are! whereas a good and a
charitable conceit of God would make a good construction of his dealings, as
the wife of Manoah did, Judge. 13.22, 23. when Manoah offered a sacrifice, and
an Angel appeared (which Angel was the Lord Jesus Christ) he said, We shall
surely dye, for we have seen an Angel (for this was their opinion in ancient
times, that if a man did see an Angel he should dye:) the Angel received the
sacrifice, and did wonderfully accept it, and yet he says, We shall surely
dye. Here was a groundless suspicion: but mark how she reasons, If the Lord
were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat
offering at our hands: as if she had said, Oh do not you think so hardly and
uncharitably of the Lord, as that he will kill us; why did he thus and thus? we
may rather expect good from God, becuse he has done good to us before: So I
say, and so I would have thee to say to thy soul, The Lord does me no harm,
and therefore why should I think that he intends any unto me? I have received
nothing but good from the Lord, and therefore why should I think so ill of
God? Oh take heed of this.

3. The third hinderance is this, Hinderance 3.
Judging the goodness and kindness of the Lord according to thy own desires,
what thou would have; not after thy own unworthiness, nor the kindness
which others do enjoy better than thy self; murmuring that thou art not
worthy, whereas thou art not fitted that God should do any thing for thee. This
mis-judging many times carries the heart with a special mistaking against the
Lord: as it is with a poor creature that has had the means, but not received
the like comfort and mercy thereby that others have, see how the heart reasons
saying, Others have such and such assistance, in the mean time God leaves me;
and such and such have evidence of his favor, but God regards not me: had I
but such power against corruptions, and such evidence of Gods love and favor
as God has given to such and such Christians, far younger than I! I seek,
and pray, and entreat, and have not: and with that the heart is carried with a
secret heart-burning against the Lord; this breeds a secret kind of wrangling,
and quarrelling, and withdrawing from the Lord. Therefore labor thou to still
those distempers, and to rectify thy self, and to judge as thou ought.
Judge not thy self by what others have, and by what thou deservest, but say,
Blessed be God I am not as I might have been, and blessed be God, I am not as I
have deserved: for then I had either been upon the chain with felons, or upon
the gallows with thieves and robbers, or in the Alehouse at my abominations;
for my nature is prone to it as well as others. I confess I am not so holy as
I ought to be, but blessed be that mercy in Jesus Christ that I am as I am: I
have not what others have, and yet it is a wonder that I have any thing at all
at the hands of the Lord, so unthankefull and dead-hearted as I am: others are
meek, and patient, and heavenly, and painful, and therefore it is a wonder
that I have any thing at all. Go thy way, and be contented with the Lords
goodness, and quarrel no more, and mis-judge the Lords kindness no more.
Thus you see the hindrances removed; now there is a way made, that the soul
may come to some terms of love with God.

Means 2.
2. When the soul has been thus ordered, we must labor to be thoroughly
acquainted with the beauty and sweetness of Christ in the promise, that this
may provoke our souls to love the Lord, and to rejoice in him. When these
hindrances are removed, there is way made for the promise to come and meet with
the soul, these breed-bates are sent out of town, and now there may be some
possibility of love, and this is the next way to work and draw our hearts to
Christ, and to kindle in us these affections of love and joy.

The soul that is loosened from all the causes of jarres and dissentions
between Christ and him; that soul is ready to match with the promise, and to
bestow it self in love upon Christ. In a marriage a man must know the party
first, and the portion, and understand both, or else he can love neither; so
thou must see the beauty and excellency of the promise before thou can love
the Lord Jesus. As it is in the baser affections, the covetous man sees a good
bargain before he loves it: so that it is the eye that makes the bargain, as
one well observes; so thou must look wisely upon the promises, and be able to
know them, and this will make thee love them: as in Psalm. 91.14. Because he
has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on
high, because he has known my Name. How came he to love the name of the Lord?
because he knew him; as it is Cant. 1.2. when the name of our Savior was as an
ointment powered forth, then did the virgins love him: this name is the graces
of our Savior revealed and communicated to us: and Cant. 4.9. see what our
Savior says, My sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of
thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck: this is by way of comparison from the
less to the greater: the Spouse of Christ is the Church of Christ, and by eye
and neck is meant nothing else but the beauty of his grace in the heart truly
humbled; now the Lord Jesus Christ looks upon these graces, and loves them,
and is ravished with the fight of them. Now if the work of grace in the heart
of a poor sinner ravished the heart of Christ, who is the God of all grace,
then much more if our hearts could but see one finger of the excellency that is
in Christ, they would be ravished with earnest love, and kindled with violence
toward him. There are three things that ought mainely to be respected in the
promise, that we may eye and apprehend, and that our hearts may be kindled with
love to the Lord; and these three work love any where.

First, the worth of the party in himself.

Secondly, the desert of the party.

Thirdly, the readiness of the party in himself to seek our good.

Three things in Christ to make us love him.
So it is with the Lord Jesus, first, he is worthy of our love, in himself
considered.

Secondly, he has deserved it.

Thirdly, he seeks our love. Thou that dwell in a poor cottage, wilt
hardly believe this; but I say, he seeks thy love.

First, Christ is worthy in himself. I wonder that the Lord Jesus Christ will
suffer himself to be beloved by such wretches as we are: if we had a
thousand hearts to bestow upon him, we were never able to love him
sufficiently: for as Nehemiah said, Nehem. 9.5.
The name of the Lord is above all praise: and as the name of God is above all
praise that we can give him, so the name of the Lord is above all the love
that we can bestow upon him. Will you let out your love and affections? (as we
use to say in the market) it is a good penny worth, it is worth more money than
you shall pay for it: so if you will lay out all the affections that you have,
you may lay them out here, and that with good advantage too. What would you
have? you may have enough for your money: Would thou have beauty? then thy
Savior is beautiful: Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the children of men;
yea, he is full of grace: nay, the Spouse, Cant. 5.10. says, My beloved is the
chief of ten thousand: and in the 16. verse, He is altogether lovely, he is
a very beautiful husband. There is no beauty in the world, but it has its
blemish, nor no day so fair but it has its clouds; but the Lord Jesus Christ
is altogether love: if beauty will please thee, he is altogether excellent.
Would you have strength? Psalm. 45.3. he is all strength: A wife would not have
a cowardly husband, therefore the Text says, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O
most mighty, ride on prosperously; so that Kings are slain, and people shall
fall before him, and his right hand shall teach thee terrible things,
therefore, if beauty will please thee, he is the fairest of all: if strength
will please thee, he is the strongest of all: if riches will please thee, he
is more rich (if it be possible) than he is strong; for Heb. 1.2. he is the
heir of all things; he is not for a Crown, or a Kingdom, or lands, or
revenues, but the heavens are his, and the earth, and the sea far and wide,
and all the depths thereof are his, yea, and thine also, if thou will have him:
He is rich likewise, in regard of his grace, as the Apostle says, Col. 2.3.
In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. What would thou
have? eternal life and happiness? then he that has Christ, has all these:
for Christ is the Author of life and happiness to all that have him; and he
has not only these in himself, but he will infeoffe thee in them, if thou will but match with him. If the world, and beauty, and strength, and life, and
salvation will prevail, it is all thine; let the Lord Jesus Christ once have
your love, and it is done. See what the Prophet David says, Psalm. 63.3. Thy
loving kindness is better than life, therefore my lips shall praise thee. You
know what we use to do in the world: if a man match with a maid where there is
much wealth, we say he is made for ever; so say I: Truly the world cannot, nor
will not do so for you; it promises fair, and performs nothing. If thou set
thy heart upon riches and honors, they will fail thee. Where is all the
beauty of the world? Some sickness or other makes many a men ready to run out
of his wits for grief: A man is here in health to day, and in hell to morrow;
but if thou will love the Lord Jesus Christ, he will never fail thee: he only
is worthy of the choice of thy affections, therefore set them not upon that
which cannot comfort thee: if thou will have Christ, set them upon him, and all
that he has is thine.

Secondly, Christ, as he is worthy of our love, so he deserves it; if his worth
cannot win our love, yet let his desert have it. It is a great matter to win
the affections of a man. If a man be never so worthy of himself, for his
parts, and gifts, yet if he have wronged me, and dealt basely with me, and
expressed the part of an enemy, says a woman, I will not have him, no not though
he had all the world: But it is not so with the Lord Jesus Christ: for as he
is worthy of all love in himself, so he has dealt mercifully and graciously
with you, and therefore he deserves your love; deal equally with him, and give
him what he deserves. We have had hard dealings from the world, and base usage
from these base things, never a man here but has found it so; for it has
promised much, and done nothing, and all the pleasures it affoorded us, have
left nothing but vanity and emptiness behind them. Let the adulterer come
forth, and show what pleasure he has ever had by his filthy dalliances and
base courses: he has had but an ill match, a galled conscience for the
present, and the expectation of plagues and punishments for ever. The world
also has vexed the covetous man, and pleasure has disquieted the ambitious
man; but the Lord Jesus Christ has ever dealt graciously and mercifully with
his servants. In your sickness who helped you? in your want who supplied you?
in anguish of heart who revived you? was it not the Lord Jesus Christ? and
therefore do not only what religion requires, but what reason requires. If
you love them that love you, do not the Publicanes even the same? they do
good to such as do good to them. The Lord Jesus Christ has loved you,
therefore love you him, and enlarge your hearts to him for ever.

Ob. Oh but (says the soul) I confess the Lord has been merciful, and it
is his mercy that I live, and he has enlarged himself toward me, but yet I
grow graceless. What love is this if the Lord Jesus Christ give me these, and
deny me that which is better than these? what love is this? I now speak to all
that want assurance; To all such I answer in three things.

Three things done by Christ for a sinner, though as yet he want assurance.
Ans. I will tell thee what he has done for thee, taking thy self in the
worst condition.

First, consider that thou live in the bosom of the Church, and that Jesus
Christ has brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel; many thousands
of poor Infidels and Heathen would be glad to gather the crummes that fall
from thy Table. The Heathens never knew the way to a Savior, they never had
the means to comfort them; and is not this mercy then, that God has brought
the word of life and salvation to thee, and set thee under the means? for he
has not dealt so with other Nations, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his
ways: he has not dealt so with many better than thy self, I mean better, in
regard of many actual transgressions of thine. Oh therefore love him for this
favor.

Secondly, consider farther what the Lord Christ has done for thee; he has
not only brought the means of grace to thee, and planted thee in a land of
Goshen, where thou did enjoy them, but after thou had resisted and opposed
them, and cast his kindness behind thy back, and slighted his Spirit,
sinful wretch that thou art, he has often come and entreated thee to receive
mercy; and though again and again thou have opposed it, yet he has been
patient and good to thee: love him for it. Again, the Lord Christ takes no
advantage against thee, as thou surmisest: He might have done it, and that
justly too; thou that resistest the means of grace, it is just that thou
should never have them. If God had sent thee one way, and the Gospel another,
it had been just; but he has not done so: therefore love him, he deserves it
at thy hands.

Thirdly, he has not only brought thee under the means of grace, and been
patient to thee, though thou have resisted the means; but he has let in some
inkling of his love, and come nearer to thee than all this. Why should Jesus
Christ offer mercy to thy wife and child? it is extraordinary kindness: thou
can not but know that there are many in the same family, that have the same
means, and yet remain in a miserable condition: and why are thy eyes opened,
and thy conscience awakened in any measure? every morning you rise, and every
night you go to bed, bless and magnify the Lord Christ that has dealt thus
mercifully with you; for he is worthy of it, as Jude said, Joh. 14.22.
Why will thou reveal thy self to us, and not to the world? why will thou
show mercy to a poor cottage, and enlighten a blind mind, and a sottish
spirit in this manner? Oh this is love, Oh love him again for it, he deserves
it.

Thirdly, Christ seeks thy love; here is the admimiration of mercy, that our
Savior that has been rejected by a company of sinful creatures, should seek
their love: for shame refuse him not, but let him have love before he go. Had
the Lord received us when we had come unto him, and humbled our hearts before
him with deep importunity; and had he heard us when we had cried unto him,
nay, when we had spent all our days, and all our strength in begging and
craving one good look from heaven, and at the day of our departure taken
compassion upon us, it had been an infinite mercy; but when the Lord Jesus
Christ shall seek to us by his messengers (as all the Ministers are his
messengers) to accept of his love, this is beyond all expression: I say, if he
had only sent a love letter from heaven, and said that he was willing to match
with us, and had left us to find out the way and the means, it had been
beyond all wonder; but that the Lord Jesus Christ should come and wait upon us,
and seek our love, it is the wonder of mercies. When a company of base lusts
and sinful desires have found acceptance with us, and the door has been open
upon all occasions to talk with them, though the Lord Jesus Christ has often
come and said, Oh muse upon my name, and not upon the world and these lusts;
and we would not hear him: when, I say, you and your adulteresses have been
upon the bed of dalliance, and Christ has been at the door, and could get no
audience, nor acceptance: yet after all this, he has not only called, but
seriously besought us to be reconciled to him, that is, to love him, and to be
beloved of him, and blessed by him for ever; these are the terms of his love.
What shall I answer the Lord? will the Lord seek our love? then return him
this answer, and say, Shall he seek love and not have it? shall he crave it,
and I not give it? Oh God forbid. Can the Lord Jesus Christ be in love with me?
In truth Lord I am out of love with my self, by reason of my base heart, and
filthy thoughts; I have abused thy Majesty from time to time, by following my
base lusts, adulteries and abominations; I have not only loved the world, but
filled my self therewith: and thus my adulterous heart has gone away from
thee to them. But will the Lord Jesus love such a wretch as I am? Yes, he will;
for the Lord says, Hosea 14.5. I will heal their backe-sliding, I will love
them freely. He looks for no portion, no he will take thee with all thy wants.
Is not the Lord worthy of thy love? he desires no more, and sure he deserves
no less. Deuteronomy. 10.12. when the Lord had recorded all his kindness toward the
children of Israel, mark how he inferres this, saying, And now Israel, what
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk
in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul? So I say to thee, after all the sinful
abominations of thy heart, and all thy sinful practices committed, what is it
that the Lord does require of thee when all thy sins are pardoned? only that
thou love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. Let me therefore tell you what
to do; get you home, and every one in secret labor to deal honestly and
truly with your own hearts, and make up a match in this manner, and say, Is
it possible that the Lord should look so low? that the great Prince should
send for the poor peasant? that Majesty should stoop to meannesse? and heaven
to earth? and God to man? Has the Lord offered mercy to me, and does he
require nothing of me but to love him again? call upon your own hearts, I
charge you, and say thus; Lord, if all the sight of mine eyes were love, and
all the speeches of my tongue were love, it were all too little to love thee:
Oh let me love thee dearly, O Lord my strength. Say you had a fair offer, and
that a poor Minister of God did wish you well; be not coy and squeamish, the
Lord may have better than you every day; lie down therefore and admire at the
mercy of the Lord, that should take a company of poor dead dogs; I say, be
sure that you be not coy and squeamish: say as the Prophet did, Lift up your
heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of
glory shall come in, Psalm. 24. Now the hindrances are removed, and the promises
are brought home, we will come to see if the match be liked of.

Means 3.
Lastly, it is our skill and cunning to draw these two together. Ye see what
we have said, the hindrances are removed, and the promises are brought home,
now if we can but affect a Savior he is our own; he that will not now be
beloved of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, let him be ever accursed. There are two
particulars considerable, to fasten these two together.

Two means to bring our hearts and the promises together.
labor to give attendance daily to the promise of grace and Christ, drive all
other suitors away from the soul, let nothing come between the promise and
it, and forbid all other banes; that is, let the promise confer daily with
thy heart, and be expressing and telling of that good that is in Christ daily
to thy heart. Simile.
You know if all things be done and agreed upon between the parents of two
parties to be marrried, and there wants nothing but the fixing of their
affections one upon another, the only way to draw their affections to one
another, is to keep company together, and daily to meet and see one another:
so let thy soul daily keep company with the promise, and let not thy heart
only see the promise once in a week, but daily; shut out all others besides,
and keep company only with that, and see what beauty, and strength, and grace
there is in the same; and say, Oh wretch that I am if I had had either wit or
grace, I might have been made happy long ago. Thus keep company with the
promise, that thy soul and it may dwell together.

do thou by undeniable arguments make good to thy own soul, the
unconceivable good that will come to thy soul; nay, God has pawned his truth
to thee for it. As it was with Sechem Hamors son, Genesis 34.24. when he would
persuade the Citizens to join side with him, he does two things; First, he did
commune with them in the gates, and then he shows what undoubted good they
should be sure to get by it: Shall not their cattle, and their substance, and
every beast that they have be ours? and hereby will they consent, if every one
be circumcised as they are. He communed of the business, and of the good that
comes by it: so likewise let us commune with the good of the promises.
Secondly, conclude that the good thou expectest, shall come thereby, and that
all happiness shall come unto thy soul. If thou match with Jesus Christ,
shall not all his mercy, all his excellency, all his merits and love, yea, and
all his comforts and grace be thine? Yes, every grace of Jesus Christ, and all
the comforts, not only of this but of a better life. We stand demurring upon
the matters of agreement; if we might have a good engagement what would we
do? lay all these aside, and know, that if thou will have Christ thou must
part with all, and then thou shall find in him what ever thy heart desires: 1
Corinthians 3.23. All is yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: so I
say to every of you, if Christ be thine, then all is thine; nay, all the
Devils malice shall promote that which shall make for thy good. Therefore, is
this so, that the Lord Jesus Christ is worthy of your love, and has deserved
it? is he worthy of more love then all that you have, and does he seek it?
(for he has sent me this day to entreat love at the hands and hearts of all
you poor sinners) you then that are in higher ranks and places, the Lord
Christ is worthy of your affections, and he does offer love to all you that are
weary and have need, to every poor soul: now what answer shall I return to him
in the evening? shall I say, Lord I have tendered thy mercy, and it was
refused, and they slighted thy mercy and thy promise, and they would none of
Christ; they have taken up their hearts with the world, therefore they cannot
give up their hearts to thee? Brethren, it would grieve my heart to return
this answer: Christ Jesus becomes a suitor to you, and does beseech you through
me to be reconciled to him, and to be blessed by him for ever: Will you love
the Lord Christ? let him have but love from you, that is all he cares for. I
beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, if you will not love him nor his
grace and mercy, yet love your own selves; deny not this gracious offer, lest
hereafter you seek for love, and mercy, and compassion, and be refused and
condemned for ever. Therefore give up all, and bid adieu to all other Lovers.
And because it is not in your power to love Christ, go to the Father of love,
and to the Spirit of love, and entreat him but to strike one spark of love
from the promise, and say, good Lord, is it true, I have a base vile heart, and
I have contemned thee my only comfort: but thou that requirest love, thou that
art the God of love, kindle but one spark of love in the heart of thy servant,
that I may love thee more than my self, and all things here below.

Hitherto of the love of Christ. Next we will speak of joy in God.

Spiritual Joy.
HABAKKUK 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall
be no heard in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my salvation.


THIS Text may fitly be called, Order.
The poor man's comfort in a dear year. It was the Prophets stay in the great
desolation which he foresaw to be coming by the Chaldeans. In the first
Chapter he complains of Isreal's sin, and the Chaldeans cruelty. In the
second, he sees a vision of comfort for the Church, and the destruction of the
enemies. In the third, he prays for accomplishment, and strengthens his faith
in prayer, by recounting the old dealings of God with his people. Now toward
the conclusion, he professes his own hope and confidence in God; which, by
his example he would work all godly men unto. True, he was greatly afraid at
the vengeance of God; but by fearing before hand, he procured a sweet security
for time to come, verse 16. That I might rest in the day of trouble. And in the
text he speaks more fully, Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, etc.

Parts.
In the words is, 1. A supposition of great evil which probably might come upon
the Jews, verse. 17.2. A proposition of his own unmovable comfort amidst it
all, verse. 18.

Exposition
Of the supposition. In many particulars the Prophet sets forth an extreme
vastation and desolation of their country; all commodities should fail, which
concerned both delight and necessity: that is, Corn, Wine, Oil, and other
fruits, both small and great Cattle, those in the fold, those in the stall,
Sheep and Oxen; all should come short of the wonted plenty. I name four
ways whereby such misery invades a nation, and the particular inhabitants.

First, by War, and the Sword, which lays all waste where it comes, as in
Germany; the vines cut, the fruit trees rooted up, the corn burnt, or not
sowed, flocks and herds driven away, Temples and houses laid in their rubbish,
and people slaughtered. Neither Eastern nor Western Babylonians can afford
better terms of agreement with the Israel of God: Prove. 12.10.
The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Secondly, by drought, or other calamities of ill weather, when the year of
restraints comes, Jer. 14.1. and then he describes a grievous famine; the
former and latter rain is withheld, the sweet influence of the Pleiades is
restrained, Job. 38.31.
the heaven made as brass, the earth as iron, unkindly winds, devouring
worms, blast, mildew, and other evils which we have endured.

Thirdly, by losses and casualties which the wisdom of man cannot foresee,
nor his power prevent. Thus the folds and stalls of Job were made empty, and
the like has befallen many a rich man, and may hereafter. To the world-ward
none can rightly be accounted blessed, but he that is fairly buried: Others
have wine, and oil, and olives, and other dainties in plentiful measure; but
this or that man has lost his part, and has much ado to sustain his
necessity.

Fourthly, by mere poverty, and utter disability to make such provisions: Some
never had these fine things, mentioned in the Text, nor have, nor are likely
ever to have, unless at other men's tables: with some, every year is a dear
year, through their whole life, though some pinch them more than other. A
poor, empty, smoke-bound cottage, with course bread, and water out of the next
ditch, must contain and content them till their dying day.

Yet to such as these the proposition of Habakkuk extends it self: If the
persons and causes be alike, the joy also shall be alike: I will rejoice in
the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. If Christ be come into the
house, and by him salvation, who shall forbid them to be comfortable, as
Zacheus and the Jailer?

I will rejoice in the Lord: or, because of the Lord, Bajehova; and so in the
next clause, Baelohi: God is left unto me, when all else is taken away: still I
I have a God to take comfort in. And

First, he is greater matter of comfort, than any of those things can be of
sorrow and dejection: for those are finite evils, but God an infinite good.

Secondly, he is higher than they all; my comfort lies out of the reach of all
enemies, and all adversities.

Psalm. 46.1.
Thirdly, he is nearer than any of them: a very present refuge in the time of
trouble. Losses and crosses go near to the heart, and to the quick, but God
is nearer.

Fourthly, he is Jehova, in whom I rejoice, has his being of himself, and
gives being to all the creatures, and preserves it so long as him pleases:
Therefore by his benefit I shall subsist, when all the secundary means of
maintenance are intercepted: Matthew. 4.4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

Fifthly, he is the God of my salvation: that is, he saves my body and natural
life, whether I have means, or no means: it is he that strikes the maine
stroke in my preservation: by an Hebraisme often called, The God of salvation:
and this not only temporally, for the body, but spiritually and eternally, for
the soul. And then the argument is easy; He that does the greater, will do
the less too: God that saves us from hell and the Devil, will save us from
starving, and the like miseries: Jehova, that became the Lord Jesus to us when
we had no strength, will never stick with us for trifles in comparison.

This sweet and blessed name meets him that reads the Text in the Original:
Baelohi jishgni, which Saint Jerome translates, in God my Jesus, or Savior:
just as the Virgin sang, Luke 1 47. De civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 32.
My spirit rejoices in God my Savior: and Saint Austine preferres the using
of this, nomen amicius and dulcius, before the Septuagints, Deo salutari meo.
Certain it is, that by Christ only we have interest in God, and can rejoice in
him: There is no salvation in any other: Act. 4.12.
nor any other name given under heaven, by which we can be saved. And in him
do all true Christians triumph, Phil. 3.3. not in the righteousness of the
Law, nor in any legal and carnal privileges. And we have ample cause to
rejoice in him, even in the greatest failing of natural comforts, and greatest
desolations that can come upon us. Although the fig tree blossom not, etc.
Although there be another drought, and another, and ten years one after
another, and a greater mortality of pestilence, and the sword too, with all the
mischiefs that accompany it, Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my salvation.

In greatest wants true Christians have cause enough to rejoice in God.
Doctr. However the world goes for comforts of nature, yet in Christ we have
full cause to rejoice, and so should stir up our selves to do. See Psalm.
42.5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and 73.25, 26, 27, 28. Dying Jacob lifted up himself,
by thinking on the salvation which God had wrought for him: Genesis 49.18. Job
stripped of all, praised God, as when he had all about him. Moses, seeing him
that is invisible, feared not the wrath of the King. Micaiah, having seen God
in a vision, was nothing daunted at the presence of two glorious Kings. The
three children, believing in God, regarded neither NebuchadneZZars anger, nor
the furnace extraordinarily heated. So the Apostles, Acts 4. and 5. and the
Martyrs in several histories of the Church.

Eccles. 1.2.
One reason whereof may be taken from the vanity of the creature. Vanity of
vanities, vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity and vexation of
spirit. They are good comforts of nature where they may be had, and a good man
will make them so many encouragements in the way of grace: But God never
appointed them to be part of the Saints portion: Genesis 15.1.
No, I am thy portion, thy buckler, and great reward: and so the Christian
makes account, Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore
will I hope in him. And he sets no such high price upon wine, oil, or other
comforts, as that without them he should not rejoice in his God. So he either
parts with them the more easily, or wants them the more joyfully.

excellency of the Creator:

Attributes, on which whiles a Christian meditates, he shall ever find
something to set against his particular malady, with a large overplus of
comfort.

Works, both of Creation and Providence; and this, both for preservation and
gubernation, Psalm. 92.4, 5. Thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy work: I
will triumph in the works of thy hands: O Lord, how great are thy works! and
thy thoughts are very deep! And these very evils, drought, dearth, war, etc.
are they not by Gods permission? and limited how long they shall continue? and
ordered to a good end? Romans 8.28.

Ordinances: The Word is our song in the house of our pilgrimage, and the
joyful tidings of our salvation. The Sacrament is a marriage supper of the
great King for his only Son: Eat, O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly,
Cant. 5.1. Psalm. 84.1.
O beloved. And the Tabernacles of God are amiable, the only joy of David.

unspeakable benefits in and by Christ: that one word (Salvation) is an epitome
of all blessings, it comprehends the causes, means, effects, and perpetuity of
our blessedness, and absolute overthrow of the enemies; and specially the
immediate author of salvation, which is Christ. It would ask an hours
discourse, and more, to tell in particular what ample cause we have to rejoice
in Christ; that if we had nothing left us, but naked Christ, in naked Christ we
should have Peace and Joy enough, John 16.33. Christ at the worst and poorest
is a rich treasure; Quod cunque Deo indignum est, mihi expedit. Tert.
Whatsoever became him not as God, is expedient and profitable unto us: even
his shameful and accursed death. And if his death be so joyous and blissfull,
what shall his resurrection be, his ascension, session at the right hand of his
Father, and intercession for us, with all the gracious execution of his Kingly
and Prophetical office? Why should the want of temporalls disturb our joy in
this God of salvation?

Retain comfort in God, whatever thou want. Jam. 1.9.
Use 1. Of exhortation: To retain our comfort, as the Prophet here does. As
all true-hearted Christians should stir up themselves to rejoice in God, and
the sure mercies of David, while the means of grace and of worldly comfort do
continue, so especially, the brother of low degree should rejoice because he is
exalted (in spiritual things) as high as any, and has equal share in the God
of salvation. In deep poverty, in falling from a great estate, in dear
years, in desolation by war if it should come, in all troubles and
afflictions, still we have a ground of joy, while God is in heaven, and can
have recourse to the Christian heart at pleasure: Hold thine own, remember thy
evidences, make use of thy provisions; now is a time and occasion to say as the
Prophet, Although the Fig Tree blossom not, Psalm. 46.1. -- 5.
etc. and as the Psalmist, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help
in trouble: therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, etc.
Although the stone cut my reins, my spleen pain me, or other diseases
torment me; although I be put beside my means, turned out to the wide world,
my wife and children set to begging, my self shut up in prison, and wait for
the day of execution; although I meet with a peevish and pestilent adversary at
the law, be defamed, know not how presently to clear mine innocence, but go
for an evil doer, etc. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation. None of all this can drive away the great Comforter from me,
but rather he will solace me the more for these discomforts in the world:
Christ is left still, and the love of God, and the kingdom of heaven, to
receive me out of the most miserable shipwreck. And the same God that now
admits me a guest at his table, to eat of his sweet and fat things, will one
day make me sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.

O my brethren, were not we our own foes, and stood in our own light, what
comfortable lives should we lead even in the midst of the valley of the shadow
of death! Were it not for passion, Psalm. 23.4.
impatience, covetousness, doting on the fine things of the world, love of
credit and reputation among worldlings, living too much the life of sense,
formalitie in holy duties, security in putting away the evil day, and other
corruption, certainly we should joy in our God all the day long, whatever the
year be, or can bring forth: we might do what we are commanded, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say, Rejoice. No dearth, or other
evil should take us unprovided. It is our own fault, that we totter or
stagger at any time. Faith, hope, patience, contentment, and other graces, with
the comforts of Gods holy Spirit, will set us as unmovable as a rock in the
sea, amidst the greatest waves and storms whatsoever.

Reproof to them that grow uncomfortable for crosses.
Use 2. Of Reprehension: It is utterly a fault in Christians, if they be
melancholy and dejected, because of cross years, bad harvest, loss in that
or any other kind, casualties, calamities, or other evils, that come by the
hand of God or man: as if you had no hope in God, but only in this present
life, or in the things of this life; or as if God were not sufficient for your
comfort and blessedness without these temporalls; or had tied himself to
means, as you are tied to the use of them: or as if you must needs gain so
much, at least save your selves harmless, otherwise God and you will be
friends no longer.

I know that in arguing you will not stand to these inferences, as truths, and
will deny the adoption of Gods children to depend on outward comforts. But, he
that whines, pines, sighs, is cast down by the want of them, perhaps because
he is something abridged of his former plenty, what does he but say in effect,
that outward prosperity is one sign of the child of God? Consider and
beware. It is a diabolical strain, to call our adoption into question, for
present want of comforts for the body: If thou be the Son of God, Matthew. 4.3.
command that these stones be made bread. We dishonor God, torment our own
hearts, tear our own flesh, shorten our days, hazard our part in heaven, or
at least make our way thither more unpleasant than we need to do.

Use 3. Of Instruction. We see by this doctrine, Make this sure, God is the
God of my salva^ion.
what is the maine thing which we had most need to do, even in our greatest
peace and prosperity, namely, to do the same as the Prophet here had done;
make this sure to our hearts, that the Lord is the God of our salvation; and
every particular Christian to his own heart in particular, he is the God of my
salvation, therefore I will rejoice in him; although these and these evils
should come, strange, grievous, tedious, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation.

Quest. This were worth the having; but how should I get it? I would do any
thing for it.

Answ. Tracke the footsteps of this Prophet throughout this prophecy. It is
not for every profane or sensual liver to say, he will rejoice in God, etc.
Such are sent to weep and howl for the misery that shall come upon them; and,
woe unto you that laugh now, ye shall weep; and, Jam. 5.1. Luke 6.25. Amos
6.1.
woe to them that are at ease in Sion; only the righteous are called to
rejoice in the Lord, and they that are upright in heart to shout for joy and
be glad, Psalm. 32.11. Therefore,

Means to rejoice in evil times.
None but believers can rejoice in God when great trials come; none else are
righteous; none else have a faith to live by, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by
his faith. He that deceives himself in his faith, deceives himself also in his
joy: Fancy, presumption, and self-love will leave a man in the suds, when he
has most need of comfort; well it may uphold him while the fig tree blossoms,
etc. but in the defect of these it fails too, and makes him as pensive as
before he was jocund.

Reuben, etc. The wise of heart will consider and lay it to heart, and by
renewing his repentance, take off the controversy, so far as it concerns
himself, if it cannot be done for others. So did this Prophet, chap. 3.16.
When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness
entered into my bones, and I trembled my self, that I might rest in the day of
trouble. When we teach joy in God amidst great calamities, we teach not an
Atheistical and Cyclopicall contempt of the judgments of God: God forbid; but
to take off the edge and sharpness of afflictions by the exercises of
humiliation. Even reckoning makes long friends: which is true of God and his
people, If we would judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
we should not be judged.

verse. 1. A prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet upon Sigionoth. No stream of joy
will run in a dry year, but that which springs up from the mountain of
heaven. If we make our moan to our Father in heaven, and get a comfortable
answer from him, that is comfort that will stick by us, and stay with us when
we have most need of it: Joh. 16.24.
Ask, that your joy may be full.

wait the Lords leisure, till he have mercy upon you, Psalm. 123.1, 2. with Hab.
2.1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to
see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved. Stay
with God in his good ways, at last there will be a vision of comfort.
Hastiness of spirit loses many a comfortable return of prayer. He that
believes, Isai. 28.16.
must not make haste.

Chap. 1.2, 3, 4. O Lord, how long shall I cry and thou will not hear! even
cry out unto thee of violence, and thou will not save! why do thou show me
iniquity? etc. They that mourned for the abominations of Jerusalem in the time
of peace, were marked in the foreheads in the time of trouble and desolation.
Ezekiel. 9.4.
None shall have the victory over sin, and the sad effects of it, but he
that holds up the quarrel against it, though in present he get but little
ground both in himself and others.

Solomon said, Eccles. 7.7.
is apt to make a wise man mad) look up to God, and complain to him, and
refer to him the righting of all injuries: So did our Prophet, chapter 1.12. Art
thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy One? we shall not die, O
Lord, thou have ordained them for judgment: and, O mighty God, thou have
established them for correction. They are mighty, but God is mightier than
they, and will pay them one day for all the desolations they have made on
earth. Down shall come tumbling one day both the Chair and Tower of Babylon,
and the whore that was drunken with the blood of Saints, Rev. 17.6.
and of the Martyrs of Jesus. Now they lay whole countries waste and desolate,
to establish their idolatry and superstition; The fig tree blossoms not,
neither is fruit in the vines, etc. yet both these Churches in their miseries
have cause to rejoice in the God of their salvation, and we for them. If we ply
him well in prayer, we may yet see them reap in joy, after their sowing in
tears; and as much rejoice with Sion as ever we mourned for Sion. And in the
mean time, Psalm. 73.1.
at the very worst, Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart.

Ob. All this while you discourse of temporals, which it may be easy to want,
and yet rejoice still in the Lord; but what say you to persecution, to the
broken heart, to the terrors of God in the soul, and other spiritual evils?
how can we now rejoice in the Lord, or joy in the God of our salvation?

Answ. None of these may banish all joy from the heart of a poor believer;
Prove. 15.33.
Before honor (says Solomon) goes humility; and before consolation,
humiliation. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 120.5. We will
open this Text something largely, and therein satisfy the objection the more
fully.

It is to be understood,

1. Of the Church in general. The common estate of Gods Church in this world,
is to be under the Cross, and the end of that is the Crown of joy and glory.
A good issue there is of all the Saints trials: So in this Psalm, the Jewish
Church had been seventy years in the hard captivity of Babylon: They hanged
up their harpes at the willowes; Psalm. 137.1, 2, 3.
they wept at the remembrance of Sion: their enemies flouted them, and required
songs in their heaviness: too grievous to last always, their God raises up a
Cyrus for them, who shall send them home to their own country, and not send
them empty, but with great riches and encouragements: and, sooner or later, the
Church shall be rid of all tyrants and persecuters, Antichrist, Gog and Magog,
and every enemy.

2. Of the particular members of the Church. Each child of God which is now
under hatches, and often forced to water his plants, shall one day receive of
the Lord double for all his sorrow and perplexity: as in instances.

First, in the act of conversion unto God, there is much fear and sorrow, both
by the law condemning, and especially by the Gospel aggravating sin to the
height of heynousnesse. The Christian is weary, heavy laden, Mat. 5.3, 4, 11,
28.
poor in spirit, mournful, ready to despair. But here Christ comprehends
him, and gives him faith to lay hold on his merit, whereby he is blessed and
comfortable, Math. 5.3, 4. and godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation.
2 Cor. 7.10.


Secondly, in the holy acts of renewing our repentance: for example, before a
Sacrament, in time of calamity, at the work of the Ministry, awaking and
summoning the heart to make peace with God again for relapses: this costeth
the Christian some pains and trouble of conscience, and sometimes he is very
low brought; but all is for settling a stronger and firmer peace in his soul,
Psalm. 30.5, 11. After a storm Christ ever brings a great calm into the heart.

Thirdly, in mourning for the abominations of the times. This takes away the
comfort that others have to the world-ward, and macerates a Christian with
vexing, grieving, sighing, praying, fasting: but will procure the mark of
deliverance in the evil day, Ezekiel. 9.4. and joy with the Church and children
of God, for whom sometimes he vexed his righteous soul, Esaias 66.10, 11. And
(says our Savior) Ye shall weep, Joh. 16.20, 33.
and the world rejoice, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy: in me you
shall have peace.

Fourthly, in enduring the afflictions of the Gospel, or of the world, shame,
reproach, loss, pain, persecution for righteousness sake, shall be
abundantly recompensed with joy in the holy Ghost, and the joy of heaven, Mat.
5.10, 11, 12. The like of suffering by the hand of God or men in common
affairs. They that are well exercised by afflictions, shall one day be
comforted, as Lazarus: all will end as a Comedy, in mirth and felicity.

All this is metaphorically compirsed in the Text, by a figure of sowing and
reaping, usual in the Scripture: Sow to the flesh or spirit: sow liberally,
Gal. 6.8. 2 Cor. 9.6. Psalm. 97.11.
and reap liberally: the Lord gives bread to the sower: light is sown for the
righteous, etc. A wet and cold seed-time brings the husbandman afterward a
plenteous and joyful harvest: so the sad times and occasions that go over
Gods people, will first or last bring them a great measure of joy, comfort,
blessedness. Hear the limitations a little.

1. Not the tears themselves, considered in themselves, bring forth the
joyful crop, but the sowing in tears; Esau his tears were shed to no
purpose: and in hell there will be weeping and wailing, but because there is no
sowing, no good comes of it. It is only the precious seed (in verse. 6.) that
affoords the good sheaves: and it is required it be godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.9.
that we mourn for the absence of the Bridegroom, and that we faint not when
we sow, Gal. 6.9.
neither in faith nor obedience. In due time ye shall reap, if ye faint not.
It were unreasonable to sow in September and look to reap in October. No, stay
till the month of harvest, and then see what blessing God will give: The
husbandman has patience, etc. Jam. 5.7.

2. Of the joy that is to be reaped, here put for the whole happiness of a
Christian, as a Christian, both here and hereafter, according the Grecian
salutation, (...), They joy before thee, Isai. 9.3
according to the joy of harvest. In this life a Christian has the beginning
and first fruits of the Spirit, peace, joy, quietness, assurance for ever. In
Christ he shall have peace: by the Ordinances comfort is to be had; and the
afflictions would be too sharp and heavy, if there were not some mixture of
joy. But in the world to come we shall have joy to the full: what is wanting
now, shall he supplied then to the uttermost. This rich harvest will pay for
all the cost, and labor, and patience; good measure, pressed down, and
running over.

3. Of the reaping of that joy, first it shall be certain, which no
husbandman can promise to himself: a Christian is sure to reap if he sow.
All the promises of God are Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.
Secondly, it shall be abundant, not an hundred for one; but a thousand, yea,
millions of degrees beyond our expenses, a far more exceeding, 4.17.
and eternal weight of glory. But many a poor husbandman reapes sparingly,
scarce can pay his rent and live, etc. Thirdly, it shall be in joy only, all
tears for ever wiped from our eyes; no chafe among our wheat, no darnell, nor
weeds of any kind. The joy of this harvest is never done, the barns never
emptied, the provisions never spent, the labors no more repeated. It is no
proverb for these husbandmen, Their work is never at an end: No, they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them: henceforth they are blessed,
Rev. 14.13.

Sorrowful seed-time breeds Christians a joyful harvest.
Doctr. The sorrowful seed-time of true Christians (in the exercises of
humiliation and mortification) yields them a rich and joyful harvest. They
shall be paid for all sooner or later. They sow in righteousness, and reap in
mercy, Hos. 10.12. they have their fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life, Romans 6.22.

Reas. 1. Because of the promise of God. And why?
This in the Text is uttered by way of promise; and there be many the like
promises in Scripture, which for the matter of them are precious, for the
manner free, for the extent universal, and for certainty most faithful,
confirmed diverse ways, by oath, etc.

heirs of blessing, the Israel of God, partakers of the heavenly calling and
promise. Destroy not the cluster, for there is a blessing in it, Esa. 65.8, 9.
They are as an Oak, whose substance is in them, though the leaves be cast,
Chap. 6.13. namely, in and by Christ, who makes them honorable before God, and
capable of a sound and lasting joy.

precious seed which they bear forth, and must bring home again in the
harvest. The seed of God abides in them, 1 John 3.9.
and they sin not as the wicked do: that is, Romans 11.29.
the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, which are without repentance, of an
immortal being, and immortal in the effect, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25.

field wherein they sow, is joyous and wholesome: I mean, the duties they
perform, and ordinances they frequent. Prayer yields a comfortable answer of
God to the soul: The Lords Supper affords much joy and peace of conscience:
hearing receives the glad tidings of the Gospel, etc. In the field lies a
treasure, he that buys it, goes away rejoicing.



Causes of true joy assured by mourning.
which are, the love of God, a part in Christ, inhabitation of the Spirit the
great Comforter, the white stone and new name, the image of God in the soul,
the testimony of a good conscience, interest in the prayers of all Gods people,
a sanctified and safe use of all mercies, and afflictions, joyful and assured
expectation of the glory of heaven, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Grant the full and the
immediate cause, and the effect will follow.

Objection. What say you to the case of desertion?

Answ. It is one day of the sorrowful seed-time; the harvest comes afterward,
and the Eclipse will soon be over: in darkness the Lord shall be a light
unto me, Mic. 7.8. Some lightsome passages there are in the mean time. Sharp
Preachers make you gainers.


Use. 1. If so, then by our sharpest preaching you receive damage by us in
nothing; we make some weep and take on for their sins, we wring tears from
them: we take them off from their pleasures of sin, which are for a moment.
But while you are set a sowing in tears, you are set into the right way of
reaping in joy. We give you the best counsel that can be given, and little
deserve that outcry that is made against us; Oh this is bitter preaching, this
man speaks not in love, he would make us all despair, I think: and, Should
not a Minister come with the spirit of meekness? Yes, but not meekness
opposed to zeal: meekness to the bruised reed, or broken heart; to others,
sharpness. A corrosive for some is wholsomest, some patients need lancing: and
all is well, that ends well. If our preaching bring you to an harvest of joy,
no matter though it compelled you to sow in tears. And, what wise man will
think his estate either so holy, or so safe, as to reject tears for a
womanish passion?

Use. 2. If so, Enemies help the joy of true Christians.
then it is a bootlesse thing to go about to grieve or disquiet a godly
Christian. Thou make him cry perhaps; but to whom? is it not to his father in
secret, who will put all his tears into his bottle? and is there not a rich
crop arising out of this sad and dripping seed-time? A ridiculous conceit, to
think of drowning a fish in a fair and pleasant river, it his own element,
he is where he would be. Ridiculous also it is, to attempt the making a true
Christian unhappy, or weary of his estate: for, even out of darkness arises
light to him, out of tears joy, one contrary out of another: the omnipotent
grace of God who promised, will also do it. Indeed for carnal men, you may so
set them on weeping, that they may dye upon it: 2 Cor. 7.10.
Worldly sorrow causes death: But with the godly it is not so: God will ever
hold them up by the chinne, and lead them through all their waves to a safe and
joyful harbor. Well may Julian and his fellows mock at this doctrine, and
tauntingly heap up more indignities upon the Saints; but God will bless them
the more for their cursing: stay but till the appointed weeks of harvest, you
shall see what it is to sow in tears.

Esteem none by present grievances.
Use. 3. If so, then judge not the state of whole Churches, or particular
members, by present afflictions: think them not presently miserable, after the
seed is cast into the ground; it abides many a cold blast before harvest come.
1 Cor. 15.36.
It is not quickened, except it dye, much less multiplied: in July or August
you will see what is become of your Wheat and Rye. In the day of judgment at
farthest, you will see the reward of true worshippers, and what confusion will
befall Papists, Athiests, scoffers, hypocrites, idolaters, superstitious
fools, persecutors. Then ye shall return and see a difference, Mal 3.18. Now
there is a difference, but then it will appear: now the judgment of God is
according to truth; but that is a day of the declaration of the righteous
judgment of God. Romans 2.5. Sow still, though in tears.


Use. 4. To urge perseverance in the good ways of God, notwithstanding
discouragements, What if thou sowest in tears to God and righteousness? what
if the whole season prove a cold, wet, blustering time, as the poor
husbandman sometime finds it? What if scarce a day go over thy head, but
thou either weepest, or sighest, or meetest some bitterness in thy life? yet
is this an hopeful weeping; there is an harvest coming, to make amends for
all: None shall abide with Christ in temptation, Luke 22.28, 29
but Christ will appoint a Crown unto him: And, as the mother goes through all
her hard labor comfortably, in hope of a child to be borne, so must the
Disciples of CHRIST through all tribulations, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22. Faint not
therefore, that ye may reap in due time; Be strong in the grace of Christ,
Fear not: Rev. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.
These are evil times for the discouraging of zeal and piety; but remember
this Text, They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

Use 5. Be patient in suffering for God.
A ground of patience in all suffering according to the will of God, especially
for the cause, the service, the faith, the truth of God. Seed cast into the
earth is not cast away, nor lost, but will be improved to good advantage: The
husbandman willingly endures that cost, and adventures all to the blessing of
God: And such is thy sickness, poverty, trouble in the world, and other
calamity, when thou have made a good use of it: A little patience will make
thee gainer thirty fold, sixty, an hundred, a thousand fold more, if religion
be the cause of thy trouble. The Martyrs sowed in tears, but because they
carried forth precious seed, they brought their sheaves back with joy, singing
in the prisons and flames, triumphing over their persecutors, finding no ease
to their minds till they had recanted their recantations: Losing their lives,
they saved them: sowing to the spirit liberally, they reaped life and
immortality.

Comfort in death, our own or friends.
6. A ground of comfort against death, both our own and our friends. Death is a
kind of sowing, though in weakness, mortality, and dishonor, 1 Cor. 15.36.
Many tears are shed at the parting of friends, of husband and wife, of parents
and children, Joh. 18.14.
of Pastors and people. Death is the King of terrors, it has a sting and
bitterness: but where Christ comes, not only the sting is taken forth, but the
nature of it is altered, and there is a joyful resurrection, as a joyful
harvest, to make the body rise in honor, in power, in liveliness, and
immortality, though sown a weak and contemptible body. Christianity therefore
here must command moderation to our mourning. Tears are natural expressions
of love and compassion: (...).
and good men (they say) are easily dissolved into tears. But seeing religion
tells of reaping in joy, our hearts must thereby be fenced against
immoderatenesse of grieving.

Be paineful in thy calling.
7. If so, let every one follow his particular calling painfully and faithfully,
though with tears: Ministers in sowing the seed of eternal life in the hearts
of their people: Rich men in sowing upon the waters, or objects where they are
never likely to find their seed again, 2 Cor. 9.6. and poor men in praying
abundantly for their Benefactors, for their Preachers, for their neighbors,
for the peace of Sion: prayer is as seed cast into heaven, and therefore must
needs be fruitful: Therefore, though praying, preaching, governing, ordering
of the family, and other duties, be a sowing in tears, accompanied with many
difficulties, thanklesse offices many times, yet hold not thine hand morning
nor evening; observe not the wind nor rain; he that does shall neither sow
nor reap in comfort, Eccles. 11.4.

8. A motive it is to beginning and renewing our repentance. Encouragement to
repent of sin.


First, fear not the harshnesse of turning to God: Say not, a Lion is in the
way, a Bear will meet me in the streets; some trouble there is, but soon to
be overtaken with peace and joy: trouble, but with promise: trouble, but
nothing to the trouble and misery which impenitent persons reserve themselves
unto. No sowing in tears, no reaping in joy. A lazy husbandman, that flies
wind and weather, must look for no crop in harvest: nor a lazy Christian.

2. Be willing still to renew your repentance, And to renew our repentance.
specially before the Sacrament; this has abundance of joy in it: this bread
strengthens man's heart, and this wine makes it glad, as Psalm. 104.15. this
feast of fat and sweet things will in present make us reap in much joy, though
nothing to that which remains for hereafter. Presently faith is strengthened,
and the Joy of faith increased withal, and the Christian that has gone
worthily, shall walk in the strength of that banquet holily and comfortably for
many days afterward. Therefore what if you sow a little in tears beforehand,
whilst you examine your estate, be wail your unworthiness, confess your
sins, sue for peace with God, and to lay hold on eternal life? What if due
preparation cost you well the setting on? endure all in hope of the harvest.

My brethren be awakened from security: you find your evidences for heaven
somewhat muddy, and that you had need renew your covenant with God, and Oh that
you could get the old feelings, and the comforts that sometimes you had! To do
that, renew your repentance; sow a little more, though in tears; digest all
well, because you do all in hope, and with a promise, that they who sow in
tears, shall reap in joy.

FINIS.



