An Exposition upon the.23. psalm of David full of fruitful and comfortable
doctrine, written to the City of London by John Hooper, bushop of Gloceter and
Worceter, and holy Martyr of God for the testimonye of his truth.

Whereunto is annexed an Apology of his, against such as reported that he
cursed Queen Mary, with certain Godly and comfortable letters in the end.

Prouer. 11 By the blessinge of the righteous the city prospers: But when
the ungodly have the rule it decays. Anno. 1562.

To the fayethfull and lively members of our savior Jesus Christ, inhabytinge
the city of London, grace and peace from the heavenly father through our lord
Jesus Christ.
Your fayeth and firm hope of eternal life (dearelye beloved) which of
long time ye have learned and thoroughly persuaded your selves in, by the truth
and infallible verity of the heavenly word, sealed with Christ's most precious
blood, is very sore and daungerously assaulted, and by all means possible
attempted to be taken from you, that ye should have no longer credit to gods
truth but believe man's lies, no more to have salvation by Christ ye once dyed,
and offered him self once for all forsyn, but ye ye must believe now your
salvation in Christ many times offered by wicked men every day in the
abominable mass, to y^ v^ter conculcasion and opressing of Christ's death, as
y^ wicked Pope and his adherentes would persuade you, and not as Christ your
savior ^athe taught you. But this sudden and miserable change from the
truth unto falshod and from God and Christ to the devil and Antichriste,
doubtless comes of god for our manifold sins toward the heavenly father
our shephearde, that taught us a long time with his blessed word, and we
were neither than^kful for it, nor yet put our trusts in him, as in one that
only could save and defend his own word: but we thought in our
foolyshenesse that the world was so much and so many ways with the word of
God, that even by man's strength it might have been defended: where as the
truth of Goods word is permanent^ and never fails saying, cursed be the^
that make flesh their defense and shylde. For as king Dauyd when God ^adde
brought him to possess his kingdom p^aceablye, said (like a fool as he was)
I shall never be more vngu^eted, but yet the Lord turned his face from him, and
he found straight way such an alteration as he never found before, with
increase of new dangers more troublous the^ ever he had before: even likewise
when god had given us a blessed and holy king, and such maiestrates
(although they were sinners) as wyshed the glory of God only to be preferred
by true doctrine: we like carnal men thought our selves so sure, and so
stablished, that it had not been possible to have seen such a pitious and
miserable change, and the truth of Gods word opressed as we see at this
present day. But we be most worthily punished, and even the same wa^es that
we offended. We put our trust in flesh, and where as Gods spirit in flesh
dwelled, as in our holy and blessed king departed Edward the syxte (who is
deadde in the flesh, and his holy soul reffeth with the heavenly father in
joys for ever) he is taken from us now and can not healpe us, and such as in
his time, seemed much to fououre the glory of God, are become Gods enemies,
and can both hear other to proceed against the glory of God, and also set
forth the same them selves as much as they may: So that such spiritual
and Godly persons as sought in the flesh Gods glory, are taken from us, or
else in such case as they can do no good. And such flesh as followed and loved
God in the sight of the world, and had great vauntage by his word, are
become his very enemies, and not only his, but also enemies too his members.
But yet as king Dauyd knew his foolyshe folly and with repentance repented
and found grace: So it may please God to^ give us of his grace and holy spirit,
to amend our faults in the like offenses, and help us as he did him. But
doubtless great is our iniquitye. For there was never so great abomination
read of and so quickly to preuail, as this abomination of the wicked mass
has prevailed in England. And al Christen men know that the Turks and hethen
neither have nor yet had ever any so sensiblye known, and many fest an idol.

Wherefore that almightye God of his mercy may preserve his people in this
noble city of London, I have written upon this. 23. psalm of king David, to
advertise men how they shall beware of ^eresies and false doctryn, and so to
live to his honor and glory. And ^ know (dearly beloved) that these godly
people which seek Gods honor, and all other that wyshe them well, be accounted
the queen's enemies, although we daily pray for her grace and never think her
barme: But we must be content to suffer slander, and give god thanks for
them. Nevertheless this is out of doubt, that the queen's highness has no
authority to compel any man to believe any thing contrary too Gods word,
neither may the subject give her grace that obedience: in case he do his
soul is lost for ever Dure bodies, goods and lives be at her highness
commandment, and she shall have them as of true subjects: but the soul of
man for religyon is ^ounde too none but unto God and his holy word.

The argument or matter which the prophet chefely entreats of in this
psalm.
IT should seem by the merua^lous and wonderfulle description and setting
forth of almy^htye God, by the prophet and king David in this psalm, that he
was inflamed with the holy ghost bei^ge delivered from all his enemies, to
declare unto all the world how faithful and mighty a defender and keeper God
is of as many^ as put their trust in him. He was in great danger, and
specially in the wars that he made against the Ammonytes, the euente and
success whereof it seems by the. 20. psalm his subjects greatelye ^cared.
Wherefore they commended their king (as true subjects always use) with
earnest prayer unto God. And that battle and many other dangers more ended
(wherein the Godly king found always the protection and defense of the
heavenly father ready and at hand) now Being at rest, he would have this
merciful defense of God known to all others, that as he in all his adversities
put his trust in the Lord, and had the ouerhand of al his enemies: even so by
his example all other men should learn too do the same, and assure them
selves to find (as he found) the Lord of heaven to be the succor and def^ce
of the troubled, and their keeper from all evil.

And because the hearers and readers of this his moo^^e dyuine and Godly hymn,
should the better understand the same, and the sooner take credit thereof in
the heart, he calls the heavenly father (the God of all consolation) in this
psalm, a shepherd or heardman f^dynge his fl^oke, and the people, with him
self he cauleth sheep pastured and ^edde by the shepehearde. And by these two
means, as by a most convenient allegory or transla^ion me^e for the purpose,
from the office of a shepherd and the nature of sheep, he sets out
meruaylously the safgard of man by Gods prou^dence, and good will toward
man. And in the same allegory or translatyon he occupyeth the four first
verses of this psalm. In the first verse, and so to the end of the psalm he
declares still one matter and argument of gods defense toward man, and how
man is preseru^d. But yet it seems that he expresses the same by other
words, and by an other translation, showing the nature of God almightye in
feding and nourishing of man under the name of a Lord or king that has
prepared a table and plenty of meats to fe^de the hongry and nedye, and
sets f^orth man poor and destytute of consolation and necessary help,
under the name of gestes and bydden folks too a kings table, where is plentye
of all things necessary, not only to satisfy honger, and to quench thirst,
but also too expel and remove them, that the poor manne shall never honger
nor thyr^te again: And not only that, but also for ever world without
end, this poor manne shall ^well and inherete, by the mercy of his heavenly
king, the joys everlasting. And this last translation or allegorye is in
manner not only a repetytion of the first in other words, but also a
declaration, and more plain openings of the prophets mind, what he means in
this celestial hymn.

The text of the psalm. The parts of the psalm. The Lord feeds me etc. 1.
Who it is that has the cure and charge of man's life and salvation. In
pleasant pastures. 2. Wherein the life and saluatyon of man consysteth. He
shall convert my soul. 3. How man is brought to the knowledge of life and
salvation. For his names sake. 4. Wherefore man is brought too life and
saluatyon. Although I walk through the valley. 5. What trouble may happen
too such as have life and salvation. For thou art with me. 6. Whereby the
trouble of Gods people is overcome. I will dwell in the house of the Lord. 7.
What the end of Gods troubled and afflycted people shall be.

The first part of the psalm.1. Who it is that has the cure and charge of
man's life and salvation.
The Text.
The Lord feeds me and I shall want nothing.
The explanation.
King David says the lord feeds him: wherefore he can lack nothing to live a
virtuous and Godly life. In this first part some things are to be
considered. First of God that feeds, and next of man that is fed. God that
feeds David calls by the name of a shepeheard, and his people he calls by
the name of sheep. By this name of a shephearde the prophet opens and
disclosethe the nature of God to all his miserable and lost creatures, that he
is content not only to wish and desire manne that is lost, to be found and
restored again, but also does seek and travail to restore and bring him home
again: As it is written in Esaias the porphet, Esa. 40.
he shall gather togeyther his lambs in his arm. And in Ezechiell the prophet
the lord says, Ezech. 44.
behold I will require my flock of the sheepeheardes. etc. And I will deliver
my slocke from their mouth, and they shall be no more their meat, for thus
says the Lord: behold I will search out my sheep, and will vysit them as
a shepehearde does visit his sheep, when he is in the mids of his
scattered sheep, so will I visit my sheep and deliver them from all places
where as they have been scattered. etc And Jeremy the prophet in the same sort
declares the nature of God toward the lost flock, Iere. 31.
saying: he that despersed Israel shall gather him together again and keep
him as the shepehearde keeps his flock. Christ our savior names him self a
good shepehearde, and says that he was sent to call such as were not sheep
of the vtt^r mark and sign in ye world, Io^. 10.
to be his sheep. This nature of the heavenly father saw king David, when he
said at the beginning of this heavenly himn^: The lord feeds me etc.

When he is assured of Gods merciful nature that seeks the lost sheep, he
opens farther the nature of god, what he will do with the sheep, which he
finds: feade him says the prophet David, and puts him self for an
exsample. Here is the mercy of the great sheepehearde farther declared, that
he kills not his sheep, robbe^h them not, but seedeth and nourishes them. Of
this speaks the prophet Ezechiell in the parson of almightye God: Ezech. 34.
I my self will feed my sheep and make that they shall rest quietly, says
the Lord God. That which is lost I will seek, such as go astray I will bring
again, such as be wounded I will bind up, such as be weak I will make strong,
but such as be fat and strong those will I root out, and I will feed my sheep
in reason and judgment. And the great shepeherd Christ says, Ioh. 10.
whether his sheep go in or out they shall find pa^ture.

After that this king has opened in this hymn, y^ Gods nature is not only
to seek the lost sheep, but also when he has found him to feed him, then
he adds in his hymn, after what sort he feedethe him: So that I shall
lack nothing, says the prophet. Hear is the declaring of the great
shepeheardes pasture, wherewith he feedethe the flock of his pasture. Christ
expresses the same wonderfullye in the openinge of his office and doctrine
unto the world in Sayncte John saying: I came that they might have life and
have it most aboundauntelye. Ioa. 10.4.6
And talkinge with the poor woman of Samaria ^olde her that the drink he
would give her should be water of life. And to y^ capernattes he said yt meat
which he would give them should work eternal salvation. As these properties be
in God the shepeherd, (as the prophet has marked) even in the like sort be
the contrary conditions in man the sheep he speakethe of. For as the nature
of God is too seek, so is the nature of man to go a straye, As the p^ophet
says: I have strayed like a wandringe sheep. psalm. 119. Esa. 53.
And even so does Esaye write of al man kind: All we have erred (says he)
as sheep goinge a straye. Christ our savior also in saint Mathewe does
bewail the people of the world that stray as sheep that had no shepeherd. Mat.
9.
Saint Peter likewise says unto his cuntremen that he writes unto, 1. Pet. 2.
ye were as sheep that went a stray, but ye be converted now unto the
shepehearde and pastoure of your souls. And as the nature of man is to stray
from God, 3. regu. 22.
so is it likewise to feed upon all unwholesome and infected pastures: too
believe every false prophet that can do nothing but lie. Esa. 28.
In the prophet Esaias the Lord says, the nature of sheep is too be
deceived, and their pastoures to be droncke, that nether know nor see the
pastures of the word of God. And in the same prophet there is a most
horrible plague upon man for sin, for the pastoures shall be unable to
feed, Esa. 29.
and all the food^ of life shall be as a book fas^ clasped, and shut. This
goinge a stray and seeding upon evil pasture, 2. These., 2.
is wonderfully set forth by Saint Paul: for when men will not feed upon
the truth, it is Gods just judgment they should feed upon falsehode.
And as Gods nature is not only too feed but fullye to satisfye and to
replenyshe with all goodness, so that nothing may lack for a Godly and
virtuous life: Ioa. 4.6.
In like manner the nature of man is not only to feed but also to
replenyshe it self with all infected and contagious doctrine, Romans 1.
until such time that he despise and contemn God and all his wholesome laws.
This we may see in yt holy prophet Esaias. Esa. 30.
The people says the Lord, provoke me unto anger, a lyinge nation that will
not hear the law of god, they say to their prophets prophecye not, look not
out for us things y^ be right, speak pleasant things unto us, etc. And this
replenishynge of man with corrupt pasture, Iho. 7.
is horribly set forth in Saint John when the wicked priests and phariseis
would not believe the shepeheardes voice Christ, no not their own servants
that told them the truth, nor yet Nycodemus one of their own court and
profession. Thus in the first part of this celestial hymn is the nature of
God and manne described under the name of a shepehearde and of sheep.

Of this part of the psalm what the prophet has said of God and of man,
What is to benoted out of this part of y^ psalm
we must for our own doctrine and learning gather some things to be the
better by. Romans 15.
For Sayncte Paul says, what so ever is written, is written for our
learning. Two things we learn of this first place: The one a certaintye that
God has the cure and charge of us. And the other a consolation and comfort,
that we and all ours be under his protection and governance. The first
doctrine too be certain and sure of Gods defense, and care over us, makethe
us constante and strong to suffer and bear all aduersityes and troubles that
God shall send us. And the second doctrine shall cause us patientlye and
thanckefullye too bear our cross and to follow Christ. Both these doctrines
the prophette Dauyd expressethe in the. 3. and 4. verse of this psalm: If I
should says he, traua^le and pass through places contagious and infected,
where appears nothing but the image and shadow of death, or be compelled to
pass through the bands and tyranny of mine ennemies, I will not fear, for
thou art with me (O God) and defendes^ me. Psalm. 91.
In the 91 psalm he settethe forth the assurance, and felicity of all them
that put their whole trust in the mercy of God, and therein also the prophet
reckeneth up a wonderful sort of dangers, and lays them before the e^es
of the fayethfull, that he may by the syghte and knowledge of the dangers,
fyxe and place the more constantlye his faith and trust in god that has the
charge and cure of him: he shall says he defend us from pestyle^ce most
infectiue: from ^lyinge arrows in the day. etc. By the which ^^e prophet
understands all kind of euyls that may come unto us by the means of the
devil, or of wicked men. And these things the faithful shall escape (says
the prophet) because they say from their hearts unto God, Quoniam tu es spes
mea, that is to say, for thou art my hope: even as he said in the beginning
of this psalm, The assurance of gods defense and comfort in troubles must
be learned out of gods word.
the Lord feeds me and I shall want nothing. Such certaintye and
assurance of Gods defense, and such consalation in troubles of this life, we
must learn and pray to have out of gods word, or else it were as good never to
hear nor to read it.

And from this fyrtie part of the Psalm, every estate of the world may
learn wisdom and consolation. If the Lord feed and govern him, he shall
have God too his master and teacher, that shall give him wholesome and
commodious doctrine, mete for yt state of the life he has chosen to live in
this world. For all that shall be saved in time to come, follow not one kind of
life. Some be magistrates and rulers, and appo^^ted too see both the laws of
the re^alme, and the gooddes and commodities thereof to be used and applied to
yt use and profitte of such as be under them. Some give them selves to study
and contemplation of heavenly and divine things, not busying them selves with
trauayls of the body, but to know the^ selves the way of life and be teachers
of the same to others: Some be given too apply the laws of the common wealth:
some too exercise the trade and course of merchandise: some one kind of
living and some another. But of what art, facultye, science or kind of
living so ever he be, that is not contrary to Gods honor or honestye, he may
use therein to serve God, to observe justice, to exercise truth, keep
temperaunce and be acceptable to God, who has given laws meet and convenient
to publycanes and soldiers, servant and masters, parents and children,
husbands and wives, and so to all other: but al these sorts of people must
assuredly know, that in every of these vocations be more dangers, then he
that must live in the^ is able to bear. Therefore from the botome of his heart
he must be assored of this beginning of king David's himne: The Lord feeds
me and I shall lack nothing. And in deed the lord has not only said, he
will feed and defend him from all dangers, but also says he will teach him
how too live veriuouslye and reverently toward god, and honestlye and quietlye
toward man, what state or vocation so ever he choose to live in, so it be not
against Gods laws and the law of nature. So says king David: psalm. 25.
God has appointed a law to rule and teach the man yt fears him what so
ever kind of living he appoints him self to live in. What treasure is there
to be compared unto this, that man is not only fed and maintained by God, but
also taught and instructed in every craft and science that he apointeth him
self to live in? Blessed therefore is the man that in the entrails and deep
cogitacions of his heart, can say, believe and feel, this to be true that
David says: The Lord rules me and cares for me and I shall lack nothing.
But yet there is almost nothing spoken, that this king would have chieflye
known. How be it doubtelesse they be wonderful things, that pres^rue and
teach all persons both men and women in what so ever kind of living
honestlye they appointe them selves to live in. He him self knew this to be
true right well, ^as it appears when he says: blessed be the lord my
strength that taught my hands to battle. Psalm. 144.
For if the lord had not taught and ruled him, he had been overthrown many
times, because there was not only more strength then he had of him self against
him: but also more wit, more policye, more experience. But what things can
overcome that man y^ is covered with this shields, dominus regit me, the lord
rules me? doubtelesse nothing at all, whether it be in heaven above or in the
earth benethe, or in hell under the earth. Not withstanding this is not all that
this doctrine, the Lord rules me, does for the poor sheep that is ruled:
but hear must the reader and hearer of this psamle follow king David, and
desire too have the eye of his mind purged and made clean. For if yt scales
of infidelity, and the love and delight to sin remain, or else the mind be
otherwise occupied then upon the understanding of the hymn: he shall hear
it or sing it as the ungodly colleges of priests do, that daily boo and rore
and holy scriptures out of their mouths, and understand no more the meaning
thereof, then the walls which they singe and speak unto. We must therefore do
as king David did, lift up the eses of our minds in to heaven, and fyxe
our fayeth as he says fast in the Lord, psalm. ^^.128.
And then shall we see the unspeakable treasures and wisdom, that lies hid
in this marvelous and comfortable head and beginning of this psalm^^* The Lord
feadeth me. etc.

Our savior Christ opens plainlye in. S. John what it is too be the sheep
of God, and to be fed by him, and says they will bear the sheepeheards voice,
but no strangers voice, and because they hear the ^hepeherds voice the
shepeheard will give them everlasting life, and no man shall take them out of
the shepeheards hands. There is the greatest treasure and most necessary riches
for the sheep of god uttered, The inward and spiritual comfort, treasure and
riches, which this doctrine brings.
which is not the knowledge of God alone to be preserved in this life, and to
lack nothing that is expedyente, and necessary for the preservation thereof: but
also to understand which ways the heavenly father teaches and leads us
to the mansion, and dwellinge place of life everlasting. And if man were wise
he might soon perceive, how much the life to come is better then the life
present, yea be it never so favorably fed and preserved by the heavenly
father ou^ shepeheard and governor. For his tuition here of us, although it
^^^sure, and so strong that none can tak^ ^s ^ute of his hands: yet is our
safeguard and life troubled and mingled with aduersyt^es, subject to persecution
and also unto death, but in y^ life to come gods tuicion is al toy, al myrthe,
al solace, with all perpetuite, and endless felicity. And of this treasure David
cheeflye meant in the forefront of the psalm, when he said: And I shall lack
nothing. 1. pet. 4.
For as we see (vnytl this life be taken from us) most troubles and most care
begins and tarieth in ye house of God among his sheep, which be as lambs
among wolves. Wherefore the voice and teachinge of the shepeheard does heal the
minds of the sheep, Mat. 10.
Gods dear elect, and pulls from them al unprofitable fear and carefulnes:
It quenches all flames of lust and concupiscence: it makes and gives a man
a noble and valiminde to contemn all worldly things: it brings a man in
love with gods true honor, makes him joyful in trouble, quiet in adversity,
and sure that the end of gods people shall be glorious and joyful: and also
that this favor of the shepehearde shall shall be his guide in too the place
of bliss, whereas be crounes of everlasting glory for such as have been
led by the Lord, and there they shall lack nothing. For there is neither eye
can see nor tunge can speak, nor mind can comprehend thees^ joys and
glory. And therefore the prophet both constantlye and chearefullye said: The
Lord feeds me and I shall lack nothing. For all things of this world be
but tryfelles in comparison of things to come. Although it be a singular
favor of god to understand his goodness and mercy toward us in things
belonginge to this life: yet is it not to be compared too the other, as Dauyd
wonderfullye declarethe in the. xxv. psalm. when he has no^bred a great many
of Gods benefits, which he does bestow upon his poor servants in this
life, he in the end makes mention of one specially that passes them all, in
these words, Arcanum domini timentibus illum, et testamentum s^um
manifestabit illis. That is to say, the Lord opens to such as fear him
his secrets, and his Testament, the Lord opens to his faithful seruaun^e the
mysteries and secrets of his pleasure, and the knowos his laws. And these
treasures, the knowledge and right understanding of Gods most holy word, be
says was more sweet unto him, then honye or the honye comb, and more he
esteemed the virtue of it, then he ^yd precious stones. Of all gifts this was
the princypall, that God gave unto him a right and true knowl^dge of him
self. Wherefore it shall ^e most expedyente and necessary, for every
Christian man to labor, ^tudye, and pray, that he may earnestlye, and with
a fayethfull heart know him self to be no better then a selye pore sheep
that has nothing of him self nor of any other to save his body and soul,
but only the mercy of his shepeheard, the heavenly father, and to be assured
also that his only mercy and goodness alone in Christ and none other besides him
is able too ^eede him, so that he shall lack nothing necessary in this life,
nor in the life to come.

The.2. part of the psalm. Wherein the life and salvation of man consists.
The Text.
He shall feed me in pleasant pastures, and he shall lead me by the rivers
side. etc.
The explanation.
He shall set me in the pastures most pleasant and rich of his doctrine, and
in the contemplation of heavenly things, wherwithall the mynde^ of godly men
are nonrished, and fed with unspeakable toye, and near unto the plentuous
fluddes of the holy ghost, and the sweet waters of the holy scriptures he will
feed me: In the which places the sheep of the lord are nourished to eternal
life aboundinge with milk and bringinge forth most blessed fr^te. Job. 2^
Act. 20. Iere. 3. ^zech. 34.2 regu. 57 Mich. 5.
The scripture of God uses this word feed in many significations: some time
too teach and instruct: sometime too rule and govern, as magistrates rule
their people as well by law as by strength: Sometime to punysh and correct
etc. But in this place the prophet uses feedinge as well for instruction by
Gods word, as also for defense and safegarde of Gods people by Gods most
mighty power. Job. 10. Psalm. 74.79 95. Iere. 3. E^ze. 34. Joel. 1. Mat. 4.
He uses this word pasture for the word of God it self, as a thing which
is the only food of a man's soul to live upon, as the meat and drink is
for the body. He uses this word lead for conductynge, that the manne which
is led at no time gooe out of the way, but always may^ know where he is,
and whether he is going: as in many other of his psalms he usethe the same
manner of speaking. Psalm. 60.73.76.
The ryuers of ref^ction be uses for the plentyfull gifts of the holy ghost
wherewithal the faye^hfull man is replenished. Apo. 7. Esa. 55. Ioa. 4.7.
His saying therefore is as much as if he had spoken without allegorye or
translation thus He enstruc^e^h me with his word, and conducteth me with his
holy spirit that I cannot err nor perish.

In this part of the psalm be many things worthy to be noted. First it is
declared, that the life of man consists in the food of gods word: then
that there is none that geeueth the word to be eaten, but God our heavenly
shepehearde. The next, that none can rate of this meat of gods word, but
such as the holy ghost feeds with the word. Mat. 4.
Our savior Christ declares that man lives not by bread alone but of every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. We can no more live in God
without Gods word, then in the world without worldly food.
Whereby he teaches us that as the body lives by external meats, so does
the soul by the word of god. And no more possible is it for a man to live in
God without the word of God, then in the world without the meat of the
world. And S. Peter confessethe the same. John. 6.
For when the Caparnaites and many of Christ's own disciples has sa^isfyed
their bodies with external meats, they cared not for their souls, neither
could they abide too be fed nor too hear the meat of the soul spoken of,
although Christ did dress it most holsomlye with many godly and swet^ words:
they would not tarry until Christ had made that meat ready for them. They
could be contended to feed their bellyes with his meats but their souls they
would not commit to his diet, but departed as hongry as they came, through
their own folly. Christ was leadinge them from the five barley loves and two
fyshes wherewith they had filled their bellyes unto the pleasant, pastures of
the heavenly word that showed neither barley loves nor fish, but his own
precious blood and paynfull passion to be the meat of their souls: how ^e
it they could not come in to this pasture, nor taste in any case of the sweet
herbs and nouri^hmente of their souls. When Christ perceived they would not be
led in this pleasant pasture, he let them go whether they would, and to feed
upon what pasture they would, and the^ he asked of his. xii. that ^ar^ed
saying: will ye depart also? Peter as one yt had fed both body and soul as his
fellows had, perceived that the body was but half the man, and that being fed,
there was but half a man fed, and also that such meats as went in to the
mouth satisfied no more the^ the body that the mouth was made for: he felt
more^uer that his soul was fed by Christ's doctrine, and that the honger of
syn, the ire of God, the accusation of the law, and the demand and claim of
the devil, were quenched and taken away: be perceived likewise y^ the meat which
brought this nourishment was the heauenli doctrine that Christ spoke of
touching hi^ death and passion, and he understood also that this meat passed
not in to the body by the mouth, but in to the soul by faith, and by the
presence of gods spirit with hi^ spirit, y^ body also should be partaker as well
of ye grace that was in it, as o^ the life. So y^ he felt him self not only to
have a bodi and soul alive, but also y^e they were graciou^ly replenished with
the pastures and food of gods favor. Wherefore he said unto Christ, to who^
shall we go? Thou have ye words of everlasting lif. Which words in effect sound
no other thing the^ this psalm does, where David says: The lord fedeth me and
I shall want nothing. for he leads me into his pleasant pastures, and
pastureth me by ye rivers side. Wherein it appears manifesly y^ ye word of
god is the life of the soul.

The prophet David does meruelously open this thing in the repeting so many
times the word of God in a psalm worthy much reading, and more marking of ye
things contained therein. psalm. 119.
For he entreats al y^e psalm through, y^ a godly life does consist in the
observation of gods laws, and therefore does he so many times in the psalm
pray God to illuminate and endue his spirit and heart with these two virtues,
knowledge and love of ^is word, wherewith he may both know how to serve god,
and at all times too be acceptable unto him. ^n^e. 11.
And our savior Christ him self in saint Luke says unto a woman, blessed
be they that hear the word of God and keep it. Ioa. 5.
And in Sayncte John Christ exhorts all men to the readinge and exercisinge
of the scripture. And yet our blind gides say that ignorance is the mother of
godlynes
For the ignorancye of gods word brings with it a murryne and rotte of the
soul: yet for the sins of the people God said, he would sen^e a honger and
^amyn amonge^ men, not a honger of bread nor water, Amos. 8.
but of hearing Gods word. Kin^e David therefore as o^e assured both of
the author of life, and also of the food wherewyth the life is mayntayned,
stays him self with Gods benediction and favor, that he is assured God
feeds him with his word. And he shows also that none is the author of
this word neither can any give it but God alone. For when the first faule of
Adam and Eve by eating forbidden meats had poisoned and infected both body
and soul with sin and Gods displeasure, so that he was de^titute both of
gods favor and wis^ome: none but god could tell him where remedy and help
lay, nor yet could any deliver him the help but God. For till god made
promise that the seed of a woman should make whole and save that which the
devil and man had made sick and lost by reason of sin, and also made open
the remedy unto Adam, and enclyned his heart to believe the remedy: Adam was
dead in sin and utterly cast away. Then the pity of the heavenly
shepehearde said, he should notwithstanding in time be brought in to the same
pasture again, and none should deceive him nor bring him any more out of
the pastures of life. Ioh. 10.


But only God gave this meat, Ephe. 2.
which was his holy word and promise, And also the mouth of fayet^ to eat
these promises of Gods only gift. And the same appears thoro^ out the whole
Bible, that only god by se^ding of his word and preachers brought knowledge
of everlasting life to the people that were in ignorancye. As S. Paul says:
god before time spoke unto our fathers by the prophets, ^eb. 1.
and in these later days unto us by his son, and after the ascension of his
son, by his Apostles, and euangelis^es, in so much that non of the prophets
ever spoke of Gods word, Math. 28
that mayntayned the life of the soul, other wise then they received it of the
^ighe shepehearde, almighty god, 2. Peter. 1.
as. S. Peter says: prophecy came not by the will of man but the holy me^ of
God spoke as they were taught us the holy ghost. So that God is the only
author and fountayn of his true word the food of all men's souls. Iac^ 2.
In like manner he is the only geuer of the same, as he is the geuer of it, and
none but him self: So none can eat it, but such as have the same delivered
unto them by the ^^^ye ghost. So our savior Christ likewise in the gospel
of saint John tells Nicodemus that it was not possible to understand and to
know the grace of redemption, Job. 3.
except ^e were borne from above. And when saint John preached the word of
God at Philippos amongs the women by the water side, the lord opened the heart
of Lid^a to vnders^a^d the things spoken of by Paul. Act. 16.
And when Christ preached among the Jews and wrought wonderful miracles, yet
they understood nothing, nether were they any thing the better. Job. 8.
And Christ shows the cause. Proptere^uos non ^uditis, quia ex deo no^ estis,
that is to say, therefore ye hear not, because ye he not of god. But the fault
was not in god but in the obstynacy and frowardnes of their own hearts, Mat. 23.
as ye may see in S. Matthew. Christ offered him self, but yet the malice of
man rebelled at al time^. S. Paul to the Corinthians wonderfully sets forth
man's unableness, 1 Cor. ^.
and says: y^ natural man is not able to co^prehe^d the things y^ be of god.
Ioh. ^.
And in S. John Christ says no man ca^ come unto him, except the heavenly
father draw him, for they must be all taught of God. Now as the prophet saw
these things for him self and his salvation in Gods word: Even so must
every Christian manne take heed that he learn the same doctrine, or else it were
no comodity to have the scripture of god delivered and taught unto us. And
every reader and hear^r must learn of this psalm y^ there is none other food
nor meat for the soul^ but Gods word. And who so ever do refuse it when it is
offered or pr^ached, or when they know the truth thereof, do yet of malice,
fear, lucre and gain of the world, or any other way repugne it: they be
unworthy of al mercy and forgeuenes. let every man and woman therefore examyne
their own conscience, with out flatteringe of them selves, and they shall find
that the most part of th^s realm of England in the time of our holy and
blessed king Edward the syxt, were fed with this holy food of Gods word,
or else might have been fed with it. For it was offered and sent unto them, as
well by most godly statutes and laws of parliament, as by many noble me^, and
virtuous learned preachers. If they fed not upon it accordingely or now
their teeth stand on edge, and their stomachs be closed with it, to their
peril be it.

Thus Christ says: Ioh. 15.
they have nothing whereby justly to excuse them selves of their sin. And
likewise he says, that who so ever hatethe him, hates also his father. By
which words it appeareteth manyfestlye that no man can hate Christ's doctrine
but he must hate Christ him self, and no man can hate Christ, but he must also
hate the father of heaven. Wherefore it is expediente for every manne to mark
such places. For it was not Christ's name nor Christ's person that the Iewas
hated so mo^tall^e Christ for, but they hated him to death for his doctrines
sake, and it was Christ's doctrine that condemned the world, and showed the
life and learning of the world to be evil, and could not abide the light of
gods word, Ioh. ^.
and therefore in no case they could abide to hear of it: As ye see the like
in his poor preachers. Mar^ewhi y^ p^eacher^ of God are contemned ^f ye world.
For his words sake they be less passed of then dogs or brute beasts. For
they be hated to death, and more favor does Barabas the murderer find, then
Peter the preacher of Christ that would lead the flock redeemed with Christ's
precious blood, in to the pastures of gods word with the prophet David: and yet
in this hatred of Gods word the food of gods sheep, they would ^e seen and
non but they to love and honor god, but it is not so in their hearts. For they
have a contempt of God, as their fruits well declare. And Christ says they
hate both him and his father, yea and that without cause.

But thou Christian reader, see thou feed thysoule with no other meat, Psalm.
35. Ioh. 15.
the^ with the wholesome pastures of gods word whatsoever the world shall say or do.
Look upon this text of saint John: when the comforter shall come, who^ I shall
send from my father, even the spirit of truth, Ioh. 1^.
which does proceed from the father, he shall testifye and hear record of
me. W^y that place and think wherefore the son of man referred him self to
the witness of the holy ghost, and ye shall know that it was for no untruth
that was in the author being Christ, or in the doctrine that he preached: but
only to make the disciples to be of good comfort, and that they should not
esteem the gospel he preached unto them any thing the less, although it
had many adversaries and enemies and was spoken against in manner every where:
for against the fury and false judgment o^ the world that co^temn^d the
gospel, they should have the testimonye of the holy ghost to allow and warante
the Gospel. Let us therefore pray to the heavenly shepehearde that he will
give us his holy spirits to testifye for the word of God the only food of
our souls, that it is true that God says, and only good, that he
appoints too feed us. And this we may be assured of, that in this heavy and
sorrowful t^me, there is nothing ca^ testify for the truth of Gods word and
keep us in the pleasant pasture thereof, but the very spirit of God, which
we must set against all the tumultes and dangers of the world. For if we make
this veri^ye of Good subject to the judgment of the world, our fayeth shall
quayle and faynte every hour as men's judgments varye. Wherefore let us pray
to have always in us the spirit of adoption, whereby when our faith shall be
assaulted, we may cry father father, and the same help for the mayntenaunce of
the truth, God promised by his holy prophet Esaias sayingd: This is my covenant
with them (says the lord) my spirit which is in thee, ^sa. 59.
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart from thy
mouth, nor from the mouth of thy seed nor from the mo^th of the seed of
thy seed from hence forth until the world^ end.

Hear does the almightye God set forth, what a treasure and singular gift his
word is, and that it shall not deparxe from his people until the worlds end.
And in these words i^ this part of David's psalm marua^lously opened and set
forth. It is the Lord alone that feeds and instructs faith Esaye the
prophet. It wa^ not man's own imaginatyon and intention, nor the wisdom and
religion of his fathers (what so ever they were) but it was the Lord that
spoke and made the covenant with man, and put his spirit in manne to
understand the couenaunte, and by his word and none other word, he
instructed manne and said, What things we receive by fedinge upon gods
promises in this life.
that by these means all men should till the worlds end, feed and eat of
gods blesse^ promises. For in his word he has expressed and opened to
eueriman what he shall have, even the remission of sin, the acceptance in to
his fatherlye favor, grace to live well in this life, and at the end too be
received in too the everlasting life. Of these things the reader may know what
maintayneth life, even the word of God, Mut. 4. psalm. 19.119 2. Timo. 3 ^eb.
1.1. Pet. 1.
as Christ says: if ye abide in me and my words abide in you, ask what ye
will, and ye shall have it. He shall learn also, that it is not genenerall
counsel, provincial counsel, the determyna^^on and agreemente of men,
that can be the author of this food, but only God. Gala. 1.
And as God is the only author of this food: even so is his holy spirit he
that f^edeth the poor simple soul of the Christyan manne myth his blessed
pasture and not the wisdom of man, Ioh. 6. Esa. 54. Ioh. 15.
men's sacrifyces, or men's doynge^. But as touching the food of man's soul
too be the only word of God, I will if it be Gods blessed pleasure (to
whom in the bitter and paynefull passion of Christ, I commytte my will, with
my life and death) open vnt^o the sheep and lambs of God at large in an other
book.

The.3. part of the psalm How manne is brought too the knowledge of life
and saluatyon. Which part shows what man is of him self, and how he is
brought in to this life to feed in the pleasant pastures of gods word.
THe Text.
He shall convert my soul and bring me in to the paths of righteousness.
The explanation.
MY soul erred and went a stray from the right way of godly living, but
the Lord converted me from my errors and faults of living, and brought me
to the observation of his holy laws, wherein is contained all justice, truth
and godliness. Here is to be noted what degrees and orders the Lord and
heavenly shepehearde, does use i^ bringing his sheep unto y^ pasture of life.
First he conuerteth the man ye is gone astraye, bye his wicked ways and
sinful manner of living. If he were an infidele, he brings him first to
know, feel, and hate his infidelity, and afterward to a true faith. If he be
a persecutour, he shows him first his tyra^nye, and afterward how to use him
self meekelye. If he be a sinful man that lives contrary to his knowledge
and profession, he brings him first to the knowledge and hatred of his syn,
and afterward to the forgeuenes of y^ same. As Christ our savior wonderfully
teaches in S. John, Ioh. 16.
where he satih: The holy ghost when he comes shall rebuke the world of
sin, justice, and judgment. By the which words he declares that the
faithful of God, can not profyt in the gospel of Christ, nether love nor
exercise justice and virtue, except they be taught, and made too feel the
burden and danger of sin, and be brought to humble them selves as men that
be of them selves nothing but sin. And therefore the law and threateninges
of god be very wholesome, whose nature and prosperity is to cite and call men's
conscience unto the judgment of God, and too wound the spyrite of man
with terroure and fcare. Wherefore Christ uses ^ wonderful way, and
teaches the same unto his Apostles, that nether him self for that present
time, nor they in time to come, could preach profitablye the gospel,
wherewyth men are led in to the sweet and pleasant feeldes of Gods
promises by his word, The conscience that feleth y^ fringe of death by s^^ne,
thur^teth for life
except they use this order, to lead them from sin to justice, and from
death to life. And as justice and life comes by Christ showed unto us in his
bitter passion. death and glorious resurrection: so does sin and death both
appear and be se^te by the spirit of God showed unto us in the law. This
order also saw^ the holy prophet when he said: the Lord conuerteth my soul,
and leads me in to the paths of ryghteousenes. This is a wonderful s^ntence,
and much and deepelye to be considered and wayed of thee christian man. The
Lord conuerteth my soul says David: he feleeth in him self that as long as
the devil and sin have the rule and kingdom in man, the soul of man being
Gods treasure is deformed, foul, horrible, and so troubled, that it is like
unto all things more then unto god and virtue, whereunto it was created: but
when the wicked devil and deformed sin be by the victory of Christ overcome
and ^xpulsed, the soul waxes fair, amiable, sweet, louinge, pleasant, and
like unto God again, and comes in to order and obeysauce unto his creatoure,
and so brought in to the paths of righteousness, feeds with the rest of Gods
well ordered flock^ upon the pastures and food of his ^olye word to be his
blessed will.

Oh that we would in the glass of gods word look upon our own souls when they
be in the tyranny of the devil under the kingdom of sin, as this king
did: we should more loeth and detest our own soul, and the company that our
soul is accompanied with all, then if we should for all our life time be put
in too styes with hogs and always be bound ^urynge our life, too live with
them, feed as they feed, sleep and wake as they do, and be as they be in all
things. Luc. 15.
Look in the gospel of Sayncte Luke, and there shall ye see a man by sin,
so foul, so disordered so accompanied with swine, so hongerbaned, so rent and
torn, so beggarly, so wretched, so vile, so loathsome and so stinking y^ the
very swyne were better for their condycion then he was. But se how the heavenly
shepeherd beheld from his heavenly throne, the place of the everlasting joys,
this poor strayed sheep, feedinge not emonges sheep but emonges swyne, and
yet could not be satysfyed therewyth. And no maruayle, for swyne feed not
upon the meat of sheep, nor yet do sheep fyl the^ selves with hog^draffe and
swillings: but this shepehearde used his old wonted clemencye, and struck the
heart of this sheep, making him to weep and bewail his condition, a men to
come to such dishonor to be coupled and matched with swyne, too feed like
swyne, eat like swyne such meat as swyne eat, remembringe that the worste
in his father^ house was a prince and noble king in comparyson and respect of
him: then also being persuaded of his fathers mercy, he returned and his
father brought him in to his pleasant and sweet pastures, and gave him his old
favor and accustomed apparel again as a man to keep company with men, and
no more with adulterou^ men, and unclean swyne: How be it be came not to his
old honor ^gayne, till the Lord had practysed in him that he practiced in
this prophet king David, animam meam conuertit, h^ conu^rted and turned
mysoule.

It is but a folly for a man to flatter him self, as though he were a
christian man, when his heart and soul is not turned unto the Lord, he
shall never feed in the pastures of life, but be an hipocryte all the days of
his life, as the most part of the world be that profess Christ^ name at
this present day. They say they be converted from the world too God, when
there is nothing within the pastures of Gods word, but that they will
contemn rather then too have as much as an cuyll look of the world for it.
They say they be converted to God when they be contented with the world to
^onoure that for God, that is b^t bread and wine in the matter and substance,
as the scripture of God, and the holy church of Christ have taught believed
these. 1500. y^ars and more. Oh. Lord be these men turned to thee; be these
the men that shall dwell with thee, in thy holy mount of Sy^n, Psalm. 24.
and stand in thy holy place? May doubtless, for they be not turned ^o thee,
but from thee, and be not with thee but against tho^ They speak with the and
yet their deede^ dishonor thee, they talk of truth and practice lies. What
(good lord) shall thy simple and poor unlearned sheep do? Where shall they
seek thy truth? For the ^hepeheards say and sing this psalm every week and
at every dirige for the dead and yet they be not converted in their spirits
too thee that thou might lead the^ in to the paths of righteousness. But
lord there is no man now (in manner) that dare accuse them: they destroy
them selves and thy sheep, and no man can be suffered with gods word to
remedy it. Notwythstandyng^ (good Lord) although in this world none may
accuse them, yet they in the world to come shall have king David (whose
psalms they dayelye read and in whom they most glory) too accuse them both
of here^ye and blasphemye, as Moses shall accuse the wicked Jews, whom they
most glory of. For as the Jews r^dd^ the scripture of Moses, and yet
w^^^neuer the better: so these priests of Antichrist read the holy scripture
and yet neither the people, nor they them selves, are any thing the better.
And in this they pass the abhomynation, of the Jews and Turks. For they
were, and yet be content, that their books of religion shall be used in their
churches in the vulgar and common tongue, but these enemies of god and man would
not have the word that God has appointed for all men's salvation, to be used
in any tongue but in the latten. The God therefore of ^eace that brought again
from death to life, the great shepehearde of the sh^epe, by the blood of the
everlasting tement, our Lord Jesus Christ, conuerie the souls and hearts
of all those, that cause the sheep of God thus to eat and feed upon the
carine and infected pastures of meunes tradicions. Amen.

Now as king David in this text has wonderfully set forth the miserable
nature of all Gods sheep, and put him self for an example that the nature and
condition of all men is corrupt, wicked and damnable, so that it can not be
partaker of gods benediction and everlasting grace, except it be borne a
new, amended, restored and instructed: So likewise he shows that none
conuerteth the soul of man but the heavenly father the great shepeheard, that
both sees the lost state of his sheep, and wylleth of his mercy the salvation
and calling of the sheep home again, and then he proceeds further and
shewethe what the heavenly shepehearde will do with his sheep: he says, he
will lead them in to the paths of justice. Wherein the prophet declares that
it is not only God that conuerteth the man from ^uyll, but also he alone that
keeps him in goodness an virtue. And therein is showed a wonderful myserye
and wretchedness in the soul and body of man, that can neither begin nor yet
continue in a life acceptable unto God, except^ that God wholye wooreke the
same himself. And as it declares the wonderful wretchedness of man, so does
it many felt and set forth a wonderful and unspeakable mercy and
compassion of god toward man* that so meruailouslye and graciously he can be
content to healpe and save his enemy and very aduersar^e. But herein is
required of as many as the Lord conuerteth from iniquity and sinful
lyuinge, that they walk in the same law, and use their conversation in
equitye and justice, as it becomes obediente men and women redeemed with the
shepeheards precious blood. For the Lord do^th not teach his sheep the trut^
that they should live in falshode, neither g^ueth he them the remission of
their sins that they should return to the same again, but because they
should ^tudiouslye apply and ^^lygentlye excercyse the^ selves in virtuous
works too the honor of almightye God. Psalm. 1. Mat. 5.


There be two sorts of people that the Lord will judge and punish in the
later day, with extreme ire and justice. The one sort ^e called upon to
learn the knowledge of god and of Gods honor as gods word co^maundethe, but
they will not hear nor obey the calling but know god and learn God as the
custom and manner of the world is to know him and learn him, though it ^e
never so far from the truth. And the other sort be contented to hear and
learn to know God, and too serve ^im as he teaches in his holy and most
pure word, but in their hearts consent not to their knowledge, but contrary
to it they do out^ward service to a false god and frame their conversation,
both in religion ^owards God and their manners toward men, Woeful are these
days when in so clear light of the truth y^ professor^ thereof are ^o
faithless and (...).
as men of the world do. So that god has no more reverence of him that knows
the truth, the^ of him that i^ ignoraunte of the truth. Esaye the prophet
speaks against yt first sort of men, that will not hear when they be
called, nor learn when they be taught, and says: when other men shall laughe
they shall weep, Esa. 65.
when ^ther be merye they shall be sorye, when other be whole they shall be
sick, when other men shall live they shall die, and when other men rejoice in
myrthe, they shall lament^ in sorrow. Romans 10.
And good cause why says saint Paul, for the Lord has stretched forth his
hand always to a rebellious and obsti^ate people, that will not learn nor
know his holy will. Again, the other sort that know and have learned the
Lords will, and pleasure, and yet prepare not them selves to do his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes saye^^ our sau^oure Christ. Luc. 12.
And the Lord in Sayncte Mathewe does wonde^^fully charge both such as
igno^^ntly do offend, and those that do^ with knowledge offend, those also
that be called upon to amendment in faith and charity, and those that b^ not
called upon by preachinge of the truth, and sayteh: the greater d^^natyo^ is
upon such as know or ^yghte know, or ^s when they do know they be nothing
the better for their knowledge. He putiethe forth there four cities,
Choro^aim and Bethsaida, Li^e and S^^one: ^w^ of them many ^ymes admony^he^ by
Christ to amend: The other (...) no^ so called upon, neuerthel^ss^ ^othe of
them the Lord will judge; but most seuerlye such as negl^^t the word of God
when it is offered. Therefore it is not enough for a man to ^arken or bear,
read or learn Gods word, but ^e must be ruled by Gods word, frame his
whole life after Gods word, and before all things avoyde ydolatrye by Gods
word: as king Dauyd says i^ thi^ psalm, that the Lord did not o^elye
convert his soul, but ^roughte him in to the paths of justice.

Let every man and woman, therefore ^^^nke with them selves, what kno^ledge they
have received of God. For ^e that has received most shall make account for
most, and the more he knows and abuse the his knowledge, the more shall be
his damnation, and in case they know nothing at all, and he never the better
for all the preaching of the Lords word, let them take heed what persons
they be and in what place they have dwelled. In case their pouertye was such
that they could not hear, and their dwelling where as was no preachinge at
all: yet be they under the judgment and damnation of God because the know not,
as Li^e and Sydon were. If they were of such state as they might have come if
they would, and had preachers to tell them the truth, in case they would
have hard the truth, such men and women shall be the more in danger of
Gods severe and just judgment. God requires not only a compte of that has
been received but of y^ might have been received.
For God does not only take an account of that men have received, if they
use not gods gifts well: but also straytelye requirethe of them that might
have learned, the thing that either ^yllingelye or obstinatelye they re^^sed
too learn: as ye may see by Chorozaim and Bethsaida. God will as well take an
account of him that refused too receive the gift of Gods word, as he
requires an account of him that has received it, Mat. 11. Luc. 12.
and abbused it. Whereby we learn that not only the manne that abuses Gods
word shall be damned, but also be that will not learn Gods word. King
David had the word offered, he received it, and was carried therebye in too the
paths of justice, and lived Godly thereafter. Now he goes forth and
shows wherefore manne is brought to life and salvation.

The.4. part of the psalm. Wherefore man is brought to life and salvation.
The Text.
For his names sake.
The explanation
HE brought not me to life and salvation says the prophet, for any m^rytes
or deserninges of mine, but for his own infinite goodness sake. And what so
ever evil has been done and sin committed, all these things I ascribe to
my corrupt nature, and accuse my self too be the doet of them* but if any
thing have been thought, said, or done, that is virtuous and Godly, that I
wholye ascribe and attribute unto the mercy of God that gave me a good mind to
wyshe too do well, and also strength to do the things, that he gave me will
too wyshe. Of this part of the psalm we learn, that manne can neither wyshe,
nor speak, nor do any thing, nor yet understand any thing that good is but
only through the mercy of God, who makes of an ignoraunte man a man of
knowledge, of an vnwilling^ man a willinge man, of an evil speaker a good
speaker, and of an evil doer, a good doer. Therefore. S. Paul, when he sees
that the nature of man will take upon her to be y^ author of any good thing, he
acuseth and condemns her of arrogance and pride, saying, what have thou that
thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.
If thou have received, why do thou glory as though thou receauedest not?
And in the same Epistle he says that he preached Christ crucified, 1. Cor. 1.
which was a slander too the Jews and a foolishenes to the gentiles: ye^
says he the foolyshenesse of God is wyser then men, and the weakness of
God stronger then men. And that had king David good experience of when he
said, the Lord rules me, and I lack nothing, he puts me in a sweet
pasture and leads me by the ryuers side, he turnethe my soul, and
conducteth me in too the way and pathe of justice for his names sake and for
his mercies sake. He saw the deu^ll, the world, his flesh, and sin all
conquered by the power of God, and for his names sake brought both to live
and also virtuously to live to his honor that gave the life, and too his own
salvation that received the life.

All our teachinge a great many of years and also your whole labors have
been ch^fely too know the miserye of man and the mercy of almightye God.
Wherefore it shall not need long too tarry in openinge of this place of the
psalm, for ye be rich in God in these two points, God give you grace well to
use them: Yet in any case we must remember that our souls be turned from
sin, and we accepted as the people of everlasting life, only for Gods
mercyes sake. So does king David wonderfullye open unto us in the. xxxii.
psalm, where as he says blessed be they whose sins are forgeuen, and whose
transgressions be covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
his sin. Of the which words we learn that the Godly king called those
happy and blessed, not that be clean and pure without sin (for there is no
^uche man in this life) but those be blessed whose sins the mercy of God
forgeuethe, and they be only such as unfeignedly acknowledge their sin,
and stedfastelye fr^me their hearts bel^ue that the death and passi^n of Jesus
Christ is the only exp^a^ion and purginge thereof: As S. Paul wonderfully
expounds David's words in his Epistle to the Romans. Romans 4.
As the prophet by thees^ words, for his names sake, ^^clareth that there is
nothing in him, nor in any other man, wherefore God should turn the soul of
man from death to life, from error ^o truth, from the hatred of God to gods
love, fr^^e wandringe a stray to a stablisshed contynuaunce in the veritye of
Gods word, but only Gods mercy: So does he in other of his psalms
always when he entreats of ^^ddes mercy and of man's sin, set forth
manne so naked and vile as a thing most des^itu^^ of all bra^^he and
saluatyon, and she with that none of these gyfts, remyssion of sin,
acceptance in to Gods love and favor, pasturinge of ^h^m wy^h his most
blessed word, can happen unto any other sauinge unto such as do know and
earnestlye confess that they be sinners and infected with many contagious
and dangerous infirm^tyes: Psalm. 32
And therefore he says in the second verse of the psalm above mentioned,
blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there
is no guyle. For there is no geater guyle, nor more danger in man than to
think him self to be somewhat when he is nothing in deed, or else to think
him self to be of such purity of mind, as though he needed not this free
remission and favor of God. And as there is nothing more proud and
arrogant, then such a mind: so there is nothing in man more detestable and
miserable. Of the contrary part, they be blessed that honger and thurst for
justice, for God fylleth the hongrye with good things, Mat. 5. Luc 1.
but the proud he sendethe a way emptye. And that knew this holy prophet
right well, that it was humility and the casting down of him self y^ was most
acceptable unto God, and the seekinge of wealth and salvation only for his
names sake, that is too say, for his mercy promised in the death and passion
of his only son our savior Christ. In the end of the. xxxii psalm
king David that had thus humbled him self, brings in god that speaks
unto him whiles he is thus making his complaynte of his corrupt nature and
sinful life, saying in this manner, intellectum tibi dabo etc. that is to say,
I will give thee understanding, and instruct thee in the way thou shalt go,
and will have mine eyes ever upon thee. Wherein he declares that such humbled
men and lowelye persons as know their iniquitye, shall have understanding
of God, and shall not swerve from the right ways: not for their deeds and their
deseruings, but for his mercy that vouchsafes to instruct and teach the^. And
so likewise does this godly king show in this psalm: The Lord rulethe me
and I lack nothing, he ^eedeth me in sweet pastures, and leads me by the
rivers side, he tourneth my soul and brings me in too the paths of
righteousness, and all for his names sake. When he has opened the salvation of man, and also the cause thereof and wherein it consists: he proceeds to
the v. part of his oration and holy himne.

The.5. part of the psalm. What trouble may happen too such as God gives
life and salvation unto.
The text.
Although I walk through the valley and shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me.
The explanation.
Saying I have such a guide and defendour, there is no difficultye of perryll,
nor fear of death, that I will pass of. For what harm can death do to him,
that has God the authoure of all life with him? Or what can the tyrany of man
do, where as God is the defendoure? In this first part king David shows how
the Lord God does exercise his sheep that he fedeth with his blessed word,
in dangers and troubles, and also how he will defend them in the mids of
their troubles what so ever they be. In the first words of the. v. part of
this sacrate and holy hymn the prophet declares that the life of Gods sheep
and people in this world can not be wythonte dangers and troubles.
Therefore Christ says that he came too ^ut fire in the world, and that the
same fire should burn, meaning that he came too preach such a doctrine as
^^oulde move dissension and dyscorde between friend and friend, the father and
the son, and set them at debate. The wicked make y^ gospel of peace an
occasion of discord.
Not that his word is a learning or doctrine of dissension and discord of it
self, but that by the malice of men that can not abide t^ be rebuked by the
word of God, Luc. 12
they will be always at discord and variaunce with the word of God, and
with any freende or ^oo that teaches it. John. 7.8.9 10.16
And the same does Christ onre heavenly shepehearde show us both in his
doctrine and in his life, The cross is the (...) badge of Gods children.
who was hated and troubled more then any manne before or sythens his time,
and assurcthe all his too have troubles in this world, yea and death also. But
it forces not, for he fayeth I have overcome the world. Ioh. 16.
And what so ever the daun^ers be and ^owe horrible so ever they seem, Christ
being with us, we need not to fear. Therefore in this ^^ynte the prophet
corrects the foolish opinonion of man that would live as one of the sheep
of God in this world without troubles. It is contrary both to the person
that professes God, and also to the religion that he is professed unto, for
in the world both shall be as Christ says hated. Of which hatred comes
persecution and troubles, so that the people of God shall whether they will or
will not, pass through many dangers, and no less perylous then the
shadows, and very image of death, as here king David shows in this
hoolsome and blessed hymn.

And as he sees right well that the state and condition of Gods people and
sheep, Zacha. 13. Mat. 16.
is too be troubled for Christ's sake and his word: Even so did Zacharye the
prophet speak of Christ and his people, how that not only the sheep should
be troubled and scattered abroad, but also the shepehearde should be strycken
with the swearde, that both sheep and shepehearde should be condemned in
this world. But now as David and Zac^arye declare, that the life and condition
of Christ and his sheep be troublous in the world: So do they both declare,
that what so ever the troubles be, they be both known and appointed upon
whom they shall fall and in what time they shall trouble the sheep of God, so
that they can come no sooner then God appoints, nor do any more har^^ then
the heavenly shepehearde shall appoynte them to do. And this we may see and
learn as well in Christ as in his sheep. How many times did the priests and
Phariseys conspyre Christ's death? Yet because his time was not come, they
had not their purpose: but when the time of God was come, Christ said too
his sheep, ye shall be all troubled this night for my cause, for the
shepe^earde shall be strycken and the sheep shall be scattered abroad. Then
as God had appointed the time, it could be no longer differred. And because
they should not mysse of him whose death they sought, Ioh. 18.
he came and met them and offered him self unto them, and said that he was the
same manne Jesus of Nazareth whom they sought. And when they had taken him and
used as much crueltye toward him as their wicked malice and deuylyshe hatred
could deuyse, they killed him, and made him to pass not only the shadow and
image of death, but also death it self. Math. 27 Mar. 15. Luc 23. Ioh. 19.
They thought then they had him where as they would, and said he has saved
other, let him now save him self if he can.

When he was laid in the grave with his fathers, they thought too execute
their plagues and tyranny toward him being deadde, purposinge that as they
had brought him to death and killed him: so likewise they would keep him down
still that he should never see life again, but rotte in the earth like a
wretch, until worms had eaten him. And for the perfourmance of this purpose
to do all their whole wylles to the vttermoste, they came to Pylate and said,
that the dysceauer of the people that lay in the grave, made his bost whiles
he was alive, that the third day after his death he would rise again, but
if it should be so, it would be worse with them after then it was before.
Appoynte therefore soldiers said they, and wratchmen too keep the sepulcher
till the third day be pas^e. Mat. 27
Whiles they ye^ minded to lay as much evil and contempt upon Christ our
shepehearde as the^ meant unto him, came the heavenly father, that sussereth no
more ignomyny to faule upon his, nor will suffer them to continue any longer
then him pleases, with this inhabition and stay of further proce^dynges in
dyshonouringe and persecutynge his ^nelye son and said: I am redijt lux
tertia, surge sepulte meus, that is as much to say, now is come the third
day, arise mine own dear son buried. And then was the sorrow and contempt
of this our persecuted shepehearde not only ended, but also turned in to
endless and vnspeak^able joys: he passed with his forefather David most
bitter pains, and also most vile death, but he feared not because god was with
him. A Doctrine of Gods providence most confortable to all his ^^flicted.
The same apoyntment also has the heane^ly father made with al dangers and
troubles that shall happen unto us his poor and afflycted sheep taken daily
(as it were to the shambles) to suffer what Gods enemies can devise. But the
heavenly shepehearde does see all their doings out of heaven and mocketh
them too scorn, Psalm. 2
for they shall never do as much as they would, against Christ and his people,
but as much as god will suffer them. David afterward in his. 37. psalm,
teaches us the same with meruaylous words and divine sentences. Commit
domino viam tuam et spera in eum etc. Lay (says he) thy care upon the the
Lord, and trust in him and he shall healpe thee.

It is most necessary therefore for every troubled man to know in his mind
and feel in his heart, that there are no troubles that happen unto manne,
what so ever they be, come they by chance or fortune as many men say and
think, but that they come by the providence of God: Yea the very wyndes of
the air, tempests in the cloud, tremblinge of the earth, rages in the sea,
or any other that come, how sudden or how unlooked for so ever they appear:
Psalm. 29.
As ye may read in the. xxix. psalm of this prophet, where as be wonderful
tempests, and troublesome things spoken of, as well done in the waters, as
upon the dry^lande.

But here alas is our nature and knowledge much too be lamented and
complained upon. For as the knowledge we have of Gods favor and gentleness
toward us in Christ (for the most part) consists in the understanding of
the mind and talk with the mouth, but the virtue; strength and operation of
the same favor of God is not sealed in our hearts and consciences: Even so
be the troubles and aduersyties, which God threateneth for sin, spoken and
talked of with the touge, The cause why there be so few sincere and true
professour^ of ye gospel.
and known in the mind, but they be not earnestlye nor feelingelye sealed in
our conscience and heart. And of this comes it, that we neither ^oue God,
nor rejoice in his promises as we ought to do, when we hear^ or read them,
neither yet hate sinn^ nor be sorrowful for gods displeasure, as sin and gods
displeasure should be sorowed and mourned for of chri^^^an manne. Hereof also
comethe it, (dearelye beloved) that we love no farther then in knowledge and
tongue, nor hate v^ce but in knowledge and tongue. But alas how miserable is
this our state and condion that knows neither life nor death, virtue nor
vice, truth nor falshode, God nor the devil, heaven nor hell, but half as
much as they ought o^ ^hristian men too be known. Read, you therefore and
mark the. xxxvii. psalm, and you shall know that it is not enoughe, for
christian men to understand and speak of virtue and vice, but that the virtue
must be sealed in the conscience and loved, and that vice kept out of the
conscience and hated, as Dauyd says: leave doing of evil and do good. So
likewise he speakethe of a feelynge christian man, whose conscience has
tasted how sweet and amiable go^ is. Last and feel (says the prophet) how
sweet the Lord is. And this assure your selves, that when ye feel your
sins, and bewail the daunand damnation of them, Psalm. 5^.
the spirit of God has wroughte that feelinge, and that troubled and broken
heart God will not despise, and there is no doubt nor mistruste of a sensible
and feelinge sinner. ^ere i^ thy comfort thou broken hearted and afflycted of
the Lord
But in case he can find in him self no love too the obedience of God, nor
desire too do his will by hearing of his word, nor any feelinge at all of
sin, nor desire to be rydde from it by hearing of the law: he has
knowledge in the mind and speech in the mouth, but consent and feelynge in
hy^ heart and conscience. And this knowledge lyuethe with sin and speaks
with virtue: where as the heart and conscience consents t^o good, and
abhors evil, if the virtue and nature of gods word b^ gods spirit be sealed
in the conscience (and this does. S Paul teach wonderfullye) as well by
fayeth that comes by hearing of Gods word, as also of his precious supper,
the sacrament of his bodi and blood and passion. He says that the heart
believes to righteousenes, Romans 10.
That is to say, the conscience and heart of him ^^ y^ sealed, What it is to
believe unto ryghteousenes
and assured of the virtue and grace of Gods promises in Christ, believes too
righteousenesse or is ascertayned and knows it self to be righteous and suit
before god because it has consented, and received the mercy of God offered in
the Gospel through the merits of Christ, and then the same says which God
has sealed in the heart, Faith sealed once in the heart with thassurance of
god sinercy can be no more without y^ fruit of well doing the^ fire without
heat.
breaks forth by confession, which confession is a very fruit of fayeth to
salvation, as it is written by Saint Paul in the same place. And where this
fayeth is so kindeled in the heart, there can be none other but such a fruit
folowinge it. And as possible it is too have fire without heat or flame, as
this virtue fayeth without the fruit of well doing And that is it that Saint
Paul says to the Corinthyans: as often as ye eat of this bread and drink
of this cup, show ye the Lords death until he come. Wherein S. Paul
requires a knowledge of Christ in the receauer, not only in his mind that
he know Christ dyed for his sin and the sin of the world, and too
speak and declare the same death with his ^onge unto others, but this is the
chefest and most principal commoditye of Christ's holy supper (which men
now ungodly call the mass) that the virtue and benefyte of Christ's death
as it is appointed for the remyssion of his sins, 1. Cor. 11.
be sealed and fullye consented unto in his conscience. And this knowledge of
Christ's death, When right knowledge and assured ^ese of gods mercy are joined
together, note what they work
with the assurannce of the virtue, strength and power thereof in the heart,
will and ought to inflame us to thanks geuynge, and too preach and teach unto
others those commodities of Christ's death, that we know and feel first in
our selves within our own spirit and heart.

This I have tarried longer then I thought in this matter, because I would
bring my self and all others as much as lyethe in me, too feel that
knowledge and talk of virtue and vice, of Gods favor and of Gods
punishmente, is not sufficy^nte, and to bring my self and all men from
knowledge and talk, Knowledge it talk with out the feeling of gods frutefulle
working spirit is not of God.
to feelinge, consentinge, and a full surrendrynge of our selves unto the
profytte and vauntage of the things which we speak and know, or ^ls
knowledge and speakinge please not God, nor profit our selves, as Christ says:
Not every man that says lord lord, Math. 7
shall enter in to the kingdom of heaven. Therefore did David both know,
speak, and feel signed in his heart, the faucure, healpe and assistaunce of
God to be with him in too what troubles so ever he should fall, and in that
feelinge said he would not fear. But it may fortune I have so written of
virtue and vice to be known of in the mind, spoke of with the mouth, and
feite in the heart: that ye may judge and feel in your selves, never to have
come to this perfection. For this is out of doubt, he that has gods love and
fear thus sealed in his heart, lives in this life rather an Angelical life,
then the life of a mortal man: and yet it is evident by king David in this
psalm, and by his. 111. psalm, and in many more, that he was so sure and so
well ascertained of Gods present help in his troubles, that hes cared nothing
for death, or any other aduersityes y^ could happen. And doutlesse we perceive
by his psalms in many places, that his faith was a^ strong as steel, and he
trembled not nor doubted any thing, but was in manner without all kind of
mistrust, and nothing troubled whatsoever he saw contrary to gods promises,
and he passed over the^ as things that could not once withdraw his
cogitacions from the truth and verity of gods promises which he believed. As
Abraham likewise did, he staggered not but with constancy of faith would have
killed his son, Gene. 22
so strong was his faith. But as the gift of fayeth is a treasure
incomparable, thus to know and feel faith too overcome all dangers: so makes
it yt heart of him that is sealed with such a faith to feel the joys and
mirth unspeakable. But as this faith is the gift of god and comes only from
him: so is it in him only to apoint the time when it shall come, and how much
and how strongly it shall be given at all times, which is not at all tyme^
like, but some times so strong that nothing can make the fayethfull manne
afearde, no not death it self, and some times it is so strong that it makes
the man afflicted to be contented too suffer, yea death it self rather then
too offend^ God. But yet it is with much conflycte, great troubles, many
heavy and meruaylouse cogytacions, and some time with such a fear, as the
man has much a do to see, and feel in the later end of his heavy
conflicte the victory and upper hand of the temptation. And at an other time
the Christian man shall find such heaviness, oppression of sin, and
troubles, The state of Gods children beaten down with the sense and horroure of
sin and dreede of gods iudgemente^
that he shall not feel as much (in manner) as one spark of fayeth to
comfort him self in the trouble of his mind (as he thinks) but that all the
floods and dreadefull assaults of desperacion have their course through his
conscience. Nothing feels he, but his own mind and poor conscience so one
too eat the other, that the conflicte is more pain to him then death it
self, he understands that god is babble to do all things, he confesses
with the knowledge of his mind, and with his tongue in his headde that God is
true and merciful, he would have his conscience and heart too agree
thereunto and be quiet, but the conscience is prycked and oppressed so much
with fear and doubtefuldes of Gods tree for sin, that he thincketh God can be
merciful unto other but not unto him. And thus does his knowledge for the
time of temptation, rather trouble him then ease him, because his heart does
not or rather can not consent unto the knowledge; yet would he rather then his
life, he could consent unto god, love god, hate sin, and be Gods altogether,
although he suffered for it all the pains of the world. I have known in
many good men and many good women this trouble and he^ines of the spirit for
the time, as though God had clean hyd him self from the afflicted person,
and had clean forsaken him: yet at length the day of light from above, The
co^for^e of the afflicted eue^ when god seems to have forsa^en them.
and the comfort of the holy spirit hath^ appeared, that lay covered under
the velle and covert of bitter cogitacions of gods just iudg^ments against
sin. Therefore seeing that faieth at all times has not like strength^ in
manne, I do not speak too dyscomforte such as at all times find not their
fayeth a^ strong as Dauyd did in this psalm. For I know in the holy Saynctes
them selves it was not always like, but even in them as in others. And
although we can not compare with them in all things in the perfection of
their fayeth, yet may they compare them s^lues with us in the weaken^s of our
fayeth, as ye may see by the scripture.

In this psalm and in many other, ye shall perceive that Dauyd by the
con^^ancy^ and suertye he felt in the promises of God was so strong, so
joyful, and comfortable in the myddest of al dangers and troubles of death,
that he did not only contemn troubles and death, but also desired death, and
to be dissolved out of this world* as S. Paul and others did. At an other time
ye shall perceive him too be strong in fayeth, but not so joyful, nor yet the
troubles, so easy unto him but that he suffered great battle and conflicte
with his troubles, and of the cause of all troubles sin and transgressyon of
Gods laws, as ye may see in the syxt psalm, whereas he cried out and
said: Lord chastene me not in thy ^urye, nor punish me in thy wrath: my
soul is sore troubled, but how long lord will thou dyfferre healpe? And of
such troubled consciences with c^nflyctes, ye shall find often times in the
book of psalms, and in the reast of Gods scriptures, yet shall ye find the
end of the temptation to be joyful and comfortable to the weak man that was so
sore troubled. For although God suffer a long fight between his poor
soldier and the d^uyll, yet he gives the victory to his servant, as ye may
see in king Dauyd. When he cried out that b^the his body and soul was weri^d
with the cross of Gods punishemente, yet he said at the last, discedite a me
oper arij iniquitatis, quoniam exaudiuit dominus vocem fletns mei, depart
from me ye woorkers of iniquitye, Psalm. 6.
for the Lord has bearde the voice of my weepings. And in other of his
psalms ye shall perceive his faye^h more weak, and his soul troub^ed with
such ang^yshe and soro^e, that it shall se^me there is no consotion in his
soul, nor any show of Gods carefulnes to wards him. In this state ye may
see him in the 13. psalm, where as a man in manner destitute of al
consolation, he makes his complaynte saying, how long will thou forgette
me? The same may ye read also in the. 43. psalm, where he shows that he,
his most just cause, and the doctrine that he professed, psalm. 42.4^
was like altogether too have been overcome, so that his spirit was in manner
all coumfortles. Then he said too his own soul, quare tristis es anima mea
et quare co^turbas me? Why art thou so heavy my soul and why doeste thou
trouble me? Trust in the Lord etc. And in the. 42 psalm he sets forth
wonderfullye the bitter syghte and sorowefull conflicte between hope and
desperation. Wherein he complayneth also of his own soul that was so much
discomforted, and byddethe it trust in the lord. Of the which two places ye
maya learn that no man had ^u^r fayeth at all times like, but sometimes
more strong, sometimes more weak, as it pleased God too give it. Let no man
therefore despair although he find weakness of faith, for it shall make him to
humble him self the more, and too be the more diligent to pray to have help
when he p^rceau^th his own weakensse, and doubteles at length the weak manne
by the strong God shall be brought to this point, that he shall in all
troubles and adversities say with the prophet, if I should go through the
shadow and dangers of death, I would not fear what troubles so ever
happen. And he shows his good assurance in the text that folow^th, which is
the syxt part of this holy and bl^ssed himne.

The.6. part of the psalm. Whereby the troubles of Gods elect be overcome.
The text.
For thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me, thou shalt
prepare a table before me against them that trouble me, thou have anointed my
head with oil and my cup shall be full.
The explanation.
Saying thou art with me, at whose power and will all troubles go and come, I
doubt not but to have the victory and ouerhand of them, how many and dangerous
so ever they be, for thy rod chasteneth me when I go astraye, and thy staff
stays me when I should (...). Two things most necessary for me (good lord)
the one to call me from my faut and error, and the other to keep me in thy
truth and very^ye. What can be more blessed then to be sustained and kept
from falling^ by the staff and strength of the most highest? And what can be
more profitable then too be beaten with his merciful rod when we go astray?
For he chasteneth as many as he loves, and beatethe as many as he receaueth
in too his holy profession. Notwithstanding whiles we be here in this life he
fedeth us with ye sweet pastures of wholesome herbs of his holy word, until
we come too eternal life, and when we put of these bodye^ and come in too
heaven and know the blessed fru^tion and riches of his kingedome, then shall
we not only be his sheep, but also the geastes of his everlasting banke^.
The which Lord thou set before al them that love thee in this world, and
do so anoint and make glad our minds with thine holy spirit that no
adversities nor troubles can make us sorye.

In this syxte part the prophet declares the old saying emongs wise men,
non minor est virtus quam querer^ par^a tueri. that is to say, it is no less
mastrye to keep the thing that is won then it was to win it. King D^uyd
perceaueth r^ghte well the same, and therefore as before in the psalm he
said, the Lord turned his soul and led him in to the pleasant pastures
where as virtue and justice raygned, for his names sake, and not for any
righteousness of his own: So says he now that being brought in too the
pastures of truth, and in to the favor of the almightye, and occompted and
taken for one of his sheep, it is only god that keeps and mayntayneth hi^
in same state, condition, and grace. For he could not pass through the
troubles and shadow of death (as he and all Gods elect people must do) but
only by the assistaunce of God, and therefore he says he passed through all
perryll, because he was with him.

Of this part of the psalm we learn that all the strength of man is unable
too resist the troubles and persecutions of gods people, and that the grace and
presence of god is able to defend his people and nothing but it. Therefore
does Saint Paul bid the Ephesiians be strong throught the Lord, Ephe. 6.
and through the might of his strength, for he says that great and many be
our adversaries, strong and mighty, which go abou^e not only to weaken us,
but also to overcome us, and we of our selves have no power to wythstand,
wherefore he wylleth us to depend and stay only upon Gods strength. And
Sayncte Peter al^o when he has declared the force and malice of ye devyll, ^.
Pet. 5.
he wylleth us to resist him strongelye in fayeth. And Saint John says that
this is the victory that ^^ercometh the world, ^. Ioh 5
^uen our fayeth. And our savior Chris^e, when the ty^e was come that he
should depart out of the world corporallye, and perceived how maliciou^^^
and strongly the d^u^l and the world were bente against his diseyples that he
should leave in the world as the ^e^monges wolfes, Math. 10.
and towlyttle ^trength his poor flock had against such merua^lous
trouble^t he made his mo^te holy and effectuous prayer for them present and
them in trouble, and likewise for us that be now, and also in trouble in this
sort: Pater sa^cte serua eos per nomen t^um quos dedisti mihi. etc. That is to
say, holy father keep them for thy names sake whom thou have given me.

Hear has every one of gods people such learning as teachethe that our
help is only in the name of the Lord who made ^ea^en and earth. Psalm. 120.
And in this learning he shall understand two necessary lessons. The first
that none can defend us but God alone, who is our protectoure and none but
he. And by this learning he will beware too ask or s^eke healpe any other
where, saving of God, as we be instructed by his holy word. And herein we
honor him, to know and ^onfesse that there is none that can preserve, nor
save us but he alone. The other lesson is, that our conscience understanding
that God can and will help us, shall cause us in all trouble to commend our
selves unto him, and so more strongelye and patiently bear and suffer all
troubles and adversities, being assured that we shall overcome them through
him, or ^lles be taken by them from this world, in to a world where as is no
trouble at oll. So said this holy prophet and king David, if I walk in the
shadow of death I will not fear, for thou art with me. Now in y^ he says he
will not fear, he means not that a man may se and suffer these perils
without all perrilles (for then were a man rather a perfect spirit, then a
mortal creature) but he means the fear shall not overcome him. Mat. ^6.
For Christ him self feared death, ney^her is there any man that shall
suffer imprisonmente for Christ's sake, but that he shall feel the pains.
Nevertheless gods pirite shall give strength too bear them, and also in
Christ too overcome them. There is no man that can have fayeth but some
times and upon some occasion it may be troubled and assaulted with mystrust:
no man such charity, but that it may be, yea and is troubled with hatred: no man such patience but that it may at times feel impaciency: no man such
veri^y but that it may be troubled with falshode. How be it in the people of
God by Gods healpe, the best ouercometh the worste, and the virtue the sin.
But in case the woorste prevail and overcome, the man of God is never quiet
until he be restored unto God again, and unto the same virtues, that he
lost by sin: as ye may see in this king by many of his psalms, that he
believed and found God to defend him how so ever his state was, and therefore
attributes unto him the whole victory and praise of his deliverance saying:
Thou art with me and dorst ^uercome.

But now the prophet declarethe how and by what means, God is with him and
does deliver him from all troubles. And this means of Gods presence and
de^ence he openneth by diverse allegories and translations, wonderful meet and
apt to express the things that he would show unto the world. The first
t^anslation or allegorye he takes of the nature of a rod. The second of a
staff, and says they did comfort him and defend him. The third he takes
of a table, which he says the great shepehearde prepared before his face
against as many as troubled him. The fourth he takes from the nature of
oil, and of a cup that was always full, wherwy^h he was not o^clye
satisfied, but also ioyefullye replenyshed in all times, and all troubles what
so ever they were. By the rod is many ^ym^^ in the scripture understand the
punishemente and correction that God vse^h, too call home again, and too
amend his electes and beloved people when they offend him. He punysheth them
and yet kylleth them not, he beats them until they know their faults, but
casts them not away. As he said to king Dauyd, that when he dyed his
kingedome should come unto one of his own children, and in case he went
as^raye from his law, 2. regu. ^.
he would correct him with the rod of other princes, and with the plagues
of the sons of men, but my mercy (says God) I will not take from him as
I did from Saul. This same manner of speathe may ye read also in his.
lxxxix. psalm, and in the proverbs of his son king Solomon ye have the
same doctrine. He that wantethe a heart must have his back beaten with a
rod. Prouer. 10
And in the same book he says, he that sparethe the rod batethe the
child. So does king Dauyd hear confess that it is a very necessary and
requysyte way, too keep the sheep of God from perishinge, to be chastened and
corrected when they wax wanton and will not hear the voice of their
shepehearde. And it is the part of every wise Godly^ man, to love this
correction and chastysmente of the Lord, as Solomon sayethe: Prouer. 12.
he that loves discipline and correction loves knowledge, be that hates to
be rebuked is a fool. And king David says, it is to my great good and
commodity that the Lord chasteneth me. Psalm. 1^9.
This rod of correction, David says is one of the instruments and means,
wherewithal god preserves his sheep from strayinge. Now in the scripture
sometime the rod is taken not for a correction that amendeth a man, but for
the punishemente and utter d^struction of man, as David says of Christ:
thou shal^e break them with an iron rod: Psalm. 2 Apoca. 12.
and in the Apocalipse ye may see the same. But I will speak of the metaphors
and translacions none otherwise then ^auyd does use them in this place for his
purpose.

The staff which he speakethe of in the scripture, is taken for strength,
power and dominion. Which staff is spoken of as ye may see in the books of
the kings, 4. regu. 1^.
how the Embassadoures and men of war sent from the king of the Assirians to
Ezechias at Jerusalem, called the strength and power of y^ Egiptians, and also
of the almighty god, a staff of reed and a broken weapon, not able to
wythstand the king of the assirians, Esa. i^. 14*28.39. Ezech. 29.
and of such manner of speech ye may read many times in the prophets. But
in this place David confesses that the staff of the Lord, that is to say
Gods power, is so strong that nothing is hable to overcome it, his wisdom
is such, that no man can make it foolyshnes, his truth is so true that no man
can make it false, his promise is so certain and sure that no man can cause him
too break or alter it, his love is so constant that no man can withdraw it,
his providence is so wise that no man can beguyle him, his care is so
great for his flock, that they can want nothing, his fold is so strong
that no beast can break it, he lets his sheep so in and out that no man can disceaue him, he has such a care of all as he neglects not one,
he so louethe the one that he hates not the other, he so teaches all as none
is left ignoraunte, he so calls one as all sh^ulde be aduertysed, he so
chasten^the one as all should beware, he so receauethe one as all should
take hope and consolatyon, he so preseruethe one as all the rea^t ^aye be
assured, he uses his staff and force too comfort one king Dauyd (as he
says thy rod and thy staff they comfort me) as all other should assure
them selves too be safe under his protection. In this metaphore and
translation, under the name of a staff, king Dauyd has declared the power
of God too be such, that in case he should pass by and through thousands of
perilles, he would not care, for Godde is with him with his rod and staff.

Then he settethe forth the third allego^ye, and express the an other
means, which God uses for the defense and consolation of his poor sheep,
and says that god has prepared a ta^le in his syghte against all these that
trouble him. By the name of a table, he settethe forth the famylyare and (in
manner) fellowelyke love, that the God omnypotente has toward his sheep,
with whom he uses not only frendeshyppe, but also, famylyaritye, and
dysdaynethe not being the king of kings, too admytte and receive unto his
table, The frendeship and familiarity of god the heavenly shepehearde toward
his sheep.
vile and beggarlye sinners, scabbed and rotten sheep. That friendship and
famylyaritye is maruayloussly set forth in this, that he made a table for
David: as though David had said who is he that can hurt me, whi^ the Lord of
lords does not only lou^ me but admytteth me to be always familiarlye in his
company. The same manner of speech is used of king David toward Miph^boseth
Ionathas son, 2 r^^u. ^.
when he said he should not only have the feeldes again of Saul his
grandefather, but also be entertained at his own table, that is to say used
frendely, honorably, and familiarlye. This word table is diversely other
ways taken many times in the scripture, but in this place it is nearest too
the mind of king David, to take it in this signification that I have noted:
And our savior Christ takes it in the same signification, in Saints Lukes
gospel where he says, his dysciples shall eat with him at his table in the
kingdom of god.

The fourth means that the heavenly shepehearde uses in kepinge of his
sheep, the prophet sets forth under the name of oil and a full cup. In
the word of God these words have also comofrtable significations and meaninges
extendinge to David's purpose. Isaac when he had given the blessinge from Esau
to Jacob, said to Jacob, God shall give the of the dew from heaven, and from
the fruitful ground thou shalt have abundaunce of corn, Gene. 27.
of wine, and oil etc. By the which blessinge he meatne that Jacob should
lack nothing too serve his needs, and to make him merye. And if we take
David that he means by oil, as Isaac did, that at the Lords table was all
plentye, myrthe and solace, we take him not amysse, for so many times oil is
taken for consolation and joy in the scripture. When Christ had pourged the
hurt man's wounds first with smartinge wine, be afterward put in to them
sweet oil to ease the smarte and sharpenes of the wine And so likewise says
our savior Christ to Simon the Pharisey that gave him meat enoughe to his
dinner but gave him no mirth: Luc. 10
Since I came in too thy house thou gave me no water for my feet, nor oil
for my headde, this poor woman never ceased to wash my feet with the tears
of her eyes, Luc. 7.
and to^ anoynte them with oil. But in many psalms king Dauyd uses this
word oil too signifye the holy ghost, as when he speaks of our Savior
Christ: Thou haste loved justice and hated iniquitye, Psalm. 45.
therefore has God anointed thee with the oil of joy above thy fellows. And
this oil is not y^ material oil that kings and priests were anointed with all
in the old time of the law, of whose co^feccion we read in the book of the
Levites but this is the oil by whose efficacy, strength, and power all things
were made, that is to say the holy ghost: And in his. 89. psalm he speaks of
oil in the same signification. Therefore I take king Dauyd here, when he
says God has anointed his headde with oil, that God has illuminated his
spirit with the holy ghost. And so is this place taken of godly men, his
head taken for his mind, and oil for the holy ghost. And as oil nourishe
the light mytigateth labors and pains, and exhilerateth the countenance:
The worc^e of the holy ghost in the hearts of the faithful.
so does the holy ghost nouri^he the light and knowledge of the mind,
replenisheth it with gods gifts, and reioyseth the heart. Therefore the holy
ghost is called the oil of mirth and consolation. And this consolation comes
unto king David, and to all gods lively members, by the means of Christ, 1.
Pet. ^.
as Saint Peter says: we be people chosen and a princely priesthode etc. By
the word cup in this verse he means that he is fulley instructed in all
Godly knowledge, too live ver^uouselye and Godly for the time of his mortal
life, and so is the cup in the scripture taken for any thing that can happen
unto us, whether it be aduersitye or prosperity, for they be called cups: As
Christ said of his death, Mut. 2^
father if it be possible take this cup from me. And David in the. 16 psalm
uses it for man's prosperity in God: The Lord (says he) is the portion of
mine enheritance, and of my cup. And therein he speaks in the name of
Christ, whose inheritance is the whole number of the fayethfull, and says,
that his enheritaunce which is the church, by Gods appointment is blessed and
happy, for no aduersitye can destroy it. This is meante by, David's words,
the rod, the staff, the table, the oil, and the cuupe, and he uses all
these words to declare the carefulnes, love, and defense of God toward
miserable man. And he could the better speak thereof unto others, because he
had so many times ^ealte, and had experience that God was both strong and
fayethfull toward him in all time of danger and adversity.

And here is to be noted that the dangers that man is subject unto in this
life, be not alone such as heretofore king David has made mention of, as
sickness, treason, sedicion, war, pouertye, banishmente, and the death of the
body, but he fealte also (as every man of god shall feel and perceive) that
there be greater periles and dangers that man stands in ieopardye of, then
these be, by occasion of sin, the mother of all man's adversity. What sin
bryngethe a man unto
Sin brings a man in to the displeasure and indignation of god, y^
indignation of god brings a man in to ye hatred of god, ye hatred of god
brings a man in to despair and doubtfulnes of gods forgeuenes, dyspaire
brings a man in to everlasting pain, and everlasting pain continues and
punishes the damned creature with fire never to be quenched, with Gods anger
and displeasure which can not be reconciled nor pacified.

These be the troubles of all troubles, and sorrows of all sorrows, as our
savior Christ declares in his most heavenly prayer in Saint John: Ioh. 17.
Non rog^ vt tollas eos e mundo sed vt serves eos a m^lo. That is to say, I do
not (says Christ to his heavenly father) pray that thou should take
those that I pray for out of the world, but that thou preserve them from
evil. And in this prayer he has wonderfullye taught us that a christian man
is subject to two troubles, one of the body, and an other of the soul, one of
the world and an of the devil. As for the troubles of the world he says, It
is not expedyente y^ we be without troubles lest we sete our selves and forget
God.
it is not so expedient, that christian men be delivered from the^ least in
idleness we should seek our selves, and not god, as the children of Israel did:
but this he knew was most necessary, that the father should preserve us in the
mids of these troubles with his help, from all sin, and ^ransgression of
his holy laws, and this he assured his disciples of, and all other that put
their trust in him: not that they should in this life be preserved and kept
from troubles and adversities, but that the heavenly father should always
give unto his, such strength and virtue against all the enemies of God and
man's salvation, that they should not be overcome with troubles, that put
their trust in him. For God suffers and appoints his to fight and make
war with sin, and with all troubles and sorrows that sin bryngethe with
it: but God will never permytte his, to be deadlye and mortallye wounded. It is
therefore expedyente that man know who ^e his greatest foes, and do work most
danger.

There be diverse psalms, wherein he sets forth the perryll that he was
in, as well in his body as in his soul. As when he complayneth of his
banyshemente emonges not only cruel people, but also ungodly, that sought
too take both his mortal life from him, and also his relygyon and trust that
he had in Gods word. Wherefore he compares them too the Tartaryans and
Arabyans, psalm. 12^.
men without pyttye and relygyon. And the like does he afterward in
another psalm, where as geeuynge thanks for his delyuery, he says that
sinners trod upon hy^ back, and many times warred against him, and he should
have been over thrown if god had not helped him. psalm. 129.
Wherein he speaks not only of battle with the sword against the body,
but also of heresye and false doctrine against the soul. As ye may see how
Senacharib and Julius the apostata, two emperors, fought against the people of
god, not only to take from them their lives: but also their religion and true
honouringe of god. And of all battayls that is the cruelest, and of all enemies
the principal, that would take the soul of man from gods word and bring it
to the word of man. And that persecution and trouble openly against gods word
continued many years, until Christ was preached abroad, and princes made
christians. Then thought the devil his kingdom to have been overthrowen, and
christian men might live in Christ's religion without any trouble or war for
religion. How be it at length for sin, the devil entered by subtle means,
not only to corrupt true religion, but also persecuted the true professoures
thereof under the name of true religion, and therein used a marvelous policye
and craft by men that walked inordinatelye among the christians them selves.
From whose companies, sects and conversation, S. Paul wylled us to refrain by
these words: 2. These. 3.
we command you brethren in the name of our lord Jesus Christ, that ye
refrain from every one that is accounted a brother, that vseth^ him self
inordina^ly, and not according too the institution he received of us. And
because ye have not taken heed of this holy commandment, and kept your
selves from danger and peril of heresye, sin, ydolatry, and superstition,
by the rod and staff of god, nor have not eaten your meat of religion at Gods
table, nor your minds have been anointed with the holy ghost, (as Dauyd in
this psalm says that he was against all troubles by these means defended
and maynetayned, that no peril of the body y^ sword, nor perryll of the soul
by false doctrine cold hurt him) therefore mark a little, and see the
dangers that have hurted both you and your conscience also, not like to be
healed (as far as I can see) but more hurt hereafter. For the way to heal
a man is to erpulse and put away sickness, and not to increase and continue
the syckenesse. From whom think ye that saint^ Paul commanded you to
refrain in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ? He says from him that
behaueth self inordinately. Who is that think ye? Sayncte Paul says, he that
rulethe not him self after the rule and instytution that he him self had
taught the Thessalonyans. So that we must refrain then from all such, as
conform not them selves too the institution of Saynct^ Paul, Gala. ^.
yea although he be an Angel from heaven.

This departure from such as have ruled and put forth erroures and lies, is
not new, but has been used in England of English men more then. 20. years
synse we departed from the sea of Rome for the ambition of the Romish
bishops that transgressed both this ordinance of saint Paul and also of
Christ. Of the which deadly and pestilente ambition, Ezech. 34. Act. 20
the prophet Ezechiel prophesied, and so did also S. Paul, if prophecies by god
and commandments by his holy Apostles had any thing prevailed in our
dull and naughty hearts. Read the places and see your selves what is spoken
of such a wicked shepeheard. I do put you in mind of this wicked sea, because
I do se that contrary to the word of God, contrary to the laws of the realm
most Godly against the popes supremacye, against all our oaths that be
English men, and against all the old Godly writers: This Antichrist and
member of the devil, is not unlike to have the regymente of your souls
again, which God forbid. I do exhort all men therefore to beware of him as of
one that came noughtely to such usurped authority, and whose autoritye is not
only the trouble of all Christian realms and princes, but also of all
christian souls. And as he has been always a trouble unto the one, so has
he been a destruction to the other: as I will a little declare unto you, that ye
may know him the better, and so by the rod and staff of gods word, defend
your selves from him.

The greek church for this ambition of the Romyshe bishop, separated her self
from the church of Rome, and would not have to do with her. For after that
the greeks knew, that the bishops of Rome, meante to take from them their
liberties, they would not endure it: yet did the Romish bishops always, to come
to the supremacy, pycke quarrelles and matters to fall out upon, first with
the clargye and then with the laity. Platina writes how Pius bishop of Rome
being deceived by one Hermes a very evil man, began a new order about the
kepinge of Ester day, and altered the time y^ the Apostles and their disciples
used until Pius days, which was to celebrate and keep the day of the
resurrection of our savior Christ the. 14. Moon of the first month, which
is with the Jews our march. And although it be well done to keep it upon the
sunday, yet was this an hortible presumption upon so light a cause, to
exco^mucate the greek church, and to make division where before was union. It
came too pass in Uictors time the first, which was about the year of our
Lord. 200. and in the time of Ireneus the bishop of Lugdune the disciple of
John the Evangelist, this Uictor would have condemned the greek church, and
proceeded with excommunication against it, had not Ireneus let it: yet was
it the elder church, and had continued in the doctrine of the Apostles, from
Christ's time, and had John the Evangelist among them for the space of. 68.
years after Christ's assension. And notwythstandinge the greek church was the
elder church: yet they took the Romayne church too be equal with them,
according to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and also according too
the decree that was made in the general council at Nice. And the greek church
never contended with the Romyshe churhe for the supremacye, until a proud and
arrogante moncke that ^ayned humylitye, was preferred to be bishop of
Constantinople, which came to such arogancye of spyrite, that he would have
been taken for the universal headde of the church: which was a very mark
too know that he was of Antichriste and not of Christ, Antoninus histor. tit.
13 3.23.13.
as gregorye the great writes to Constancia the Empress, and at length this
proud monk at a sin^de kept at Constantinople, created him self the
universal head of y^e church. Although before his time, one Me^na, and other
Archbishoppes of Constantinople, for y^e dignity of the imperial state being
there, were called universal Patriarks: yet y^^ was by name alone, and without
execution of autoritye in any forrayne bishopric or church. But such was
the ambition of these bishops that walked (as saint Paul says) inordinatly,
y^^ they would have the head and principality of religion and of the church, at
Constantinople, because there was the head and principalitye of the worldly
kingdom, and so they began betime to confound y^e ciuyl policy, with the polily
of y^e church, until they brought them selves not only to be heads of y^^
church, but also lords of al Emperors and kings, and at the last of God and
gods word: as ruthfullye it appears in men's conscience at this present day.
Which abomination and pride, Pelagious yt second bishop of Rome both spoke
and wrote against, Distinc. ^9* nnllus.
and would that he nor any man else should have the name of a general bishop.
Antonimus titu. 12. ca^^
And S. Gregory does confirm the same godly sentence of his predecessor
P^lagius and would not when he was commanded by the Emperor, whom John the
bishop had abused, take the Archbishop of Constantynople for the universal
head, nor condescend unto the Emperors comaundeme^t, and wrote to the
Empress that it was contrary to the ordinance of Christ and his Apostles,
and contrary to the council of Nice. He said also that such new arroga^cy was
a very toke^ y^ the time of Antichriste drew nighe. And Gregory did not only
write and speak against this arrogance and pride, but suffered also great
danger (as Platina writes) and so did all Rome by the Lo^bards that Mauricius
the Emperor made to beseage Rome, because Gregorye refused too obey the
Archbishop of Constantino^le, as the head of the church.

But although Pelagius, Gregory, and other godly men, detested and abhorred
this wicked arrogancye to be the universal head of the church: yet the bishop
of Rauenna, began emonges the Latyns too prepare the way to Antichrist, De
gestis longobard. lib. 3. cap. 12.
as Paulus diaconus says, and separated him self from the societye of other
churches, to the intent be might come too be ahead him self. But what at
length came of it Platina writes. In ^eon. ^
And within a short time after, Boniface the third being the bishop of Rome,
about the year of our lord. 607, Phocas the Emperor judged him to be head of
the church, against both the bishop of Constantinople, and also of Rauenna,
and such a sentence was meet for such an arbitoure. Phocas was a wicked man,
a covetous man, an adulterer, Platina in bonifac. 3.
and a traitorous murderer of his lord and master Mauricius: and this man to
make god and the Romans amends, Paulus dioconus de gestis Long. lib. 4. cap. 11
gave sentence that the bishop of Rome should be the universal head of the
church. But hear was contempned the sentence and doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, and also the decrees of the holy counsel of Nice. And no marvel,
for they condemned both parts of arrogance and usurpation, and not Only
these councels, but all other for many years, which decreed that although
one seat was named before the other, yet the bishop of the principal seat
should not be the chefest priest, or head of the reast but only he should
be called the bishop of the chefest seat. And how much it is against S.
Ciprian, De simplici^ate clericorum.
they may see that will read his works, and also against. S. Jerome. But
what law can rule wickedness?

This wicked sea contended still after Phocas had given sentence with it for
the supremacye, yet were the bishops of Rome always subject to the
Emperoures, as well of Constantynople as of France, for the time of their
raygne: yea. 400 years and odd after the judgment of Phocas, they were in
this obedyence, and were made by the Emperoures, until the time of Gregoaye
the. vii, who in the time of great sedicion translated the Empire in to
Germanye^, and never used iurysdiction in Emperors, nor kings, nor yet in the
Citysens of Rome, but only desired to have all bishops causes too be
discerned by the sea of Rome, yet could not obtain so much at those days:
as it appears by the council of Aphrike, whereas Boniface the first could
not obtain with craft, nor with his lies that he made of the Cannons decreed
in the council of Nyce, to have causes deferred to the sea of Rome. To be
called Pope was at the first general to all bis^ops.
And as for this name Pope was a general name to all by^hoppes, as it
appears in the Epistles of Ciprian, Jerome, Augustine, and of other old
bishops and doctors, which were more holy and better learned, then these
later ambicious and glory^use enemies of Christ and Christ's church. Read
the text. Distinct. 50. C. De eo tamen etc. Absit. And there shall ye see
that the cleargye of Rome in their letters called Ciprian pope, and Clo^ou^us
the king of France named the bishop of Rome as he did other bishops, ^isto 2.
li. 2 Capi. 27
a bishop.

This was the state of the primative church, which was both near unto Christ
in time, and like unto him in doc^rin, and kept S. Paul's equality, where as he
says he was appointed amongs the genitles as Peter was emongs the Jews. Gala.
2.
And although the bishops in the time of Constantine y^ great obtained that
emonges bishps t^ere should be some that should be called Archebishops and
metropolitanes: yet all they were not instituted to be heads generally of the
church, Conc. nicen Capi. 6
but too the end they should take more pains, to see the church well ordered
and instructed, and yet this preemenence was at the liberty and discretion of
princes, and not always bound unto one place and one sort of prelates, as
the wickedness of our time believes: as ye may see in the councelles of
Calcedon and Aphrike. So that it is manifest this superior preeminence is not
of Gods laws, but of man's, instituted for a civil policye: and so was the
church of Constantynople equal with the church of Rome. And in our dates
Erasmus Roterodame wrytethe and says, this name to be high bishop of the
world^ was not know too the old church: but this was used that bishops were
all called high pryestes, and that name gave Urbane the first unto al bishops,
as it is written in Distinct 59, cap. Si officia. anno. Do. 226. But as for one
to be headde of all, it was not admitted. And the Greek church did never
agree too this wicked supremacye, nor obeyed it, until the year of our Lord.
1202, compelled thereunto by one Baldewyne that brought the French men by the
help of the venetyans unto Constantinople, to restore one Alexius unto the
Empire, upon this cond^cio^ that he should subdue the greek church to ye church
of Rome. But this came to pass, that the pope never after he had gotten by
alms and healpe of princes to be over them, passed one foot for the Emperor
of Constantinople farther then he served his turn. So that ye may see both
his beginnynge and procedinges to be of the devil, which if ye kill not with the
staff of Gods word, and beat him from your conscience, he will double kill
your souls.

Now within 150 years after Phocas had made the bishop of Rome head of the
church, the bishop of Rome centemned the Emperor of Constantinople, and
devised to bring the Empire in to France, and too give the king of France
the same autoritye over the bishop of Rome y^ before the Emperor had, as it
apeareth in Charles the great and his successors a long time: and yet was ye
bishop of Rome under the princes and not (as he is now) an idol exempt from
all order and obedience. For princes made the bishops of Rome, and al other
bishops within their realms and s^ con^inued the making of the pope in ye
Emperors authority, until it was about the year of our Lord. 1110. After
that Henrye the fyfte being sore molested by sedytion moved against him by
the pope Paschalys the second, ^e means here autoritye to elect bishops and
to have power of both swordeal
was constrained at length to surrender his authority unto him, who turned y^
face of his bishoprik into manfest wars. What followed when the pope was thus
free, and lined without obedience too the Christian magistrates, I will not in
this treatise make mention, but put you in remembrance that for certaynty
there followed such trouble emonges christian princes, as never was before, as
it is to be seen by the doing of the wicked man Gregorye the. vii. who took
then upon him to have aurity to use two swords, the spiritual and the
temporal, in so much that Henrye the fourth was compelled 62. times to make
war in his life, Alberus crantziuse^ clesiast histor. li. 6.
by the means of the bishop of Rome. And as it is written, this wicked
bishop styrred up the Emperoures own brother in law Radalphus the Duke of
Sw^upa to ware against him, and sent him a crown of gold with this verse
graved in it. Petra dedit p^tro petrus diadem^ Radulpho. That is to say, Christ
gave the Empire too Peter, Peter gives it to Radulphe, meaning that Christ had
given the Empire worldly too the bishop of Rome, and he gave it to Radulphe.
Ye may see what a rod the Emperors made for their own tail. For after
they had made the bishop of Rome headde of the church, the bishops made them
selves shortelye after the headees of Emperoures and kings. A just plague of
God for all them that will exalte such to rule, as God said should be ruled.

These bishops be not only proud, but also unthankful. For where as all the
world knowethe the bishops autoritye to come from the Emperor in worldelye
things and not from God, Abbas ospergensis^ suo chroui^o.
but against God: this monster Gregorye the seventh said that Christ gave him
the Empire of Rome and he geeveth it to the Duke of Sweuia Radulphe too kill
his good brother Henrye the fourth. He that will know more of this wicked man,
and of his brethren bishops of Rome let him read Be^no the cardinal that
writes in his history of the popes, that he saw, of John 20. benedict 9.
Siluester 3. Gregory 6. Leo. 9. Alexander 2. But in his old days he saw and
writes horrible and execrable things of Gregorye the. vii. Yet was England
free from this beast of Rome then, in respect of that it was before the idol
was expulsed in king Henry the, Plantina in Allex. 3.
viii time. But Alexander the third, never rested to move men to sedition,
untyll such time as king Henrye the seventh was c^ntented to be under him as
other were. And all this suffered England for Thomas Becket the popes martyr.

When they were crepte up into this high autoritye, all their own creatures
bishops of their sect, Cardinals, pricstes, monks, and friars, could never
be contented too be under the obedience of the princes, and to say the truth
princes dur^^^ not (in manner) require it, ^or the^ were in danger of goods and
life. And the Emperor Henry the seventh was poisoned by a monk, that
poisoned the idol of the mass, both a god and minister meet^ to poison men,
and both of the popes making. And what conscience did they make of this think
ye* Doubtless none at all, for the pope says and so does all his children
that he can dyspence, and absolve them selves and all men from what oaths
so ever they have made to God or manne. This enemy with his false doctirine is
to be resisted and overcome by the word of God, or else he will destroy both
body and soul. Therefore against all his crafts and abh^minations, we must
have the rod, the staff, the table, the oil, and the cup that David
speaks of in a readiness to defend our selves with all. Now follows the
last part of this holy hymn.

The.7. part of the psalm. What the end of Gods troubled-people shall be.
The text.
Thy louinge kindness shall follow we all the days of my life, and I will dwell
in the house of the Lord forever.
The explanation
I Will in the mids of all troubles be strong and of good chere, for I am
assured that thy merc^ and goodness will never forsake me, but will continuallye
preserve me in all dangers of this life, and when I shall depart from this
bodily life, thy mercy will bring me in too that house of thine eternal
joys, where as I shall live with the in everlasting felicity.

Of this part we learn that the dangers of this life be no more the^ God can
and will put from us, or preserve us in them when they come unto us without
danger: also that ^ troubles of this world be not perpetual nor damnable for
ever, but that they be for a tym^ only sent from God to exercise and prove
our fayeth and pacyence: at the last we learn that the troubles being ended,
we begin and shall continue for ever in endless pleasure and consolation, as
Dauyd shewethe at the end of his psalm. So does Christ make an end with his
dysciples when he has committed them for the time of this life, too the
tuy^^on of the heau^nlye father, whiles he is bodyelye absente: he says at
length they shall be where he is himself in heaven for ever. For in this
life, all be it the faythfulles of God have consolation in Gods promises, yet
is their Joy very dark and obscure by reasonne of troubles both^ without
and within, outewardelye by persecution, inwardelye by temptation. Therefore
Christ desyrethe his father too lead and conducte his church in truth and
verifye whiles it is here in fight and p^rsecution with the deuyil, until it
come too a perfect and absolute cons^lation, where as no trouble may moleste
it. For then and not before (too what perfection so ever we come) shall we be
satisfied, psalm. 1^
as Dauyd says. The plentyefulnes of pleasure and joy is in the light and
contemplation of thee O Lord. For then shall the mind of man fullye be
saty^fyed, when he being present, may presentelye behoulde the gloryouse
majesty of God: 1. Cor. ^
for God has then all joys present to him that is present with him, and
then manne knows God as he is known of God. These joys in the end of
troubes, should geeue the troubled manne the more courage too bear troubles
pacientelye, and be persuaded (as Sayncte Paul teaches) that the troubles of
this present life, Romans ^
be not woorthye of the joys too come, which shall be revealed too us when
Christ comes too judge the quycke and the ^eadde, too whom with the father
and the holy ghost be al ^onoure and praise world^ without end. Amen.

FINIS.

