CERTAIN SELECTED ODES OF HORACE, ENGLISHed; and their Arguments annexed.

With Poems (Ancient and Modern) of diverse Subjects, Translated.

Whereunto are added, both in Latin and English, sundry new

EPIGRAMMES. ANAGRAMMS. EPITAPHES.
printer's device? (not indexed in McKerrow) or decoration

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Richard Moore; and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleetstreet. 1621.

Rectangular illustration with center circle containing a wheat sheaf supported
by two animals, around which are the words: "Cor unum via una" (description
from EEBO catalogue record of Tract Supplement / E4:1[52a] which consists
entirely of this same device)
RVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI ET DOMINO, D. TOBIAE, Archiepiscopo Eboracensi,
Angl. Primati and Metropolitano dignissimo.

ANAGR. ToBIAS MATHEVS. I HOMO SAT BEATVS.

EPIGR. de Eodem.
Ipse beatus homo es, coelestia dona beatum
Si faciant. I: SAT nempe BEATVS HOMO es.
Aliud. ToBIAS MATHEIVS. IEHOVA SIT MI SABOT.

Epigram.
Tranquilla pacis mea men's sic sede locata,
MI terrae saturo, SIT que IEHOVA SABOT.
Angl.
My Soul, SIT in the seat of Safety, blessed:
IEHOVA is MI SABOT, my sweet Rest.
Ad Eundem.
SI tibi (cui reserant sacrae sua claustra Camoenae,
Cuius and a labijs Attica mella fluunt)
Haec non displiceant Venusini carmina vatis,
Strididulae (ut potui) mi modulata lyrae,
Sed vultus crepta tui splendore tenebris,
Incipiant coelo liberiore frui;
Non ronchos metuam, non vani scommata vulgi,
Censores tetricos, grammaticasve Tribus.
Solus eris contra haec Aiacis spicula scutum;
Dulce and praesidium Tu mihi solus eris.
Angl.
IF Thee, the Muses sacred Rites that knows,
And from whose Lips pure Attick Honey flows,
These Lyrick Poet's Songs do not displease,
Tuned (as I could) to my Pipe's homely Lays,
But (doomed to darkness) by thy graceful Sight
Be brought abroad, to see the gladsome Light;
No gleering Scorns I Will fear, nor spiteful Gibes,
Nor crabbed Critics, nor Grammarian Tribes.
Thou, thou alone, against all these Darts shall be
An Aiax-Shield, and sweet Defense to me.
Amplitudini tuae, omni observantia devotus, IOH: ASHMORE.

To my Friend, the Author.
TO praise Thee, is a Labor to no end;
Since those, that read Thee, cannot but Commend.
Let Envy read, and Envy will become
A Convert; or, at least, she will be dum.
G. S.

Ad Amicum suum, Ioh. Ashmore.
LAus in laudato, non in laudante, Poeta est:
Laus meritum sequitur, corpus ut umbra suum.
Extollam licet ergo tuos ad sydera Versus
Laudibus, extollent te tua Metra magis.
Ioh. Owen.

In harum Eligantiss. Odarum Translationem, Hexastichon.
EN, Flaccus rediviuus adest; nimiumque negata
Anglica dulce melos protulit art lyra.
Flaccus adest: Eadem men's est, and carminis idem
Sensus: forma eadem est, ingenij que genus.
Flaccus eris totus, si qui aspiraverit orsis
Sit tibi Mecaenas (docte Poeta) tuis.
Samuel Pullein.

To the ingenious Author.
MVch have I read: but, never could I find
A Poem that so well did please my Mind,
As thy sweet Numbers. It is hard to tell,
The Matter, or the Manner, which excel.
This Work of Thine, with such Perfection framed,
So Scholler-like, may Others make ashamed
(When they reflect upon thy Strains their sight)
To publish their Composures to the Light.
Let no brow-bended envious Carper say,
That my Affection made my Judgment stray.
Such Stateliness does in thy Poems dwell,
That what thou writ'st but few can Parallel.
Thomas Cordin.

Graced by the Muses, Poet most expert,
My Praises cannot equal thy Desert.
My ravished Soul thy rare Strains does admire,
And thy sweet Muses high aspiring fire.
Come Poets; and his temples Crown with Bays:
Not many have, or can write better Lays.
R. I.

CERTAIN SELECTED ODES OF HORACE TRANSLATED.
Ad Mecaenatem. Lib. 1. Ode prima.
THE ARGUMENT.
That many a way, most men assay
Their heads up high to raise:
Which he neglects, and most affects
A Lyrick Poets praise.
The English answers the Latin, in Lines and syllables.
MEcaenas, of the race of Kings thy grandsires, bred,
O thou my chief support, and garland of my head;
Some with Olympian dust besmeard delight to ride
In Chariots, and the burning wheels with skill to guide
Fast by the mark, whom victory and palms of praise,
With shouts unto the gods, Lords of the earth, does raise.
This man's puffed up, if fickle Romans do agree
To rear him up with styles of three fold dignity.
If he in Garners safely have laid up in store
His corn from Afric brought, he cares for no more.
He that in peace at home delights his Land to till,
On no condition unto him proposed, will
Turn Mariner, and feare-full with a Cyprian plank
Cut out a way through hills and dales of billows rank.
The Merchant, fearing winds that in the Icarian Seas
Do wrestle in great rage, the country life does praise,
And their town fields: Then straight his shake-ship does repair,
Untaught the scorn-full wrongs of poverty to bear.
In froathing boawles of generous wine he healths does drink,
And busies not his brain, of State affairs to think;
But careless under the Arbute shade sometime he lies,
Sometime by the holy well where bubbling waters rise.
In camps entrencht* and trumpets sound some men delight,
And in stiff shocks of bloody wars that matrons fright.
The huntsman stays in the cold with hazard of his life,
Unmindful how he left his young and tender wife;
Whether his trusty Dogs pursue the fleeing Deer,
Or the revenge-full Boars the toils asunder tear.
The Ivy wreathes, rewards that learned for-heads get,
Me canonized among the highest gods will set.
The pleasant groves, the light-foot Nymphs, and Satyrs dance,
Shall me above the vulgar sort of men advance,
If Euterpe my pipes stop not, nor the sweet Muse
Polymnia my Lesbian Harp to tune refuse.
But if that thou among the Lyrick Poets place me,
Not heaven it self can then with more co^tentment grace me.
Ad Licinium. Lib. 2. Ode 10.
THE ARGUMENT.
Those that desire soon to aspire
To happiness of life,
By the golden mean, the same must gain,
Which most is freed from strife.
THou shall Licinius better live, if still
Thy Bark thou do not force into the Deep;
Or, ore-much fearing lest rough winds should fill
Thy sails, too near the crooked shore do creep.
He that regards and loves the golden mean,
Is not with smoke of his poor house blear-eyed:
And, well advised, he blends not with the train
Of mighty Princes that are most envied.
Oft-times, the winds do toss the Cedars tall:
And stately Towers up-reard into the air,
With greater danger to the earth do fall:
And thunderbolts the highest hills do tear.
In all distress, a well instructed mind
Hope intertaines: And fears, when fortune smiles,
That suddenly she will turn and prove unkind.
Jove black faced winters brings and them exiles.
If now wisht-for success do thee refuse,
Think not that still it will continue so:
Sometime Apollo's Harp the drooping Muse
Strikes up; Nor bends he still his angry bow.
If clouds of hard mishap ore-cast thy day,
With beams of thy great courage them expel:
And when thy Ship does dance upon the Sea,
Led down the sails with too proud winds that swell.
Ad Lydiam. Lib. 1. Ode 13.
THE ARGUMENT.
It much him mooves, that Lydia loves
His Rival: And their life
He does commend, whose love toth' end
Continues without strife.
WHen Lydia thou of Telephus do tell,
His rosy neck and plyant arms do praise,
My liver then (alas!) begins to swell,
Enraged with wrath which nothing can appease.
My color, changing often, does plainly show
How my perplexed mind is plunged in woe:
And tears, by stealth from watery eyes that flow,
Can nothing quench loves fire that still does grow.
I vexed am, whether iarre-breeding wine
Caused roaring Boys to wrong thy shoulders fair;
Or the Lust-raging Lad, those lips of thine
The wanton mark caused of his tooth to bear.
Believe me, he will never constant prove,
That rudely wrongs sweet kisses in such sort;
Those kisses, which the Goddess fair of love
Graceth with the fifth part of her best sport.
Thrice happy, and more happy, are they sure,
Whose mutual love so banisheth all strife,
That pure and constant it does still endure
Till Fates cut off their well-spun thread of life.
Ad Grosphum. Lib. 2. Ode 16.
THE ARGUMENT.
No outward thing thee well can bring
Unto a quiet mind.
Within it is, that brings this bliss:
There help we best may find.
THe Merchant toiled in the Egean Sea,
When Phoebe's face is veiled with a dark cloud,
And the known stars from sight are fled away,
For ease unto the gods does cry aloud.
For Ease, the Thracians (terrible in war)
For Ease, the Medes (with comely quivers bold)
O Grosphus, to the gods still suitors are,
Bought with no gems, with purple, or with gold.
No treasure, neither Sergeant can arrest
The wretched hurly-burlies of the mind,
And cares with rest-less wings that beat the breast,
And in faire-fretted roofes still harbor find.
He lives well with a little, that does keep
His late Sires table furnished with mean fare;
That is not robbed of rest, nor scared from sleep
With hide-bound Avarice, or heart-scorching Care.
Why do we, short-lived things, on tentars set
Our greedy thoughts with vain desire of pelf?
In climats furthest off, What would we get?
Who, from his Country exiled, flees from himself?
Care, vice-borne, climbs into the brass-stemd ships:
In warlike troops her self she slily shrowds:
Swifter then Stags, swifter then winds she skips,
That do disperse, and drive away the clouds.
Be Ioviall while time serves (Time will not stay.)
Hate curiously to enquire what will betide:
Sour discontentments with sweet mirth allay.
Entirely good, nothing does still abide.
Untimely death did stout Achilles slay:
Old age Tithonus did Epitomize:
And my birth-star perhaps grants me a day
To date my life; which thine to thee denies.
Fair flocks of sheep, fat herds of cattle low
About thee, and thy lustful Mare with pride
Neighs out, now for the Chariot fit: and thou
Wearst purple, twice in Tyrian liquors died.
The Dest'nie, never deceived, on me bestows
A little ground, and vein of Poesy
Which from the pleasant Greekish fountains flows,
And the un-taught Vulgar wills me to defy.
In ambitiosum quenda^ and avaru^. Li. 2. Od. 18
THE ARGUMENT.
That he is content with his small rent;
When richer still do crave,
And for more look by hook or crook
Though one foot in the grave.
NO Ivory seeling, nor roof adorned
With light-out-streaming gold, in my house shines:
No beams from Hymet press pillars formed
Where the sky-touching hill Afric confineth.
No wealth by ill means do I win,
Nor for me clyents purple spin.
But of trust and wit some store have I:
To me but poor, come men raised high by fortune:
More of the Gods themselves never crave I,
Nor greater things of my great friend importune:
I wish not for more land or rent.
Sabine alone yields me content.
One day another day expels,
New Mons soon die: Thou marble-trimmers hyrest
Ready to go where Pluto dwells;
And, building, vainly to long life aspirest.
From Neptune thou the shore do steal away,
Incroaching on the angry Sea.
What should I tell, how against all order
Thy neighbors landmarks always thou removest,
And from thy tenants that upon thee border,
Ground pilfers: Thou from house and home out-shovest
Both man and wife, that wailing bear
Their household gods and children dear.
Yet have thou (rich Lord) no assurance
So great of any house where thou remained,
As that thou shall be kept in durance
Of all-devouring hell, and there restrained.
What will thou? None the grave can shun:
It takes the King, and the Kings son.
Nor was hells Catch-pole with gold bribed
Wily Prometheus backward to bring again:
He boasting Tantalus derided,
And his proud offspring though they cried out amain.
He eases men cast down with woe,
Whether they call on him or no.
Ad Posthumum. Lib. 2. Ode. 14.
THE ARGUMENT.
None can deny, we all must die.
And riches to no end
Some keep with fears, which their glad heirs
Soon riotously will spend.
OPosthume, Posthume, years do pass away
Like glyding streams. Nor piety can stay
The wrinkled brow, nor old age hasting fast,
Nor death, that all attacheth at the last.
Not if my friend, each day in all thy years,
Stern Pluto thou should with three-hundred Steers
Seek to appease. Three-headed Gerion,
And Tytius, ore the Stygian stream are gone:
Which all must do that here do draw their breath;
Both Kings, and silly Laborers of the earth.
In vain from bloody broils we take our ease,
And from the encounters of the Adrian Seas:
In vain in Autumn seek we to avoid
The Southern blasts, whereby we are annoyd.
We needs must see Cocytus heavy flood,
And Danaus cruel daughters staind with blood,
And Sisyphus that rowles against the hill
The stone that tumbles back upon him still.
Thy house, thy land, and wife to thee most dear,
Thou needs must leave: Nor to the mournful beer
Will any of these trees that thou do dress,
Attend on thee, but the sad Cyparess.
Thy heir, more worthy, riotously will waste
Thy Cecube wines with many locks kept fast;
And die the pavement with high-spirited wine,
Better then Prelates drink of when they dine.
Ad Pirrham. Lib. 1. Ode 5.
THE ARGUMENT.
He says, their state is cursed by Fate
That Pirrha's baits inthrall:
From this gulf freed, vowed gifts with speed
That he hung oth' Church-wall.
WHat pretty youth, weltring in roses
With liquid odors overspred,
O Pirrha thee in 's arms incloses,
When thou loves Lecture have him read
In The inner bower? Neglecting curious dresses,
For whom plaitst thou the gold-wire of thy tresses?
How often will he that at his pleasure
Enioyes thee now (alas) complain,
That he is robbed of that sweet treasure
By angry gods, and vows made vain?
How will he curse the Seas so soon that wrangle,
Whom such sly baits could not before entangle?
For he poor soul, deceived, believed
Thou would be true to him alone,
And lovely: But his heart, now grieved,
Thy false inconstancy does moan.
His tents he in destructions black field pitches,
Whom thou untride, with thy fair face bewitches.
The Temples wall, that is consecrated,
To every eye the Table shows
Where my sad shipwreck is related:
And how in the midst of all my woes,
I hung to the Sea god, after strange beseeches,
My doublet wringing wet, and cod-piec't breeches.
Ad Martium Censorinu^. Lib. 4. Ode. 8.
THE ARGUMENT.
That to his friends he nothing sends
But Verses: and this gift
Does make men's name, resound with fame,
And them to heaven up-lift.
RIch plate and Jewels, that do lively show
The work-mans skill, I frankly would bestow
Upon my friends, O Censorine. I would
Give them fair tables garnished with gold,
In-layd with Ivory, on strong trestles set,
The high-priz'd rewards of valiant Greeks. Nor yet
Should thou the worst have, if I did abound
With those things that Parrhasius have renowned,
Or Scophas, to these present times; The one
Cunning in colors, the other in hard stone,
To make a man, or god: But, this I want:
And of such ornaments thou have no scant.
Thou verses love: I verses can give well,
And of this gift the worthy praises tell.
No marble Statues with high titles wrought,
By which both breath, and life again is brought
To noble Captains after they are dead;
Nor Hanniball, with break-neck speed that fled
(When all his threats upon himself returned)
Nor faith-less Carthage into cinders burned,
Do more his noble acts commit to Fame
( Afric subdued, that gaind a glorious name)
Then the Calabrian Muses. If they fail
To do good deeds, it naught will thee avail.
Had not the Boys name long since from us fled,
Whom Mars (when Ilia lost her maidenhead)
Begot, if envious silence could from us
Conceal the acts of worthy Romulus?
From Stygian rivers, Aeacus, set free
By powr-full skill of divine Poesy,
Is canonized for ever to remain
Amongst the Heroes in the Elysian Plain.
Praiseworthy men the Muse forbids to die:
The Muse men blesses with eternity.
Great-hearted Hercules is so Jove's guest,
And frolicks with him at his wished feast.
The two Tindarian twins, so, safely keep
The Ships, though tossed in billows of the Deep.
So Mars (his temples circled with vine-bowes)
Grants men's requests, and binds them to their vows.
Ad Lydiam. Lib. 3. Ode 9.
THE ARGUMENT.
Though late some jar did them debar
From kindness used before:
Yet jointly now, they make a vow
Of love for ever-more.
Hor. WHile lately Lydia thou did love me,
When thy white neck I in mine arms (then blessed) did fold,
And thou no Gallant graced above me,
I then the Persian King more happy was inrould.

Lyd. While Horace thine affections flame
Was firm, and Lydia thou then Chloe 'steemd not less,
Thy Lydia then, of no mean fame,
I lived more honored then the Roman Emperess.

Hor. Now Thracian Chlo' has my heart sure,
That sweetly bears a part in prick-song, and can play:
For whom I would deaths pain endure,
If so the Dest'nies would put off her dying day.

Lyd. Kind Calais, and me Love so
Heats with his mutual fire, dispersing clouds of strife,
That twice I death would undergo
If for my Boy I could renew his lease of life.

Hor. What if old Love to us wing make,
And us now severd, in still lasting links do bind?
If gold-haird Chloe I forsake,
And Lydia my door never shut against her find?

Lyd. Though he be fairer then a star,
Thou lighter then the cork that still does floting lie,
And angrier then enraged Seas far;
I love with thee to live, with thee I wish to die.

Eadem aliter.
THE ARGUMENT.
In one state they can never stay,
Whom Cupids toys entangle:
What now they choose, they straight refuse
Still fickle and new-fangle.
Hor. WHen I enjoyed thee without check,
And none more welcome did embrace
The snowie treasure of thy neck,
The Persian Monarke gave me place.

Lyd. While thou loved not another more,
Nor Chloe bare away the bell
From Lydia renownd before,
I Roman Ilia did excel.

Hor. Chloe, my Mistress, is of Thrace,
Whose warbling voice by skill is led:
For whom I would see Death's pale face,
If she might live when I am dead.

Lyd. Now Calais is my hearts delight.
He answers me with love again:
For whom I twice with Death would fight,
If he my halfe-selfe might remain.

Hor. What if sweet Venus do revive,
And true-loues-knot between us tie?
If from my thoughts fair Chlo' I drive,
If my door open when Lydia 's nie?

Lyd. Though he then stars be fairer far,
Thou angrier then the raging Seas
When against the sturdy rocks they war:
With thee I Will live and end my days.

Eadem paulo fusius.
THE ARGUMENT.
The storm now spent of discontent
(If Lovers words be true)
The bonds again (still to remain)
Of love we will renew.
WHen I had scaled, and did possess
The happy Fortress of thy love,
And all assaylants comfortless
Tired with long siege did thence remove;
In Fortunes lap, who then, but I,
By Venus luld-asleep did lie?
Lyd. While thou this lovely fort kept well,
And thy affections did not range,
Nor against thee often made vows rebel,
Nor Lydia did for Chloe change,
No Princess was more blessed in earth,
I then did draw most happy breath.

Hor. Now Thracian Chloe has the raines
Of my affection in her hands,
Skillful in Musicks sweetest strains,
And well to play she understands:
For whom I would breathe out my last,
If she might live when my life 's past.

Lyd. Well featured Calais is my joy:
He has possession of my heart:
He sets me free from all annoy:
He love for love does still impart:
For him I twice would death endure,
If him long life it might procure.

Hor. What are our iarres if Venus smile,
And (cunning) with her grace-full train,
Our minds distracted reconcile,
And bind us in a steadfast chain?
If from my house fair Chlo' I reave,
That it my Lydia may receive?

Lyd. Though he in beauty far excel
The stars, the fairest youth alive:
And thou unconstant be, and fell,
As waves against the winds that strive;
With thee I would in life remain,
With thee I death would intertaine.

Julius Scaliger so extolleth this Ode, and the next following, that I assaid
to translate this, three ways; desirous that one of them may give content. His
words are these:

Inter caeteras, duas animadverti, quibus ne Ambrosiam quide^, aut Nectar
dulciora putem. Altera 3, 4. lib. Altera 9. tertij, Donec gratus eram, etc.
Quarum similes malim a me compositas, quam Pithonicarum multas Pindari: quarum
similes malo composuisse, quam essetotius Taraconensis Rex.

Ad Melpomenen. Lib. 4. Ode 3.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whose birth the Mase does not refuse
To grace with friendly eye,
Shall glory gain, by the sweet vein
Of divine Poesy.
WHose birth Melpomeney
Thou smiling look upon,
No toil in Isthmos him can make
A famous Champion.
No stately Steeds shall draw,
Contending for the prize,
His conquering Charet going on
With joyful shouts and cries.
Nor good success in war,
To the Capitol him brings
Adornd with bays, because the threats
He batterd of proud Kings.
But waters, that their course
By fertile Tiber take,
And woods with leaves thick-clad shall him
Renownd by verses make.
The Gallants of great Rome
Amongst the crew recite me
Of lovely Poets: Envy now,
With venim split, less bites me.
O Muse, that guid'st the strings
Of the sweet warbling Lute:
O thou that if thou will can give
Swans notes to fishes mute;
It Is thy free gift, that me
Her Poet Rome does call:
It Is by thee that I breath, and please,
If ought I please at all.
Lauds rei rusticae. Epod. 2.
THE ARGUMENT.
He many ways the life does praise,
That men in the country find:
Amongst the rest, he likes that best
For quietness of mind.
He Is blessed, from City turmoyls free
(As whilome men were wont to be)
His Sire-less land with his own steers
That plowes, and Usurers never fears.
Alarums fierce him do not raise,
Nor trembles he at the angry Seas:
He the proud gates of great men flees.
To Lawyers he creeps not with fees;
But to the youthful Vine does wed
The Poplar with his stately head,
Or else dead branches off does cut,
And better in their room does put.
Or in the winding valley he,
Sees where his heads of cattle be;
Or honey lays up safe to keep
In pots, or sheares his feeble sheep:
Or when Autumnus head is crowned
With apples ripe in each field found,
How glad's he pears he graft to pull,
Or grapes of pleasant liquor full,
With which he Priape thee rewards,
Or Sylvan that the fields regards?
Now under the aged Oak he will rest,
Now on the grass, as he likes best.
Mean while from hills the waters fling,
And in the woods the birds do sing,
The bubbling fountains murmurings make,
And him invite a nap to to take.
But, when sharp winter cold does blow
In The thundering air with sleet and snow,
With dogs he drives the eager Bore
Into the toils prepared before;
Or stretches forth his nets on stakes,
With which the greedy Thrush he takes,
The farre-come Crane, or fear-full Hare
(His pains sweet pay) he does ensnare.
Thus busi'd, who does not forget
The cares that lazy Lovers fret?
But if his modest wife part bear
In guiding the house and children dear
(As Sabines and the sunburned wife
Of stern Apulia led their life)
And sacred fire of dry wood burn
Against her Good Man home return:
If the milch Yewes to Fold she bring,
And milking them do something sing,
And draw forth wine, and spread the board
With the unbought cates the Farms afford,
No Leverine shellfish more likes me,
Nor Bret, nor dainty Golden-eye,
In Eastern Seas if any tossed
A storm do drive upon our Coast.
I love not more an Afric hen,
Nor the Ionian Attagen,
Then Olives ripe, that gathered be
From fattest branches of the tree;
Or Rheubarb that does love the field,
Or Mallows that good physic yield,
Or Lamb slain at the Landmarks feast,
Or Kid from the Wolves jaws releast.
Thus feasting, how much doth't him good
To see his full-fed flocks home scud?
To see, with necks faint, drouping how
The Oxen draw the turnd-up plow?
And Hindes; the swarm rich men desire,
Beaking themselves before the fire?
The Usurer Alpheus (this said)
A country life then needs would lead:
In The Ides his money forth, cald-in;
In The Calends it lays out again.
This Ode following, came unto my hands under the name of Mr. Ben. Johnson:
which (for the happy imitation of Horace) I have also published.

Ad Authorem.
THE ARGUMENT.
Till his Sire true do claim his due,
This Infant I do cherish:
Though without name, it were a shame
It should in darkness perish.
REmember, when blind Fortune knits her brow,
Thy mind be not dejected over-lowe:
Nor let thy thoughts too insolently swell,
Though all thy hopes do prosper never so well.
For, drink thy tears, with sorrow still oppressed,
Or taste pure wine, secure and ever blessed,
In those remote, and pleasant shady fields
Where stately Pine and Poplar shadow yields,
Or circling streams that warble, passing by;
All will not help, sweet friend: For, thou must die.
The house, thou have, thou once must leave behind thee,
And those sweet babes thou often kissest kindly:
And when the have gotten all the wealth thou can,
Thy pains is taken for another man.
Alas! what poor advantage does it bring,
To boast thy self descended of a King!
When those, that have no house to hide their heads,
Find in their grave as warm and easy beds.
Ad Torquatum. Li. 4. Od. 7.
THE ARGUMENT.
Goods got with care, we should not spare,
But spend them merrily:
It then best fits, while time permits;
Which soon us hence will carry.
THe snowes are fled, the fields are clad with grass,
And leaves trees prank:
Times change, and floods decreasing pass
Not their known bank.
The Graces, with the Nymphs nak't on the strand,
The Measures sweetly dance, hand joined in hand.
The Year and Night, that cancels the fair day,
Shows we must die:
Cold by the Spring, the Spring is driven away
By Summer nie:
Summer to Autumn yields, that pours forth grain:
Then barren Winter takes his room again.
Yet the swift Moons their losses soon repair:
But, when we shall
Come where good Anchus and Aeneas are,
To dust we fall.
How know thou, whether the great gods will give
Thee one day longer in the world to live?
Thy friendly gifts the clutches escape alone
Of thy glad heir.
When thou just Minos doom have undergone
(Laid on the beer)
Nor thy high birth ( Torquatus) nor thy wit,
Nor piety thee thence will ever quit.
Diana, Patroness of chastity,
Could not recall
Hyppolitus, that in dark vaults did lie
Of Pluto's hall:
Nor Theseus the infernal chains could rend,
That captive held Pyrithous, his friend.
Ad Chloen. Lib. 1. Ode 23.
THE ARGUMENT.
That there is no cause, from Cupids laws
Why Chloe free should sit;
For Hymen's rites, and sweet delights,
Since she is already fit.
THou shunn'st me, Chloe; like the Fawn
Missing her mother in the Lawn,
That trips to the hills, in fear
Of every blast and breare.
For, whether winds amongst leaves rustle,
Or Lizards in the brambles bustle,
She trembles at the heart,
And quakes in every part.
I come not Tiger-like to ill thee,
Or as a Lion fierce to kill thee:
Still follow not thy mother,
Now fitter for another.
Ad Aristium Fuscum. Lib. 1. Ode. 22.
THE ARGUMENT.
If thou, within, do feel no sin,
That tortureth thy mind,
Thou may from thence a sure defense
Against all dangers find.
AN upright man, and honest liver
(O Fuscus) needs nor bow, nor spears
Of the black Moore, nor yet the quiver
He full of poisoned arrows wears;
Whether through Circes scalding Sands,
Or craggy Caucasus, he go,
Or places where through many Lands
Hydaspes streams do gently flow.
For, in the Sabine wood while I
Of Lalage sung without dread,
And rom'd with care-less liberty,
A Wolf from me unarmed fled;
An hideous beast: whose like in the groves
Of warlike Daunia does not dwell;
Nor in Morisco's Deserts roves
The dry-nurse of the Lions fell.
In The dull fields set me, where no tree
Releeved is with gentle air;
That never from clouds, and mists is free,
But still does angry tempests bear.
Under the glorious chair me set,
Whence Phoebus mounting up on high,
The earth with burning rays does beat,
And dwellings unto men deny;
I Lalagen will love the whiles,
That sweetly speaks, and sweetly smiles.
Lib. 1. Ode 26. Ad Lamiam.
THE ARGUMENT.
He does declare, that those, which are
Unto the Muses kind,
Do ease their grief, and find relief
From Passions of the mind.
I, Of the Muses loved, sad Care and Fear
Will to the stubborn winds commit to bear
Into the Cretian Seas, secure alone
Of tidings from the Northren coast that is blown
Of some King there, that is awful for his might;
Or what so Tyridates does affright.
O gentle Muse, that love the fountains clear,
Fair fresh flowers gather, springing here and there:
And garlands for my dearest Lamia make:
My praise without thee no effect can take.
Thee and thy Sisters it becomes well
With Lesbian Harp, and Songs, his praise to tell.
Lib. 3. Ode 30.
THE ARGUMENT.
That more his name is raised by Fame,
For Lyrick Poesy,
Than Kings that raise Pyramides,
For lasting memory.
A Work I ended have, which brass will far out-weare, The English (as the
first) answers the Latin in lines and syllables.

And 's higher tha^ the stately piles that Kings up-rear;
Which neither rating Rain, nor boystrous Northren blast,
Nor progress of years numberless, ever down shall cast:
On which never wingd-foot Time shall any vantage have.
I wholly shall not die. My better part, the grave
Shall not enclose. My fame, with Ages following, shall
Grow always green, whiles to the sacred Capitol
The Priest with silent Vestall virgins up shall go.
It will be told, where raging Aufidus does flow,
And poor in water where old Daunus forth does show
His sunburned face to people rude, that I (from low
Estate advanced) was he that first of all did suit
Aeolian Songs and Sonnets to a Roman Lute:
Be proud, Melpomene, of this deserved praise,
And bind my temples willingly with Delphian Bays.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMMES, EPITAPHES, ANAGRAMMES, And other Poems of diverse subjects; in
Latin and English.

printer's device (?) not found in McKerrow: "grain sheaf flanked by lions
enclosed in circle with motto 'cor unum via una', not found in McK."
[description from EEBO catalogue record of STC (2nd ed.) 2390.5 where this
device appears on title page] COR VNVM VIA VNA


LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Richard Moore; and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleetstreet. 1621.

AD ORNATISSIMVM virum, D. GEORGIVM CALVERT, Equitem auratum, and Regiae
Majestatis a Secretis, and Consilijs.
EXcerptes varijs exhortis undique flores,
Naribus afflantes qui placuere meis,
Eque meo paucos collectos nuper agello
Connexosque, unum in do tibi fasciculum:
Queis si laeta tui spiraverit aura favoris
(Ambrosii quae illis roris ad instar erit)
Mista rosis noster calathis tibi lilia plenis
Hortus, and hyberno tempore, pulchra dabit.
Dignitatis tuae studiosissimus, IOH: ASHMORE.

A SPEECH, MADE TO the Kings Majesty coming in his Progress to Rippon, the
15. of April, 1617. In the Person of MERCVRIE.
HIgh Jove, with all the gods together met,
To see (great King) thy coming to this Town,
The casements large of heaven have open set,
And from their star-pav'd floors have sent me down,
Thee in their name to welcome to this place;
Which both thy Bounty, and thy Presence grace.
Young Phoebus, from his bright and radiant hair,
Such joyful light abroad here never shed
Since good King Adlestone of yore did rear
These stately piles with gold embelished;
Which aftertimes (miss-led) did rent asunder,
And at the last (alas!) were fired with thunder.
What Iliads of grief! what dole-full teen!
What Outcries then were heard of young and old!
What Lamentation in the streets was seen,
As in this fear-full case they did behold
These holy things doomed to the fire a prey?
But at a trice the Heaven his rage did stay.
For, in the Dest'nies rowles, that open were,
(Thrice sacred King of men) they found, that thou
These woeful ruins should again up-reare,
And Royal gifts for aye on it bestow:
Nor can we think how better they deserve
That build, then they from down-fals that prezerve.
No marvel then, if every field and tree,
The windows and the tops of houses too,
With people of all sorts replenisht be,
And where thou go if Nymphs sweet flowers do strowe.
From every place (good King) see how they run.
To feast their eyes; and cry, HE IS com, HE IS com.
Nor were the sluices of thy Bounty so
Set open to the Churches good alone:
But, it abundantly did also flow,
And to the Town by grace-full streams was show'n,
When (made a body Politic) they did rise
To Place, with Hutton's, York's, and Mallory's.
And though Pactolus, with his golden sands,
Be far remote from places where they dwell:
Yet come they not (good King) with empty hands:
For, other gifts they bring which gold excel;
TRVE LOYAL HEARTS: which thou will not forsake.
Of Harvest small, the gods small hand-fuls take.
The gods above, thy loving Subjects here,
Thy sacred Person in protection take:
And so Adieu, to gods and men most deer;
Whom, in such Progresses, often happy make:
And, by Heroic deeds beseeming thee,
Make way to the high towers of Eternity.
These verses following, were then delivered to his Majesty, and by him most
graciously accepted.

Ad Potentissimu^ and Clementiss. Regem IACOBVM, Ecclesiae Collegiatae
Ripponensis Restauratore^ benigniss. auspicatissimo Maiestatis suae progressu
Ripponam advenientem, 15. Aprilis 1617.
Ad Regem.
SIbonus est Superum Rex Dispensator, ut illos
Terrestris curae non grave tangat onus;
Vivite tum coeli secure Numina: Talis
Oeconomus nobis haud datus ante fuit.
Angl.
If of the gods good Kings high STEWARDS be,
To ease them of the care of things below;
Then live secure, O heavenly Powrs: for we
So good a STEWARD never before did know.
Ecclesiae Ripponen: Prosop.
Struxit Adelstonus: Danus destruxit: at Odo, et
Thurston, Pontifices, mi magis ampla dabant:
Rexque (sacra accenso Iacobus pectore flamma)
Sacrilegae reddit quae rapuere manus.
Angl.
King Adleston me built, Danes down did pull:
But Odo'nd Thurston, made me beautiful:
And (moved with zeal) King James does now restore
What sacrilegious hands had robbed before.
Altera eiusdem Prosop.
Me Danus miseram afflixit, Belloque potitus
Indigno Scotus vendidit (heu!) pretio:
Hijs sed fata dabant ut regnis Regia proles
Gentis commissa haec expiet (Ecce!) suae.
Angl.
The Dane me sacked, poor wretch, the Scot, o're-bold
In victory, unworthily me sold:
But, to both Realms a Royal stem, by Fate,
His peoples faults (Behold!) does expiate.
These following, were added since.

Alia eiusdem Prosop.
Audijt Elizabetha meas Regina querelas:
Sed nihil auxilij (morte vetante) dedit.
Regis erat magni tantas fulcire ruinas:
Solus habes laudem hanc, Rex bone: solus habes.
Angl.
Queen Elsabeth often my complaints did hear:
But she no help (by death prevented) gave me.
These ruins craved a great King them to up-reare:
This praise thou have alone, good King, to save me.
De Rumore falso, de Regis morte subito sparso.
Fama per attonitam subito cum spargeret Vrbem
Ante diem te (Rex magne) obijsse diem;
Indomito cuneti laxabant fraena dolori,
Et veluti vero in funere quisque gemit.
Heu, pater, exclamant, Patriae est extinctus: in illo
Extincta est populi luxque, decus que sui.
An quisquam melius rerum moderavit habenas?
Iustitiave prior, vel Pietate fuit?
Quisquam adeovixit cum Maiestate benignus?
Regali miseros sustinuitve manu?
Heu! tantae nullus conscendit culmina laudis:
Talem nulla dabant saecula: nulla dabunt.
Vera quidem falsae sic famae filia fama est,
Quae mundo lauds exprimet usque tuas.
Angl.
When Fame (great King) did through this City fly,
And told how Thou too soon a death did die;
All places paid to thee the woeful Rent
Of Tears, which from their grief-swoln eyes they sent.
The Father of our Countrey's dead, they cry,
And with him all our joys do buried lie.
Who ever the raines of kingdoms so did guide?
Whose Justice joined with Mercy so is tried?
Who mildness so with Majesty has sorted?
Or with his kingly hand the wronged supported?
None ever (alas!) with such high praise did live.
No Age has given one like him: none shall give.
So, false Report has true Report brought forth,
Which still shall witness to the world thy worth.
De Eodem.
Cur populi, procerumque pias sic verberataures
Fama per indignas te cecidisse manus?
Scilicet, hoc meditans, ut vivus cernere possis,
Quae tibi defuncto fama superstes erit.
Angl.
Wherefore did Fame this woeful News forth spread,
That thou (our Sovereign) by cursed hands wast dead?
Sure, to this end; that thou alive might see,
When thou art gone, what fame will follow thee.
Ad CAROLVM, Augustissimum Walliae Principem.
Anagr.
STEVARDVS. EST ARDVVS.
STEWARDVS. ARDVVS ES TV.

Aliud.
CHAROLVS STEVARDVS. CHARVS ET ARDVVS SOL.

EPIGRAM.
ARDVVS orb suo SOL, luce ET CHARVS uterque est: Lucet ut Ille Polo, luceat
hicque Solo.
Of the Prince his Imprese. Ic Dien. I serve.
Natus ad Imperij diadema, EGO SERVIO, Princeps.
Qui been non servit, non reget ille been.
Angl.
I SERVE, the Royal Scepter born to sway.
He Will never rule well, that well did not obey.
Ad Pictorem.
Pingere si nostri Pictor vis Principis ora,
MAIESTAS vultu sit venerandasuo.
Insideat labijs PITHO, frontique MINERVA:
MANSVETVDO suis sit generosagenis.
Laeta suos circumvolitet VICTORIA crines:
Et CHARITVM ex oculis emicet alma cohors.
Scandere si neque as tanta ad fastigia, dicas;
NATVRAE (ah!) Dominae cedit ut ARTIS opus!
Angl.
If thou our Prince set forth in colors fit,
Let MAJESTY (enthroned) in 's Countenance sit.
On 's lips let PITHO, on 's brows let PALLAS rest.
Let MILDNES be his rosy cheeks chief Guest.
Let joyful VICTORY o'r his locks hover.
Let his eyelids the GRACES grace discover.
But, if thy Skill this reach not, say; Alas,
How far does NATVRE, ART (her Page) surpass!
To the most Beautiful and Virtuous Princess, the Lady ELISABETH.
Anagr. ELISABETA STVARTA. Written before her marriage.
TE BEAT ARA SALVTIS.

Carmen Heroicum ex vtrisque;
Te beat Ara salutis, ELISABETA STVARTA.
Epigr. de eodem Anagrammate.
Virginis intactae soboles nostrae Ara Salutis
Te Beat, and semper (Regia virgo) beet.
Angl.
The Virgins birth (O Royal Maid) Gods Son,
For ever bless thee, as he has begun.
Ad eandem sereniss. Heroinam.
Dia cohors Charitum per te numerosior una est:
Vna tenes quae sunt omnia pulchra trium.
Angl.
Thou to the Graces number addest one:
But, all their virtues are in thee alone.
Ad Illustrissimum Dominum, GEORGIVM VILLIERS, Marchionem Buckinghamiae
Amplissimum.
Non mores faciles, laetae non frontis honores,
Ingenij aut Genij non decus omne tui:
Externas tibi nec Iuveni data fama per or as,
Quae reducem pennis te fovet alma suis:
Fortunae comitata bonis non inclyta virtus,
Nec tua in Aonios munera grata choros,
Ad te oculos, animosque trahit mirant^um, and in albo
Vere nobilium nomen habere dedit.
Scire cupis quid sit? (verborum ambage relicta)
Haec uno pulchre in Te omnia iuncta simul.
Angl.
Nor generous 'haviour, nor thy brows sweet Graces,
Nor MILDNES which thy GENIUS still embraces:
Nor FAME, which thou did find in forain Lands,
And with her wings here fairly on thee fannes:
Nor virtues rare, with Fortunes gifts attended,
Nor bounty to the Muses so commended,
To thee men's eyes and hearts draws, and in the scrowle
Of true Nobility does thee inrowle:
But, what it is, soon would thou understand?
All these, in Thee alone, joined hand in hand.
To the same right Honorable, GEORGE, Marquess of Buckingham, upon the
Accession of his Office of the Admiralty. Ex Latino.
SIng Io. Buckingham does Seas controwle:
He Horses rules, and Waves that proudly roll.
So, amongst the gods, Neptune, that bravely glides
Through Crystal streams, courageous Horses guides.
Then, let none think this double Power unfit;
Since even the gods, themselves, have practiced it.
Idem aliter.
Let Us Io's sing, till the Eccho's ring;
For, Buckingham oth' Seas
Is General: He does Horses free,
And struggling Waves appease.
So, amongst gods high in Majesty,
He, that with triple Mace
The Sea with waves rules when it raves,
Guides Horses swift in chase.
Let none amiss then think it is,
That double power is given
To one to bear; since to us here
The example comes from Heaven.
Idem paulo fusius.
Io. A thousand Mermaids dance oth' Maine;
Their Viceroy Buckingham to entertain.
So, he, that the proud-neighing Horse commands,
Is General in Thetis liquid lawnds.
Likewise, amongst gods that are of highest place,
Saphir-hewd Neptune, with his aw-full Mace,
The mutinous waves, that subjects to his laws,
Makes sturdy steeds take bits in foaming jaws.
Then, let no Cynick with his furrowed brow
Grudge at this double power that 's given him now;
Since, from the gods that reign in greatest state,
We have this pattern given to imitate.
To the Right honorable, EDMUND, Lord Sheffield, after his Recovery from a
dangerous sickness.
WHen sickness late Heroic Sheffield pressed,
Pallas was sick, and Mavors wished to die:
Pallas, whom still he harbourd in his breast;
And Mars, who always raised his thoughts on high.
And if that death had taken him away,
Mavors, and Pallas, both, had died that day.
Which Atropos, who came with murdering knife,
Perceiving, cast the same out of her hand;
And did refuse to cut his line of life
Whose worthy praise is spread by Sea and Land;
And said; Nay live: yea, and for ever live.
So joy to men, and life to gods I give.
In Bubbum.
The Sermon Bub (whatsoever the Preachers do)
Into three parts divides; and then sleeps two.
In Gervasium.
A Double Gelding Gervase did provide,
That he and's wife to see their friends might ride.
And he a double Gelding proved indeed:
For suddenly he fell so to his speed,
That both alight, with blows and threats among:
He leads him; and his wife drives him along.
To the Right Honorable, Sir FRANCIS BACONE, Knight, Lord High Chancellor of
ENGLAND.
Anagr. BACONE. BEACON.

Thy Virtuous Name, and Office, join with Fate,
To make thee the bright BEACON of the State.
Epithaphium Radulphi Simson, Ecclesiae Collegiatae Rippon. Choristae.
Spes Patris alma sui, suavis luscinia, cuius
Hac sacra solita est vox resonare domo,
Ascitus superis paret, mundoque supremum
( Ah) NVNC DIMITTIS deficienscecinit.
Ec iam virginea redimitus tempora lauro,
Te Deum Divis, atque Aleluia canit.
Angl.
His Parents hope, the quires shrill Nightingall,
With whose sweet voice these sacred walls often rung,
Summond to the Saints, and answering at first call,
His NVNC DIMTLIS to the world has sung;
And, crowned amongst Virgins, with eternal Bays,
TE DEVM sings, with Aleluiah's.
To Master Aldebrough Esquire.
Anagr. ARTHVRE ALDEBROVGH. THOU EVER GLAD HARBOR.

Epigr. de eodem.
Not weary to do well, THOU do persever;
And a GLAD HARBOR to thy friends art EVER.
Aliud. ARTVRVS ALDEBROGVS. SVRGIT LABOR ARDVVS.

Epigram.
Turpe viro torpor. SVRGIT LABOR ARDVVS. Ille
Quot premit aerumnis! Hic quot ad astra vehit!
Angl.
Sloth for a man unfitting is.
High labor up does rise.
How many has that spoyld; and this
Advanced above the skies!
To the Right Worshipful, Sir EDWARD MOSLEY, Knight, Attorney of his Majesty's
Court of the Duchy of LANCASTER.
This NOTHING take of him, that owes to Thee
All things; and NOTHING, if it greater be.
IAnus is come; and now begins to call
For gifts, due at his first days Festival:
But, gifts to him I none can find to bring:
What? Are the sluices of the Thespian spring
So shut up? Are my wits so in the wane,
That the old Porter of the year, again
Returning, should me empty handed see?
I rather that, which no where found may be,
In ways before unknown will seek: and, Lo,
From place to place by wandering to and fro,
My Muse has NOTHING found. This Gift take well.
Nothing does pearl, Nothing does gold, excel.
This therefore with a friendly eye behold:
A new thing 's here; which none before have told.
The Latin and Greek Poets did rehearse
All other things in their yet-living Verse:
Nothing the Greeks and Latins left unsaid.
Where-soe'r fair Ceres in the fields does spread
Her Plentie-bringing hands from Heaven's towrs,
Or old Oceanus (from his watery bowrs)
The broad ball of the Earth encloseth round,
Nothing 's beginning or end is not found.
Nothing 's immortal: Nothing, on all sides,
Still in the height of happiness abides.
But, if from hence we prove the divine praise,
Shall we not Altars then unto it raise?
Nothing 's more pleasant than the cheerful light.
Nothing with beauty more allures the sight,
Then a well watered garden in the Spring.
Nothing, than meadows, is more flourishing.
Nothing is milder then the Southern wind.
In hurly-burlies, Nothing rest does find.
Nothing is just in Peace. Nothing holds faith
In Courtiers. And (as Tibullus says)
He happy is, that Nothing has. For, he
Fears not the traps of wily Treachery.
He fears not scar-fires that great Towns lay waste:
Nor he, by Thieves,
or Robbers, is aghast:
Nor he, in careful Suits, his wit does waste.
And Zeno's Wiseman, that does so subject
All things to Fate, Nothing does not neglect:
H' admireth Nothing: Nothing he desires:
And the Socratian but to this aspires,
Nothing to know; which now is sought busily:
And boys in the school learn Nothing willingly,
Because to Wealth and Honor it does bring.
Know Nothing, and thou then shall know the thing
Which with a NO-SAY, eye-like, died in grain,
Is in the top of learnd Pythagoras Bean.
Mercurialists, the bowels of the earth
That rent, and with fire-belching bellows breath
Smelt metalls, and their Patrimonies mingle
With Sulphur, Mercury, and smoaky Ingle,
Instant upon their secret work in holes,
Forced in their Fornaces with hell-black coals,
At last with costly loss searching each creek
Find Nothing; and yet, Nothing found, still seek.
No Perch can measure this in the Artists hand:
Nor he, the number of the Lybian sand
That knows, can number it. Nothing, alone,
Is to Minerva and Apollo 'nknowne.
Nothing, it self above the Stars up-reares:
Nothing is higher then the glorious Spheres.
And though all ornaments of Wit You have
(Searching things hid in Natures secret Cave)
And graceful speech (which when you do advance, He was Commissioner from his
Majesty touching the Forest of Knarsbrough.

Might make whole Forests after you to dance
The Measures) and grave Wisdom (which does bring
You to employment, from our gracious King,
In matters of great Consequence) yet you
(Oh! give me leave to speak the thing that is true,
And all that know you, needs must to me grant)
Do seem of Nothing to be ignorant.
Yet Nothing than the glorious Sun-beame's lighter:
And Nothing then the glowing fire is brighter:
Nothing does fit each Fancy. Add this too,
Nothing's more subtle than the clouted-shoo.
Touch Nothing: and thou then wilt surely say,
Without a body Nothing touch we may:
Nothing behold: and thou will say, that we
Can Nothing without help of Color see.
Without a Voice, it speaks, and hears; and flies
Without Wings: Nothing walks without Thies.
Without a Place, Nothing to go is able.
Than Physic, Nothing is more profitable.
Then, try not the Thessalian spells, or reeles,
When the Idalian dart thy breast, pearc't, feels;
Nor Dictean weeds, from Ida's top taken, prove.
Nothing does cure the wounds of cruel Love.
And though thee Charon o'r his sad flood carry,
Nothing will thee forbid there still to tarry.
Nothing the infernal King does pacify,
And bends the distafs of hard Destiny.
The Titans brood, in fields Phlegreian drowned,
Than stroke of Thunder Nothing mightier found.
Nothing without the worlds great walls does stray.
The gods fear Nothing. Why then do thou stay,
My Muse, so long? Than Virtue Nothing's better:
And (to conclude) Nothing than Jove is greater.
But, now these subtle Trifles time bids end;
Lest, if in too much paper I commend
My Verses, unto you of Nothing sent,
They might more Weariness bring, than Content.
To Mr. MILES MOODY, of an Epitaph which he wrote of the death of his virtuous
and loving wife, Elisabeth, daughter to Mr. William Fawcet, Alderman of Rippon.
ANd does the Torrent of thy long-pent Grief
At last break through the floodgates of thy woe;
That in a stream of tears finds some relief,
Which from thy heart o'r-charg'd with Sorrow flow?
Nor can I blame thee, that (so left alone)
The loss thou of thy dearest does bemone;
Like the true Turtle, that his lovely mate
(As she is busy feeding of her young)
Beholds oth' sudden (O ungentle Fate!)
With a wreathed Serpent slily creeping stung;
Whose poison shed it self int' every part,
And ceased not till it had seized her heart.
Her Mind devout, her Life was harmless led:
To parents, children, and to thee most dear.
With hope of Joy, she (on her dying bed)
Undaunted, intertain'd Death drawing near.
In Earth, she by these virtues was commended:
These were the stairs by which she Heaven ascended.
Then serve a Supersede as on thy Woe:
She will be absent from thee but a while.
Meanewhile, the hours, that lingering seem too slow,
Thou with her lively pictures may beguile.
The time's at hand, when (joined in Joys for ever)
Nor Time, nor Death, shall power have you to sever.
An Epitaph upon the death of ELISABETH BRIGGES, Daughter to the discreet
Matron and Widow, Bettrice Brigges.
COme Virgins, come: Why do you linger so,
With streams of tears that from your swollen eyes shower?
Her Grave with Roses and with Lillies strowe,
That of your Garland was the fairest Flowr.
Lillies and Roses soon decay and perish,
While bitter Wormwood and sharp Nettles flourish.
Your Garlands break: henceforth no garlands bear:
Their fading does your fading state express.
For Garlands, deadly Yeugh and Elder wear,
And branches of the saddest Cyparesse.
Lillies and Roses, etc.
Ye Holly-hocks, why hold you down your heads?
And Violets, why pine you so away?
Because (alas!) that she from you is fled,
That dressed you, and has taken her leave for aye?
Lillies and Roses, etc.
O Hymen, why did thou pale Death permit,
Within thy Right, to set his hate-full feet;
And take her, that for thy sweet Rites was fit;
For Bridals, that gave her a Winding Sheet?
Lilies and Roses, etc.
When Death arrested her, with his sad Mace,
And clowdy Mists her Senses overspread,
Her native favor he could not disgrace;
Which was composed of purest white and red.
Lillies and roses, etc.
All, that thy sweet conditions did know,
Desired, that their lives they so might spend:
And all, that from this life did see thee go,
Desired that their lives they might so end.
Lillies and Roses soon decay and perish,
While bitter Wormwood and sharp Nettles flourish.
To Sir JOHN MALLORY, Knight, after his Recovery from a great Sickness.
OF late, when Sickness on thy limbs did seize,
Which Physics skill could nothing help or ease,
And with an Habeas Corpus Death was pressed,
With Non Omittas, ready theet' arrest;
Each corner of thy house was filled with Woe,
And sense-distracting Grief ran to and fro.
Which heard, the Cry oth'Poor about thy gates,
So shook the doors of th'Adamantine Fates,
That by their Page th'a Supersede as sent
To Death, to show they had altered their intent.
For, if we take him, one of them did say,
How many will with hunger pine away!
In Matildam.
When Maud has taken deep moultar of the Can,
She tells long stories of her dead Good Man:
How kind he was to her at bed and board;
And that he never gave her angry word.
Twixt every Cup she talks, no Healths forbears;
Which her resolves, like Niobe, to Tears:
Then sighs she, and drinks off another Cup
(For, Sorrow's dry.) then suddenly gets-up
(Nor can her Gossips cause her longer stay)
And t'her dear husbands Grave she takes the way:
And thither come (crossing her self) does weep;
Then wrings her hands, kneels down, and falls asleep.
To the virtuous, and fairly spreading Buds of Beauty, Mistress Marie,
Francis, and Ioane Metcalf, daughters of Sir Thomas Metcalf, Knight, he
dedicates these Roses.
Ex Ausonio.
In The Spring, the Day, by fair Aurora led,
Breathed cooly; yet the Sense with pleasure fed:
Quick Air before the Fastern Steeds did run,
Advising to prevent the scorching Sun.
Then roved I in a garden by a spring;
Where to delight me fitted every thing.
A candie Pearl upon each grass-pile hung:
Nor sparingly Pearls on the herbs were flung:
On cawles of Cobweb-lawne, glazed spangles played;
Which full of heavenly liquor down-ward swaid.
I saw the Rose-beds, with trim dressings proud;
Which till fair Day a deawie veil did shroud.
Ith'thickets Gems were scattered here and there:
Which hide themselves when Phoebus rays appear.
Whether the Rose Auror', or she has died
The Rose with maidens-blush, t's not yet tried.
Their Deaw, their Color, and their Morn is one:
And both from Venus have protection.
Perhaps their savour's one: Ith'aire, That Is spent.
This, nearer us, has a far sweeter sent.
One Goddess guides the Star, and the Flower, too:
And clad in Scarlet liveries, both go.
Nor suddenly the branches of the Rose
In equal distances themselves disclose.
This bravely wears a Periwig on her head,
Her pretty Leaves are all with Purple spread.
From her square Base she climbs, and up ascends;
And (pointed with a Rubie-button) bends.
Her plaited Robes this gathers in the top,
Ready to open now her silken Shop.
Her smiling Treasures then she shows plain,
And seeds of Saffron, which there safe remain.
She that but now her golden Leaves did brandish,
Now pale (alas!) left of her Leaves does languish.
I mused, to see their Beauty did not stay;
And, in their Cradle, that their Hairs grew gray.
Even while I speak, see how their Glory Sheds,
And how their Punick-pride the Ground o'r-spreads.
Such Shapes, such Births, and diverse Changes grown
In one day, are in one day overthrown.
We blame thee, Nature, that Flowrs soon decay:
Thou only show them, then take them away.
The age of Roses but one day does last:
Which being gone, their youthful time is past.
Her, whom now born the Sun saw rising red,
Setting, he fainting sees on her Deathbed:
Yet her Short Life required is, that she
Lives ever in her fair Posterity.
Pull Roses, Virgins, while the time does last:
And think how soon your Rose-time will be past.
To Mr. WILLIAM MALLORY, and his dear brother JOHN, the generous and graceful
children of Mr. WILLIAM MALLORY, Esquire.
SEe here the Map of humane Misery,
The Labyrinth that you are entering to,
Full of cross-waies of ambiguitie
Like to Maeander running to and fro:
Here had you need of Ariadneys clue;
Which in all doubts will aid and succor you.
By help of it, the Minotaur you 'll slay
(A Monster bred of Lust and lewd Desire).
And, being rid of that perplexed way,
To sweet repose of mind you 'll thence retire.
Those, that to kill this Monster do not strive,
Shall (peece-meal) be devoured of him alive.
And may not I, the Palinurus now
That at the Helm in a calm River sit,
Of your lancht Frigot, tell what the heavens foreshowe?
That happy Winds shall still attend on it;
And that great Neptune, with his azure train,
Will steer it, till the happy Port it gain.
Ausonius, ex graeco, de ambiguitate eligendae vitae. Edyl. 15. beginning thus;
Quod vitae sectaboriter, etc.
WHat kind of life may I desire as best,
If Courts of Justice freed from Brawls never rest?
If break-sleep Thoughts in private houses wun,
If home-Cares after weary Pilgrims run,
If to new losses Merchants be inured,
If Husbandmen, Want (not to be endured)
Forbids to loyter: if Toil them o'r-throwes?
If Seas, by Shipwreck, prove our deadly foes,
If Discontents attend a Bachlers life,
But more in vain to watch a wanton Wife?
If Wars be bloody, if the sharking Arts
Of Usurers, suck blood from poor-mens hearts?
Each Age brings Cares: none like the present season.
Young Babes, yet sucking, Judgment want and Reason.
Boys it is hard within due bounds to keep:
And hare-braind Youth fall into dangers deep.
Fortune afflicts men by cruel Wars,
By crafty fetches and revengefull Iarres,
By endless troubles linkt as in a Chain,
Still to be changed for worse that do remain.
At last, Old Age, ill-wisht-for, on us grows,
And us a spoil to all Diseases throws.
We always present things despise: it is seen,
That some have wished, they gods had never been.
Iuturna cryeth-out, Why made he me
Immortal? Why from Death's stroke am I free?
So unto Caucasus Prometheus tied
Forbear not but on Saturns son out-cry'd.
Nor ceased he even Jove himself by name
(Because he was exempt from death) to blame.
Behold the Virtues of the mind; and see
Hippolytus o'r-thrown by Modesty:
But, he that takes delight his life to stain
With Wantonness, or baits of Pleasures vain,
Let him behold what punishment did fall
On lustful Tereus, or Sardanapal.
The Carthage Wars bid treachery eschew.
Saguntum, that she kept her faith, might rue.
Live, and keep friendship still; this only thing
The Pithagoreans did to ruin bring.
But, fearing it, Keep none: for this, alone,
The Athenians did uncivil Timon stone.
With inter-fering Cares, Minds fraught dissent:
That, which now pleases, straight will not content.
Some Honors seek: which, had, they naught regard;
Who, where they might command, stand at Reward.
When this man is by favor raised high,
He Is thrust into the mouth of pale Envy.
Still watch-full Cares go with the Eloquent:
But unkembd Clowns do want life's Ornament.
Be thou a Patron, and defend th'accused;
Of Clyents Thankfulness is seldom used.
Be thou a Clyent, then thou must be sure,
Thy Patrons words, full of commands, to endure.
To this man, Senators make suit and moan:
But, straight disgraced GRIEF him attends alone.
Poor Old Age men despise. If Heirs thou want,
Of cheating Claw-backs thou shall have no scant.
Be frugall, and a Niggard thou art named:
Be lavish, then thou shall be more defamed.
If thou be forced Adversity to bear,
Then all things else will go against the hair.
Then, with the best Greek Sentence, I agree;
It Is good, Not to be born; or Soon to die.
To Mr. JOHN CAMEAGE.
Thou living, do right well, to have
Remembrance of thy death and grave.
Anagr. CAMEAGE. AGE CAME.

Epigram. de eodem.
When perils I by Land and Sea had past,
AGE CAME, and Sommond me to death at last.
Epitaph.
QVae mihi prima dedit primis documenta sub annis,
Vrbs haec me tenuit, donec maturior aetas
Me varios hominum mores, and regna vocavit
Visere, nec rabidi vitavi vincula Turcae:
A queis mirifice explicitus, non immemor artis
Typhi tuae incubuit pelago cum mortis imago,
Meque meosque fere exhaustos ad littora fida
Christicolum adduxi: (summus Deus ille deorum
Mi nauclerus erat) reducem me patria multos
Post exa^tlatos terraque marique labores
Excipiens, vocat intermissa ad munia vitae;
Et tandem placida hic compostus pace quiesco.
Angl.
This City, where to learn I first began,
Me breeding gave, till (growing to a man)
Strange fashions I and kingdoms longd to see;
Not did I escape the Turkish tyranny.
From which delivered strangely (of thy Art,
O Typhis, that skillful was in part)
Through raging Seas (guided by power divine)
To the trustier shore of Christians, me and mine
I safely brought. Then, almost spent with toil,
I came again to see my Countrey-soyle:
Where to my former trade of life addressed,
At last I here in quiet peace do rest.
Epitaphium D. STEPHANI PROCTER, Militis.
Absorptam tumidis navem prope fluctibus olim,
In portum docta dirigis ipse manu,
A Circes technis rabidaeque voragine Scyllae;
Dulcis ubi aeternum est nunc tibi parta quies.
Angl.
Thy Ship, late tossed from Coast to Coast,
Thou steerd in the Port to rest,
From Circes charms and Scylla's harms;
Where thou art ever blessed.
De Poculo. Ad G. N.
Pulchra tibi argenti labris enpocula mitto:
Candida purpure is iunge labella labris.
Haec te Nectareo saturabunt pocula succo:
Oscula tuque illis, Nectare digna dabis.
Angl.
With silver Lips this Cup to thee I send:
Which with thy rosy Lips allow to blend.
It will thee satisfy with Nectar sweet,
Sweeter then Nectar, when thy Lips it greet.
Aliud.
Aurea labra tibi; sunt huic argentea: mista
Sint haec, ut pulchris lilia pulchra rosis.
Ad M. T.
Tu surdo cantas, das pulchra emblemata caeco,
Indoctis cum das carmina docta viris.
Angl.
Thou Pictures shows to the blind, to the deaf thou sings,
When to the unlearned thou learned Poems brings.
Reverendo in Christo Patri and D. IOH. KING, Episcopo Londinensi.
ORphea mirari cessent Acherontis ab undis
Ducentem Eurydicen dulce sonante Lyra:
Aut Amphionio fundatas munere Thebas,
Dum tangit nervos artipotente manu:
Fluctibus aut dorso delphinis Ariona tutum,
Mulcet dum cytharae monstra marina melos:
Coelitus afflata hijs tua Regia Buccina praestat,
Terrenas mentes ducere docta Deo.
Angl.
Let men now cease of Orpheus Harp to tell,
Which brought his wife Eurydice from Hell;
Or how Amphion with his Lute did call
Both Stones and Trees to build the Theban wall;
Or how a Dolphin through the Seas did bring
Arion, hyr'd with his harmonious string.
Thy Kingly Trumpet, filled with heavenly breath,
Excels them, raising men to Heaven from Earth.
Sibi merito colendo D. IOANNI BENETO, Militi.
Anagr. IOANNES BENETVS. NONNE BEAT JESUS?

Epigram.
Vel tu, vel nemo est (Benedicte BENETE) beatus:
NONNE BEAT JESUS te, Benedicte? Beat.
Epigramma ad eundem.
Gratior est pulchro veniens si corpore virtus,
Cui non virtutis laus celebranda tuae?
Splendidior a facit quae si fortuna sequutrix,
Quis been Fortunae dona locata neget?
Sed dedit haec Jesus, qui se dat: quo sine Formae,
Fortunae, atque Animi sunt Bona cuncta nihil.
Ad D. HIGGINS: cuius rogatu, sequens Epitaph. scripsi.
Ipse rogas (reverende) tuum que rogare, iubere est:
Hoc Gravitas, mira and Mansuetudo facit.
Haec rogat illa iubet: sic se amplectuntur, ut and tu
Iusta rogans iubeas, atque tubendo roges.
Epitaphium D. GVIL. TALENTIRE, Rectoris de Goldsbrough.
Tu bona (Talentire) tibi commissa talenta,
Condeb as sterili non male cautus humo:
Reddebas Domino at fidus cum foenore seruus;
Et fidei pretium coelica regna tenes.
Angl.
The Talents, which thy God unto thee lent,
Thou hidst not, Talentire, nor lewdly spent;
But, as a Servant true restored with gain;
And have thy Faith's reward, in Heaven to reign.
Ad D. GVIL. MALLORY, cum VIRGILIVM sibi auro pulchre ornatum dederim.
Hoc (generose puer) tibi do; Maiora daturus,
Si non obstaret sors inimica mihi.
At tibi quod munus magno maius dare possim
Virgilio, cuius maxima fama viget?
Angl.
This gift (O generous child) I give to thee,
That greater would, if Fortune favord me:
But, what gift greater may I to thee give,
Then Virgil great, whose greatest praise does live?
Ad T. N.
Me debere tibi dixisti Epigramma: tuoque ut
Liber ab aere siem, mitto Epigramma tibi.
Angl.
Thou say, I owe to thee an Epigram.
Take this: So, now out of thy debt I am.
Ad celeberrimum Poetam, IOANNEM OWEN.
En: promissa tuus tandem calcaria mittit
Ashmorus, merito motus amore tui;
Vt tibi, quem morum candor facit omnibus aequum,
Plectatur merito si sit iniquus equus.
Epitaphium Reverendi viri, D. MOSIS FOWLER, primi Ecclesiae Collegiatae
Ripponensis Decani.
Coelum, Terra, Homines de re rixantur eadem:
Fowlerum affirmat quilibet esse suum.
Mercurius coelo tantas componere lites,
Descendens, statim iussa paterna facit.
Coelo animam, terrae corpus mandavit habendum,
Ingenij nobis clara trophaea dedit.
Angl.
Heaven, Earth, and Men for one thing do contend:
Each one does Fowler challenge to be his.
Gods Messenger, from Heaven, this strife to end,
Descend's: And thus his will performed is.
His soul to Heaven, his body to the Grave,
To Us the tropheis of his wit he gave.
Allusio in eiusdem nomen.
Caeca tibi haud nomen tribuit Sors Aucupis: Ille
Vt captat volucres, sic capis ipse viros.
Ambo indefessi vos retia tentitis: ambo
Docto pellaces mittitis ore sonos.
Intentos oriens pradae Sol cernit: and idem
Cernit Neptuni vespere regna petens.
Est tamen, inter vos, aliquid discriminis: Auceps
Tu captos servas mitis; at ille necat.
Angl.
Blind Fortune has not Fowler named thee then.
For, as he Birds does take, so thou take men.
Not tired with toil, both spread your Nets, and mend:
Heart-charming Tunes from skillful Mouths both send.
The Sun both busy sees, when he begins
His race, and when in Neptune's bowr's he Innes.
Yet this betwixt you both the difference makes:
Thou gently sav'st, He kills those that he takes.
Lamentatio CATHERINAE FOWLER, castae and integerrimae Matronae, in suorum
morte.
Vnus erat coniux mihi, filius vnus, and vna
Gnata: sed, hos mihi tres, tres rapuere dies.
Quid deserta querar? voluit sic Trinus and Vnus;
Orba vt terrenis coelica sola sequar.
Ad D. Cradock, Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelmensis Cancellarium, de Patris sui
morte.
Stemmatibus Proavum clarus; sed clarior alta
Virtute, and iunct a cum Pictate fide,
Cradocchus iacet hic, coeleste ad lumen anhelans;
Lumina qui clausit mox fruitura Deo:
Invita quem morte manet cum foenore vita,
Per Christum coelo, per sobolemque solo.
Ad Eundem.
Munera cum miseris Dij dant mortalibus, illis
Copia non minor est: sic imitare Deos.
Sed nil dant, nisi sint votis, precibusque vocati:
At tu, sponte tua; sic super asque Deos.
Ergo tibi surget nostro Ara ex pectore sacra;
Vnde tibi lauds, and pia thura dabo.
Angl.
Whenas the gods their Gifts on men bestow,
Their Store's not less. The gods thou follow'st so.
But, they give not except long vows compel them:
Thou, of thy Self, un-askt: So thou excels them.
Therefore my Heart shall still the Altar be;
Whence, Praise and Thankfulness I Will yield to thee.
Pulvinulus.
Non me materies, Dominae sed sedula dextra,
Laudat: gratus eris si sibi grata facis.
Ad Martialem.
Pythagorae verum si dogma est, corpore casso,
Emigrare animam corpus in alterius;
Tunc quem tam graphice pinxisti (docte Poeta)
Nunc est Lindallus, qui Decianus erat.
Nam mag is haud simile est lac lacti, quam Deciano est
Lindallus multis dotibus ingenij.
Ergo adamanteis vinc'lis iungatur uterque,
Et cum laud illis, and sine fraud tibi.
Ex Martial. Lib. 1. Epigr.
If any worthy be to be inrowl'd
Amongst true Friends, of which fore-times have told:
If any in Greek Arts, or Latin be
Well washed, and good with wise simplicity:
If any that loves Right, goes honest ways,
And so to God, that all may hear him, prays:
If any staid with Magnanimity;
If this be not our Lindall, Let me die.
Ad D. CHRISTOPH. LINDALL, Ripponae Praebendar. digniss.
Anagr. CHRISTOFFER LINDALLE. ILEND, OFFER, CHRIST ALL.

Epigr. de Eodem.
Qui been te novit, doctissime vir, been novit
Convenit ut fact is hoc Epigramma tuis.
Angl.
That with this Epigramme thy deeds agree,
They well know, that did ever well know thee.
To the worthily much-honor'd Knight, Sir THOMAS FERFAX, of Denton.
Whether thou warlike Barbary bestride
(That angry is with the controwling bit)
Or in calm Peace (thy armor laid aside)
Determining Causes on the Bench do sit,
Or do retire to the Muses thy delight,
And reads, or makes as they to thee indite:
Wheresoe'r thou art (renowned Knight) thou do bear
The Image of that Monarch great of France,
To whom Minerva brought both Shield and Spear;
Whose Ensigns Victory did still advance;
And on whose Grave, with bi^ter tears besprent,
Mars mournes, and Prowess her hoare-hairs does rent.
Achilles Friend so like him did not go,
Whom Hector in his room enraged did slay,
As thou do him in every point: For, so
His eyes he moved, his hands did so display.
And, more: The Heavens this Grace unto thee give,
His Virtues cannot die, while Thou do live.
Ad D. FERDINANDVM FERFAX, Militem.
Anagr. Pherdinandus Ferfaxeius. I, Prudens dux: (ah!) ne differ as.

Epigr. de Eodem.
^ Pede, Dux, fausto: noli differ paratus:
Sic and Alexandro subditus orbis erat.
To the famous Martialist, Captain WILLIAM FERFAX.
Nor from thy Name do thou degenerate,
Stern Mars his Minion, Darling of the Muses;
Nor prises Honor at so low a rate,
That it to obtain thou any toil refuses.
The way is steep, in which they must begin,
That Honors Fort do Scale, Surprise, and Win.
With Trumpets sound, how sweetly do thou join
The pleasing tunes of gentle Erato!
And with what sacred theft do thou purloine
The hearts of men! What manly Virtues grow
From thy young Years! which since as I desire
I cannot praise, I only will admire.
Dialogus inter Vram and Skell, duos amnes Ripponam ambientes, and in part
oppidi orientali coeuntes, de morte celeberrimi viri, Ioh. Mallory, Equitis
aurati.
Vr. DIc mihi Skelle precor, solitus quite dare nobis
Laetum, cur subito solueris in lacrymas?
An tibi quis liquidas turbavit flumine lymphas?
An dilecta tibi Nympha proterva fuit?

Sk. Non hoc aut illud: gravior me cura fatigat,
Nostraque sollicito and corda dolor premit.
Nonne tibi nota est communis causa doloris?
Nonne Malorei funera nota tibi?

Vr. An Maloreus obit? Parcae potuere feroces
Talis, and heu tanti, rumpere fila viri?
An Maloreius obit? Fatorum O ferrea iura!
Et nunquam humanis (heu!) saturata malis!

Sk. Illius interitu liquidis fleuere sub antris
Naiades and scissis exululare comis,
Illius interitu reboarunt omnia luctu;
Quicquid habet Coelum, quicquid habetque Solum.

Vr. Hoc fuit, in thalamo cum me sopor altus habebat
Muscoso, and Nymphae carmina laeta dabant,
Horrendum ut Boreas mugiens, coelique ruina
Corriperet stratis? hoccine causa fuit?

Skel. Ergo, cum nobis eadem sit causa dolendi,
Ambobus pariter, sors and amara siet;
Nostros iungamus latices, and flumen in unum:
Qui geminatus erat, sic dolor unus erit.

Vr. Esto: sed hac sub lege tamen, coeamus ut ambo
In Patris Oceani liberioris aquas:
Hic dabit Amplexus, vitreoque cubile receptis;
Vt levet ipse malis hospit is instar erit.

Sk. Gratius an quicquam mihi sit, quam cernere vultus
Illius immensas qui moderatur aquas?
Hic nos excipiet: nobis lacrymando exhaustis,
In fletus salsas suppeditabit aquas.

Vr. Angl.
TEll me, good Skell, from mirth to mourning cheer
What so has changed thee, or what moves thy mind?
Has any troubled late thy Waters clear?
Or does thy lovely Nymph now prove unkind?

Sk. Nor this, nor that: far greater Grief I know,
Which on my woeful Heart does heavy lie.
Have thou not heard the cause of common Woe;
The Funeral of famous Mallory?

Vr. Is Mallory dead? O cruel Fates decree!
Could his great Worth obtain then no Relief?
O Irow laws of still-stern Destiny,
Never satisfied with humane Woe and Grief!

Sk. At his death, Nymphs in liquid Bowrs did weep;
And, shrieking out, did rent their greenish hair:
At his death, Wayling did all places keep:
Both Heaven, and Earth their mourning weeds did wear.

Vr. Was this the cause when sweet sleep closed mine eyes
In my moss-matted room, whiles Nymphs did sing,
That Storm-winged Boreas, and the thundering Skies,
Me from my bed so suddenly did bring?

Sk. Since both of Us then Partners are in woe,
And neither from disastrous Chance are free,
Lets join our streams, and both together go:
So, that, which twofold was, one Grief will be.

Vr. Content: but, thus; that both together we
Do run to our Father Oceans larger coast:
He Will us embrace in's glassie Hall; and he,
To ease our Grief, will play the gentle Host.

Sk. May any thing more joyful me betide,
Than him to see that rules in the watery Field?
He Will us receive; and t'us, with weeping dried,
He for fresh tears salt waters still will yield.

Ad humanissimum virum, D. FRAN. TRAPPES, Militem.
Ne merito videar sterili assimilandus agello
(Nam data vix sterilis semina mittit ager.)
Ecce tibi acceptum (Miles dignis sime) reddo,
Vt magis auct atua and Copia nostra siet.
Foelix hoc foenus, quod danti, quodque locanti
Est lucro. Tali foenore Musa beat.
In Rufum.
Rufus, but late returning from the South,
Knaps Southern; and now scorns his Countrey-mouth:
He cringes with his Face, and looks aside;
And sets his Countenance, as he were a Bride.
He wears a nitty Lock: his Fingers skip,
And dance Carantoes 'twixt his Waste and Lip;
And is with Complement so filled to the Brim,
That when a Gentleman but said to him,
What is it a clock; he first his hand did kiss;
To say then, At your service, did not miss.
And as the time he entertained thus,
Before he would lay open or untruss
The Budget of his Speech, with much adoo
A formal leg he made, and said, It Is two.
Ye Homebred things, if you in's comp'nie fall,
Be mannerly; or he will shame you all.
Ad G. W. qui casu caput suum Cantabrigiae fregit.
Alma foret nunquam Iovis ex capite edita Pallas,
Frangi non sineret si caput ipse sibi:
Et tibi non fractum caput est modo Palladis urbe,
Pallas ut intraret sic caput alma tuum?
Angl.
Pallas had never been born of high Jove's head,
If's Head had not been broke and brought a-bed:
Was not thy Head, then, broke in Pallas Town,
That Pallas in thy Head might take a room?
In Sacrificum quendam.
A Priest, for Penance, one enioynd to take
A journey with three Pease, loofe in his shoo:
Which he, devoutly given, did not forsake,
But framed himself his Penance straight to do:
Yet, that he might perform it with more ease,
His wit did serve him, first to boil the Pease.
To the Right Worsh. the Lady ELSABETH Metcalf, the La. Catherin Fennick, and
the La. Marie Bethell, Daughters of Sir Hen. Slingsbie, Knight.
Judge, Ladies, that are modest, fair, and wise
(Since in their judgments Men do vary so,
And in these cases Women best advise)
Whether Lucretia did do well, or no.
Virgil: Lucretia.
When with a knife chaste Lucrece stabd her side,
And streams of blood thence gushed-forth, she cried,
My spirit in Heaven, my blood shall witness here,
That I from stains of Chastity am clear.
How well will these, brought for me, plead and prove;
This with the Ghosts, that with the Gods above!
Beza de Eadem.
My Body's staind: my Soul is pure and free.
Then, from this body, chaste do thou not flee?
In Eandem.
If the Adult'rer, Lucrece did thee please,
By Death deserved thou seeks unworthy praise:
But rather if he forced thee against thy will,
For thy Foes fault, thou (mad) thy blood did spill.
In vain then Lucrece thou seeks praise, at all:
For, madly thou, or wickedly, did fall.
To Mrs. Dorathy Wythes, wife to Mr. Charles Wythes, Esquire.
Anagr. Dorathy Wythes. Wise, Hearty, Does.

Epigr. de Eodem.
Wise and Hearty, both are good:
Does, gives them Life and Action.
Without it, both are but a Bud,
That grows to no Perfection.
To Mr. Mark Metcalf.
Eutrapeley (as some thought) is not dead,
Though long since she from us be gone and fled.
She Is with Mark Metcalf gone to York from hence:
And with him there keeps daily Residence.
An Epitaph of I. H. Dyer.
He lives with God, none can deny,
That while he lived, to the World did die.
Ad Poetam doctissimum (utinam ditissimum) Ioh. Owen.
Vates Mecoenas olim tres unus alebat:
At nunc tres uni vix alimenta dabunt.
Angl.
Three Poets one Mecoenas once did cherish:
But now Three, One, for want of means, see perish.
Aliter.
Mecoenas erst three Poets did mantaine:
By Three, now, One scarce Bread and Cheese can gain.
Aliter.
Three Poets one Mecoenas whilom fed:
Now Three let One go supperless to bed.
Ad amicum suum D. ROBERTVM Millner, de nomine suo, Ashmore.
Littera non erit H, atque S omnino liquescet,
Ne quidquam nobis sint in Amore morae.
Ad D. ROB. MORE, Armigerum.
Qui (More) more tuus, tuus and sict Ore que, Re que,
An dubites quin sit totus Amore tuus?
Praenobili viro, D. Clifford, FRANCISCI Illustriss. Cumberlandiae Comitis
filio and Haeredi.
Cessent, Nobilibus sacrae qui Palladis arts
Demunt, aut doctis nobile stemma negant:
Hos omnes unus vincit Cliffordus utroque;
Stemmatibus clarus, clarus and ingenio.
To the Honorable, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Knight Baronet.
Be where thou will, Worth always thee attends,
In Public and in Private causes known.
Virtues thy Worth, thy Worth Virtues commends;
Which in thy Words and Deeds are daily show'n.
Where-e'r thou goes, so let thy Worth shine forth,
That men may truly still say, There Went-worth.
To Sir Charles Egerton, Knight.
Moved (gentle Knight) by thy great Courtesy,
And good Report I meet with every where,
I add these few words to the Memory
Of Him, to whom in kindred thou were near;
That Man of Worth, whom lately we did see
England's State- Atlas, Cheshire's Treasury.
Ex Io. Syl. Anagr. Thomas Egerton. Honors met Age.

Honors met Age; and, seeking where to rest,
Agreed to lodge and harbor in thy Breast,
Ad Humanissimum virum, D. Guliel. Austin, Armigerum.
Ergone cum clara resonet tua Buccina voce,
Auribus obstreperet nostra Cicuta tuis?
Sed ita vis; neque detrecto: Sic Daulias ipsa
Carmen iners audit non variantis avis.
Stridulus arguto sic garriat Anser Olori:
Sicque Cicada tuis O Galerita sonis.
Ad Ornatissimum Virum, D. Guidonem Palms, Militem.
Corporis, aut Animi, si quis Bona ponderet, inter
Millia multa virum Palms tibi Palma datur.
Angl.
If Ornaments thou of the Mind,
Or Body in the Weigh-scales set,
Amongst many Thousands thou'll not find
One, that from Palms the Palm can get.
Ad Reverendum virum, D. Doctorem FAVOR.
Est Favor in vultu: verbis Favor ipse relucet:
Corpore pars toto nulla Favore vacat.
Non mirum est igitur si sint ea plena Favore
Quae facias, cum sis Totus and ipse Favor.
Ad Insignem Poetam, D. Ben. Johnson.
Ne sit iners impune, tuus titubetve Caballus,
Munera Mulciberi mitto polita manu.
Neve tuus languescat amor, tibi Carmina mitto:
Sic Pauper diti poma dat Alcinoo.
Ad D. Franckland.
Sit tibi terra ferax (omni feritate relicta)
Qui candore animi notus es esse ferax.
Angl.
Still let the Land be Frank to thee,
(All rudeness set aside)
Whose Frankness in all Courtesy
So well is known and tried.
Ad Hen. Bethell, D. Gualteri Bethell, Militis filium, cum Iustinianum sibi
mitterem.
Vis fieri Doctus? vis Dives? Iustinianum
Perlege: Doctrinam, Divitiasque dabit.
Angl.
If Learning thou, or Riches would obtain,
Justinian read: By him thou both may gain.
Ad D. Io: Davies, Milite^, Iudicem Itinerariu^.
Si tua legisset redivivus Carmina Plato,
Queis Animae dotes Entheus ipse canis:
Aut tua voluisset Bilbili Epigrammata Vates,
Tempora queis salse liberiora notas;
Diverso quamvis Genio scripsere hic, and ille,
Traderet hic Palmam, traderet ille tibi.
Angl.
If Plato lived, and saw those Heaven-breath'd Lines
Where thou the Essence of the Soul confines,
Or merry Martial read thy Epigrammes
Where sportingly these looser times thou blames;
Though both excel, yet (in their several ways)
They both, ore-come, would yield to thee the Praise.
Ad D. Thomam Best.
An quisquam neget hunc foelici sydere natum,
Qui solet in quo vis Optimus esse loco?
Angl.
With happy stars he sure is Blessed,
Wheresoe'r he goes that still is Best.
To Mistress Katherin Dutton, Daughter of M. Dutton, the worthy Alderman of
Chester, lately deceased.
Anagr. Katherine Dutton. That kind true one.

Epigr.
A Woman kind, that is not True,
Plays false, and makes her Husband rue:
If True she be, and nothing Kind,
She is a Corrasiue to his Mind.
True kindness, and Kind Truth in one,
Make-up a happy Union.
Epitaphium Robini.
Round Robin's gone: And this Grave does enclose
The Pudding of his Doublet and his Hose.
Ad D. Iohannem Petty, de quodam Male.
Sit male (Mal^) tibi, si sis malus, atque molestus,
Atque malo petus sit Tibi (Male) precor:
Sin (mage quod cap^o) tu sis bonus, atque benignus,
Opto ut contingat nil tibi (Male) mali.
In Fidicinem infidum.
Non tibi danda fides, Fidicen: discrimine nullo
Tuque fides violas, tu violasque fidem.
Aliud.
Qui fidibus ludis, volupe est tibi ludere amicos:
Est eadem fidei cura fidisque tibi.
Dominus quidam de se.
Poscenti soleo nummos irascter: An quod
Do Minus atque Minas, dicor ego Dominus?
To M. Christopher Moyser.
The Friendship, that betwixt us is begun
For causes just (which we our selves best know)
Will for the same I trust on smoothly run,
And with the time increase, and greater grow.
Ad Reverendum virum, sibique merito colendum, Ad D. Hodgson, sacrae Theologiae
Doctorem.
Anagr. Phineas Hodgsonius, Doctor. Dignus Honor dato, poscis.

Epigr.
Dignus Honor dato merito tu poscis Honorem:
Qui datur indigno, non honor est, at onus.
Of One that (wearing an Hawthorne in his hat to save him from the thunder) was
suspected, upon Examination found to be a Priest, and is now in Prison. In
Sacrisicum.
Albo Sacrificus spino sua tempora cinxit,
Sic Iovis ut sugeret fulmina missa manu:
Caesaris at non sic effugit fulmina laesi.
Divisum Imperium cum love Caesar habet.
Angl.
A Priest, that he Jove's thunder might not fear,
An Hawthorn garland on his head did wear:
Which him from Caesar's thunder could not hide.
Caesar with Jove Dominion does divide:
In Eundem.
Fulmina dum vitas, invitas fulmina demens:
Interior a Deo, haud exterior a placent.
Angl.
While fondly thou the Thunder shuns
Upon the Thunderbolt thou runs:
For, surely God (whom all should praise)
Not outward things, but inward please.
To Mr. John Paget.
Our Friendship strengthened by continuance,
And the respect that to thy worth is fit,
Claim in my Writings this rememberance,
That each Page should John Paget have in it.
In Tortum.
Tortus, accused to lie, to feine, and flatter,
Said, he but set a good Face on the matter.
Then sure, he borrowed it: for (it is well known)
Tortus never wore a good Face of his own.
De Seipso.
Surety, what is that? I to my loss have tried,
Who for another Debt too Sure am Tied:
If this I had Etymologiz'd before,
I never had been shut within this door.
FINIS.
GENERIS SPLENDORE, Doctrina, and Pietate viro praecellenti, D. THOMAE WHARTON,
Equiti aurato, D. Philippi Baronis de Wharton, Filio and Haeredi.
ACcipe, sed placidus, de laud haec carmina Ruris
(Aulae and nunc ruris, non mediocre decus)
Dum facili aggredior fiscellam texere hibisco,
Quae modo dictavit rustica Musa mihi.
Sic tua (foeminei laus, and nova gloria, sexus)
Pignoribus ditet te Philadelpha xthori:
Sicque tuus, pulchra pulcher qui ludit in Aula,
Te clara faciat prole Philippus Avum.
Angl.
ACcept these Lines, the Countrie's praise that tell
(O thou the Court's and Country's dear Delight)
Which, as I Mawnds made in my homely Cell,
My Country Muse did late to me indite.
So, let thy Philadelph (her Sexes praise)
Enrich thee still with Treasures of her bed:
So, let thy Philip, in thy Hall that plays,
Thee Grandfire make by Issue fairly spread.
Virtutum tuarum cultor observantissimus, IOH: ASHMORVS.

THE PRAISE OF A COUNTRY LIFE. MARTIAL. Lib. 4. Epigram. 90. De Rusticatione.
ASks thou, in the Country how I spend the Day?
Early, each morning, to the gods I pray.
My Servants then, and Fields to see I go,
And every one appoint what work to do.
This done, I read, and Vows to Phoebus make
To ease me, and my drouping Muse t'awake.
My Body then I rub and ore-anoynt,
And easily stretch-out each Lim and Joint,
Rejoicing in my mind, secure and free
From debt, and the black books of Usury.
I dine, I drink, I sing, I wash, I play,
I sup; then, from my Rest not long do stay:
Yet, till my Lamp a little Oil do spend,
Some time I nightly to the Muses lend.
VIRGIL. Georg. lib. 2. Vitae Rusticae Laus.
O Happy (if their Happiness they knew)
Are Husbandmen; to whom, in seasons due
(Far from Bellona's Rage in bloody Fields)
The thankful Earth food from her Bosom yields.
If their proud Gates from each Room belch not out
Of Smell-feast Parasites a fleering Rout;
Nor Pillars they desire, that bear on high
Roofs fairly fretted with Imagery;
Nor Clothes, where scattred Gold sportes interlaced;
Nor Plate of Corinth curiously enchased;
Nor their white Fleeces are with Venim foiled;
Nor self-pure Oil with Slibber-sawces spoiled:
Yet quiet Rest, and harm-less Lives they have
So rich of good things, that they need not crave;
And spacious Grounds, where they do walk at leisure;
And Caves, and Springs, and Woods, and Groves, for pleasure.
Their bellowing Oxen, and their bleating Sheep,
In some cool Shade them summon to sweet Sleep:
There Forests, and there Dens of wild Beasts are,
And Youth enduring toil with little Fare;
There holy Rites, and holy Fathers been:
Astraea, leaving the Earth, There last was seen.
But, first let the sweet Muses (whom above
All other things I most esteem and love)
Me entertain their Priest, and to me show
The Circuits that the Heavens and Stars do go,
The sundr' Eclipses of the Sun and Moon,
Whence Earthquakes come; what Power the Sea so soon
(His Bars broke down) makes proudly rage and swell,
And brings it back, within its Banks to dwell:
Why Winter-daies so fast do run away,
And why the lingering Nights so long do stay.
But, if dull Blood, congealed about my Heart,
Forbids me to undergo this worthy Part
Of Natures Worth; Then let the Country please-mee,
And Rivers (running through the Valleys) ease-mee.
Then let me love the Woods and Floods unknown.
O that there were, O that there were but one
That would me set upon the pleasant Plain,
By which swift Pirchius does his Course maintain
With posting Waters! or on Taget Hill,
Which Spartan Virgins with mad Shriekings fill
In Bacchus Feasts! or, under Hemus Bank,
Would cover me in the Shade of Branches rank!
He Is happy, that the Causes of things knows,
That vanquisheth, and at his Feet down throws,
All Cares, and Dest'nies unappeas'd Mis-haps,
And the hideous Noise of Hel's still-gaping Chaps.
He Is happy too, the Country-gods that knows;
Pan, and Sylvanus (that in Years now grows)
And sister-Fairies, tripping on the Lawn.
He, from his settled Life, will not be drawn
By Honors Ensigns, nor by Robes of State,
Nor by ambitious Thoughts that hatch Debate,
And faith-lesse Brethren sets by the Ears;
Nor Treachery, amazed with doubtful Fears;
Nor by Rome's Glory (that now bears Sway)
Nor Kingdoms, that soon perish and decay.
He pulingly never mourns for the Poor,
Nor him envieth that is rich in Store.
The Fruit, his Trees and Ground yield willingly,
He gathers, and he keeps carefully:
Nor does he hard and cruel Laws behold,
Now brawling Courts, where Judgments are inroul'd.
Some, Seas unknown with Oars molest, nor shun
They murdering Steel: to Princes Courts Some run.
He Cities sackes, and Matrones makes to weep,
That he may bowze in Pearl, in Purple sleep.
From Riches hid, Another seldom flitteth;
But, on his buried Gold (as brooding) sits.
He, at the Bar struck mute, astonished stands:
Gaping for Praise, Him Shouts, and Claps of hands
In The Theater (for, they redoubled be
By Senators, and the Plebeity)
Raise like a Top, and turn-sick make with Pride.
These Swaggerers hands theirs Brothers blood have died.
From place to place These still do trudge and range,
And their sweet Homes for Banishment do change:
New fangled, from their trusty Friends they run,
To seek a Place warmed with another Sun.
The Husbandman with crookt Plough does not spare
To stir his Ground. Hence, his Revenewes are:
Hence, to his Country, Scot and Lot he paies:
Hence, Sust'nance for his Household he does raise,
And his young Nephews: Hence, he does preserve
His Herds of Beasts; and Steers, that well dezerve.
Nor will it rest, but the Year will set abroad
His Riches, and each Bough with Fruit will load;
Or great Increase will Cattle cause to yield,
Or Ceres Gifts so shed in every Field,
That scarce the Furrows may their Burden bear,
And their large Barns asunder that will tear.
Winter draws on. The Olive-berries then
They grind in Mills: The Hogs come home again
Frolic with Mast and Wildings in the Woods.
And Autumn is no Niggard of his Goods:
The Vessels he to the Brimmes with ripe Grapes fills,
And presses them forth on the sunshine Hills.
Meanwhile, their pretty Babes they hug and kiss:
Mild Chastity still their Housekeeper is.
The Kine with strouting Vdders come to the Pail:
The wanton Kids (in the rank Grass, by) assail,
With Horns new put-forth, proudly one another:
Nor to the Gods, unthankful, does he smother
Their Gifts; but keeps his Feasts Solemnities,
And on the Grass with Flowers embrodered lies;
Where, in the midst, the Fire they compass round,
When his Help-fellows quaffing Boawls have crowned:
Which lightly touched, with Vows he calls on thee,
O Bacchus. Then he Games, for Mastery,
In the Elm to Neat-heards sets: He, that shoots best,
Must have the Shout and Praise from all the rest.
Their leather-Pelts put-off, the thick-skin Crew
Themselves in untaught Wrestling tugge and tew.
Long-since, the ancient Sabines lived thus:
Thus Remus, and his Brother Romulus:
Warlick Hetruria thus to Greatness grew:
Yea, Rome herself (to whom all Nations sue,
The admired Minion of the World) thus rose,
And in one Wall seven Towers did thus enclose.
And, long before the Cretian King did reign,
And cruel People lived by Bullocks slain,
Good Saturn thus on Earth did spend his Days:
Fearful Alarums yet men did not raise
To hateful Wars; nor (on hard Anvils wrought
With crackling noise) for slaughter Swords were sought.
But now, in the Wilde-goose-Chase o'r-hal'd with Pains,
It Is time to loose my froathing Horses Rains.
Ex M. Antonio Flaminio, ad Agellum suum. Sic incipit: Vmbrae frigidulae, etc.
COol Shades, Air-fanning Groves,
With your soft Whisperings,
Where Pleasure smiling roves
Through deawie Caves and Springs,
And bathes her purple Wings:
With Flowrs inameld Ground
(Nature's fair Tapestry)
Where chattering Birds abound,
Flickring from Tree to Tree,
With Change of Melody:
Sweet Liberty and Leasures,
Where still the Muses keep,
O! if to those true Treasures,
That from your Bosoms peep,
I might securely creep:
If I might spend my Days
(Remote from public Brawls)
Now tuning lovely Lays,
Now light-foot Madrigals,
Never checked with sudden Calls:
Now follow Sleep that goes
Rustling in the green-wood Shade;
Now milk my Goat, that knows
(With her young fearful Cade)
The Pail in the cooly Glade,
And with Boawls filled to the Brims
Of milky Moisture new,
To water my dried Lims,
And to all the wrangling Crew
Of Cares to bid, Adieu;
What Life then should I lead!
How like then would it be
Unto the Gods, that tread
In The starry Gallery
Of true Felicity!
But you, O Virgins sweet,
In Helicon thar dwell,
That often the Fountains greet,
When you the Pleasures tell
In The Country that excel:
If I my Life, though dear,
For your far dearer sake,
To yield would nothing fear;
From Citie's Tumults take-mee,
And free in the Country make-mee.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT WORSIPfull, Sr. RICHARD HVTTON, Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices in the Court of Common Pleas.
IF my Hopes harvest, Worthy Sir, had not
Been blasted with the Breath of dull Despair,
My Muse (never branded with the hateful blot
Of cheap Ingratitude, freed from base Care)
The Tribute of her Love (for Causes just)
Would not so long have smothered in the Dust.
Yet looks She for one Sunshine Day: Mean while,
Accept these Gleanings, gathered in the Fields
Of good Freeholders, in the blessed I Will,
Where each one shows (as his Affection yields)
Who is most blessed: which none can better tell,
Then the sweet Singer does of Israel.
Your Worships, in his best endeavors to command, IOH: ASHMORE.

OF A BLESSED LIFE. MARTIALIS, ad seipsum, vel potius ad Iulium Martialem. Lib.
10. Epigr. 47.
O Merry Martial, I mistake,
A happy Life if these not make;
Riches bequeathed, not got by toil,
A fire never out, no barren Soil,
No Strife, seld' Office, a Mind found
Still calm, fit Strength, a Body sound,
Wise Smpleness, Friends equal bred,
No costly Fare, a Board soon spread,
Nights never drunk, but from Cares free,
A gamesome Bed with Modesty,
Sleep making Darkness short to be.
Be with thy State Content: so stay:
Wish not, nor fear, thy Fatall-Day.
Strigillius contra Martialem.
O Trifling Martial, it is most sure
That these things a blessed Life procure:
Sense of our Sin, an Heart relenting,
Grief for our errors, Tears repenting,
And Faith, that saving Health embraces.
For, he that on this sure Rock places
His ne'r-shak't Faith, thar Christ alone
(True God) our Nature has put-on,
And Us (marked with Deaths blackest Letters,
Unto eternal Chains and Fetters)
Has ransomd with his dearest Blood,
And 'twixt God's Wrath and Us has stood:
In Heaven he shall ('mong Heroes blessed)
Crowned with unblasted Bays still rest.
Perhaps, thou'l say; These words are blunt;
Nor Romans so to speak ar wont.
O trifling Martial, it is most sure,
That these things a blessed Life procure.
Georg. Fabricius.
THese things true Happiness do teach,
At which well-minded Christians reach:
God rightly and thy self to know,
And what thou do thy Neighbor owe;
A temperate Tongue, chaste Speech, Heart pure,
A cheerful Giver's Hand to the Poor,
A Life with small, and 's own Content,
Unstained Faith, and Love permanent,
A Mind with good Success not drunk,
Nor with disastrous chances shrunk,
But which good Hope keeps, and makes bold
His Savior Christ still to behold.
Ad Martialem. Lib. 5. Epigr. 21.
IF that with thee, dear Martial, I might
Securely spend my days as I desire:
If vacant time we might dispose aright,
And at the last to a true life retire;
No Princes Courts, nor houses would we know
Of mighty men, nor irksome suits would try,
Nor unto greedy Lawyers would we go,
Nor poare on a proud worm-gnawn Pedigree:
But, a well-pend, and lively acted Scene,
Small Brooks, Fields, Walks, fair Damsels, Bathes and Shades,
Should be the Labors we would entertain,
Should be the Shops wherein we still would trade.
Now, neither of us lives to himself (Alas!)
But does perceive with grief of mind, and see
How fair Suns rise, and how away they pass
Fruit-less to us, for which we blamed be.
Does not a man, to live that knows the way,
Cut Off encumbrances that thence him stay?
Marcus Antonius Flaminius, ad Steph. Saulum: Sic incipiens. Ne tu beatum
dixeris* etc.
THink not (good Saul) that he is blessed
Through Cities stately Gates that goes,
With swarms of crouching Suitors pressed,
And noble Peers that him in close.
No, not if in high-rooft Barnes he
Fair Affricks fertile Harvests hold,
And Gems, and polisht Ivory
Possess, and ruddy heaps of Gold.
Nor he the secret Seals that opes
Of Causes; or by skill profound
Mounts to the Stars, or by Wit gropes
To find the Treasures hid in the Ground:
But him thou Blessed well may call.
That rightly does his God adore,
And from his Precepts does not fall,
But them than Gold esteems more.
He Is not puft-up with peoples Praise;
But, still God's Praise to him is dear:
Which to maintain and more to raise,
Reproaches he does willing bear.
And often, from Earth's Cares set free,
His happy Soul to Heaven ascends;
Where it enioyes the Deity,
And parlies with celestial Friends.
And so, full fraught with heavenly Joy,
Unto an higher pitch he rises
Than worldly Dangers can annoy,
And Men's mad purposes despises.
The Shepherd so, from peril far,
As he secure lies in his Cave,
Beholds the sturdy Winds at war
With Seas, that proudly swell and rave,
Lipsij laus, and vota Vitae beatae.
He Is like the gods, and higher then
The rest-less Race of mortal Men,
That wishes not, or (in despair)
The doubtful Day of Death does fear.
In whom Ambition does not reign,
That is not vexed with hope of Gain,
That trembles not at Threats of Kings,
Nor Darts that angry Jove down flings:
But, firmly seated in one Place,
Vulgar Delights does scorn, as base:
That of his Life one Tenor keeps;
Secure that wakes, secure that sleeps.
If I might live at mine own pleasure,
I would no Office seek, nor Treasure;
Nor captive Troops should me attend,
As to my Charret I ascend,
Drawn by white Steeds, with Shouts and Cries;
A Spectacle to gazing Eyes.
In Places I remote would be:
Gardens and Fields should solace me:
There, at the bubbling waters noise,
I with the Muses would rejoice.
So, when my Lachesis has spun
The thread of Life, she well drew on;
Not unto any man a Foe,
I full of Years from hence would go,
And Date my days in quiet state,
As my good Langius did of late.
Psalmus Primus DAVIDIS. Beatus vir, etc.
He happy is, amongst the brainsick Crew
Of ill-advising men, that does not walk;
Nor the lewd Path of wicked men pursue,
Of holy things that dare profanely talk;
Nor in the Scorners chair sits (swollen with Pride)
That God contemn, and Godliness deride.
But he seeks-out farre-better Ways to tread,
Led (in the winding Labyrinth of this Life)
By his Creator's Laws, as a sure thread
That guides him through cross-wayes of worldly Strife.
By it, his Words and Actions he does frame:
Early and late he thinks upon the fame.
He Is like a thick-leav'd tree, that planted is
By the green Bank of some smooth-gliding Stream,
That with his fruitful arms stretcht-forth does bliss
The Laborers Pains: which Phoebus with his beam
Does never so search, nor Winters rage can stay,
But yearly Rent she to her Lord will pay.
So shall not the ungodly and unkind
Despisers of Gods Statutes and his Grace,
That (with themselves at war) no Rest can find;
But, like the Chaf, are tossed from place to place
With every sudden blast of Wind that blows,
Which scorns their lightness, and to Heaven it shows.
For, when the just Judge comes in a bright Cloud,
Circled with Angels, clothed with Majesty,
The wicked (daunted) will cry-out aloud,
Casshierd from Saints for their impiety.
For, as in good men's Ways God takes Delight,
So he o'r-throwes all wicked By-ways quite.
FINIS.

