TWO SERMONS UPON THE XII. CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE TO the Hebrews, the
sixteenth and seventeenth verses.

PREACHED IN THE CITY OF LONDON the twelfth day of June, 1608.

By THOMAS HOPKINS Minister at Yeardley in the County of Worcester.

HEBREWS 13.4. Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

COLOSS. 3.2. Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things
which are on the earth.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM WELBY, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Greyhound. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL WILLIAM HANCOCK MAYOR, THE Worshipful Justices and
Aldermen his brethren, with my Christian countrymen of the City of Couentrie,
be all grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ; Amen.
RIght worshipful and my loving Countrymen; having some occasion this last
summer to travel up to the City of London, and being there, I was entreated
by a godly friend to bestow my labors on a Sabbath day, in preaching at the
Parish Church in which he dwelled: to whom I willingly agreed. Whereat, there
were some, contrary to my knowledge or priuitie, that took the pains to take
the notes of the Sermons, and before my departure out of the City made me
acquainted therewithal, and showed them unto me: and reading part of them, I
did greatly marvel thereat; and worthy was the Author to be commended for his
pains and skill, having never seen the like so largely taken by any
whatsoever: for scarce could I find any word of substance wherein he failed.

Here upon certain of my friends who were hearers thereof, labored with me to
commit them to the Press: and in hope I would satisfy their earnest suit,
sent down after me their notes fair copied out to my house: which after some
pains taken in setting the same in order, and some things (though not much)
added for the more plain opening of that, which time prevented me in the
preaching, I have sent it up again to them to use at their pleasure. The which
having by Gods help finished, I do make bold to dedicate the same to your
favorable view. The reasons moving me thereunto are specially these three:
The first is, because of the experience I have had of diverse of your godly,
zealous, and sincere love to the Gospel. The second is, being bound by nature
to leave it as a testimony of my unfeigned love to my native City. Thirdly, in
regard of the undeserved kindness and beneuolences I have often received from
you. In some liew whereof I thought it a part of my duty to dedicate these my
poor labors unto you, as thereby to manifest my humble thankfulness. Now if
any censorious disposition shall say that these Sermons are too mean to be put
in print for this ripe and exquisit age, I would wish them to consider, that at
the building of the Temple, as well they were accepted that brought Goats
hair and Rams skins, as they that brought Silk, purple and skarlet. But
howeuer it be, I do more then hope you will both kindly accept of this from
me, and entertain it as a testimony of my loving affection to you all.

The God of all comfort multiply his gracious blessings upon you all, and
grant all peace and prosperity to all those that unfeignedly love and seek
the peace of the Church, and prosperity of the Gospel. From my house at
Yeardly, the 20. of December. 1608.

Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded, Thomas Hopkins.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, the searcher of all hearts does know, that at the preaching
of these Sermons it was far from any thought of mine they should ever have
been committed to the Press to be set out in print, confessing my great
inabilitie that way. But forasmuch as some of the hearers took the pains to
gather the notes thereof, without either my knowledge or consent; and thereupon
seeming to have some liking thereof, were earnest with me for my consent to
commit them to the print: whose godly desire I perceiving to proceed from a
special willingness to make others partakers of that profit they seemed to
have received themselves, gave them my promise, if they would copy them fair
out, and send them down into the country to me, I would take some pains in
the viewing them over, and setting them in order, and so would send them up to
them again to use at their pleasure: which they so did; and accordingly (by
the Lords help) I have performed to them, as my leisure in my charge would
permit me. Now then, if these my simple labors shall be thought worthy the
view of the world, I do humbly entreat thee (Christian Reader) to bear with
me; which I know thou would willingly do, if either thou did know my
weakness in gifts, my small leisure for undertaking any such work, or
specially the mark and end I aim at. I pray thee construe all in good part;
and what is amiss for want of skill, correct it; and if any thing have
ouershot me in ouerzealous carriage, impute it to my infirmity. But if there
happen any thing that shall work to humbling for sin, either general or
particular, for the land, or for thy own self, give all the praise to God: and
as I have endeavored to benefit thee and others, which is the maine end of my
labors, so do I entreat thee to assist me with thy prayers unto God, that
he will assist me with his blessed spirit in the work of my Ministry. And
thus hoping I may entreat for a friendly acceptance at thy hands, and to
afford me thy good word for my good will, and a favorable construction for my
pains, I do commend it to the blessing of the Almighty, and thee to his
gracious protection, wishing to thee as to myself, viz. the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ. December 20. 1608.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Thomas Hopkins.

TWO SERMONS UPON THE XII. CHAP. OF THE AVTHOR TO THE Hebrews, the 16. and 17.
verses thereof.
HEBREWS 12.16.17. Let there be no fornicator or profane person, as Esau,
which for one portion of meat sold his birthright.

For ye know, how that afterward when he would have inherited the blessing,
he was rejected: For he found no place to repentance, though he sought that
blessing with tears.


I Mind not (beloved in Christ) to stand upon more circumstances then I take
fitting for the opening of my Text. Although to have showed you my simple
judgment, both as touching the occasion, the Author, the time, and the
argument of this Epistle, could not but have bin profitable for sundry
respects: but then must I spend more ^e then is allowed me, and I fear,
should abridge you of some things which I am willing to open unto you.
Wherefore omitting all these, Verse. 5.
know you that the Author of this Epistle, having in the former part of this
chapter, encouraged them patiently to undergo the cross of afflictions,
assuring them that they were no signs of Gods anger, Verse 6.
but rather of his love, in which they had cause to rejoice: from thence he
proceeds to an exhortation, Verse. 14.
the substance whereof is, that to their holy profession they would join a
godly life and conversation, charging them to have care that no sin might
grow amongst them that were professors of the Gospel, calling it by the name
of a Root of bitterness; Verse. 15.
because that howsoever it might be pleasant and sweet at the first, yet it
would bring forth bitter fruit at the last. The which exhortation he enforces,
and thereto moves by three special reasons.

The first, because such are easily to be drawn from that grace they seemed to
have, and one reigning sin would eat it out.

The second reason was, because hereby they would be very scandalous to the
weak, and Apostataes of the whole Church.

Thirdly, because their examples would be great hindrances to other: yea and
more hurt would ensue by their ill life, then ever they did good by their
profession.

Now in the verses read, he goes on with a dehortation, dissuading them from
such vices, as would bring a scandal to the Church of God. Amongst the rest
he sets down two, namely, Fornication and Profaneness, in the which
whosoever flues and delights, shall in the end bring great dishonor to God,
slander to his own profession, and hurt to his own conscience.

The first (I say) he sets down, is Fornication. Whence may arise this
question: why he names this sin before many other, which he might have named? I
answer, specially for two causes: The one in regard of the profession: the
other in regard of the person. In regard of the profession, because first it
dishonors God: not that God will lose one jot of his honor, though he should
cast us all to hell; but my meaning is, he accepts it as a dishonor to him,
when such a one that makes profession in mouth, denies the power of it in his
life. Psalm. 50.16.17.
As the holy Ghost sharply reprehendeth the hypocrite, asking him how he durst
be so bold to take his words in his mouth, and not to live answerable to it in
his life. 2. Sam. 12.14.
Secondly, it opens the mouths of Atheists, causing them to blaspheme the
Gospel, who are ready upon the least occasion to speak evil of it, and such
as profess it in sincerity. So also in regard of the person, because if he be
qualified with any grace of sanctification, it will in time eat it out, and
grieve Gods Spirit, though not on the sudden, yet it will bring him so low, as
the work of sanctification cannot grow in him. Example we have of David, Psalm.
51.10.11.
who by this was feign to cry to the Lord to create a new spirit in him; and
had thought it would have cast him out of Gods presence.

Again, it may be demanded, why the holy Ghost names not rather Adultery then
Fornication? I answer: First, we must note that he does include it herein, and
all other sins of that kind. Secondly, and specially, because those to whom
he did write, were not all married, but many and the most part of them were
single persons. Therefore names he rather the sin of fornication then
adultery, lest the single persons might take any exceptions against his speech.

The second sin he dehorts them from, is the sin of Profaneness: a sin many
know not, others make light account of it: but the holy Ghost sets it down for
a grievous sin, and a sin of all such as profess the Gospel to be abhorred.
To which end he sets not down an example of a fornicator, because it was an
usual known sin, and a sin some men make conscience to shun and avoid:
but he sets down an example of a profane person, and hangs up the picture of
a profane wretch, for a warning to all others.

In which example, we are to consider of three things: The first is the
person, who it was, viz. Esau, a man qualified and commended in the Scripture
for some gifts of nature, in which I doubt he may go beyond, and shame many of
us: yet for his prophanenes is recorded as aspectacle of Gods wrath, and
branded for a reprobate. The second is his fact, which was, that for one
portion of meat he sold away his birthright. Of which fact we shall hear more
in the opening, being like many at this day amongst us, who sell, and willingly
part away with their birthright for vanities. The third thing is his
punishment, which is threefold; First, he is wounded in his conscience with
grief and shame, that he had no better grace, but to part with such a
treasure at so base a price. Secondly, he labors and bestirres himself to
seek to recover it, but all in vain: for he seeks to his father, who could
not help him: but not to God, who must have helped him, if ever he had had any
help at all. The third was an utter denial of mercy, in that he lost the
time in which he might have had it; now all the means he could use for it,
would not prevail to recover it again. And so falls it out with many at this
day, who forsaking the Gospel, for the present things of this life, come to see
their error how lightly they have passed it away, which wish and desire to
recover their former estate, but can never prevail.

Thus much for the opening of the words: the sum whereof is, a dehortation from
two horrible sin, of such as live in the bosom of the Church, and make show
of religion in outward profession: lest by forsaking it for the present things
of this life, they be not able to recover it again. Now let us come to the
instructions that may be gathered hence.

And yet before I come to handle them, I hold it very profitable to take the
course of the Author; namely, to begin with the exhortation, whereon the
dehortation is grounded, and that is, to stir us up to a holy conversation,
and to join with our profession a holy life, without which, as he says
before, Verse. 14.
We shall never see God to our comfort; and this will make the rest more
profitable to us. And though many in this city might think or should suppose
it a needless doctrine, yet for my part I take it needful and profitable to
deal with you, as the holy Ghost dealt here with them. In that he labors
earnestly to exhort them to holiness of life, in regard of their profession,
we are to observe, that it must be a principal care of those who have taken
upon them the profession of the Gospel, to labor to join a holy
conversation thereunto. The profession must not consist in a formal love and
outward show of the Gospel, but they must express and show the power of it in
their lives and conuersations. A thing the Apostle commends the Thessalonians
for, 1. These. 1.5.
that the Gospel was not in word, but in power, that is, they did as well
practice it in their lives, as talk of it with their mouths. And this the
Apostle Peter labors to exhort those he wrote unto, 2. Pet. 1.5.
that with the knowledge of faith in the Gospel, they would join virtue, by
which he means holiness of life: exhorting ye they that believe well, should
live well, that so their lives might beautify their profession. It seems
diverse of the Church sent to Paul to know his judgment touching such servants
as were converted to the Gospel, how they should behave themselves to their
Infidel masters. 1. Tim. 6.1.
To this he sends an answer to Timothy, commanding, that being bound to the^,
they should not depart or use them vnconscionablie, but rather to be more
careful in their service, and to use diligence and faithfulness to them, that
so the name of God and his Gospel, be not evil spoken of. A good lesson for
such servants in this city as profess the Gospel, and serve irreligious
masters, not hereby to take a liberty to be idle, careless, and false in word
and deed, but so much the rather to be the more careful in their service, lest
they give their Masters occasion to speak evil of the name of God and his
Gospel.

Now if servants must be thus careful toward their masters that be Atheists,
how much more then should every one that has given his hand and name to the
Gospel, be careful, who has many to ouerlooke him, and would be glad to take
a small occasion to discredit his profession? There are many reasons may be
added to press this doctrine the more upon our consciences, but I will content
my self with these three.

1. Pet. 2.12.
it will gain credit also in the consciences of such as be yet uncalled. To
which end the Apostle exhorts them to have their conversation honest among the
Gentiles, that they which speak evil of them as of evil doers, may by their
good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of visitation. By
which all you that be Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses are exhorted,
though you have untoward sons, unfaithful servants, liars, swearers, yea
such as scorn at your coming to Sermons, and use of holy exercises in your
families, as giving thanks at meals, prayers, reading of Chapters, etc. yet
should your carriage in your lives be such, as that they seeing your Christian
behavior in your shops, in your words, in your dealings, etc. may have cause
to praise God. Yea, if ever the Lord call and convert them, they shall praise
God, that they ever dwelt in such a family, and that ever they came within thy
doors.

The experience hereof God has showed daily amongst us, of many, who in their
service were deriders of holy duties, and stopped their ears at the
instructions of their governors, yet the Lord having opened their ears, and
softened their hearts by his word and spirit, they have so praised God for his
mercy to them, that their parents by whom they were begotten, and borne, have
not been so dear to them in their hearts, as their Master and mistress, in
whose Christian family they were converted.

our profession. The contrary opens the mouths of Atheists to slander and
discredit the same. One profane Gospeller does more harm in the Church, then
an hundred Atheists. Wherefore, says the Preacher, Eccles. 10.3.
Dead flies cause to stink and putrisie the ointment. Yea, one dead fly will
putrify a whole box of ointme^t, where as a thousand falling into a barrel
of pitch, will do no such harm: So the Gospel is so precious a thing, that
the evil example of one professor does more harm to it, then the example of
many Athiests; a thousand drunken companions never discredit the Gospel so
much as one that professes well, and lives ill.

For is it not a thing common amongst us, that when men see a professor commit
any sin (yea though of infirmity, and of weakness, with no purpose to live
in it) do but mark how they presently labor to discredit, not so much the
person of the man, as his profession. For are not these their very words? See,
these are our professors and holy men; he is wise that will believe what they
say: here is a profession indeed. Yea they will not stick to curse the very
Book of God, and blaspheme his Gospel. Therefore if you will be professors,
look to your shops, your families, your counting houses, your weights and
measures, else if you be faulty in these, you will bring more discredit to
religion, then ever you did good with your outward profession.

Esaias 38.3.
An example we have of Ezekias, who having received the message of death, is
said to turn to the wall, and to put the Lord in mind of the integrity of his
life, wherein he took great comfort. Yea, it will put a man in more comfort,
then all the treasures of this world. For what consolation can a man take in
worldly things, when he is privy that he does lead a vicious and wicked life,
and is in danger of Gods wrath?



If this were true, and this liberty granted to sin, who would make
conscience to commit sin? But let us know, that these are doctrines of
devils, and he that has not care to join an holy life to an holy belief,
Mat. 22.12.13.
shall one day with the man wanting the wedding garment, be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.



Ioab, 1. King. 2.28.
to murder, and then to run and take hold of the horns of the altar? Nay,
with the Jews, to swear, Ierem. 7.9.10.
lie, steal, commit adultery, etc. and to come and stand in this house before
me, says the Lord? no more will the Lord allow either of your Bibles under
your arms, or your prayers in your families, nor your running after Sermons,
if your lives be not reformed.

In the civil law it is well known, a long protestation will not relieve a
thief, if he be tainted, and proved guilty of the fact: no more will your
protestations and fair speeches relieve you, when your shops, your counting
houses, your houses, your chambers will condemn you. For I appeal this day to
many of you that hear me, whether the Lord may not truly say to you, as he
said by the mouth of his Prophet Micah, Micah. 6.10.
Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant
measure that is abominable? So say I to thee, are the treasures of wickedness
in thy house? Is the pooremans pledge, his bed, his gown, his axe, his spade,
his coat in thy house? live thou by briberie, extortion, oppression, false
weights in thy shop, false balance in thy warehouse, and dare thou take on
thee the holy profession of the Gospel? I tell thee, all thy prayers, alms,
hearing of the word, receiving the Sacraments are abhorred of God.

In the time of the Law, none might offer the blood of a dog or a swine; yet
were they both like the blood of a lamb: and though the one was accepted, yet
the other was abhorred. So let all thy outward profession seem never so holy,
yet not joined with a holy conversation, God detests it.

How may the Lord complain against this city, as he did against Samaria? Come
to Bethel and transgress, Amos 4.4.5.
to Gilgal and multiply transgressions: and bring your sacrifices in the
morning, and your Tithes after three years. And for a thanksgiving of leaven
publish and proclaim the free offerings: for this likes you, O ye children
of Israel, says the Lord. In which he taxes them, for that after many sins
committed, they would come in the morning on their Sabbath days, and bring an
offering or a tithe, and offer it up, and then think God was well pleased. So
how many in this City, all the week long, spend it in swearing, lying,
oppression, etc. and then on the Lords day come to Church in the morning, and
hear a Sermon, and make a show of loving holy exercises? Oh this likes them
well; but this likes not the Lord: for he accounts them hypocrites and
dissemblers. Yea, these are they that do more hurt to religion and professors,
with their running after Preachers, with their carrying of Bibles, with their
holy protestations, and their lives odious, then the common drunkard,
whoremonger, usurer, etc. There is nothing more odious in Gods sight, then that
man that caries the lamp of profession, and denies and disgraceth it by an
unholy life. I end this point with the saying of our Savior to his Disciples,
and in them, to all that take on them the profession of his name: Matthew. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father that is in heaven. And so much for the general doctrine
drawn from the Apostles dealing with the Hebrews. Now it follows according
as it is in the Text.

Let there be no fornicatour. You heard before that these words contain a
dehortation from such vices, as he knew would bring a scandal to the Gospel;
whereof he sets down two special sins: The first is here fornication. The
reasons wherefore he sets this down were before showed unto us. As also we
heard why he sets down this sin, rather then the sin of adultery, being a
sin of an higher degree. Then it rests we gather what we learn hence:
which is, in that he labors to dehort or draw them from this sin of
fornication, we learn, that amongst other sins, all that live in the Church
of God, and sincerely profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ, must labor by all
means to shun and avoid the sin of fornication, adultery, incest,
whoredom, and all of that kind.

It is too true, that many professing the Gospel, make a light account of
fornication: oh they take it but a trick of youth. And it may be one reason of
the Apostles dehorting or drawing them from this sin, being of like account
amongst them. But howsoever they or we make light account of it, yet the holy
Ghost accounts it a grievous sin, especially amongst such as profess the
Gospel. For he speaks not to Atheists, but to Christians, and such as had
taken on them the profession of Christ Jesus and his Gospel. So I, knowing that
I preach to such as profess Christ, and outwardly make a show of loving both
him and his word, dehort and draw you from the sin of fornication, being no
small or light sin, but an odious and grievous sin. I tell you, a man or
woman that have given their names to Christ, and laid their hands to the plow
of the Gospel, and yet live in fornication or adultery, etc. do live in a
woeful and fearful estate. And that this sin is a great sin, specially of
professors, we may see by the words of ye Apostle to the Corinthians, who
says, Be not deceived; 1. Cor. 6.9.
neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. Where the Apostle amongst the
rascal row of capital Sins, places fornication as a master-sin, and
ringleader to other sins, and bids them not to be deceived: for as light
account as they make of it, yet it will shut them out of Gods kingdom. And the
same Apostle writing to the Galathians, Galath. 5.19.
reckoning up diverse sins of the flesh, sets fornication in the forefront,
almost of all: which he would not have done, if it had been a sin of light
account. The like you shall read in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.3.
where he having exhorted them to holiness of life, labors to draw them from
such vices as would hinder this work of God in them; amongst which, he begins
with the sin of fornication. And this he does so much the rather, in that it
was (of many) not counted a sin of any great reckoning. And so howsoever many
account it a light sin at this day, yet know you it is a heinous sin, a most
grievous in Gods sight.

I would not wish any of you to think, that I do aim at any one particular
man, (for it is well known I am but a stranger, and God is my witness, before
whom we do stand, I judge reverently of you all) but in discharge of my duty
and conscience, I labor to show you the horriblenesse of the sin of
fornication, and all other of that kind. The reasons to press this doctrine
upon our consciences, are diverse.

1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
according as the Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians, telling them, that if they
will frame their lives to the will of God, they must abstain from fornication;
and know how to possess their vessel in holiness and honor.

Shall I take (says the Apostle) the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.15.
and make them the members of an harlot? Now an harlot is a member of Satan, so
that he that prostrates his body to an harlot, does prostrate it to the
devil.

Hebr. 13.4.
But whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. And the reasons hereof may be
specially these two. The former,



And I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and
snares, and her hands as bands: He that is good before God, shall be delivered
from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her. (I pray you read it, and note
it well) giving us to understand, that by being good before God, is meant a
sound, sincere, religious man, whom the Lord will so preserve, that though he
may be overtaken with this sin, yet shall he not live and delight in it. And
hence we see why the Lord permits so many harlots in the land, because there
are so many hypocrites amongst us.

Jeremy says, Ierem. 23.10.
that Adultery will cause the land to mourn, and as Hoseah says, The Lord
has a controversy with the Land: a capital sin was, because there was
whoring committed therein. And for experience we need but look on this City,
on which the Lord continues one of the arrows of his wrath, I mean the
plague and pestilence. Know ye, that Whoredom is a capital sin that prouokes
the Lord. For this sin is a special means to pull down the wrath of God, to
send and continue this kind of punishment. So that when you hear the plague
increase in your city, you may thank the whoremonger for it.

Fornicator is fit for nothing but for hell, he is neither fit for God, nor
for himself, nor for the land. Not for God; for all he does is accursed: yea,
his very prayers he makes, if he make any. Not for himself; for thereby he
consumes his body, and wastes his goods, and hastens beggary, or some evil
and untimely end upon himself. Not fit for the land, for he hastens and
procures Gods wrath and heavy displeasure against it.

The uses of this doctrine.
work a detestation of it in their hearts: and to take heed of the harlot;
for she will not leave thee, till she have got the blood of thy soul: yea, as
Solomon says, Prou. 9.18.
Her ghests are in the depth of hell; meaning they are as sure to go to hell,
except they repent, as if they were there already. Remember, yet God offers
grace, yea, this day I stand here as Gods minister to entreat thee, as thou
have any love to God, any fear of his judgments, any hope to appear before
Christ Jesus with any comfort, at the day of judgment, or any care to be
saved, to get out of this sin betimes, else be sure in time it will bring
thee to damnation.



in thee for this grievous sin, Gods wrath, and Gods curse will follow thee
at the heels. Yea, I say further, that after thou have married her, till there
be a reconciliation between God and thee, all the time thou have lived in
marriage, thou have lived a fornicator.

Is there any here who are privy in their consciences they have abused their
bodies with their wives before the solemnising of Wedlock, and entrance into
that holy ordinance and covenant of God? have thou repented, have thou been
grieved from thy heart? then no doubt, thou have obtained pardon. But if thou
have felt no grief, no sorrow, no humbling, no tears, but made account all is
well and healed by marriage, know thou, and know thou again, God will one day
call thee to a new reckoning, and will take vengeance on thee in the depth of
hell.

sin amongst other sins, cries loud in the Lords ears for vengeance? No,
no, as the Prophet says, Ierem. 5.9.
He will visit for these things, and his soul will be avenged upon such a
nation.

Or profane person as Esau. Text.
Now follows the other sin, he dehorts and draws them from; which is
profaneness. And because there were diverse did make light account of it, and
many others that did not know what it meant, he sets down an example of a man
hated of God before he was borne, and being dead, is, as it were, hung up for a
spectacle for all profane men to look on, set out in the book of Genesis the
25.27.28. Chapters.

And hence, before we proceed to the opening of the story, we are to observe
something, in that the holy Ghost sets before us the example of a profane
man. 1. Cor. 10.6-11
presently tells the end and use of such examples, which was his severity to
them, and to be warnings to us, as appears in the eleventh verse. So the
Apostle Jude tells us that Sodom and Gomorah and the cities about them, which
the Lord destroyed for following strange flesh, were and are set forth for a
warning and example to all filthy and beastly minded men. So that so long as
there is a people upon the earth, so long has the Lord set down in scripture
examples of his wrath to forewarne them of the like severity against them. And
we see, that diverse for some horrible offenses are hung up in chains, not
only to show the kings severity against them, or for men to stand gazing upon
them, but for warnings to all his subjects to take heed they run not into the
like offense, lest they incur the like punishment. And therefore for
murderers, the Lord has, Genesis 4.
as it were, hung up Cain; for profaneness, Genesis 27. Numb. 16.
Esau; for murmurers against God and his Ministers he has proposed Coreh,
Dathan and Abiram; Judas to all Traitors, Lots wife for all Apostataes. These
and many more are set forth for examples to us. These and many more are not
pictures of Gods anger, only hung up to be gazed upon, but to warn us by
their examples of the sins.



The use hereof serves to teach us what use we should make in reading the
stories of Gods judgments upon others in the book of God: not so much to
wonder at them, that they had no better grace, or to admire the severity of
the Lord against them: but to apply it to our selves, and to say in our
hearts; This example is set out to warn me, to teach me, that if I commit the
like sin, I may fear the like punishment or worse.

Which reprooues specially two sorts of men at this day: 1. Sort.
The one is such as in reading diverse chapters of the Lords just judgment
against diverse nations, cities, Kings, Priests, men, women, children for their
sins committed against him, make light account of them, as if it no whit
concerned them, though their consciences condemn them of the like sin. They
read the story of Esau, Genesis 27.
and of Gods wrath against him for his profaneness; yet though they know in
their hearts they set more by their pleasure then by preaching; by their gain
then by godliness; by their pottage then by religion; yet it never so much as
mooues them at al. So again, how many do read the story of Lots wife, Genesis
19.26.
who for her looking back was turned into a monument of Gods anger, yet
themselves are privy of the decay of their first love, and with Demas have
embraced the world, and yet are no whit dismayed at al? Look upon her all you
that are privy to your selves and guilty of blacksliding in your zeal and
love to the Gospel. She was turned into a pillar of salt, and remains a
spectacle of Gods vengeance for all such as thou art. She was turned into a
durate substance, and without speedy repentance, he will turn thee into a
heavy judgment, and that is hardness of heart, which is harder then salt; for
it is the plague of all plagues.

You then that of religious servants are become irreligious masters: you that
are privy to your hearts, that 10.20.30. years agone you were more forward
and zealous in Gods worship, and now are decayed and cold, looking back to the
pleasures and profits of this world, look one Lots wife: she, as it were,
hangs in chains for a woeful spectacle to behold. Let her move you to labor
to recover that you have lost, lest the Lord make you spectacles to others, as
she is made a spectacle to you. And for this city and others is Jerusalem in
the Scripture to be a perpetual example: her special sins were, pride,
contempt of Gods word, and abuse of Gods Prophets. Her doom is recorded for
England, and for thee London, whose pride is as great, if not greater then ever
hers was. And for whose contempt and abuse of Gods Ministers it is a wonder the
Lord smites not the land.

Let us all then hereafter in reading stories of the Lords judgments on
others, make them examples and warnings for us: else to make account, the same
God that was revenged on them, will not let us escape.

The second sort that this doctrine reprooueth, 2. Sort.
are such, as in setting their children to read in the Lords book, they hear
the story of Lots drunkenness, of David's adultery, of Peter's denial, and
thereby they do bless themselves, and strengthen and comfort their hearts:
yea they have learned to allege them as examples to extenuate their sins. Am
I a drunkard? so was that good man Lot. Am I an adulterer, says another? so
was that man after Gods own heart, David. Shall I despair of my salvation,
says the wicked persister in sin, and I read, the thief repented on the
cross, and found mercy at the last hour? O vile wretches, who has bewitched
you to pervert Gods word to your destruction? It is as much as to poison thy
soul. Look on their repentance: Lot fell of infirmity, and no doubt repented
with much grief: yet look upon Gods judgment upon that incestuous seed.
Look upon David; read the 38. Psalm, it made him go crooked; his sins
were as fire in his bones; he had not a good day to his death, but the grief
of his sins made him to roar out. Thou would be loath to buy thy sin as
he did. And as for the example of the thief: First, the Lord knocked but once,
by one sermon, and he repented: but thou have had many sermons, and have had
many callings and cryings to thee, yet repented not. Secondly, this is an
extraordinary example, and there is not the like in all the Scripture again.
And the end is, that thereby we should neither despair nor presume: one, that
we should not despair, and but one that we should not presume. This example is
for all penitent sinners, who upon their repentance may assure themselves, the
Lord will receive them to mercy.

Now if thou can promise to thy self the same repentance and faith in Christ
that he had, then may thou promise thy self the same felicity he now
enioyes.

But look thou on his fellow, who had no grace to repent, and who hangs as an
example to all impenitent wretches to look upon: that they despise not the
mercy of God, nor reject his call by us: lest it come to pass, that when thou
would repent, thou can not. To thee that do strengthen thy self in thy
sin, upon presumption of mercy to other, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.
I refer thee to the words that the Lord himself speaks, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. He
that when he hears the words of the curse, blesses himself in his heart,
saying: I shall have peace, though I do walk according to the stubbornenesse
of mine own heart; thus adding drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not be
merciful unto him, but the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and every curse that is written in this Book, shall light
upon him, etc.

Look thou on this and the like threatenings of God against such as strengthen
their hearts in their sin.

Thus much at this time, being loath to be ouertroublesome, referring the rest
till evening Prayer.

Let us pray for a blessing upon that we have been taught.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON.
HEBREWS 12.16.17. Let there be no fornicator or profane person, as Esau,
which for one portion, etc.


YOu have heard in the forenoone (beloved in Christ) the sum and drift the
holy Ghost aims at, which is a certain dehortation, therein dissuading every
good Christian from two great vices, which he calls by the names of the
roots of bitterness; which are, Fornication and profaneness.

Of the one we have spoken: it now rests we speak of the other vice he
disswades them from. And because I suppose the most of you were present in the
forenoone, I will not stand to make any large repetition of that which was then
handled, but only of so much as may make a better preparation to that which
shall be now delivered.

You must note, that the holy Ghost in his dehortation from this sin of
Profaneness, propounds Esau the elder son of Isaac for an example: and
having set down the use and end, every one should make in the reading of such
examples of Gods severity in scripture, (and not to take the name of God in
vain, by either lightly passing by them, as making no use at all, or else
abusing them to strengthen themselves in their sins, by the example of the
Lords mercy on others) we proceeded no further in the morning. Now I come to
that which follows, which is the person that is set forth as an example to
all profane men. It is Esau, as you have heard, the eldest son of Isaac.

And this may seem very strange that Esau should be a man hated of God before
he was borne, and that he should be hung up as an example to all profane men
to take warning by. First, he was honorably descended, for Abraham was his
grandfather, and Isaac was his father. Secondly, he was a man whom God had
blessed with great riches, and one of the wealthiest in all the country.
Thirdly, we do read of great blessings to his posterity, Genesis 36.41.
for of him came fourteen Dukes, and were in great account. Yea further, if
ye read in the book of Genesis of his carriage and behavior, you shall find
he had diverse good moral virtues and kind parts in him, and such as (I am in
doubt) many of us come short of, and yet persuade our selves to be good
Christians.

First, you have not read a more loving, kind and gentler son to his father,
then he was: and his father again loved him dearly, and more dearly then
he did Jacob. Gem. 33.4.
Secondly, how kind was he to his brother? who though he went with a full
purpose to have slain him, yet meeting of him, his heart so melted, that he
fell on his neck and kissed him: yea, his kindness was such to his father, that
hearing of his death, Genesis 25.19.
came many a mile to perform his last duty, and to see him buried and laid
him in his grave; yet we read him branded for a castaway.

Again, was he a covetous man? truly no: Genesis 33.8.9.
as may appear in the story when he met his brother Jacob, who offering him a
great present he did refuse it, protesting he had enough: which did argue a
mind void of covetousness. Was he proud? no verily: for as we read, when his
brother and he could no longer dwell together, he in courtesy gave place to
his youngest brother. What was his sin? was he a drunkard, an adulterer, an
usurer? We do not read that he did live in any of these gross sins. What
then was his sin? He was a profane man, and therefore hated of God, and set
up for a spectacle to all the world.

From whence we may observe for our instruction: brand of a reprobate. So that
it is one of the greatest sins in the world, to be profane and irreligious:
yea many papists (I mean the simple and ignorant Papist) are in better case
then a profane man. Not that I teach that every one shall be saved by his
own religion: for as there is but one true God, so there is but one true way
by which he will be worshipped, and by which we shall attain to salvation,
consisting in true reconciling of us to God in Christ. And I grant the poor
deceived Papist is not in the right way, for he seeks other ways, and
depriues himself of the righteousness of God in Christ, going about to
establish his own inventions. And further, they be Idolaters, and worship
stocks and stones, the work of men's hands, therefore cannot look to be saved
in this way. Yet I sayt, here is more hope that God will show mercy unto them,
then to a profane person: because they do it of ignorance, he of presumption:
which caused Peter to tell the Jews that they were capable of mercy, Act.
17.3.
because they did it of ignorance.

And this must move us to hope well of many of our ancestors, who lived and
died in the time of Popery, who, no doubt would not have so believed, if they
had known it, not to have been the truth which they professed. But the
profane person cannot be ignorant, but that his course of life is sin,
therefore more hope of such ignorant persons then of the profane Atheist. It
is not moral virtues, civil honesty, kind natures that is the way to heaven.
Nay a man with these may be a miserable man, except he be sanctified with
religion.

We do not hold (as the Papists falsely charge us) that good works are
needelesse to salvation. Iam. 2.14.
For we both know and teach, that faith without good works is dead; and it is
a shame if Christians exceed not worldlings: yet we say, that all moral
virtues in a man, without religion, are unavailable to salvation, and as
Solomon says in another case, they are as a ring of gold in a swines snout.
Honesty and civility are most precious Jewels, but they that have them
without religion, are no better then swine. Example of Nicodemus, John 3.3.
who was accounted a most honest man in the world, an upright dealer, a common
frequenter of the Temple, liberal to the poor, etc. yet our Savior told him,
it was not his kind nature, nor his moral virtues, nor his civil carriage
would bring him to heaven, except he were regenerate and borne anew, that is,
except there were another nature wrought in him, and so become religious.

The like example we have of the Apostle Paul, who bragges of his estate by
nature, Phil. 3 4.5.6.7.8.
saying that no man could boast of outward things as he, either of stock,
tribe, kindred, zeal, or righteousness of the law. Of the which he says, he
was unrebukable, that is, no man could justly detect him, or say so much as
black was his eye. But when the Lord wrought true religion in his heart, he
cries shame on them all, and accounts all but dung in respect of the benefit
that comes by religion.

We must not flatter our hearts with outward civility amongst men: but labor
to approve them religious toward God. It is not our care and conscience of the
second Table, will afford us one jot of comfort to salvation, except they be
grounded on conscience and respect of the first Table. It is not our detesting
and freedom from pride, drunkenness, whoredom, theft, usury, slandering,
that will be accepted of God, except there be planted in our hearts, a fear
of God, a love to religion, a conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath day, a
reforming of families, and instructing our children: a hating and abhorring the
sin of swearing, and departing from infidelity, impenitencie and hardness
of heart, which the Lord by his spirit works in those that he makes
religious. Yea, if all the moral virtues that can be possible, were in a man,
yet if these be wanting, Matthew. 22.38.
he is a profane man, and remains in the case of damnation. To this end our
Savior calls the first table, the first and the greatest. The first, because
it must be preferred in the first place, and chief room; before our eating,
sleeping, marrying, rising, labor, etc. there must go some part and duty of
the first table. The greatest, because the punishment thereof will be greater
then the other.

Esau withal.

The first is his behavior in the matching himself in marriage, wherein he
showed his profaneness two ways: The first, in that he did it without the
consent of his parents, yea so, that it was a grief to his father. The second
was, Genesis 28.8.
in that in his matching, he had no respect to religion, but married diverse
wives which were contrary to him in religion; yea he takes to wife the
daughter of Ismael, a man branded for a reprobate as well as himself. This was
a sign of profaneness and a sin that provoked the Lords wrath against him,
being a sin that caused the Lord to destroy the old world. And how many
profane parents have we at this day, that in the matching of their children,
respect money, riches, stock, kindred, friends? be they Papists, Recusants,
yea noted drunkards, whoremongers or usurers, so they may have money, lands or
friends, they little regard of what religion they be. Oh lamentable days,
that after so many years of the preaching of the Gospel in our land, men
should show themselves so profane, as to match the children with the enemies
of the Lord, and help to nourish the brood of Atheists! For what is the cause
that there be so many Atheists in our land? Surely I speak it before God, and
his angels, I do fully persuade my self they are borne and bred by this wicked
and accursed matching. And you parents, note this from me; the Lord in your
care of the matching of your children shows a manifest sign of his purpose to
your posterity. For is your care principally to match in the fear of God,
more respecting religion then money, more the love of God then carnal friends?
then is it a sign God has a blessing in store for your posterity. If
otherwise, that carnal things be the mark you shoot at; and specially, if
you dare venture to match with Gods enemies, and such as he has warned you of;
I protest to you, it is a visible sign God has a purpose to root your name
from under heaven.

And how many profane youths have we at this day, who to the grief of their
parents, choose for beauty and affection, and not for religion? To you young
men and maidens: look with whom you match, let your principal care be
religion and the fear of God: let your parents consent be in your choice.
Follow not the example of a profane man, a reprobate, a man hated of God
before he was borne: but imitate such as fear God: so you may expect with
comfort the blessing promised of God upon your labors, wife and children. And
though the world would persuade you to the contrary, yet mark what the holy
Ghost says, Psalm. 123.12.3.
Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord. Thereby giving us to
understand, howsoever it is hard to flesh and blood to be persuaded thereof,
yet the truth is, it shall be so, for the Truth it self has spoken it.

The second thing wherein his profaneness did appear, 2. Thing.
was in that he used no prayers. For though he had just cause to give himself
to prayer, yet we do not read he did use any at all. He had good examples
both of his Grandfather, his Father, and his brother; yet do we not read
that ever he did once pray. And this the holy Ghost describes to be one
property of a profane man, in the book of Psalms, and of such a one as
says in his heart, There is no God: he calls not upon God. And truly he
that never uses to pray, Psalm. 14.4.
says in his heart, there is no God.

And how brands this many in this city for profane men, who in their families
never use the exercise of prayer? The property of a sincere Christian is to
make conscience of Prayer, in three several places. The first is in the
public congregation. The second is in his family. The third is in some secret
place, where no eye but of God do behold him. A very hypocrite can make show of
Prayer, when he sees other to look on him, then can he lift up his hands and
eyes toward heaven: but in secret he has no heart to pray; when the other is
ashamed that any should see him at his secret prayers. Are not many faulty
herein? God and your conscience do know your are. Then must I tell you that
herein you carry an evident sign of a profane man.

The third thing that did set out his profaneness was his rash and unadvised
swearing, 3. Thing.
as appears in the book of Genesis, Genesis 25.33.
who coming from hunting very hungry, turned into his brothers Tent, and
spying a pot of pottage, asked him some of them to eat: whereupon Jacob seeing
a fit time, demanded of him, to sell him his birthright; he presently yielded
unto him. Then, says Jacob, swear to me in token of the bargain: whereat
without any further consideration, he swore to him, and bound it with an oath.
And how many thousands in this city are guilty hereof? Let a man come into
your shops, and deal with either Master, Mistress, servant, son or daughter,
at every word comes out an oath. So likewise there are many others, who use
their oaths, as many use their apparel, who to grace their bodies (as they
think) get them every week a new suite of apparel: So they invent every
week new oaths to grace them in their speeches. What argues this, but mere
profaneness, when God has given them tongues for the setting out of his
honor, and they abuse them, to the dishonouring of him?

The fourth thing was his delight in wicked company, and in the society of
the ungodly, 4. Thing.
as appears in the book of Genesis: how not content to tarry with his father
and brother in Canaan, Genesis 36.
he gets him to mount Seir, a most ungodly people. And how does this bewray
many for profane men at this day, who take their felicity in the company of
swearers, drunkards, whoremongers, swaggerers and vile companions? I marvel
how such can look to go to heaven. For think they to keep company here
with such leaud companions, and that God will pester his kingdom with them
hereafter? no, no: be thou sure as the skin is on thy back, or thy soul in
thy body, that the like company thou delightest in here in this life, with
the like (I say) thou art to dwell hereafter. For do thou hope to have
fellowship with Saints in heaven hereafter, and can not abide their company
here?

Beloved, if any of you be guilty herein, labor in time to get out of it:
there is no greater an enemy to sanctification then this, which caused the
Apostle Peter to give this as a principal warning to those co^uerrites: saying,
Act. 2.40.
Save your selves from this froward generation. So say I, as you will avoid the
mark of a profane man, save your selves, and come out of the company of
ungodly wretches. Text. Which for one portion of meat sold his birthright. In
these words the holy Ghost sets down the fact that branded him for a profane
man, viz. he sold away his birthright for one portion of meat. It requires
first, we know what this birthright was; and then the price he had for it. As
touching the birthright; you must note, it stood in diverse privileges, 1.
privilege. Genesis 17.7.
especially these five: First, he was by nature heir to the covenant, which
God had made with Abraham his Grandfather, and so came to his father Isaac, who
did mean to have left it with Esau; which was, That God would be his God; and
the God of his seed after him: Secondly, 2. privilege. 3. privilege. 4.
privilege.
that Christ according to the flesh should come of him: Thirdly, he was heir
to all his Grandfathers, and his fathers lands: Fourthlie, all his brethren and
sisters, be they never so many, must in his presence show reverence to him:
Fifthly, 5. privilege.
he should have been heir to all the land of Canaan; and so at his death to
the kingdom of heaven. But he most profanely sold all this away. Now let us
hear ye price he sold it for. No doubt he sold it at a great rate, Genesis 25.34.
truly for one portion of meat. What portion was it? It was a mess of
pottage: Oh profane wretch, that could find in his heart to sell such a
precious pearl, and to part with it at such a base rate! But this he did, and
so lightly did he esteem these heavenly blessings. From hence we may observe
this instruction: Whosoever he be that has his heart so glewed to the present
things of this life, as that he preferres them above spiritual things
belonging to salvation, is not only a man of a profane heart; but has a
manifest sign of the curse of God upon his soul. Example we have hereof this
profane man, who preferred these temporal things above his birthright, and
sold it away: and for what did he part it away? why, for to fill his belly:
What was the chief reason of his hunger? his hunting; he had taken such
pleasure in his hunting, that he was an hungered; and to fill his belly, he
sold away Gods blessings; and so procured the curse of God on himself, and his
posterity. Much like to many at this day, who have their hearts so set on
their pleasure and profit, as that they hunt the blessings of God from their
souls. The holy Ghost by the Apostle Paul writing to the Philippians sets
down a mark to discern between a wicked man, and one of Gods children;
Phil. 3.19.20.
the one has his mind fixed on earthly things: but the other has his mind
daily on the things that do belong to salvation. A warning of this sin has
our Savior given to us in that parable set down by the Evangelist Matthew:
Matthew 22.2.3.4.5.6.7.
where comparing his Father to a supposed King that married his Son, and made
a feast, and sent his servants to call them that were bidden; but they refused,
and preferred the things of this life before the heavenly banquet, and made
their excuses. But how took the King the matter? he sent out his men of war,
and destroyed them, and burnt up their city. In the same case it stands with
us at this day. God the father has married his Son Jesus Christ to his
Church, at which he makes a great feast: he sends out his servants the
Ministers to call you by the word preached; to inuit you to come to the
Sacraments; in which there is not only offered, but reallie given to the
worthy receiver all the benefits that Christ has purchased for his elect: Now
if we contemn, despise or wilfully neglect his gracious kindness and
bounteous liberality to us herein, preferring the things of this life before
these heavenly blessings; what can we expect, but that justly he will send
out hardness of heart and impenitencie of souls utterly to destroy and damn
us for ever? The reasons why so many set heavenly things at a small rate, value
and lightly esteem them, are: 2. John. 2.15.
To which end the Apostle says, If any man love the world, the love of the
father is not in him. Giving us to understand, that such as have their minds
and hearts fixed on the things of this life cannot perform any service to God,
which he will delight in; according to the saying of our Savior Christ; No
man can serve two Masters, Luke 16.1^.
he cannot serve God and Mammon. As if he should have said, he that sets his
heart on the things pertaining to this life, cannot but make light account of
the things pertaining to the life to come. Genesis 3.14.
The world is said to carry two breasts in her bosom, which are, pleasure and
profit, by which she does nourish many to damnation. When God did curse the
Serpent in paradise; for a sign of his curse he told him, he should go upon
his belly: so it is a visible sign of Gods curse upon that man who has his
heart set on the earthly things of this life, as his money, his riches, his
vanity, etc. Hosea speaks of; who being called to repentance, Hosea 12.8.
say they be rich, and have found them out riches; yea they boast there is no
iniquity to be found in them: by which they do measure the favor of God unto
them by their outward prosperity. The like is set out by the Laodiceans in the
Revelation, Revel. 3.16.17
who being threatened for their luke-warmenes, answer they be rich, and
increased with goods, and had need of nothing, and yet were wretched, poor,
blind and naked. All which sets down the reason, many prefer earthly things
before heavenly, because they feel no need they have of them: but flatter
their hearts with their outward prosperity, whenas if ever God do open the
eyes of their minds, they shall see they be most wretched, poor, blind and
naked. So that in their unregenerate estate, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2.14.
they cannot see the need they stand in of heavenly things. Daily experience we
may see hereof in many amongst us; who if you offer them any temporal
commodity, belonging either to the back, belly or pleasure, how ready they
be to hearken to you, and run and ride with you in hope to benefit their
estate! But offer the same men any spiritual commodity for their souls, as
hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, or some worthy books to read and
meditate upon, they turn a deaf ear, and will be at no pains or cost to
entertain such an offer: and all because they feel not the need they have
thereof in their souls.

David to run to the holy assemblies, Psalm. 19.10.
to meditate daily in Gods word: because, as he says, they were sweeter then
honey or the honey comb; of higher account then the gold, or the fine gold. So
contrarily, this makes the other to keep them away from our assemblies, to
neglect holy exercises in their families, as giving of thanks before their
meals, or any ordinary prayers in their houses, because they feel no
sweetness in them, nor no profit nor gain in them.

The uses we are to make hence are: full coffer, a fat shop, Psalm. 106 15.
and a lean soul is in sign of Gods curse. Which does reprove four sorts
of profane men in our days. While I name them, examine your hearts how it
stands between God and your consciences.

The first are such as scorn at religion, 1. Sort.
and at all such as are zealous that way: accounting them a sort of beggarly
fools; and this is, because they see it brings no profit to them, which makes
them have no care to hear the word preached, to pray, to read in their
families; and so they scoff Christians, and flout such as make conscience of
holy exercises of religion, public or private. These are mere profane men.

The second sort are such as will come now and then to hear the word, and
receive the Sacraments, 2. Sort.
and think Sunday a good day, and at Easter will come to the Communion, and
now and then hear a sermon; but every pelting occasion are content to yield
unto: sometimes they be sick; sometimes they be lame; sometimes it is too
hot, sometimes it is too cold, preferring their pleasure or profit before holy
assemblies in the congregation: These men are like old harlots, that paint
their faces to seem young and fresh: so they pretend excuses to color their
prophanenes. If there be any amongst you that can be content Sabbath day after
Sabbath to sit idle at home, or busy your selves in your trades, and suffer
your places in your seats to be empty, for shame amend it: and if it be not of
conscience, yet to avoid ye just title of a profane man: For the property of
a new sanctified man is, to set all excuses, all reasons, yea profit and
pleasure aside, for the nourishing of his soul: yea the oftener he hears, the
more he desires; this Sabbath day makes him to long for the next; the benefit
he has gotten to his soul this Sabbath day, whets his stomach against the
next: but this is clean contrary in a profane man.

The third sort are such, 3. Sort.
as can see blessings in ye word and in the Sacraments; they can make great
show of loving the word, of entertaining of Preachers, etc. But yet though they
have lived under a faithful Ministry these 10.20.30. years, have little or
nothing profited: And that is seen, in that worldly things rule in their
hearts, and carry the sway. These are like those our Savior speaks of, some
have bought farms, others have bought oxen, another sort have married a wife:
so that though these things be simply lawful in themselves; yet of them
being unlawfully used, are made means to alienate their hearts from the best
things; therefore they do deserve the name of profane men; in that they be
content to value any thing in this life, above the things pertaining to the
life to come: To which end our Savior tells us, that he that hates not his
father and mother for his sake, is not worthy of his kingdom; whereby he
gives us to understand that there must be a readiness in us, to value spiritual
blessings and spiritual exercises, above the dearest things in this life.

The fourth sort are such as think al well; 4. Sort.
and that it is sufficient, in that they have been at pains and charges for
spiritual things heretofore: but now wax weary; they have been zealous, but
now grow cold; they have taken pains, but now take their ease; they have been
at charges, but now they think it better saved; and that it will stop a gap in
their own families. They did join with such as were forward in religion; but
now with Demas, they have embraced the world, and turned to swinish pleasures.
If this be well examined, how many amongst us are guilty herein; both of us in
the Ministry that be preachers, and of you that be hearers and professors?
May it not be said of many when they were scholars, and at their first
entrance into the Ministry, how painful, how careful, how faithful in
their places by preaching, catechizing and other duties; and now scarce preach
monthly or quarterly, but put over to deputies? The like may be said by many of
you, who when ye were young men, prentices, batcherlers, you did make show of
love to the Gospel; you would take pains to run to sermons; you would have
care of swearing, and made conscience of an oath, and profaning the Lords day:
but alas now in this City, how many religious servants are become irreligious
Masters, and religious maidens become irreligious Mistresses! The Lord open
your eyes, that such as know they be guilty, may repent.

Esaus profaneness iumpe with him, which is, in that he was well content to
part with his birthright, it never did trouble him; his care was for the
belly: so how many are there in our land, both in this City, and in many
places of the Country, can be well content to be without that only ordinary
sanctified ordinance of God, the preaching of the word? and for worldly
respects, willingly subject themselves under such a Ministry as shall starve
their souls? I do speak it chiefly in respect of many of our Gentlemen, who
prefer a fair house, a pleasant air, gallant walls, before a faithful and
painful Ministry; so they may have the one, they respect not the enjoying of
the other. What is this but profaneness? I say again, if there be any here
this day, Gentleman or Gentlewoman, Knight or Lady, that for a fair house,
pleasant air, fields, barnes, pastures, gardens, orchards, etc. can willingly
depart this city, or from under a sanctified Ministry, and betake their souls
to an unpreaching Minister, and such a one as they would scarce put in trust to
keep their sheep; they carry a visible sign of the curse of God upon them;
and here I entitle their names amongst the profane crew.

Prou. 22.6.
Therefore Solomon cries out so often to parents: teach thy son, instruct thy
son. Now how can they do this, which cannot teach themselves? You cannot do
greater injury to your children, or be greater enemies to them, the^ to live
profane lives. Better is the son of the veriest beggar in your City, being
both religious, then the son of the wealthiest man in your City, being both
profane: for if thou be irreligious, thou have done as much as lies in thee
to beget an helhound; and it must be a supernatural work of God to alter the
nature of the same.

To you godly parents that love religion, and hate prophanenes. Art a rich man,
and trainest up thy son in religion? Be of comfort; whilst thou live, thou
shall have joy, and when thou die, thou shall leave them to one, that is like
long to enjoy them. Art a poor man, art religious, fearing God, and walking
sincerely and uprightly in thy calling; have many children and nothing to leave
them? Be of good comfort, thou shall leave them the blessing of God. I know it
is hard for many to believe this, Psalm. 12^.3.4
but the holy Ghost has spoken it, and left it for us to believe. Again, to
thee that have gotten great store of gold, goods, lands, livings. Art a
profane man? thou may live with sorrow enough, and die thou shall with a
woeful heart. Do think those goods and riches thou have scraped together
with vexing the body, and venturing the soul to the devil, shall long be
enjoyed? When was there ever any rich man, or where is any that can come out
and say, he ever saw the fourth generation of a profane man prosper? No, no,
the Lord will curse them, and blow upon them, they shall not prosper. It is
religion must bring the blessing of God upon them and their posterity.

Again, you that are children, pray, pray daily to the Lord to work religious
hearts in your Parents; and rejoice and be glad to see your fathers give thanks
before meals, and down upon their knees to prayer before they go to their
beds; for this will turn to blessings upon you; if you be careful to follow
their steps; and though thy father die a beggar, yet assure thy self he
shall leave thee the blessing of the Lord. Psalm. 37.25.
I have been young (says David) and now am old, yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread; not meaning that it was impossible
that a righteous man's child should go a begging; but that it is a thing that
is very rare, and that he was now forescore years of age, yet he did never
in all his life see it. And so have many men lived till they have been of great
years, yet have they seldom or not at all seen any such thing come to pass.

Lastly, to such others as know they shall have great possessions, left them
by profane parents, and such as prefer their treasure, their pleasure, and
earthly things before any spiritual duties to God: as experience in many, you
shall never see them careful to give thanks at their meals, never are upon
their knees in prayer in their families; but are swearers, prophaners of the
Lords Sabbath, usurers, drunkards; and let them tremble to be heirs to such
wretches: For if it please not God to work supernaturallie on thee, thou may
not only curse the day that ever thou wast begotten of them; but God shortly
will sweep either thee or thine away with the besome of his wrath. And once
again, I exhort all you that be parents; labor to be religious, and to bring
up your children in godly education; else you may fear that your bones shall
not be so soon rotten, as the Lord will rot and root out your posterity and
name from under heaven.

Text. v. 17. For ye know, how that afterward also when he would have inherited
the blessing, he was rejected. And now come we to the third point, which is to
the punishment, which, as you heard, is threefold. Esan having thought he had
made a good exchange with his brother, yet at length comes to see the loss,
and it shames him and wounds him in his conscience, that for so base a price he
had parted with his birthright; but all too late.

Genesis 25.34.
As example of this castaway, who at the first coming from his hunting, and
having sold his brother his birthright (yea, partly in contempt,) it is said
he rose merrily, as one that had thought he had made a good exchange: Genesis
27.34.
but afterward when he perceived his loss in coming to his father in hope
of a blessing, and that his father told him he had blessed Jacob, and he must
be blessed: then he cries out, Oh bless me also father, bless me; as if
he should have said, I hope his subtlety shall not disinherit me. Alas, I had
but a mess of pottage in my need, and must I lose birthright, and blessing,
and all? Thus this woeful wretch comes to see his loss; which before he made
so light account of. Now his conscience wounds him: Now the curse of God pulles
away the scale of his conscience, and he sees his folly. The like example we
have of Baalam, Numb. 23.10.
who though he had lived a covetous wretch, and had lightly regarded the way
of righteousness, yet in the end he wishes to die the death of the righteous:
Even so many at this day; they spend their time in the vanity of the world,
contemning the call and offer of the Lord: neglecting and despising many holy
meetings, many sermons, many sacraments, for to gain a little pleasure, ease
and profit, accounting such but fools that run to Sermons. But let such know,
the Lord will vncrust that conscience of theirs; and then they shall curse
their pleasures, their profits, their walking in the fields, that were means
to draw them away from our assemblies in the congregation; then will they be
ready to curse themselves they had no better grace, they could not see their
follies; but to prefer their covetousness, drunkenness, whordome, usury,
pastimes, plays, etc. before the heavenly way of salvation. Matthew. 26.15.
Judas thought he had sped well when he had gotten thirty pence for a kiss:
but when he came to see that he had sold his salvation for money, he was so
wounded in his conscience, Mar. 27.34.5.
that he could not rest till he had bought a halter and hanged himself. And
so will be the state of all profane men; when the crust of their conscience
is removed, and they come to see their woeful change, Prou. 6.33.
they shall find as the holy Ghost faith in the case of adulterers; he shall
find a wound in his soul, that (without repentance) shall never be put out.

The reasons hereof are: 1. King. 21.20.
as Ahab said to Eliah: Have thou found me O thou mine enemy? And so howeuer
men can so lightly sell away Gods blessings at so base a rate, yet the sin
of profaneness will find them out in the end.

Judge. 17.
because hereby God will have the^ to justify him in his judgments, and say
with Adonibezek, that God has justly rewarded the^ for their profaneness.
And how does this daily fall out in many, who in time of Gods hand on them,
cry out upon the loss of time, that they had no better grace then to sell
away their souls for pleasure, idleness, pastime and vanity? Yea, is it not
the cry of all condemned persons upon the gallows, to cry out of their
graceles profaning the Lords Sabbath? Psalm. 51.4.
Thus will the Lord be just when he speaks, and pure when he judges. So that
howeuer profane men flatter themselves in their own eyes, yea, and plead for
their sin; Psalm. 36.2.
yet as the holy Ghost says, their iniquity will find them out. And though
they think that money well gained, and that time well spent, that is gotten
with the loss of godly exercises, yet shall they come one day to justify the
Lord, when their profaneness shall find them out. Let us come to the uses to
be made hence.

Esau, yea worse than Esau, sell away in contempt many godly exercises on this
day, at a lower and baser rate than he sold his birth right: he had some
thing, but they nothing but a little pleasure, that God knows soon vanishes
away. Judas sold his Master for thirty pence; but there are many thirties in
this City, that will sell thirty Sermons for less than thirty pence. Let us
come to a more near examination of our selves, and try how guilty we are
herein. And this will appear more plain, by setting down such things as laid
open Esaus contempt of his birthright. The first was his willingness to part
from it, and to be without it; he never stood long debating the matter with
his brother; but well content to depart with it. And so at this day amongst us
how many are there that willingly and cheerfully can be content to be without
the preaching of the word, and shroud themselves where it is wanting! how it
stands with you, be Judge your selves. But I know, in diverse places of the
Country, many of our Gentlemen can well be content to put up with quarter
sermons, yea, to starve their souls, and commit the keeping of them to those
who be more fitter for a beetle and a wedge, then for any office in the
Ministry: yea further, they think too great a pains, and too much toil to
ride but two miles on the Lords day for the food of their souls, when the same
men cannot be content, unless they have two or three meals the same day for
the pampering of their bodies: let such know herein he shows himself a
profane man.

Esau showed his contempt in, was, his parting with it at so base a price. For
was it ever read of any ye sold such a precious treasure at so low a rate?
which was (as before you have heard) the inheritance of his father Isaac, and
grandfather Abraham, yea, the holy and faithful promises of God, and chiefly
the kingdom of heaven, and all for a mess of pottage. We do greatly wonder
at this, and no marvel. Yet there are amongst us that sell away the covenant
and promises made to them in Jesus Christ at a less rate then a mess of
pottage; which they do account a trifle. And what can thou make of thy
pleasure, pastime, walking in the fields, idleness, sleeping? and I tell thee
they are far worse then pottage in respect of heavenly things. Is not this a
wonderful thing, that men created after the image of God, and specially to
advance his honor, should no more esteem of the precious pearls offered to
them out of the Gospel, then swine do of Jewels? like the Gadarens, that
esteem more of their pigges then preaching: And like little children, that
esteem more their rattles and bables, then they do a bag of gold. As even
experience shows in many in this your City, that can walk in the streets,
and by the Church doors, and see the Preacher in the Pulpit; yet in contempt
can pass by, preferring some worldly matters before the pearl of the Gospel.

Esaus eating of his pottage, was in it self no dishonest or unlawful act: yet
if with Esau, they do in their hearts prefer their walking or their business
before these holy meetings; it argues their contempt to Gods ordinance, and
spots them with prophanenes.

Jacob his brother to him for it: Why, says he, Lo, I am almost dead, what is
then this birthright to me? How like to this in effect are the speeches of
many of our swaggerers at this day? Come, say they, let us be merry whilst
we may. Sorrow, hang sorrow, when we be dead, all the world is dead with us.
Another sort, in seeing Christians out of an honest heart go to the Church to
hear the word, which is the food of their souls, let them take their Sermons
to themselves, and the devil give them good of them, for I will have my
pleasure in despite of their hearts, and I will take the time whilst I may.
But God will one day waken the consciences of such profane men, and it will
wound and grieve them at their hearts that they had no better grace but to sell
away their birthright.



enemy to draw him to profaneness, then an irreligious father, or mother, or
brother, or sister: A religious husband cannot have a more pestilent enemy to
cool his zeal and love to religion, then an irreligious wife. Set down this
for a certainty, you that be religious, that your greatest enemies shall be
those of your own house that be irreligious.

Prou. 1.24.
To thee that scornest and mockest at such as serve the Lord in sincerity of
heart; If a man should call thee villain and fool, thou would be angry:
Job 30.8.
but the holy man Job says thou art so: and all such as thou art. Of all the
marks of a castaway, one of them is to be tainted with the sin of scorning
at a godly man for his service to God. Genesis 21.9.
It was the mark that Ismael was branded withal, and sent him to hell,
because he was a mocker of Isaac. I tell thee, God accounts he has no greater
enemies then such. As example of the messengers that came from Ahaziah, 2.
King. 9.10.11.12.
who in mocking sort flouted the Prophet, calling him in scorn, man of God;
but were punished with fire from heaven. The like we read of 42. children
that were devoured of two bears for mocking Elisha the Lords Prophet. But
hearken thou what the Lord says, which is, Deuteronomy. 32.41.
That he will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on
judgment, and execute vengeance on his enemies, and will reward them that hate
me. Amongst which enemies in one of the chiefest number he accounts a scorner.

Text. He was rejected, for he found no place, etc. Now follows the second
degree of his punishment; which is, how he labors to obtain it again; yea,
he goes so far, that he weeps for the loss of it, yet all in vain. Genesis
37.34-38.
Consider of Esau in seeking the blessing: he went to his father, he fell
upon his knees, he cried out for very grief, he was ashamed he had so
lightly, and at such a rate passed away his birthright; he wept, he shed
tears. Who would have thought but this repentance had been sound? Did either
Marie or Peter, or the thief in outward show go any further, or much beyond
him? Yet theirs was true repentance, and accepted of God; but his was
counterfeit, and he and it both rejected. Example we have of Orpah the sister
of Ruth: Ruth 1.7-14.
how she went far in show, she leaves her country, she travels along, she
weeps as well as Ruth, yet in the end a few words and reasons persuade her to
turn back: so there are many can make a fair show in matters of faith and
repentance, but either carnal reasons, or irreligious friends, or one thing or
other draws them quite away. This appears in that unpardonable sin, Heb. 6.4.
where is showed how, first, they may be illightned with us, endued with
knowledge and understanding of the word that has been preached unto them.
Secondly, they may taste of the heavenly gift; that is, Luke 8.13.
they may gladly receive the word, and rejoice in it; as our Savior describes
in the parable of the seed cast into stony ground.



Mark. 6.20.
Another example we have in Herod, who is said to hear John Baptist; yea,
farther he heard him gladly, yea he did reverence him: yea, which is more,
he reformed many things by his preaching to him that before were amiss; yet
cast away and forsaken of God. So a very castaway may go far in many
things. As first in his calling, he may hear the word, he may understand it,
assent to it, joy in it, practice some duties commanded by it, yet to be but a
savor of death unto death to him.



first:







Psalm. 78.34.
As the Prophet says: You said, you would not transgress, but yet you offer
to your idols, and grieve me with your sins. And the like the Prophet David
says of the Israelites in the Psalms: When he slew them, they sought him,
etc. verse. 36.
But it follows presently: But they flattered him with their mouth, and
dissembled with him with their tongue. But the purpose of the other is not so
much in his tongue, as in his heart, he does carry an unfeigned purpose in his
heart to amend, and he does endeavor in his life, never to fall into the like
sins, which before he did live in.





Now follows the second thing, viz. To set you down four principal
sanctified graces, by the which every one of us may judge of his estate to
salvation.

have the seed of Gods spirit in them, therefore they can commit no such
sin. They may sin of ignorance, yea of knowledge and of presumption, but
yet it shall have no dominion over them, they lie not in it, or delight in it,
but travel and take no rest till they be at peace with God in their hearts by
prayer, and do not give over till they feel assurance of pardon.

The second is an holy combat and fight: for theelect, are partly flesh and
partly spirit, and these two are as opposite as light and darkness, still
striving and fighting in the regenerate to get the victory. I grant there is a
kind of combat and strife in the unregenerate man, but that is between the
heart and conscience upon the committing some gross sin: but the other is
between the mind and the mind, the will and the will, the affection and the
affections; the regenerate part against the unregenerate part, and this daily
upon the temptation of any sin. And this is perceived by their carriage both
before the sin, in the temptation of it, in the act of sinning, and after the
sin committed. Before, the sin haled and pulled to it their will partly
unwilling and partly willing, the mind partly set on it and partly set against
it the affections partly liking of it, and partly hating it. Now if the
unregenerate part get the victory, and they fall into the act of sinning, they
find a terror and fear, and a very unwillingness in it. So the act being
committed (as you heard before) they hasten out of it, he gets him into one
corner or other, he cries, he weeps, he sighs, he groans that he has
offended so loving a father, entreating God that he will aid him by his
spirit, so as he never fall into the like again.

The third is, that upon any correcting hand of God upon them, and even then
when he punishes sore, whereby he seems to frown upon them, they can run to
him in prayer and make their moan to him: as example of David, who cries out, O
Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, Psalm. 6.1.
neither chasten me in thy displeasure: though the Lord seem to be angry by
afflicting of them, yet they run to him as to a father. It grieves them to
see their father displeased: being like to a loving son, who grieves to see
his father angry, yea, every wrinkle in his fathers browe makes him to fear,
yet so as that that is grounded on love, and therefore runs upon his knees to
him for pardon. So is it with Gods children, though their father chastise them
with heavy and bitter afflictions, yet they run to their father with this
persuasion, that though they have failed in the duty of a son, yet he cannot
fail in the affection of a father. Contrary to this the hypocrite and
unregenerate man under Gods heavy hand upon him or his wife, children, goods,
etc. he runs from God, fleeing from him as from a tyrant, and betakes him to
his money, friends, sports and merry companions, yea, to witches, coniurers,
wizards, or any unlawful course, if they have hope of reliese.

with joy, and with delight, it is not of conscience to meet the Lord, to
hearken what he says unto them, and to put it in practice in their lives: but
rather some worldly business drives them, or for custom or neighborhood, or to
avoid the name of a Papist.

A second use hereof serves for the reproof of two sorts of hypocrites, and
first;

Lot said by Zoar, Oh, is it not a little one. Genesis 19.
But hearken to me, thou that think it a small matter to live in one: I tell
thee, live and die impenitent in ye one, and it will be thy destruction. Did
not Herod make outward show of many things? yet because he would not leave ye
one sin of incest, God cast him off and rejected him. I tell thee, one hole in
a ship will in a short time sink the whole ship. Tell me, thou that with thy
outward holiness live an usurer, a drunkard, a careless wreth; dare drink
but one dram of poison? so one raging sin will bring thee to hell.

Saul's, Judas, Esaus; or else in the congregation at the sermons, as hypocrites
do; but in their closets or in secret, they cannot shed one tear. I tell thee
deceive not thy self, for tears be no more signs of true repentance then are
words.

Text. He was rejected. Now follows the third degree of his punishment, which
is, that having set the time of mercy so light, he is now denied, though he
uses means to obtain it. The date is out, at the glass is run, therefore no
means will prevail.

Hosea 6.4.
yea, he will chide and expostulate the matter with us, why we will not accept
of his mercy: so there is, and will be a time, that after the refusing of
grace, and contemning of mercy offered, the Lord will shut up and bolt up the
gate of mercy, so as he will not be entreated at our hands any more. Psalm.
95.7.8.
This is proved to us by the Prophet David in one of the Psalms, where he
exhorts the people, that they will take and accept of the time the Lord offers
them, lest it come to pass by their contempt and refusing the time of grace,
the Lord cast them off and reject them. I deny not but that in respect of us,
til God have manifested his will, there is hope; but in respect of Gods secret
decree, the time of Gods mercy may be out, even during this life: therefore
when mercy is offered, we must take heed we wilfully contemn it not, lest we
provoke the Lord to be gone, and utterly reject us. One of the fearefullest
signs of a castaway is, to delay and put off the Lords gracious offer of
mercy, as we read of Pharaoh, Exodus 8.9.10.
who when Moses offered himself to pray to the Lord for him, he put it off
till the next morrow; so he that has the graces and mercies of God offered to
him to day, and puts them off from his youth to his age, and from his old days
to his deathbed, may justly fear an utter reiection, even then when he hopes
of most comfort. For the further pressing this doctrine on our consciences, let
us observe some places of Scripture. And first, let us see what the Lord says
to such as despise Wisdoms call, being of three sorts: Because I have called,
and ye refused, Prou. 1.24.
I have stretched out mine hand, and none would regard. Verse 28.
And then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me
earelie, but they shall not find me. Noting, that as they refused the time in
which he called, so they should call in hope of mercy, but they should not
obtain. The like we read, how the Prophet Esaias, calling Jerusalem to
repentance, in sackcloth and ashes for their sins, Esaias 22.12.13.
she fell to sporting and feasting, despising the Lords message and offer of
grace by his Prophet: what came of it? you may read presently that their
contempt coming to the Lords ears, he answers: Surely, Verse. 14.
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die; says the Lord of
hosts. Giving them to understand, that seeing they set so light by the
admonitions of the Prophet, there should be left them no time to repent in,
till he had destroyed them. But of all the places of Scripture for this
purpose, let us see what the Lord says to Jerusalem by his Prophet Ezechiel:
Because, says he, I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged; Thou
shall not be purged, till I have caused my wrath to light upon thee. Mark this
place well, which may terrify our hearts, if we carry not the hearts of
Tigres. In which the Lord testifies not only to them, but to us, That when by all kind means and loving allurements he offers his favor, and we
obstinately refuse: let us be sure of it, when we would have mercy and
favor from him, though we beg it, cry, houle, he will deny it us. Oh that
the lamentable spectacles of some might be warnings to us, who in their life
time have heard the Lord by his Ministers call to them, and entreated them to
leave their sins, chidden them, threatened them; but all in vain, they have
stopped their ears, and hardened their hearts. But being come to their bed of
death, and the time come they must depart this life (I fear to a worse) they
have cried, houled, yea, knocked and beaten their heads to the bedposts, my
self being witness: yet could not show any sign of receiving one drop of
comfort from the Lord. And having been exhorted to pray and call on the Lord
for mercy, could not say so much as, The Lord have mercy upon me. And what
know we what our estate shall be if we wear out the time of mercy? There
is a time set us, in which we may repent; but being despised and outrunne,
there is after no hour to obtain mercy. And the reasons hereof are specially
three:



neglecting the Lords gracious offer of mercy, gets great advantage of us; and
hereby makes a way for such sins, as hardly in time we can repent us of.

Can the Blackmoore change his skin, Ier. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do
evil. Oh beloved, let us take heed of despising the Lords loving and kind
offer of mercy, Psalm. 2.12.
lest he be angry, and so we do perish in his wrath.

Now let us come to the uses of this doctrine. where the people do profit, by
the means, that is, knowledge and reformation of life.

And first, as touching knowledge: Come to many in this City, who have lived
some 20. some 30. some these 40. years, yet are very ignorant, even in the
principles of religion. You can say (it may be) God made you, Christ redeemed
you, etc. But to what end did God make you, or Christ redeem you, you know
not; but there are many as blind as beetles. And as this is too true in your
City, so is it most lamentable in the Country; where you shall have in many
places, not one of twenty to yield a good reason why they shall not be damned;
yea, they know no more the right way to salvation, nor how they must be saved
(if ever they be saved) then the veriest idiot that ever was borne. And to say
the truth, how can they, when they are content to be led to hell as a man
leads a dog in a string, according to the saying of our Savior Christ, If the
blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch?

So for the second point, which is reformation of life: I pray you rouse up
your hearts, and examine your lives what reformation there has been sithence
this last extremity of frosts, the like I think was never heard of: has any
of you left your pride, your drunkenness, your whoredom, your usury, your
briberie? and God be witness between you, and your hearts of this. And think
you the Lord will continue wooing and entreating us still? No, no; If his word
can do little good amongst us, how can his judgments profit us? The Lord in
minding to overthrow a people, does commonly send before him three arrows of
destruction, famine, plague, and the sword: of two of them our land has of
late had her part: And that we charge not God foolishly; if we mark it, we
shall find our land polluted in a high degree with the same sins, for which
the Lord has punished both Israel and Judah with the former punishments. And
first for famine, Famine.
we find the sins that did bring it were specially these three.

2. Sam. 21.
Now if we take a general surney of our state, we shall find that because of
oaths our land shall mourn; Ier. 23.10.
for the name of God in no age was so blasphemed either in Israel or Judah, as
it is in this sinful land. We find that many times, they would rent their
garments, in hearing the name of God blasphemed, which if we should do to
hear the Lords name so rent and torn in the mouths of profane men in shops,
alehouses, tauernes, markets, faires, we should never have whole clothes on our
backs.

Amos. 8.4. 5-11.
was oppression of the poor. And how guilty we are herein, the cry of
widows, fatherless, and poor men do testify; yea, if these should hold
their peace, the very senseless creatures witness it: against whom, timber,
stones, lands, bands, money do cry apace for vengeance from God.



Plague.
which you know in this City ye Lord has of late visited you withal; and in
very short space took away to the number of forty thousand: But what profit
has followed hereof amongst you? a man cannot perceive any sin reformed.
Would you know the usual sins procure this? they are specially four:





1. Cor. 11.30.
a sin common amongst us, and no sin less accounted of. For come to many
on their deathbeds, you shall hear them to confess they have been drunkards,
whoremongers, usurers, covetous, envious, etc. but you shall never hear them
confess their unworthy coming to the Lords Table: And yet this sin has
brought Gods hand on them above the rest.

And for the third punishment, Sword.
viz. the sword: a punishment long threatened to us: and of which long sithence
we had tasted of, had not the Lord in mercy kept us from it: which is
strange, Deuteronomy. 32.41.
considering our land swarms with those sins, that do daily whet the Lords
glittering sword to strike us: And they are specially three.

The first is pride in apparel; Esa. 3.16-25.
which the Prophet Esaias told the Jews, would bring the sword upon them. Which
sin, who sees not, that even this City is so infected withal, that were not
the Lord patient, it could not choose but have brought the sword long ere this
day. The heads and backs of women, who are as proud as their husbands are
covetous, cry to the Lord for revenge.

The second is hollow-harted repentance. Hos. 7.14-16.
For which sin the Prophet Hosea tells Israel: Because in their show of
repentance they cried not to the Lord in their hearts, when they houled on
their beds, they should fall by the sword. And how hollow-hearted our
repentance has been, appears plainly by the want of the reforming of our
grosle sins that ouerspread the land.

2. Chron. 36.16.17.
Because she did mock his messengers, and despise their admonitions, and
withal misused them, he would bring the sword of the Chaldeans upon them, and
would spare neither young man, nor virgin, ancient nor old. God gave all to the
sword. And how can we look God should keep the sword away, when his servants
are thus hardly entreated? Nay, I appeal to your hearts, if at this day many
be not at more quiet, and find more favor that commit sin, then those that
zealouslie reprove sin. Yea, how are these days to be lamented, when many
vile notorious wretches, and base drunken companions do abuse the Lords
Ministers. I tell you plain it is a general complaint of all the faithful
Ministers in the land of their disgrace and discouragement they be offered in
their Ministry. If we were many of us, either Lawyers or Physicians, you
would honor and reverence us: but in that we be the Lords Ministers, we be
hated and abused: Yea, many account no better of us, but as their drudges to
bury the dead, to christen their children, and to church their wives (as they
term it) yea, a rare thing to find one sound sincere lover of Gods word, and
Gods Minister. And further, who lives so quiet, and at ease in the Ministry,
as those that lead thousands to hell? who lives more merrier then he that has
gotten two or three benefices, and discharges none of them? Who lives more in
the pleasure of the world, and be so fatted up, that their eyes are ready to
start out of their heads, then such as preach by deputies? And yet these carry
the honor and applause of the people, when the faithful Minister finds course
entertainment. And what shall let the Lord to execute vengeance upon us: and
to make his arrows drunk with our blood? Deuteronomy. 32.42.
See not these things? shame will follow thee. Grieuest thou not at it? woe
will overtake thee. The Lord Jesus open our hearts to accept of his offered
mercy, and giuevs grace to meet him betimes by repentance, lest his wrath
break out on us like fire and there be none to quench it.



The first sort, 1. Sort.
are such as plead the sweet promises of the Gospel. At what time soever a
sinner does repent, etc. Come to me all ye that travail, and are heavy
laden, and I will refresh you. To the which I answer: It is true and most
true. But to whom are these promises made, and to what sinners? They be made
to all repentant sinners, that turn to the Lord with all their hearts. But
thou art an unrepentant wretch, and continuest in thy sins: therefore these
comfortable promises belong not to thee. And what sinners does he bid come to
him? those that be weary and heavy laden, that is, whole sins pinch and
wound them at the heart, and withal desire to be eased of the burden thereof.
Therefore take no occasion to presume of the promises of the Gospel, unless
thou turn from thy evil ways, and repent of thy sins, they belong nothing
to thee.

The second sort are such, 2. Sort.
as do allege the example of the these converted at the hour of his death,
presuming they shall find the like mercy. To which I answer: this was an
extraordinary example: and the Lord has set out but one, and yet one: But
one, that no man must presume by this example: For what mad man will spur his
horse till he speak, because Baalam did so? And yet one, That no man should
despair; but to know, God is able to call at the last hour. And by this he
did declare the riches of his mercy to al such as have grace to turn unto him.
Where contrary we see many thousands of those who having deferred their
repentance have bin taken away in their sins, and died impenitent. To thee
then that are privy thou have had many calls, many offers of grace, yea, ye
have seen us spend our wits, our strength, yea ouerspent our selves for thy
good. What devil has bewitched thee to post off all, and willingly cast away
thy self? What a shame is it, that the children of this world are wiser in
their kind then the children of light? The traveler will take his time in his
iourny, and will hasten when he sees night approach, lest darkness overtake
him: The smith will smite while the iron is hot, lest it cool upon him; and so
he lose his labor. The mariner will not let the tide pass him: The lawyer
will take the Term, because he knows, it being ended his clients will be
gone: so we ought to make every day the day of our term. Thy very tongue
will condemn thee in thy trade. If thou trust a man with thy wares thou do
require a bill or bond; saying, all men be mortal: but let the preacher exhort
thee to accept of the gracions time of the Lord, and tell thee thou art
mortal, and at an hours warning for death, yet thou will not believe him; but
so lead thy life, as if thou had it in fee farm. And to thee that call
thy neighbors friends and companions to the cards, tables, bowls, saying, Oh
come, let us go pass the time away: Is time so slow that it must be driven?
I tell thee, there are at this day many a thousand in hell, if they had a
kingdom would gladly give it all for one hour of that time, whereof thou
have many; not to pass it away, or to drive it from them, but in hope to
recover that which thou graceleslie do contemn.

Esaias 55.6.
and to seek the Lord, whilst he may be found: For so long as we do enjoy
the preaching of the Gospel amongst us, so long the Lord offers his mercy
unto us, and great hope the time is not past: else if we abuse this time, to
fear that either he will remove the Gospel from us, else blind our eyes, and
harden our hearts, so as nothing we do, either hear or see shall prevail
with us to salvation. I will grow to an end, lest I weary you and ouerspend my
self, with that saying of our Savior to his Disciples: John 9 4.
I must work the works of him that sent me whilst it is day: the night
comes when no man can work. In which he sets us all an example by himself,
how to redeem the time we live in here: and to labor in the duties belonging
to our calling, and take every opportunity of doing good, lest the night come,
that is, death fetch them away; and then they shall not stay or return again
to work any thing they have left undone here. Remember the often warning of
our Savior, with this watchword, Watch. In which he warnes us to accept of the
time of mercy, and to prepare for the day of account, that so with joy we may
yield up our reckonings. And how must this be? even by making our benefit of
the time of grace, and spending it faithfully in that place and calling God
has called us unto: For every one has his place, public or private, to God,
to his Church, and one to another. And I pronounce to every one, be he
Magistrate, Minister, Father, Child, Servant, Husband or Wife, that has
neglected his time, being in place, and so lovingly offered thee time by the
Lord to perform it; ye if thou be careless and negligent in this time, a time
will come that thou shall be hurried away, and shall not stay one day, one
hour, or one minute to perform any of that work in thy place thou have left
undone. To conclude, let us call to remembrance these four motives to move us
to accept of this time of grace; this acceptable day of salvation. 2. Cor. 6.2.
First, how merciful the Lord has been to us, who might have cut off our time
in our youth, in which it may be we were unthrifty; or in the midst of some
grievous sin we have committed heretofore, or of late days, and so have sent
us to hell.







Let us pray for a blessing upon this we have heard.

FINIS.

