THE SOVLES VOCATION OR EFFECTVAL Calling to CHRIST.

By T. H.

2 PETER 1.3. Through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and
virtue.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
Black Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

A TABLE OF THE Contents out of JOHN.
Doctrine I. THe soul humbled and enlightened, must learn the fullness of the
mercy of God, that there is fullness of sufficiency of mercy with him. p. 37
Use I. Look only to Gods mercy, after that thou have learned the lesson of
contrition and humiliation. p. 43
Doctrine II. That the teaching of the heart effectually is the proper task
and work of God. p. 49 Reason. Because the work is an almighty work. p. 50
Use I. It is of admirable comfort to all weak, silly, feeble minded creatures.
p. 51 Use II. If it be the work of God, then go to him. p. 52 Use III. Does
the Father teach? then acknowledge you have it as from God. p. 57
Doctrine III. That the word of the Gospel, and the work (...) ^^irit go
both together. p. 62 The manner how the Word and Spirit go together. p. 63
Reason I. Because the Lord would have all use the means. p. 65 Reason II.
Because the Lord would not have men be couzened by their own fancies. p. 65
Reason III. Because the Lord would have all to be watchful and careful, in
not losing their comfort. p. 60 Use I. Instruction to teach us the worth of the
Gospel, above all other things in the world, for it is accomp^nied with the
Spirit, and it brings salvation with it. p. 65 Use II. For trial, hence a man
may know, whether we have a spiritual heart or no. p. 67 Use III. Direction,
hence we may observe the ground, why many of Gods faithful people understand
not, that they have the Spirit of God. p. 68 Use IIII. Terror, we may see the
hopeless condition of those men that live under the Gospel, etc. p. 69 Use V.
Exhortation, you are to submit to the Word of the Lord. p. 70 The means to
submit are three. p. 71

Doctrine IIII. (...) Spi^^^ of the Lord gives special notice of Gods
acceptance to the soul truly humbled. p. 72 The manner how the Spirit does it,
is in three passages. p. 74
Reason I. Because only the Spirit of the Lord knows the Lords mind. p. 88
Reason II. Because the Spirit only can break through all those ^^^sts and
clouds of ignorance and blindness, that are in the minds to oppose this
work. p. 90 Those hindrances are of two sorts. p. 91
Use I. Is of trial to examine your selves, whether Gods Spirit has given you
special notice of Gods acceptance. p. 94 The special notice of the Spirit
from all other, is to be tried and differenced by four particulars. p. 95
Use II. It is an use of direction to teach you what means you must use to get
the notice and evidence of Gods love to your own souls. p. 101 The means to
get the witness of the Spirit are four. Ibid. 1. You must labor to be such
a one to whom the Spirit does belong. p. 102 2. You must not hearken to carnal
reason of your own hearts. p. 103 3. You must labor to understand the
language of the Spirit. p. 105 4. You must labor to keep the promise by you
for ever. p. 107
The Motives to this are two. Ibid.
Use III. Instruction to teach you, that the humbled sinner of meanest
capacity, does know more of grace and salvation, and Gods love in Christ, than
the most wise and learned in the world, that are not humbled. p. 108 Use IIII.
It is to show the certainty of the assurance of faith. p. 109 Now we come next
in order to show, how that the Lord must teach all the affections to come unto
the promise, and the first affection is the affection of hope. p. 110

Doctrine V. The holy Spirit of the Father does stir the heart of an humbled
and enlightened sinner, to hope for the goodness of the Lord. Ibid. Reason I.
Why the Lord does in the next place proceed to stir up hope, is, because it is
the fittest faculty of the soul to wait upon mercy. p. 112 The manner how God
does stir up the heart of an humble broken hearted sinner to hope, is in
three passages. p. 113 1 The Lord does sweetly persuade the heart, that a man's
sins are pardonable. p. 113 2 The Lord does sweetly persuade the soul, that
all his sins shall be pardoned. p. 118 3 The Lord lets in some relish
into the soul of the sweetness of his love. ibid.

Use I. Reproof of two sorts of persons; first of those that despair:
secondly, of those that presume. p. 119 The heinousness of the sin of
desperation, is set forth in two particulars. 1 As io is most injurious to God.
p. 120 2 As it is most dangerous to the soul. p. 121
The sin of presumption of carnal Hypocrites is set forth. p. 123 The
grounds of the unreasonable hopes of carnal Hypocrites, are five: 1 The
ignorants hope, that the Lord that made him, will not damn him. p. 125 2
Another hops that God is his God, because of his prospertie in outward
things. ibid. 3 Another hopes he shall be saved, because he has had an hell of
affliction in this life. ibid. 4 Another hopes for salvation, in regard they
enjoy the means of salvation. p. 127 5 Another hopes he shall be saved, because
there is mercy enough in God to save him. p. 129

Use II. An use of consolation to every poor broken hearted sinner: can thou
but look to God and hope, I say thy condition is good. p. 133 There are four
signs to know the true grounded hope of the Saints, from all false and flashy
hopes of Hypocrites: The first sign of true hope is, that true hope has a
peculiar certainty in it. p. 135 The second sign is this, that a true grounded
hope is of great power and strength to hold the soul to the truth of the
promise. p. 137 The third sign is this, that the excellency of this hope does
overshadow all the hopes in the world, that can be offered, propounded,
desired. p. 139 The fourth sign is this, a true grounded hope always lends
supply and succor, when all the rest of a man's abilities do fail in his own
sense and apprehension. p. 140
Use III. Of exhortation, to beseech every one to labor for this true and
grounded hope. p. 143. The Motives to stir you up to seek this hope are
these three: 1 Because there is nothing more useful than this grace of hope.
p. 143 2 Because nothing is more needful to the soul, than this true hope. p.
144 3 Because by this true hope, the hearts of the Saints are kept both in love
to God, and in obedience unto him. p. 145
The Means to attain this true grounded Hope are these three. 1 You must
labor to cast out all carnal sensuality. p. 145 2 You must labor to be much
acquainted with the precious promises of God. p. 146 3 You must maintain in
the heart a deep and serious acknowledgement of that supreme authority of the
Lord, to do what he will, and how he will, according unto his own good
pleasure. p. 148


Doctrine VI. The Spirit of the Lord quickneth the desire of an humble and
enlightened sinner to long for the riches of his mercy in Christ. p. 150 The
reason why desire comes next in order, and the manner how God the Father does
quicken up the desires of the soul to long for mercy, are. p. 152
Use I. It is an use of strong consolation, to stay the hearts of poor sinners
in the midst of their infirmities; can thou but find thy smoking desire, thy
condition is then good. p. 156. The signs of sound desires are these three: 1
Sign of a sound desire is this, that as the desire is, so the endeavor will be
p. 157 2 Sign of a sound desire is this, he that truly desires mercy and
grace, desires Christ for himself. 158. 3 Sign of a sound desire is this,
the soul that truly desires mercy, is ready to receive it with thankfulness,
and will entertain the means and messenger that may bring home Christ and
mercy to his soul. p. 159

Use II. It is of reproof to all them, that yet have not these true and
sincere desires after grace and salvation wrought in them. p. 160 There are
three sorts and ranks of professors and hypocrites, whose desires are
unsound: the Lazy Hypocrite, Stage Hypocrite, Terrified Hypocrite.
p. 161 There are four sorts of lazy professors, and lazy Hypocrites, that are
void of these sound and sincere hopes: 1 Sort of lazy Hypocrites are such, who
when they enjoy the means of salvation, yet they esteem not thy blessing, they
prize not the means. p. 164 2 Sort of lazy Hypocrites are such, who when God
has taken away and deprived them of the ordinary means of grace and
salvation, they are well contented to be without the same, they sit down very
well satisfied. p. 166 3 Sort of lazy Hypocrites are such, who when they have
the means of grace and salvation, are content to use them, and if they want
the means will seek out for them, but yet are not careful to prevent those
inconveniences, which hinder them by receiving benefit from the means. p. 168
4 Sort of lazy Hypocrites are those, who though they hear the duties
commanded, yet they neglect all duties commands. p. 169
There are two sorts of stage Hypocrites, that are void of these sound and
sincere desires. p. 172 The first sort of stage Hypocrites, are such as will
take up so much of Christ and the Gospel, as may stand with their credit, and
with their estate. p. 173 The second sort of stage Hypocrites are such, that
will use all Gods ordinances, but will part with nothing and will suffer
nothing for the Lord Jesus. p. 175 The third sort that are void of sound and
sincere desires, are the terrified Hypocrites. p. 177 The signs of a terrified
Hypocrite are two. 1 He will be lingering and hankering after some corruption.
p. 178 2 The terrified Hypocrite, he will slight and slubber over small sins,
and small corruptions. p. 178
How far this terrified Hypocrite will go, and what he may do; vid. p. 179
Use III. Is of Exhortation, wherein you are entreated in the bowels of the
Lord Jesus, to long and desire after the Lord Jesus Christ. p. 191 Means I. The
Means are four: the first is this, be acquainted thoroughly with thy own
necessities and wants, with that nothingnesse and emptiness in thy self. p.
192 Means II. The second is, consider the necessity after grace and goodness,
it is no matter of complement and indifferency. p. 197 Means III. The third
is, labor to spread forth the excellency of all the beauty and surpassing
glory, that is in the promises of God. p. 198 Means IV. The fourth is, thou
must know that it is not in thy power to bring thy heart to desire grace. p.
199
Doctrine VII. The Spirit of the Lord kindles in an humbled heart, and
enlightened sinner, love and joy to entertain and rejoice in the riches of his
mercy. p. 205 The opening of the Doctrine consists in 3. passages.
Passage I. Is this, that this love and joy is no where else to be found, but
in an heart humbled and enlightened. p. 205 Passage II. Is this, that the love
and joy is enkindled by the Spirit of the Father. p. 206. Passage III. Is this,
that the love and joy being kindled, they may entertain and rejoice in the
riches of Gods mercy. p. 207 Reason I. Of the point is this, because that love
and joy do follow desire. p. 209 The Spirit of the Father, does enkindle the
love and joy in these three particulars. p. 217
Particular I. Is this, God the Father by the Spirit, does let in some
sweetness and relish of his love into the soul, that does warm the heart.
p. 221 Particular II. Is this, that the freeness of Gods love, does enkindle a
love in the soul. p. 222 Particular III. Is this, that as the sweetness did
warm it, the freeness kindles it; so the greatness of the sweetness of this
love does set the soul in a flame. p. 224 Use I. It is an use of instruction
to inform you that there is no sufficiency in a natural heart, to be carried
to the Lord Jesus Christ, or to the work of grace. p. 226 Use II. I^ is an use
of consolation to stay and refresh the hearts of those that have received the
gracious work. p. 233 Use III. It is an use of trial to examine your selves
whether your love and joy be sound, true, and sincere, and how it does differ
from the fained, wild, and hypocritical love in the world. p. 237 The
soundness of true love from counterfeit Hypocritical love, appears in these
five trialls.
Trial I. Is this, observe the root and rise of thy love, ibid. Trial II. Is
this, observe if thou entertainest thy Savior, as a Savior; that is, as a
King. p. 242 Trial III. Is this, thou must observe if thou labourest to give
contentment to Christ. p. 244 Trial IV. Observe whether thy heart does rejoice
to see the happiness of the thing you love, p. 251 Trial V. Is this, it is
the nature of true love, to covet nearer union with the thing beloved. p. 254
Use IV. It is of repose to all those upon whom this work of love and joy in
Christ was never wrought. p. 261 Most men have not this love to God, but hatred
against him. p. 263 The persons that do not love the Lord Jesus Christ, they
are referred to three ranks. p. 266
Sort I. Are such as are open enemeis to Christ, and who these are, are largely
described in p. 267 Sort II. Are those glozing Neuters that halt between two
opinions. p. 273 Sort III. Are those fawning Hypocrites, that are fair in
show, but false in heart. p. 279 Here are further to be discovered four sorts
of Hypocrites. 1 There is a whining Hypocrite: p. 280 2 The wrangling
Hypocrite: p. 280 3 The glorious Hypocrite: p. 280 4 The presumptuous
Hypocrite. p. 280
We are now come to the work of the will. p. 283

Doctrine VIII. The will of a poor sinner humbled and enlightened, comes to be
effectually persuaded by the Spirit of the Father to rest upon the freeness of
God in Christ, that it may be interested therein. p. 284 The opening of this
Doctrine consists in 4 particulars.
Particular I. That this work must be in an heart humbled and enlightened. p.
285 Particular II. The will must be effectually persuaded, by the Spirit of the
Father. p. 287 Particular III. By the power of this persuasion, it casts it
self upon the rich grace and free mercy of God in Christ. p. 295 Now this
resting of the soul upon the rich grace of God in Christ, discovers it self
in a 5. fold Act.
Act I. It does imply a going out of the soul to Christ, that the soul runs
and reaches after a Christ. p. 296 Act II. Of resting is this, it lays fast
hold upon Christ. p. 298 Act III. Of resting is this, it flings the weight of
all his occasions and troubles upon Christ. p. 302 Act IV. Of resting and
reposing is this, it does draw virtue, and derive power from the Lord Jesus
Christ for succor and supply. p. 305 Faith does draw virtue from Christ by a
threefold Act. p. 307
Act I. Is this, Faith does appropriate and apply the promise to it self in
particular. ibid. Act II. Faith does jog the hand of God, and sets Gods power
on work. p. 309 Act III. Faith urges God with his own Word, and presses
Gods promise, and challenges God on his faithfulness and truth, not to be
wanting unto him for the acceptance of his Person, and the pardon of his
sins. p. 311 Act V. Of resting is this, it does leave the soul with the
promise. p. 312 Particular IV. Is the final cause why it does rest, that it
may be interested into all the good that is in the promise, and to have supply
of all Spiritual wants from the promise. p. 315 The Spiritual wants of the
soul which faith does supply are of 3. sorts. p. 316
Sort I. Of Spiritual wants are these, that the soul is gone away from God,
and is estranged to God; now faith brings the soul again to God. ibid. Want
II. Is this, the soul being departed from God, hence the soul is deprived of
all good, grace, and life; now faith does not only bring a sinner to God, but
it does communicate from God to a sinner. p. 320 Want III. Is this, the heart
is fearful lest it should lose that grace, now faith it is that does keep a
man grace. p. 322 Question. How does the soul come to believe? Answer. There
are three things in the promise where by the will of man is drawn to believe.
p. 327 Motive I. Is the All-sufficiencie of the freeness of Gods love. p. 328
Motive II. Is this, that this mercy is intended for thee. p. 329 Motive III. Is
this, that God does earnestly desire thee to come and to take this mercy, p.
330 Use I. Of information, that saving faith is no part of that holiness which
Adam had, nor no part of that Image to which we are restored by
Sanctification. p. 335 Use II. ^t is an use of terror to all that still
remain in unbeleefe. p. 349 The fearfulness of this sin of unbeleefe is
laid open in four Particulars. p. 352
Particular I. Because unbeleefe it does keep off the riches of mercies from
the soul that are in Christ, that it cannot enjoy them. p. 352 Particular II.
Unbelief, it does make all means to be unprofitable. p. 356 Particular III.
Unbelief, all sin in the strength and power of it in the heart of a sinner.
p. 361 Particular IV. Unbelief makes the soul of a sinner to be in a
desperate case and condition. p. 366 The danger of unbeleefe does appear in
these three Particulars. p. 369
Particular I. Consider it seriously, that whatsoever thou do so long as thou
art an unbeleever, it is all unprofitable and to no purpose at all. p. 369
Particular II. All the good things an unbeleever does enjoy, will prove
uncomfortable. p. 370 Particular III. Unbelief is the breeder and maintainer
of all the rest of the sins of an unbeleever. p. 371 Use III. It is a
collection concerning the difficulty of the work of faith, that the work of
faith is beyond the reach of all created power. p. 374 Use IV. It is to show
the benefits that come by faith to the soul. p. 390 What these benefits are in
particular, vid. p. 394. and p. 396
Use V. It is an use of consolation and great comfort to all the servants of
God, that through his mercy have received this grace. p. 416 The knowledge of
true saving faith from a false faith appears in these three trials. p. 423
Trial I. Is this, observe the root and rise of thy faith, the cause by which
thy faith was wrought, and from whence it came. p. 423 Trial II. Observe
whether thy faith does make choice wholly of Christ, and does resolve to match
with Christ only. p. 428 Trial III. Observe whether thy faith does bear it
self upon the promise in all its extremities, and is satisfied with it. p. 431
Use VI. It is a word of reproof against all those that never ye^ were made
partakers of the blessed work of grace. p. 434 Most that live in the bosom of
the Church, want saving faith. p. 437 The reasons of it, vid. p. 440 There be
four sorts in particular that have no faith. p. 446
Sort I. The ignorant persons. p. 447 Sort II. The carnal Gospellers, that do
live scandalously, and trade in their wickedness. p. 450 Sort III. The mere
civilized or judicious professors, that bear up themselves much upon their
own wisdom and judgment. p. 455 Sort IV. The counterfeit, that have a forged
kind of false faith, they have their alcumie faith. p. 464 Of these
counterfeit believers there are three sorts. p. 465
Sort I. The first sort of counterfeit believers are the temporary believers.
p. 465 Sort II. The second sort of counterfeit believers are the sturdy
hypocrites. p. 483. Sort III. The third sort of counterfeits are the shifting
stately hypocrites. p. 500 Use VII. It is an use of exhortation to desire you
to labor to get this grace of faith. p. 515 The hindrances of faith are of
two sorts; some are real hindrances, that do hinder the soul from Christ,
others do not hinder the souls interest in Christ. p. 519 The real
hindrances are four. p. 520 The hindrances that do not hinder the title to
a Christ are three in particular. p. 538
Sort I. The first kind of seeming hindrances are those discouragements,
which oppress the soul through carnal reasoning. p. 538 The second sort of
hindrances are the resting upon duties, endeavors, and performances. p. 546
The third sort of hindrances is the want of sense and feeling. p. 549 The
means or cures against these hindrances are especially three.
Cure I. A distressed soul is not to look too long nor too much continually
upon the sight and consideration of his own sins. p. 552 Cure II. Is this,
make conscience either not to attend to, or not to judge thy self or thy
estate by any carnal reason without a warrant. p. 560 Cure III. Is this, enter
not into contention with Satan concerning those things which belong not unto
you. p. 566 Cure IV. Is this, in thy proceedings with thy self, and in the
judgment of thy self, repair unto the word of the Lord, and pass no
sentence, but according to the evidence of the word. p. 573 There are four
rules of direction, to show the soul how to repair to the word.
Rule I. Is this, thou art to look into the uprightness and sincerity of
thine own soul. p. 577 Rule II. Is this, labor to have thy conscience settled
in the truth of grace, which the word does inform to be in thee. p. 580 Rule
III. Is this, that we should strive mightily to have our hearts overpowred to
entertain that we have that grace which the Word of truth does manifest to
be in us. Rule IIII. Is this, maintain in the last place the truth, which
upon these grounds thou have received. p. 592 The means to get faith are four.
p. 598
Means I. Is this, we must labor to pluck away all props that the soul
leanes upon. p. 598 Means II. Is this, labor to have your hearts established
of the fullness of content that is in the promise. p. 601 Means III. Is this,
expect all the good which thou needst and can desire from that sufficiency of
the promise. p. 607 Means IIII. Is this, labor to yield to the equal
condition of the promise. p. 608 The motives to stir up the heart to seek
after faith, are three.
Motive I. Is this, because if you once get this grace, you get all other
graces with it. p. 610 Motive II. Is this, because by faith we are delivered,
and made conquerours over all corruptions. p. 611 Motive III. Is this, because
faith does bring a blessing to all our blessings and graces. p. 614 Use. The
second branch of the use of exhortation, it is to those that have faith, to
live by their faith, and to improve it for their best good. p. 618 There are
three particulars for to learn the heart how to live by faith. 622
Partic. I. We must provide matter for our faith. ibid. Partic. II. In
providing matter of faith, three rules are to be observed. Rule I. All the
good promises are to be stored up seasonably. p. 623 Rule II. All the promises
of all kinds, and that abundantly, are to be laid in. p. 625 Rule III. All the
promises are to be laid up in the heart, that we may have them at hand for our
use. p. 628 Particular II. We must labor to fit faith for the work. p. 630
Rule I. To maintain the evidence of this grace of faith. p. 630 Rule II. To
labor to bring our hearts to a stillness or calmnesse, that faith may have its
full scope. p. 634 Rule III. Not to look first unto the means, but to the
promise for succor. p. 637 Particular III. We must order faith in the work.
p. 640 Rule I. To renounce all power and ability in our selves. ibid. Rule II.
To bring the promise home to our hearts. p. 642 Rule III. We must be carried by
the promise unto God. p. 644 Passage II. How we may take and improve the good
of the promise. p. 645
Several Treatises of this AUTHOR.
1 THE unbeleevers preparing for Christ, out of Revelations 22.17. 1 Corinthians.
2.14. Ezekiel 11.19. Luke 19.42. Matthew 20.3, 4, 5, 6. John 6.44.
2 The souls preparation for Christ, or a Treatise of Contrition, on Acts
2.37. 3 The Souls humiliation, on Luke 15. verses 15, 16, 17, 18. 4 The Souls
vocation, or effectual calling to Christ, on John 6.45. 5 The Souls union
with Christ, 1 Corin. 6.17. 6 The Souls benefit from union with Christ, on 1
Cor. 1.30. 7 The Souls justification, eleven Sermons on 2 Corin. 5.21. 8
Sermons on Judges 10.23. on Psalm 119.29. on Proverbs 1.28, 29. on 2 Timothy 3.5.

THE SOVLES EFFECTVALL CALLING TO CHRIST.

By T. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the Bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1637.

The Souls effectual calling to CHRIST.
JOHN 6.45. Every man therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father,
comes unto me.


THE ingrafting of the humble and broken hearted sinner into Christ, as we have
heard, consists of two particular passages: The first was being put into the
stock; Secondly, the ingrafting into the some. As in ingrafting naturally so of
implanting spiritually of the soul into Christ. When the soul is brought unto
this, then a sinner comes to be partaker of all the spiritual benefits, all
shall be communicated to us. Now the point at this present to be handled, is
called by the stream of Divines Vocation, and I term it the putting in of
the soul, when the soul is brought out of the world of sin, to lie upon,
and to close with the Lord Jesus Christ, and this has two particular passages
in it; partly the call on Gods part, partly the answer on ours. The call on
Gods part is this, when the Lord by the call of his Gospel does so clearly
reveal the fullness of mercy, and certifies to the soul by the work of his
spirit, that the soul humbled returns answer to Gods call.



have the special cause expressed, which is the Lord. For when a man has
heard, that is one thing; but that is not all, for the principal cause is the
Lord. God the Father alone can buckle the heart to receive the grace appointed,
and the mercy offered to the soul: and without the principal cause, all other
means, I mean the Ministers of the Gospel, although it be a savor of life
unto life, yet it may be a savor of death unto death, unless the Spirit of
the Lord goes with it. For when the Gospel is only revealed to the
understanding, and that only conceives of the letter thereof, and it soakes
not, and sinkes not into the heart: this we call an outward calling, that is
the phrase of Divines: when some light flash is imparted and communicated unto
the soul, and is not set on sufficiently, that is an outward calling. But when
God the Father does accompany the dispensation of the Gospel with the
powerful operation of the Spirit, and it puts its hand to the key of the
Gospel, and unlockes a blind mind, and a hard heart, there the soul learnes
thoroughly and effectually the way of salvation. The Text says, there must not
only be hearing, but learning of the Father, else the soul will not, nor
cannot come. Now before I can collect the several passages out of the words,
there is some difficulty and obscurity in the phrase, therefore give me leave,
as I am able, to discover the meaning and sense of the words, and then the
collection will be clear.

First, for the explication of the phrase, and I will discourse four questions
unto you, which will be useful for the clear explication of the Text. 4.
Questions.












into by his manifold rebellions. There is no help, no hope of himself, in
what he has or does to releeve and succor himself, and therefore he falls
flat at the footstool of the Almighty, and is content to be at his disposing.
Now the lesson that the soul must learn, is the fullness, greatness, and
freeness of the perfect salvation which is brought unto us through the Lord
Jesus Christ. And that we may not learn this lesson by halfes, but fully and
perfectly, and that your minds may conceive of the same, give me leave to lay
it out fully, because it will be profitable for our ensuing discourse: and this
lesson discovers it self in three things, as in three lines, as I may so term
it.

Adam, that there is not only a great deal of weakness in the soul, but
there is a great deal of wants and emptiness in the soul.

Now this is the fullness of the mercy of God, that whatsoever our weaknesses,
wants, or necessities be, there is full sufficiency enough in that mass to
fill up all, and to give the soul full content in every particular. Hence the
phrase of Scripture runs thus, when God propounds the fullness of mercy in
Jesus Christ, he calls it a treasury, and all the treasures of wisdom and
holiness are in Christ; not one treasure, but all treasures; not some
treasures, but all treasures, Esaias 61. When the Gospel was professed, there
was a fullness of mercy, and there we shall see a kind of meeting and
concurrency of all blessings together. So that where the Gospel comes, there
is joy for the sorrowful, peace for the troubled, strength for the weak; be
your miseries what they can be, here is relief seasonable and suitable to all
your wants, miseries, and necessities. Nay, this is not only for the present
necessity. Mercy is not only able to releeve your present necessity, but your
future also. It is not with mercy as with the widow of Sarepta, who thought
when the meal in the barrel, and the oil in the cruse was spent, she should
then surely perish. No, it is not so in the fullness and sufficiency of this
mercy; it has not only enough to do you good for the present, and to succor
you in all present wants; but what miseries soever shall befall thee, or what
troubles shall betide thee for future times, the fullness of Gods mercy lays
in provision against such necessities, and times of miseries and vexations. For
a poor sinner may be driven to a stand after this manner: It is true, says
the sinner, I have heretofore committed many sins, God has sealed up the
pardon of them unto me, and those sins which have heretofore pleased me, God
has given me a sight of them in some power and measure against them. But what
if more sins, if more temptations, if more corruptions, if more guilt, if more
horror seize upon my heart, how then shall I succor my self? But now this is
the fullness and sufficiency of mercy, it does not only case a man in regard
of present necessity, but lays provision for all future wants and calamities
that can befall the soul. Psalm. 130.7. The text says, Let Israel hope in the
Lord, there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. The word in the
original is, there is multiplying redemption, or redemption increasing: if
misery, sorrow, and anguish be multiplied, there is multiplied redemption also.
Then know it, if you know your own souls; you see it, if you see your own
lives, that it is new sins, new corruptions prevailing with you. But here is
the comfort of the soul, as sin increases, so mercy increases; as
corruption multiplyes, so redemption multiplyes: therefore he is called the
Father of mercy; as who should say, he begets mercy, even a generation of
mercies, from day to day; and it is a large generation of new mercies framed
and made to encourage poor souls: therefore it is said, with the Lord there
is a fountain of life. Look as it is with a fountain, there is not only
water in it for the present, but it feeds several cocks and conduits; and
though it runs out daily, it enlarges it self daily: So with the Lord there
is a fountain of life. If there be a fountain of death in thy soul, in
regard of thy sins to kill thee; so a fountain in God to quicken thee. Hence
it comes to pass that the Lord speaking of his mercy, calls it the exceeding
riches of his mercy, Ephesians. 2.7. I say, the Lord has not only fullness of
mercy, but he is rich in all his fullness; nay, he exceeds in all the riches of
the fullness of his mercy. So that be we never so poor and beggarly, these
sins increase, and those miseries increase; why yet though thou be a bankrupt
in grace, yet the Lord is full of goodness, full of mercy; yea he exceeds in
his fullness, to succor thy heart in all necessities: nay, our miseries and
wants be great, yet happily thy fear is greater than all the rest; thy soul is
troubled many times more with the fear of what will be, than with the feeling
of what is already befalne thee: But now, how ever thy miseries be great, and
thy fear exceeds all misery that can betide; yet mercy will remove and prevent
those fears, and Christ will do more for thee, than thou can fear will
fall upon thee: Nay, a man does not fear what misery can befall upon him, but
his heart may imagine more than he does fear. But here is the fullness of
mercy, mercy full to the brim, and running over; mercy is able to do more for
thee, than thou can fear or conceive shall come upon thee. Ephesians. 3.20. then
says the Lord, exceeding excess, abundantly above that we can ask or think.
So then the words run thus, then wind up the point, Thou see, thou
find, thou feel, many sorrows now assailing thee, thou expectest more
trouble to befall thee, and thou do conceive more than thou do fear; thy
sorrows out-bid thy heart, thy fears out-bid thy sorrows, and thy thoughts
go beyond thy fears: and yet here is the comfort of a poor soul, in all his
misery and wretchedness, the mercy of the Lord out-bids all these whatsoever
may, can or shall befall thee. Gather then up briefly, and shut up this first
passage. Many are the sorrows of the righteous, guilt of sin perplexing the
sinner, and filthiness of sins tyrannizing and domineering over the soul;
nay, many fears and cares for future times: for a sinner says, Sometimes my
condition is mavelous poor, my estate mavelous miserable; what if small
temptations, what if small corruptions, what if such a fall should betide me,
what then shall become of my soul? Nay, a man's imagination exceeds all fears.
The soul that thinks with it self, Should the Lord deal in justice, and
should my sins get the victory over me, which I hope will never be, for what
shall I then do for succor? yet this is the comfort of a poor soul, let it
read this lesson, The Lord is able, and mercy can do excessive, exceeding
abundantly above all, thy sorrows are abundant, thy fears are very abundant,
thy imaginations are excessive, exceeding abundant, exceeding above all present
sorrows, above all future fear, and above the course of all imaginations.
This discourse shall serve for the first passage.

We will now add the second. The soul is not yet fully satisfied, but
replies, It is true, there is bread enough in my Fathers house; that I yield,
and that I confess; there is abundance of mercy in God, a world of mercy that
pardoned Manasses, and saved Saul, but what is that to me, if there be bread
enough in my Fathers house, and I starve for hunger, and get no benefit by this
mercy of God? But how shall a man starve in this mercy? if a way can be
conceived, and a means can be propounded for another supply to the soul, to
fill up the necessity of it, this will be seen in the next particular; I say
herein appears more fullness of mercy.

Adam shall do and live: now it stood upon the use and abuse of his free will,
either to do the will of God, and be blessed; or to break the law, and be
cursed: it was in his power to receive the life: and thus either by breach or
not doing the condition required, Adam must perform. But it is not so here:
the Lord in deed requires a condition: no man can be saved but he must believe:
but here is the privilege, that the Lord as he makes this condition with the
soul, so also he keeps us in performing the condition, for the Lord he
requires that the soul should rest upon him, and he make him also to do it:
he requires the soul to cleave unto him. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. There is the tenor
of this covenant, A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit I will put
within you, and I will take away your stony heart, and give you a heart of
flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes: Or if they will walk in my ways, out of thine own power, then I
will vouchsafe this mercy and favor. Now the Lord requires this condition, and
works it also in his children; he requires this of them, and he works this in
them, for their everlasting good; as Heb. 8.9. the Lord says, This is the
covenant I will make with the house of Israel; I write my laws in their
hearts, and they shall not need to be taught. Men must know God, and believe in
the Lord. Now as the Lord requires this, as the condition of the covenant; so
the Lord will work this in them, as he requires this of them. John 1.12. the
text says, To them that believe, he gave them power to be the sons of God.
Now if a man will believe, he shall be saved. Now then he makes a man believe
that he may be a son. This is the second passage whereby the soul of a
sinner comes to be cheered: or that there is not only abundance of sufficiency
in the Lord Jesus Christ; but that mercy, as it is able to do him good, so it
will make him partaker of the good.

all good, and will make us partakers of what it has; so also it will dispose
of us, and of that it bestows upon us. Mercy will not only have a sinner,
but it will rule and order that grace it has bestowed upon the soul. For if
mercy purchase a soul at so high a rate, as the blood of the Lord Jesus; it is
right that the soul purchased by grace, and supplied with grace, that mercy
should dispose it for the honor of God. You are not your own, says the
Apostle, but bought with a price; therefore you must glorify the Lord in body
and soul. Nay, it is not only right that mercy should do it; but reason, and
beneficial to the soul, that mercy should do thus. Nay, I say, unless that
mercy should rule a man, he had not been able to give full content to the
soul. If the Lord should leave any poor soul to the destiny of his own
heart, and the malice of Satan, he would run to ruin presently: he is not
able to supply his own wants and to dispose of his own spirit, and employ
aright his own soul. For if Adam in his innocence, had a stock in his own
hands, fell and perished: then if mercy should put a man into the same estate
that Adam was, a man should bring himself into the same misery that Adam was
brought into: but there is that fullness of that mercy, that is in Christ that
it will bestow all good needful for me; so also, it will dispose of that good
in me, so that Satan shall never prevail, the world shall never overcome, nor
my corruptions bear sway in me; but the Lord shall rule me for ever: and this
is the fullness of Gods mercy. Gather up the point then, that we may see what
we must learn. There is sufficiency in mercy to supply all wants: nay, there
is ability in mercy to communicate that it has, and we stand in need of. Nay,
mercy will preserve us; and that it gives to us, against all oppositions that
can befall thee. This is the lesson that the soul must learn, that it may be
able in some measure to see the way, and learn the path that leads to
everlasting happiness. This is the first lesson that the soul must learn of
God the Father.

you, therefore take all the lesson out, and then the heart will be cheered,
and thy soul in some measure enabled to come on to the Lord, and will see some
glimpses of consolation from the Spirit.



John 1.7. If we sin, we have an advocate with the Father, namely, the Lord
Jesus Christ, to plead for us with the Father. He does not say, we take an
advocate with an advocate, that does not plead with himself: the reason is,
God the Father was directly offended; though all the persons in the Trinity
were offended, yet the Father more directly. Now he that is directly offended,
favor and mercy must come from him, to the party that does offend: and that is
the reason why Christ especially cast this upon the Father. Take a creditor
that has money, or creditors that are bankrupts; now this is no means to
help and succor these men: but it lies upon the creditor that owes the
debt, for he only it is must come to forgive the debts: for it is here God the
Father, being directly offended by the son of man, therefore from him in the
first place, must proceed the pardon, and mercy to the son of man. Hence it
comes to pass, that the text says, the Father must teach this lesson.



points, because it is somewhat difficult, and is the scope of that place, 2 Timothy 1.7. The Lord has not given you the spirit of fear, but of a sound
mind. The spirit of fear, is the spirit of bondage, in humiliation and
contrition. When the Spirit shows a man his sins, and shows him that he
is in bondage, and in fetters, lets him get out how he can: this is the spirit
of fear and of bondage. In the second place, there is the spirit of power. But
what is this spirit of power? You must imagine this spirit of power does not
intimate any particular grace, but as it were the sinews and strength of the
work of the Spirit, conveying it self through the frame of the heart and this
I term to be the effectual work of the Spirit of God. When the soul is
humbled, the Lord sweetly communicates into the soul a supernatural and
spiritual virtue. Lastly, as it is in nature, take a knife, if it be rubbed on
a Loadstone, it will draw iron unto it; now it cannot do that, because it is a
knife, but because it is rubbed on a stone, and receives virtue there from: So
it is with a heart humbled, it is a fit subject for the grace of God to work
upon: the love of God is like the loadstone, and if the heart he rubbed
thereupon, and affected with the sweetness thereof, it will be able to close
with that mercy, and come to that mercy, and go to God, from whence that mercy
comes.



The first is this, when the soul having heard of that plentiful redemption
that is in Christ, as also having apprehended the revelation thereof; it
comes to close with the work of the Spirit, revealing, presenting, and
offering grace to the heart: nay, it comes to give entertainment to he riches
of that mercy revealed to the soul. There is in the mercy of God, and in the
blessed truth of the promises, a great excellency. Now when this is so
plentifully brought home to the heart, that it breaks through all oppositions,
which may hinder the work of the Spirit upon the soul, when it is brought
home by the spirit of God; and the heart gives way, and closes with it, so that
there is nothing between that and the soul; this I take to be the first frame
of the soul, that begins to learn this lesson, it begins to close to the
truth, to give way to the sweetness that is in it, and bids adieu to all
delight and sins, and whatsoever may be a hindrance unto it, from receiving
of this grace into the soul. This is the first passage.

The second, with which I will conclude is this, that as the soul closes with
that mercy, and welcommeth it, and the heart is content to take up mercy upon
those terms: so in the second place, there is an impression and disposition
left upon the soul, that it is framed and disposed; there is a kind of print
which the soul has with it; so that as the mercy of God is revealed to the
soul, and communicated to the soul; so there is a kind of impression, frame,
and print, which the heart retains, and has wrought upon it by this grace
and free favor of God made known: therefore that phrase, Romans 6.17. is a
mavelous pattern to our purpose; the Text says, they were delivered to this
form of doctrine. Look as it is with a seal, if the seal be set to the wax,
and leave an impression, just so many letters upon the wax as in the seal,
then it is wholly sealed: So the Spirit of God through Christ, in the promises,
does reveal all the freeness and grace of mercy in Christ. Now when the Spirit
does leave an impression on the soul, that man is delivered into the truth. I
conclude all in Acts 26.18. when Saul was sent to preach to the Gentiles, the
Text says, he was but to bring them out of darkness into light: mark, when
the Lord does come to work effectually upon the soul, he brings men from
under the power of darkness: whereas the understanding was dark and blinded,
when the Spirit comes, it turns it from the darkness and power of sin, unto
the power of light and grace.

Lastly, the power of the heart does these two things: for not only some of
the heart must be brought to God, but the whole heart: therefore in the
precious promises of grace and savation, there is fullness of all good, to draw
all the faculties of the soul unto the Lord; and therefore the faithfulness
and the truth of God is mainly revealed in the promises; now that fits the
understanding, and makes it look to God for pardon, for power, and mercy.

is a possibility in mercy to save a man: hope expects it; but then the soul
must look only to Christ for mercy, desire, long for it, for that there is a
certainty that a man shall have mercy if he can desire it; love does welcome
and delight in it, nay, the soul does say, The Lord has said, thou must be
saved: nay, thou must look to Christ for mercy, it is no where else to be had:
nay, if thou do desire it, thou shall have it; and then the Lord determines
the point, it is done, mercy is thine; and then the will adds full consent,
and says, Amen, Lord, let it be as thou have said. Gather them up briefly.
When the Spirit of God does so clearly present mercy to the soul, and does
leave by the over-powring work thereof a supernatural work upon the soul,
that the spirit closes therewith, and receives the print and impression
thereof: now the lesson is fully learned: this may suffice for the opening of
the several things; now therefore we will address our selves to gather the
doctrines out of the Text. And first for the general, in that the Father is
said to teach.

means are but like the cane that conveyeth the voice; but the voice is the
Lord. John 14.26. I will send the Comforter, and he shall teach you all things.
And who is that? that is the Spirit of God. We speak to your outward ears,
but it is the Spirit of God that must give you minds to discern, and spirits
to embrace; that is the only work of the Spirit. We shall observe Matthew. 11.
toward the latter end, I thank thee Father, etc. how comes it to pass that
the wise are befooled, and fools instructed? I thank thee Father, says he,
that thou have revealed these things to babes and sucklings, and have hid them
from the wise. How comes this about? It is thy good will, Father. It is a
wonder to see a silly creature, of weak capacity, and almost a fool, and yet
he knows more of sanctification and faith, than many great Scholars. Take a
rush candle, and a lamp, the lamp is a great deal bigger than the rush
candle; yet the rush candle gives light, and the lamp none, because the rush
candle is lighted, and the lamp is not. So it is here, a Christian out of a
blind dotage, and a mere simplician in other things, yet he will talk well
of the free mercy of God, and the work of grace in his heart; when as many
great wise men are novices in these things.

Lord from heaven teach you; though all men and Angels teach you, the work will
not go forward. 1 Cor. 4.6. the Text says, The same God that brought light
out of darkness, shines in your hearts. We know, at the beginning of the
world, when darkness was upon the deep, the Lord said, Let there be light:
now that Almighty God that brought light out of darkness, which none else
could do, why the same God shines in your hearts, says the text: unless the
Lord say, Let there be light, the mind can never be enlightened, the soul can
never be cheered, nor the conscience pacified.

This is a ground of admirable comfort to all weak, silly, feeble minded
creatures. I doubt not but your hearts are grieved, when you consider the
mavelous ignorance which is in you, and how little you know concerning life
and salvation, when the Lord has laid line upon line, precept upon precept,
and the heart sometimes covets and desires to entertain the same, the soul
comes to the congregation, and says, Good Lord, let ^he word work upon my
soul, enlighten my mind, awaken my conscience; and when the word comes thus
home to the heart, the soul hopes that it shall retain and remember it: but
when it is gone, all falls to the ground, and the heart in private reasons thus
with it self: What shall I say? when my heart approves of the word, and my
soul closed with it, even then so soon as I come out of the Church, I forgot
all: what a blind mind and a hard heart have I? can there be any grace or mercy
conveyed to such a soul as mine? surely I shall one day perish. An ignorant
heart is a naughty heart, a base wicked heart; my sins are many, my
conditions fearful. Would you have any comfort? why then mark what I say, The
Lord will teach; and if the Lord be the teacher, it is no matter what the
scholar be. Reason thus with your selves, My memory is weak, my capacity is
small, my understanding feeble, but yet the Lord is my teacher; and if the Lord
will inform, who can let it, but I shall be informed? Prove. 1.23. mark what
the Text says, Return you simple ones, you scorners, and fools, and follow
me, and I will learn you wisdom. This may move you to depend upon God, in the
use of the means: the soul may say, I am simple, and I have been a scorner
too, and that is a great misery, and therefore no marvel if God blind my
mind, and harden my heart for I have been a scorner, and can any good come
unto me? can such a soul receive grace and wisdom? Why? Ah, says Wisdom,
come unto me, and I will pour abundance of wisdom upon you.

Sec ndly, if it be the work of God, then go to him, for it is a comfort to
go to a father: when therefore the means are received, and God gives a heart
to improve them, then come not to the congregation, but to God: and when the
Minister reproves, say, Father, set home that reproof to my soul and
conscience, do thou reprove, father? and when the Minister exhorts, and
informs thee daily, the argument from the Scripture plain; when the Minister
is thus exhorting, and you cannot come off clearly, look up to heaven, exhort
Father, teach Father: the Minister he speaks to thee, but Father inform us,
but Father seal to us the assurance of thy love in Christ. All you that hear
me this day, and come, and bring thine with thee, and come with thy
family into the congregation, look up to thy God, and say, Lord, here is a
vain rude servant, a silly wife, and a weak foolish child, and I am as base
and blind as any of them, and all the Ministers under heaven, and all the
Angels in heaven, cannot teach and inform us, but do thou teach us, and work
upon our minds, and frame our hearts, that we may know the things belonging
to our peace. But thou will say, Alas we have come, and looked up to God, but
we thrive and prosper not for all this, we receive not that help and
instruction from him, which he first promised, and we stand in need of. Why, I
say, the fault is thine own, the Lord is not wanting to his own word, but
thou art wanting to thy own comfort. But how then shall we so carry and order
our selves, that we may seek God so, as we may partake of that good we desire
and stand in need of?

I answer, These four means are very useful for this purpose. First, labor
to lay thy own conceitednesse and abilities down, and all thy carnal
imaginations, that shut out the truth of God, and are professedly opposed to
the obedience of Christ: if thou leanest on thy own wisdom, and bear up
thy self on thy own abilities, thou will never have direction from God, and
thou shall never be taught by him, if thou thy self can teach thy self:
therefore down with those haughty imaginations, in regard of thy own parts and
abilities, if thou hopest that God shall guide thee, and learn thee in the way
of truth. Therefore let every one be a fool, that he may be wise: when thou
art a fool in thy self, then God will inform thee, when thou can lay down
all thy own conceits, and captivate all thy carnal reasons, then thou art
like to be taught of the Lord: But before, these hinder the Lord from informing
thee in the way of truth. He that sets up his own wit above the wisdom of
the Lord, he shall never be exalted by the Lord of heaven. This I take to be
the reason why some men of deep reaches, and of great understandings, are
marvellously besotted in a christian course, and in the way of life and
salvation. The reason is, because they trust to their own wisdom, and rely
upon the arm of flesh, and upon their own policy, and upon the depth of their
own understandings; and that is the reason why the Lord leaves them to their
foolish imaginations: and as the Text says to the Romans, when they thought
themselves wise, they became fools. James 5. at the beginning; If any man want
wisdom, let him ask of the Lord. The word in the Original is, if any man be
like a beggar, that beggeth up and down for bread when he is hungry: for if
thou be empty of thy self, and a beggar in thine own apprehension; if thou
do lay down all they conceit of thy own wisdom, then the Lord will give
thee wisdom abundantly.

Genesis 18.19. when God was about to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, Why, says he,
shall I hide this thing from my servant Abraham? The end God teaches a man, is,
to improve his knowledge; and when God has taught him one lesson perfectly,
then the Lord will teach him another presently. When thou hear the word, do
that duty which God commands, reform that sin, and amend that course which
God forbids, and he will teach thee abundantly. Job 7.12. he that does Gods
will, the Lord will instruct that man. The master of a family will not give a
man fire and candle, to sit up and do no work by it, it will not quit cost.
Wisdom and knowledge is the candle of God; if thou will walk by this light,
and walk by this candle, the Lord will increase thy knowledge, till thou art
become a perfect Christian.

should always be fed with a spoon, and hold the spoone in his mouth, as
children use to do; that is to go and come to the congregation, and get
little or nothing. Hos. 2.3. When you labor more and more, pray more heartily,
study more diligently, be thinking men, and meditating men, and chewing men,
setting themselves upon the truth; till this, I never look that they should
come to any saving or judicious knowledge of life and salvation.

Romans 1.28. as who should say, Oh, this strict way, and this teaching,
preaching, and the thundering of judgments, we cannot bear them, we cannot
undergo them, we have no delight to these: take heed lest the Lord say,
Blindness take him, hardness take him, reprobate sense, let him never
entertain the word of God to inform him, let him never know the wisdom of
God to his comfort here, and everlasting happiness hereafter.

acknowledge you have it as from God, labor so to improve this wisdom, that
God may get something by it: you are but stewards of it, and therefore you must
improve it for his advantage: as the steward that receives money from his
master, etc. so has the Lord given thee a stock of wisdom, and has cleared
that eye, and that judgment of thine, use it to his glory. Therefore do not
lift up thy self, in regard of thine own parts, and sufficiency; but if you
find your hearts to swell, and rise within you, (for knowledge is a very airy
metal, as the Apostle says, it puffes up a man) therefore when thou find
thy heart thus bubling with those cursed distempers, reason thus, Why should I
be proud of a borrowed suit? my mind was as blind as any under heaven,
therefore let baseness be mine, let wisdom be the Lords, Gal. 5. The
apprentice that is taught by his master, must not presently trade for himself,
but he works for his master, and gives him the commodity: so let us do; we
are Gods scholars and prentices; we are now come into his school. Has the
Lord taught thee any skill in prayer, any wisdom to conceive? do not work
now for your selves, do not set up presently, but labor to return all to
him, and to make the Lord partaker of the good he has bestowed upon thee.

Thus much in general, that the Lord is the author of this teaching: but now
we come to particulars, to see how the Spirit in special manner does this.

This I tell you, that the whole soul must come to God: For as the whole soul
in this gracious call of God, both the mind that discovers that mercy, and
hope, and desire, and love, and joy, have bad entertaining thereof; and the
will, which is the great wheel of the soul, that falls on that mercy, and
rests thereupon, and gives answer to the call of God therein. Give me leave to
propound two things by way of preface, for the clearing of the following
truths; they will be as a key to open the door to all the following discourse.



Now the affections of the soul, that do respect evil, are especially three,
if any evil be coming; first, fear is a watchman, and the heart trembles,
and shakes, and gives in. Hence comes palenesse in the face, because fear goes
down into the very castle of a man, which is the heart; and then sorrow
greeves and mournes, and laments under the weight of that evil, we fear
evil to come, but we sorrow for evil that is come. Thirdly hatred, that
carries it self with a kind of indignation, and takes up arms against that
evil, fear is preventing, sorrow feeling, hatred opposing any evil that
comes. Now these three affections that go from evil, have been wrought upon
in contrition, and humiliation, namely, when the Lord the eye of a poor
sinner, discovers unto him that hell is gaping for him, and the God of justice
preparing vengeance for him, the soul staggers and shrinks in the apprehension
of it; then the Lord lets in the fire of indignation into the soul, and makes
the soul feel that before he threatened, and then the soul grieves; and
because his sins have been so tedious unto him, his heart is brought to a
hatred and indignation against those evils. So that if any evil, or
provocation, or temptation come to a soul broken, if the old loose companions,
old corruptions, old swearing, old blaspheming, old dalliances come to call
upon the soul, let us have our fill of love until the morning, let us take up
our old delights; when these call the soul, and would pluck the soul home
again unto them, then these four fence the soul against all those
enchantments; in so much that when the drunkard sees his company coming
toward him, he thinks, that is my plague, that is the man, and his
persuasions and counsels; he remembers his old corruptions, and his old
horrors, and his old burdens and heavy loads that lay upon his heart; and the
soul hates the drunkard, and will not yield to his persuasions, they so fence
the way, that the voice of sin cannot be heard; it may call, and call, but
the door is shut, they stop the current, that no stream of distempers may
prevail any more: this now is done before: so that now we come to the second
work. So there are other affections that carry the soul unto good, if there
be any good propounded, or offered, then there are four other affections that
the will sends out to entertain that good: hope and desire look for the good
that is absent: hope says, I marvel it comes not: desire says, I long after
it: when the goodness is near, then love welcomes it, and delights in it, and
joy rejoices, and all these, hope, desire, love, and joy, all bring, carry and
convey all the good to the will, which is the great commander of the soul:
Love and joy tell the will, We have found much goodness, and taken great
delight, and much content in the goodness and mercy of the Lord. The truth is,
we have taken delight in sin and base courses; but oh the comfort, but oh
the consolation and goodness of mercy; you cannot have a better good than
mercy. Then says the will, We will have grace and mercy, we will rest here.
Thus we see how the head and the foot of the affections do come on to embrace
that good: now the understanding does stand sentinel all the while, and
discovers all the good, and musters up hope and desire, and love and joy, and
these four are the maine we must meddle with; all the other went from evil,
and they have their proper work before: we do not hate and sorrow for mercy,
we do not fear to receive mercy, but we fear and withdraw our selves from
sin and corruptions, that we may entertain the call of mercy.



Ephesians. 1.13.

Heb. 6.5. therefore as the truth of the Gospel fills the understanding; so
there is a goodness in the promise of grace and mercy, which will answer all,
and satisfy all the faculties of the soul, as in the good word of the Lord:
mercy is a proper object of hope, that it may be sustained; a proper object of
desire, that it may be supported; there is a proper object for a man's love and
delight, that they may be cheered: nay, there is a full satisfactory
sufficiency of all good in the Gospel, that so the will of a man may take full
repose and rest therein. Therefore the Lord says, Come unto me, all that are
weary and heavy laden: come hope, and desire, and love, and will, and heart;
they answer, We come: all the mind says, Let me know this mercy above all, and
desire to know nothing but Christ and him crucified: let me expect this mercy,
says hope, that belongs to me, and will befall me: desire says, Let me long
after it; nay, says love, let me embrace and welcome it: let me delight in it
(says joy) nay, says the heart, let me lay hold on the handle of salvation,
here we will live, and here we will dye at the footstool of Gods mercy: thus
all go; mind, hope, desire, love, joy, the will, and all lay hold upon the
promise, and say, Let us make the promise a prey, let us prey upon mercy, as
the wild beasts do upon their provision. Thus the faculties of the soul hunt
and pursue this mercy, and lay hold thereupon, and satisfy themselves herein.
Hence we will raise these two points.





can work above means: we know also God can appoint other means for to call
the soul, but it is not our meaning, we must not look for revelations and
dreams, as a company of fantastical brains do; but in common course Gods
Spirit goes with the Gospel, and that is the ordinary means whereby the soul
comes to be called. God can make the air nourish a man, but he does not. If a
man should expect to be fed by miracle, he himself would be a miracle; Gal.
3.2. for there goes a spiritual power with it, it raises the dead in sin to
life; it is a living word, and the word discovers also the secrets of men's
thoughts. Now that word which raises the dead, and discovers the secrets of
men's hearts, it must needs have a mavelous power with it, and accompanying of
it.

For the opening of it, observe two things: first, the manner; secondly, the
reasons.



First, the Lord has ordained and set apart the preaching of the word, he
has sanctified it, and set it apart to call the soul. Look as it is with the
brazen Serpent, God appointed it to heal those that were stung now if 500. men
should have made another Serpent, it could not have healed one man, though they
had looked their eyes out of their heads: So it is with the Gospel, there is no
other usual means to call the soul: Hence it is casted the word of the
Gospel. Now if five hundred men make five hundred Gospels besides this, they
could never convert, or comfort one soul. Or as it is with a mint, if a mint
master coin money, it will go current; but if twenty other coin money,
though the stamp were as good, yet it is but counterfeit coin: so it is here.
1 Cor. 1.21. Let a man study all the arts and tongues that can be devised, he
never shall, nay he never can, know one drop of Gods mercy and goodness in
Christ. Why but how then may a man know it? says the Text, by the foolishness
of preaching, that is, wicked men count it foolishness.

the power of God to salvation, because the power of God ordinarily, and in
common course appears therein: the waters of life and salvation run only in the
channel of the Gospel. There are golden mines of grace, but they are only to
be found in the climates of the Gospel. Nay, observe this, when all arguments
prevail not with corruption, to persuade the heart to go to God, one Text of
Scripture will stand a man in stead, above all humane learning and inventions,
because the Spirit goes forth in this, and none else.

God does undoubtedly, as he will, when he will, and how he will, give success
to his ordinance. Isay 55.10, 11. The word of the Lord does ever accomplish
that for which it is sent. For, it is true, many a man is called after the word
is delivered a long time. Why is that? it sokes into the soul, as the snow in
December sokes into the earth, but the fruit of it is not seen until May. The
word is a savor of life unto life, it is a living savor of death to death, it
is a poison, a deadly savor; and though it hardens some, yet the work goes
forward.



John 4.1. Every Minister preaches with a spirit; some out of the spirit of
envy, some out of the spirit of sincerity: some hears out of the spirit of
love, some with the spirit of malice, to carpe at the Minister: try therefore
the spirits, and if they hold not with the word, they are naught.



Cor. 2.1, 2.

Judge. 19. he that has not the Spirit, is a fleshly sensual man. Would
thou know whether thou art carnal or spiritual? this doctrine tells thee. How
came the Spirit? If thou have it, it ever came with the Gospel: therefore see
now how thy soul stands affected with the Gospel, and so it stands affected
to the Spirit. If thou will none of the Gospel, thou will miss of the Spirit,
then Christ will none of thee. Now reason with your own souls, Why, unless I
take the Spirit, woe be to me, I may own my self, Christ will never own me.
Is it so, that I will not suffer the word to prevail with me? remember the
time will come that you must dye as well as your neighbors, and then you will
say, Lord Jesus forgive my sins, Lord Jesus receive my soul: then Christ will
say, Away, be gone, you are none of mine, I know you not. Any man, whether
noble or honorable, let him be what he will be, and let his parts be what they
will, if he has not the Spirit, he is none of Christ's: his you are to whom
you obey; but pride and covetousness you obey, and malice and spleen you
obey, you are therefore none of Christ's. Pride will say, This heart is mine,
Lord, I have domineered over it, and I will torment it: Corruptions will say,
We have owned this soul, and we will damn it. You that heretofore have made
a tush at the word, this wind shakes no corn, and these words break no bones:
think what you have done; little do you think you have opposed the Spirit,
Acts 7.5. what, resist the Spirit? Oh think of this. Why, what shall I say? by
what spirit will thou be sanctified? by what spirit will thou be saved? Can thy
own spirit save thee? no, the Spirit of God must save thee; and have you
resisted that Spirit? me thinks it is enough to sink any soul under heaven.
Hereafter therefore think this with thy self, were he but a man that
speaks, yet I ought not to despise him: but that is not all, there goes Gods
Spirit with the word, and shall I despise it? the Lord keep me from this:
there is but one step between this and that unpardonable sin against the
holy Ghost, only adding malice to thy rage; thou opposest thy Father, happily
the Son mediates for thee; thou despisest the Son, happily the holy Ghost
pleads for the: but if thou opposest the Spirit, none can succor thee,
therefore look to it.



Let every one ask this great question, How may I know when the Spirit is in
me? That you know it not, the fault is your own; look into the word. It is
with a poor soul, as with little children; the child in the night being
hungry, seeks for the dug, but if he does not lay hold of it, he gets no good
b^ it; so thou have been a long time musling about a dry chip, and have got no
comfort. Be sure therefore to lay hold upon the promise, hold it, and thy
spirit shall be filled with marrow and fatness. If there be marrow in a bone,
thou must break it before thou can get any out. So it is with the promises;
they are full of sweetness, but you must chew them, break them, and bestow
thy heart on them. An Alchimist that distills oil, does draw out the spirit of
metalls, but it is by distillation: so it is with the promises, they are
excellent metal, there is a great deal of comfort in them, but if you will
have benefit by them, you must distill them by meditation.





whom the Gospel cannot cure? 1 Cor. 4.3. I desire those whose conscience to
this day accuse them that yet they are blind, and those that brave it out, and
say, Shall I fear the face of a man? no, no, I scorn it; I beseech you let me
deal with you, do not brave it out so, for it is the greatest misery under
the Sun, for thou do as good as to say, thou will not have the word of God
to work upon thee. James 1.21. The word of God is able to save thee, and to
sanctify thee, and art thou yet polluted and defiled? Oh, take heed of it, go
and be move thy soul to the Lord, and say, Good Lord, such a drunkard thou
have met with, such a proud heart thou have humbled, and such a stubborn heart
thou have plucked upon his knees; and if drunkards be humbled, if the ignorant
be instructed, then what a cursed heart have I, that was loose and vile, and
base and profane before, and so I am now. I tell thee, what can you think of
your selves? if the Spirit go with the word, and thou mock at it, thy
condition is lamentable.

Exodus 23. When ever the word of the Lord is revealed, the Spirit of God,
blessed for ever, is there accompanying of it, therefore good reason the
creature should submit to the Creator. We speak not a word for our selves, we
preach the good word of the Lord; and how ever our selves have spoken this, if
you oppose it, know it, that it is the Lords word: therefore when you hear the
word, do what you will with us, only submit to the word of the Lord; do what
you please with us (as Jeremy says) only embrace the word of the Lord. It is
Gods word, therefore take heed of opposing and gainsaying it, labor to awe
your souls, to settle all distempers, wipe out all carping and cavilling at
the word, as they press in upon thee.





Sam. 8.19. compared with 1 Samuel 12.18. What is the reason they do so at the
one, and not at the other? why, did they fear the one more than the other?
because they apprehended God to be in the one, and not in the other.





We come now to see how the Lord works upon the soul. First, he lets a light
into the mind, for what the eye never sees, the heart never desires, hope
never expects, that joy never delights in, that the soul never embraces; but
the soul hangs a far off, and dares not believe that Christ will have mercy
upon him; God is a just God, and he a vile sinner, therefore God will never
cast the eye of pity and compassion upon him, therefore the Spirit lets in a
light into his heart, and discovers unto him, that God will deal graciously
with him, and do good unto him.

That the Spirit of the Lord gives special notice of Gods acceptance to the
soul truly humbled. Mercy is generally propounded to the soul in the
Gospel, but there is a special bringing home of mercy to the soul by the
Spirit, that he strikes through the bargain. There is many a chapman passes
by the stall, and sees the meat, and the commodity lie, that is tendered him,
and follows him home to his house, if he purpose to sell: so it is not enough
to tender mercy, and offer grace and salvation by the Gospel, for this we
often do, and you will not once look at them, but cast them away, and no man
buyeth them; but if the Spirit of God takes them in hand, he will strike the
bargain through, he will follow thee home to thy house, to thy closet, to thy
heart, he will woo thee, be thou never so coy, be thou never so stubborn, be
thou never so wayward, the Lord will bring thee to give entertainment to the
Lord Jesus, and to Gods mercy, in and through him, 1 John 5.20. as if he had
said, A man of himself has no mind, no understanding to conceive of the Lord
Jesus, and of the freeness of Gods mercy in Christ, but Christ has given us
this mind, he has given an eye to the soul of a sinner, so that he cannot
but take notice of the council holden in the high Court of Parliament,
concerning his salvation. It is with a sinner, as it is with a man that sits in
darkness, happily he sees a light in the street out of a window, but he sits
still in darkness, and is in the dungeon all the while, and thinks, how good
were it, if a man might enjoy that light: So many a poor humble-hearted broken
sinner, sees and has an inkling of Gods mercies, he hears the Saints speak
of Gods love, and his goodness, and compassion; ah, thinks he, how happy are
they, blessed are they, what an excellent condition are they in! but he is in
darkness still, and never had a drop of mercy vouchsafed unto him: at last the
Lord sets a light in his house, and puts the candle into his own hand, and
makes him see by particular evidence, thou shall be pardoned, and thou shall
be saved: this is particular notice.

For the opening of the point, observe two things: 1. The manner how the Spirit
does it. 2. The reasons why the Spirit only can do it.


For the first, the manner of the Spirits work, how the Lord does give this
notice, and how the candle comes to be lighted, and the glimpse of Gods mercy
comes in, as by so many cranies into the soul, it is discerned in three
passages.

Judgment to whom judgment belongs: but I speak of an humbled sinner,
through which he may be enabled, and by which he may be fitted to entertain
the things of God. The natural man perceives not the things of God, neither
can he; why? because they are spiritually discerned. So that there must be a
spiritual light in him, before the soul can see spiritual things without, 1
Cor. 2.12. We have not received the spirit of the world, which is the spirit
of ignorance and darkness, that possesses all the world: the world lies in
darkness and in sin; there is the spirit of the Devil and terror in the
minds of wicked men; but you have not received the spirit of the world to
delude you and blind you, but you have received the Spirit of the Lord; as who
should say, No man does, no man can know the things of Gods free grace, rich
mercy, boundless compassion in the Lord. No man can see these colors, unless
he has a spiritual eye, Revel. 3.18. No (says God) ye are blind, etc. but I
counsel thee to buy of me eye salve, that thou may see: and now the humbled
sinner begins to see, like the man in the Gospel, some light and glimmering
about his understanding, that he can look into and discern the spiritual
things of God.

Ephesians. 3.9. there they are called the unsearchable riches of God, and it is a
very significant phrase, and the word implies such riches, as a man can never
see a foot-step of them. God now does as some Tradesmen do, he has a deal
of wares in his storehouse, but the buyer and passenger sees not those, but
only them that are set out upon the stall: so it is with the Lord Jesus; he
does present unto the view of the understanding of the mind enlightened, all
those conceivable incomprehensible treasures of his mercy in the Lord Jesus. If
a man have no eye, he cannot see; if he have an eye, and have no object, nor
colors before him, he cannot see; first therefore the Lord gives an eye to
the humbled heart; and when he has given him an eye, then he lays colors
before him, that he may see and look, and fall in love with the treasures of
mercy and compassion, 2 Cor. 3. the four last verses, the Text says, The
veil of blindness is taken from our minds, and then the faithful Soul
beholds, as in a glass, all the grace and mercy, and compassion that God
lays before him in Christ; the humbled sinner has now gotten an eye, and
some spiritual eyesight, that the Lord has brought within his view, all the
riches and treasures of the Lord Jesus Christ: and the Soul says, oh, that
mercy, and grace, and pardon were mine: Oh, that my sins were done away. The
Lord says, I will refresh them that are heavy laden: Oh, that I had that
refreshing, says the Soul; You shall have rest, says God: Oh, that I had
rest too, says the soul: Now the Soul begins to look after the mercy
and compassion which is laid before it.



The third stroke of the Spirit, strikes through the bargain, and makes the
understanding close with that grace and mercy, set forth unto it; and without
this the Soul of an humble broken hearted sinner has no ground to go upon.
Believing in Scripture is called coming. Now no man can go without some
ground; now this is the ground, without which the Soul has no bottom to
bear it up, either to come to Christ, or persuade it self of mercy in Christ.
What good does it do any hungry stomach, to hear that there is a great deal
of cheer, and dainties provided for such and such men; what is it to him, if
he have them not? Take a beggar that has a thousand pound told before him; he
may apprehend the sum of so much gold, and so much silver; but what is that
all to me, says he, if in the mean time I die and starve? It falls out in
this case with a broken hearted sinner, as with a prodigal child; the
prodigal he has spent his means, and abused his Father; the prodigal has
now much need, the famine is in the land, and poverty is befalne him, and he
knows there was meat enough, and clothes enough in his Fathers house; but alas
he can expect no kindness from his Father, but only his heavy displeasure: if
any man should say, go to your Father, he will give you a portion of a
hundred pounds again; do you think the prodigal would believe this? no, no,
he would answer thus; happily my Father will imprison me, or send a Sergeant to
arrest me, or an executioner to take away my life; it is my Father that I have
offended, my portion I have spent, and his anger I have incensed; and what,
will he receive me? no, I will never believe it. Indeed, had I been a good
husband, I might have had his favor, and increased my estate, but I have lost
his favor, my own estate, patrimony and all: but if a man should come and
tell him now, that he heard his Father say so, and bring a certificate under
his Fathers hand that it was so, this would draw him into some hope, that his
Father meant well toward him; so it is with the sinner, when he is
apprehensive of all his rebellions, that he has heaped up against Gods mercy,
and spirit and grace, by his declining from the truth: If a man should tell
such a soul; go to God, he will give you a pension of a hundred thousand
pounds a year, that is, he will give you abundance of mercy and compassion,
the Soul cannot believe it, but thinks; what I mercy? no, no, blessed are
they that walk humbly before God, and conform their lives answerable to Gods
word, let them take it, but the truth is, it is mercy I have opposed, it is
grace that I have rejected, no mercy, no grace for me; you cannot woo the
soul to be persuaded, for to think that there is mercy for him. But if God
send a messenger from heaven, or if under the hand of his spirit, that he does
accept of him, and will do good to him, and pass by all former sins, and
show favor to him; this makes the soul grow into some hope, this is the
ground whereupon the soul goes to the Lord. This the Lord performs to the
soul. That which David prays for, Psalm. 35.3. the Prophet was not contented
that there was salvation in Gods hand, he knew that God had a world of mercy,
and salvation, and pardon lying by him; but David prays to God, Say unto my
soul, thou art my salvation, testify it, speak it home, Lord, once more
plainly, effectually and sensibly, there is salvation with thee. Paul was
saved, and Abraham was saved; but what is that to me? say unto my soul, thy
sins shall be pardoned, thine iniquities shall be forgiven, thy person
accepted.





mercy of God? Now the Spirit of God coming in, that casts the cause and makes
it evident, if such a poor heart have interest, and may meddle and make
challenge to mercy and salvation, because it has been prepared for them, from
the beginning of the world to this very day. Now this gives a light into the
business, and the evidence is sure, that this man has title to all the riches
and compassion of the Lord Jesus; Acts. 2.39. Every poor creature thinks,
that God thinks so of him, as he thinks of himself; and he thinks God
intends mavelous grievous things against him; and if there be any judgment
denounced, or any plague revealed, the soul sits and sincks, and thinks with
himself thus; I wretch, the Lord spoke to me and intended me; the Lord
threatened me, and denounced judgment against me; and one day he will bring
all these plagues upon me, all shall be made good upon this wretched heart of
mine one day, whereas the Spirit of the Lord judges otherwise, and God means
well toward him, and intends good to all you that have been broken for your
sins, and there is witness of it in heaven, and it shall be made good to your
own consciences, Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners, broken,
abased, vile, wretched, carnal sinners: do not think he will keep any old
reckonings in mind; Christ came into the world, only to succor sinful
humbled wretches; he only came to call sinners, not your proud, haughty
justiciaries, that trust in their own performances, no but miserable, vile,
broken, abased sinners; therefore now here is some ground, and light come in,
that we have to do with mercy. Psalm. 80.3. Cause thy face to shine upon me.
If a man be in a deep dark dungeon, he cannot tell when it is light; he may
ask, is it light? but else he cannot tell: But an humbled sinner is like a
man standing full upon the Sun rising, this face of Gods mercy shines full
upon him, the Lord lets in the inclination of his kindness, and makes known
the surenesse of his favor in the Lord Jesus Christ; now the soul has some
apprehension that he has to do with mercy.

That in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word shall be established;
so it is with the testimony, or testification of Gods Spirit, for the Spirit
does not bear witness alone, but the Father from heaven, and the Son in
heaven does join witness with the Spirit; and the court is in heaven where
this controversy must be scanned, and now the Spirit does by witness promise,
that all this mercy shall be made good and given, and the humbled heart shall
be made possessor thereof; hence it is that the soul comes to be deeply settled
herein, for God cannot deny himself, nor his promise; this is the maine ground
and tenor, whereupon we hold everlasting happiness: you know in men of great
estate, if their lease had been naught, and their tenor false, this staggers
them deeply; therefore every man labors to make his tenor as good as he can,
think on it, the maintainer of all this good, that a Saint of God has, all
his hope of life and salvation, hangs upon the maine hold, the free promise of
the Lord, the certain faithful promise of the Lord, in and through Jesus
Christ, by the testimony of the Spirit; you that are sanctified by Christ, know
nothing, unless you know how to live by a promise in some measure: Now this
promise is not only a bare word of God, and a bare intimation of some will and
intendment of good, but it is a kind of engagement, when the Lord does lay his
truth to pawn, here is good surety for a poor humbled soul, it shall
undoubtedly be bestowed upon him; he does not only intend well unto him, he
does not only prepare mercy for him, but now he ties and binds himself, so
that he cannot go back; you see now, this is the bottom to bear up the
truth, when the Lord does please to engage himself to a broken hearted sinner,
that he shall be made to believe, and made to live by his believing: I beseech
you take notice of it, this is the tenor and covenant of God with a broken
sinner; he calls him graciously, and then promises to bestow mercy upon him,
2. Cor. 6.18. Come out from among them; what then? what, shall I forsake all my
old companions? shall I renounce all commodities that I have coveted? all the
honor in the world which I have affected? Yes, says the Lord, come out from
them all, abandon them, lose all riches, and be impoverished, lose all honor,
and be abased; ah, but what shall we get by it? why then, I will be your God,
that is, I will engage my self, and pass over the title of all my mercy, and
goodness, and compassion, and all that I have you shall have, all is yours;
and what then? You shall be my people; mark that, he is obliged to a poor
humbled heart; as if he had said, I will be your God, and supply your wants,
and work graciously for you: as it was with Abraham, the Father of the
faithful, so it must be with the faithful servants of God, Genesis 12.3. Now
what there is promised to Abraham, he promises to all his children, to all the
faithful: it is thus with thee; that is thou must bid adue to thy country and
friends, and though thou live with thy Father, yet thou hate his base
courses, and though thou live with thy friends, yet thou hate their wicked
practices, and thou have forsaken thy god pride, and thy god covetousness, and
thy god drunkenness, and the like; thou know God will bless thee, he has
bound himself, and cannot go back, this is the ground of the speech: 1 John.
2.25. Eternal life is the thing there promised, but how can we entitle
ourselves in this? the text says, this is the promise he has promised, that
is, he did freely and frankly, and of himself, and out of his own good will,
engage himself to give and bestow this promise upon us; here is the root and
ground of all his promise. This is the difference between the first and second
covenant; God did covenant with Adam, that he should live upon the ground, that
he should do: Now because the covenant of eternal life depended upon doing,
it was not certain to him and his posterity, but lost it; but our eternal
life depends upon the promise of God, and therefore it is sure, because God
cannot fail, cannot change, his promise cannot be altered: if we observe the
conditions, eternal life is sure unto a broken hearted sinner; hence come all
those phrases in this kind, We are called children of the promise, what is
that? why, the very promise of God makes us children; we are begotten and made
the Sons of God: he is called in Esaias, The everlasting Father, he has
begotten us by the word, and the seed of the promise which is sown in our
hearts, by the virtue of the seed and the Spirit of grace, accompanying that
seed, we have power to receive Christ and the Spirit of Christ, and so to
become the Sons of God. This is the reason of that phrase in Scripture, We
are not children of the flesh, but of the promise; and also of this in Gal. 3.
last verse, We are made heirs by the promise, it makes us heirs; that is,
look whatever ground, or hope, or hold of eternal life, and glory, and
blessedness, you hold it by the virtue of the promise, all is by a promise,
grace and goodness is communicated to us by a promise, this is our life, and
all our hold, therefore the Gospel is made to be the testament of Jesus
Christ; as by ones last will and testament, a man leaves his goods and lands to
his posterity, so the Lord Jesus Christ out of his free good will, leaves one
legacy of mercy, and grace, and pardon, and strength, to all humble broken
hearted spirits, Galath. 3.15. though it be but a man's covenant, says he,
when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it, but if a man seal it, and
confirm it with his blood, then it is fully established; no man will, no man
can disanull it. So Christ leaves a Legacy of mercy to you, and of favor and
compassion to all broken hearted sinners by promise: and therefore it is
established, nay, it is the last promise, the last Legacy and Testament,
therefore the promise no man can alter, Ioh. 1.14. He does not leave peace
then, as the world does; they wish it, but cannot give it; they wish it, but
cannot bestow it: but Christ leaves a legacy of mercy and peace behind him,
nay, he has ratified it by his blood, and he will make it good to the soul
for ever.

but they shall be taught, they shall have their lesson without book, they
shall be made to learn; and therefore the tenor of the covenant is this: I
will write my Law in their inward parts, and they shall all know me from the
highest to the least: observe the 2 Pet. 1.3. it is a place of mavelous
difficulty, (this I take to be the meaning) there is enough to satisfy any
man, according to his divine power, he has given unto us all things, that is,
the Lord by his almighty divine power, has given unto us all things, either
appertaining to this present life here, or eternal life hereafter. But how
comes this to pass that God does this? the Text says, It is through knowledge
of him, that has called us to glory and virtue; the word in the original is,
through their acknowledgement of him that has called us. The soul does not
only barely know, that this is grace and mercy in Christ; the eye of the
understanding is not only opened, but he now comes to acknowledge the same,
and subscribeth thereby thereunto: God says, I will save thy soul, I will be
thy God; the soul says, It is true, Lord, I will deny it no more, I will
gainsay it no longer.

In a word then, gather up the point, if it be so, that the Spirit, by the
witness thereof, does discover the interest we have in grace, if it does
ratify the interest which it does discover; nay, if it makes the judgment yield
to what it has ratified, it certifies effectually and undeniably the truths of
grace and mercy thus prepared and ratified to the soul, and the soul says, I
confess it Lord, and closes therewith.





There is a double knowledge, the first is this:

A naked simple apprehension of a truth, a mere closure of a man's mind, with
a naked plain truth revealed, so that the judgment says it is so.

Secondly, there is a reflecting act, when a man looks over his understanding,
and labors to discern the work thereof, not only apprehending what was laid
before him, but when he does apprehend that he does apprehend, when he knows
that he does know it, mark that place, for we will carry Scripture with us, 1
Ioh. 2.3. Hereby we know, that we know him, says the Text, if we keep his
Commandments. A man may know a thing, and yet not know that he does know: so
then it is clear, every Saint of God has the first knowledge, that is, every
man that is truly called in truth, does apprehend, and undoubtedly close with
the work of the Spirit, making known unto him the mercy of Christ; many may
work, and most men do; the second work they do not know that they know; the
Scripture says, that the Devil himself rules in the hearts of the children
of disobedience, that is, he casts in a seed of error and delusion, and
corruption into the hearts of wicked men, and by his delusions they entertain
those errors, embrace base courses. Now not one among a thousand can say that
the Devil does thus, this is done by virtue of Satan, and yet he does not see
it; nay, there is a veil of Satan upon the soul, there is a seed of Satan in
the soul, and the soul closes with it, and yet he apprehends it not; so
every faithful soul is ruled by Gods Spirit, and the seed of Gods Spirit is
flung into his mind, and closes therewith, but he cannot discern the work
of the Spirit working upon him, the one governed by Satan, the other enlightened
by the Spirit, but neither can apprehend, nor know, what they do know in this
kind.

Matthew. 11.27. Now because the holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the
Son, he can, nay he does make known the Counsels of both, and so removes all
objections, and cleares all cavils; it is a point of consideration to you that
are weak ones, satisfaction is by the means of Christ, the Son lays down
the price, and does satisfy, the Spirit does certify it unto the soul, that
the Son has satisfied for the neglect of what God ever required at our hands,
and for the committing of what ever God has forbidden; now the soul is fully
satisfied: As for example; Take a creditor, to whom the debtor owes money,
happily the debtor is arrested for his not paying the debt; the surety he comes
and lays down the debt: now the debtor is unacquainted with this, unless
there be a messenger that brings a certificat under the hand of the creditour
that he is paid, and the surety has discharged the debt, and he is quitted;
when he hears this, his heart is fully quieted: So here the Lord Jesus is the
Surety, the Father is the Creditour, our souls are the debt; now the Spirit of
God he is the Messenger, and he brings under the hand of God, of God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, an acquittance to our souls, that what ever
sins we have committed, are pardoned through Christ; and this fully contents
the soul.

Mark, 1 Cor. 2.10. yea; the deep things of God; as who should say, how can
you tell that Gods mind is toward us, and that he will pardon? why, these
are secrets; aye, but the Spirit of the Lord knows, and searches the deep
things of God, that which eye never saw, that which the Angels in heaven cannot
tell you, that which all the men in the world cannot reveal unto you, without
God be with them, that your names are written in the Book of Life, you shall
be accepted, these are deep things, but the Spirit reveals them: This is the
first Reason, the Spirit only knows the mind; therefore, it only can give
notice thereof unto the soul.



Cor. 3.15. Now the veil of ignorance no hand can rend it, none can remove it,
but only the Spirit of God; The god of the world blindes the eyes of the
wicked; why then it must be the Spirit of God, the Spirit of another world, I
mean the Spirit of Christ that must open the eyes, and take away the veiles,
and clouds, and mists, that the god of the world casts before the eye.

that can let a light into the soul, there is none but the hand of the Lord,
that can rend, and pluck, and pull a poor fainting, despairing, dying, sinking
heart, under the burden of his manifold abominations, none but the Almighty
hand of an Almighty God can do this; when it is night, all the candles in the
world cannot take away the darkness; so all the means of grace and salvation,
all the candlelight of the Ministry, they are all good helps; but the
darkness of the night will not be gone, before the Sun of Righteousness arise
in our hearts. Hence it comes to pass, that it is a very difficult matter to
give comfort to a poor distressed soul, Psalm. 40.1. Mark what a co^le there
is to give comfort, all the world cannot comfort them, and persuade them: I
shall one day perish, say they, I shall one day go down to hell, let all the
Ministers under heaven say what they will; Comfort ye, comfort ye, says the
Lord, as who should say, they will not be comforted, they will not think, nor
be resolved of it. I mercy? and I comfort? it is a likely matter, it will never
be, it never can be, I shall never see that day: will the Lord pardon me? I do
not think it, I cannot believe it, God is a just God, and a righteous God, and
I am a vile wicked wretch, it is mercy that I have despised and trampled under
my feet, and I mercy? no certainly, there is no such matter; this makes the
Lord have such a do, Comfort ye, comfort ye, the third time, and yet they
will receive none. We Ministers of the Gospel observe by experience, that we
meet with some souls that are gone to the bottom of hell, sometimes by their
distempers, and we make known the promises, propound arguments, lay down
reasons, but nothing takes place, nothing prevails, all is presently
forgotten, and you had as good say nothing, all is forgotten; therefore none
but Gods Spirit can do it, he must come from heaven, and say, Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people: let me therefore speak to you that are Ministers, you
do well to labor to give comfort to a poor fainting soul, but always say,
Comfort Lord, say unto this poor soul thou art his salvation; Lord speak
comfort, and say to such a one, his sins shall be pardoned, mercy shall be
bestowed upon him, his iniquities are forgiven; it is that we observe in the
policy of Satan, Satan has two Policies:



Well, happily the Lord enlightens the soul of such a sinner, and sets his
sins before him, and says, here are thy sins, and for these thy sins thou
shall be sent packing to hell; now he cannot look off his sins, but the Word
reveals them, and the Spirit settles them, thou may take thy pleasures, and
live in thy sins, but the end will be bitter, for all these sins God will visit
thee, God will execute judgment upon thee; then the soul tries his heart,
examines his paths, and begins to pore on his corruptions; when Satan sees
this, he labors to draw him away, and sends drunken companions unto him, that
they may take his mind off from his sins.



not of Gods mercy, and the pardon of thy sins; under whose seal have thou
this pardon? did it come from a right Office, and from a right Seal? then it
is good, else the Lord will stop thee with thy pass in thy hand, and hang thee
with thy pardon about thy neck.



Robert or Richard, etc. Now mark all the notice and evidence that any hypocrite
under heaven has of the freeness of Gods mercy, is this, he has only some
common inkling and hearsay of salvation, they are within the hearing of the
promises made to others, and they either not rightly apprehend, or else
mis-applying the sense and meaning of the promise to themselves, they cosen
their souls, and never have any particular evidence of the truth of it to
their souls by the work of the Spirit; there is happily an expectation among
the prisoners in Newgate, that there will be a pardon come cut at the end of the
Parliament, and some man passes by and says, there is a pardon for Newgate:
The prisoners that hear this, it makes them rejoice; but when the Parliament
comes out, there is a pardon only for such persons, for such facts, of such a
quality and nature, and so happily he that rejoiced so much in the consideration
of a pardon, has nothing to do with it; now the general hearsay will do
no good, but the particul^r evidence: so it is between a cunning Hypocrite and
a child of God, when an Hypocrite has been driven to extreme horror for his
sins, then he looks out for mercy, his heart is terrified, and his soul
perplexed, and he hears there is abundance of mercy in Christ, and Christ came
to save sinners; the Hypocrite is delighted with this in the general, this is
only overly, and common, he over-heares a promise, and so quiets himself
therein; but when it comes to the trial, God came to save sinners, but what
sinners? humble broken hearted sinners: But the Hypocrite is not such an one,
therefore it belongs not to him.

the mind of an humbled sinner, that will never be plucked off, but he will
turn his eye toward it while the world lasts. This evidence that is brought
home, and cast in by the Spirit, it is so unexpected, and so pleasing, and so
incomparably strong, and wonderful, and withal so unconceiveable excellent,
that an humbled sinner when once he sees the glimpse and inckling thereof, it
will ever be prying and looking that way, nay, in the most desperate
discouragements that can befall, and in the greatest desertions that can betide
the soul; nay, notwithstanding all those subtilties of temptations that Satan
hurries into the soul, to make a man at a loss, and to make him leave looking
after the freeness of grace in Christ: yet the poor soul will ever be
lingering after this Light; look as it is with a great torch, carry it out of
one room into another by-roome, and though the torch be gone, yet it will
leave such a glimmering so that a man may follow the torch: so it is with the
soul, truly humbled, it has received the testimony of the Spirit, though the
torch, the glory of the testimony of this witness goes aside a little in
temptation, yet the Lord leaves such a kind of glimmering or inkling of
goodness, that the soul looks after the lamp and light in this kind, and
follows it for ever, Jonah 2.4. Jonah was there stubborn with the Lord, he
was sent to Ninive, he goes to Tarshish: well, God sends a whirlewind after him,
and tosseth him into the sea, and sent also a great Whale, an unruly ferry-man,
to carry him to land: Now being in the belly of the Whale, he begins to
apprehend himself, and then is joyful, and there he made a question of Gods
everlasting love; but yet when he was in the belly of hell, and mountains of
water went over him, yet mark how the holy man behaveth himself; I will still
look toward thy holy presence: He had some illuminations of Gods goodness in
Christ, and howsoever the glory thereof was eclipsed, yet there was some
glimmering left behind.

But now the flashes of the Hypocrite, they are sudden, the lightning of Gods
love that is in his mind, but it passes through the soul suddenly; and leaves
it in the same hazard and ignorance, and at a loss, as formerly; for howsoever
an hypocrite may have a glimmering, and a kind of flash, and take notice of
the powers of the world to come, yet it comes like lightning, suddenly come,
suddenly gone, and it draws the mind for the while, and the understanding
for the present; but in conclusion, the soul is where it was before, when this
flash is gone, and the lightning is over, it is just at the same loss and
danger it was before.

bears all before it, and makes the whole stream of the soul be answerable
thereunto: Take notice between the vision Saint Paul had, and which Balaam had,
God let in a light into Balaams soul, What, will thou curse Jacob? Oh, the
glory that I will bestow upon them: This made his teeth water at the goodness
of the Lord, and he says, Let me die the death of the righteous, Numb. 24.2.
the Text uses the phrase, The Spirit of God was upon Balaam; the meaning is,
he intimated the happy condition of the Saints of the Lord, and in stead of
cursing, he blessed them: though this cursed Witch Balaam had this common
enlightening to know the excellency of the condition, yet his heart was never
the better, was covetous and malicious still toward Jacob.

But look Acts 26.19. Saint Paul says, he was not disobedient to the vision,
as who should say, The blessed truth that was revealed to me, the voice that
spoke to me from heaven, my mind was framed thereby, and answerably disposed
thereunto, and I submitted and came in at the voice of the Lord. Hence the
phrase in Scripture, They that know thee will trust in thee, as who should say,
Grounded knowledge brings in confidence: So Ioh. 4.10. Christ says, Had thou
known me; it is not every knowledge that will do the deed, a man may talk of
grace, but had thou understood better the evidence, thou should have asked
grace, and received it, this is the reason of Jobs speech; when God takes a man
in hand, he will command a man to return fron iniquity: there is a commanding
power in the obedience of truth: the Lord lets in a commanding power, and
turns the heart from sin, and makes it yield to the obedience of God. Whereas
the light of the hypocrite is like lightning in the evening, a flash and away,
and leaves no heat behind it: The Sun does not only give light, but it
leaves a heat behind it; so it is with the Spirit of God, when the sunshine of
the heavenly light comes into the heart, it leaves a heat of holy affections
behind it, framing and disposing the heart of a man to be at the call and
command of God. Observe when we lay forth arguments before men, and convince
their consciences, that their course is naught, notwithstanding, whatsoever we
can speak they return to their wicked speeches, and base practices, their
lives are as wicked, their tongues as profane as ever; but when the Spirit of
God will take those arguments we propound out of Scripture, and make known
those troubles to the understanding, it communicates unto thee and them that
power to the soul, that it comes to be disposed thereunto.

them if ever they were persuaded of Gods favor, they say they thank God,
they never doubted of it; they reply, they were worse than Reprobates if they
should, but they have no ground at all to confirm this; this is an undoubted
argument of a soul that never had any sound evidence of Gods love, for where
the Spirit comes, it goes upon good ground.

Sampson, when he propounded a Riddle to the Philistines, they knew not how to
answer it, because they understood it not before he had told his wife, and she
them, then they related the Riddle to them, he confesses their answer to be
good, But, says he, had you not plowed with my Heifer, you could not have
expounded my Riddle.

I use the same comparison for our purpose; use Gods means, if you would know
Gods mind, take counsel of him that is privy Counceller of Heaven: would you
be persuaded of Gods love and affection toward you? will you know how your
case shall go at the last day? would you know if your name is written in the
Book of life? if you would, why then, know the way to obtain it, seek it of
the Spirit of the Lord, for he searches the chief things of God: consider
what our Savior tells you, Luke 11.12. Why then, must this Spirit only certify
the pardon of sin? Why, look up to heaven then, and plead thus with him, Lord,
I am a father, and give my child what he wants, and if I see him in need, I
releeve him; why, I need thy Spirit, Lord, I beg it, thou have promised it,
Lord give that Spirit to the soul of thy servant, and let it restifie to my
conscience, that thou art reconciled to me.





King. 14.1, 2, etc. Do not think to complain it with the Lord Jesus, and put
the finger in the eye and weep a few tears, and say, I confess my rebellions
are sinful, I am sorry for my sins, and will repent me of my sins: the Spirit
will say, Come out thou proud wretched hypocrite, do thou feign thy self to
be an humble broken hearted sinner? do not I know thy reservations? do not I
know thy by-ways and back-doores? Come out thou proud wretch and sturdy
hypocrite, I am sent to thee with heavy tidings, you may cozen man, but you
cannot deceive God; therefore never think he will give grace and mercy unto
thee, unless thou be fitted for it.

he was burdened with his sins: Oh, says Satan, you were burdened with your
sins, but you returned to them again; then the soul says he was humbled for
his sins, yet the goodness of God was never sealed to him: aye, says Satan,
but you continue in your sins still: aye, says the soul, I am weary of these
sins; aye, and you are weary of laboring against them too, says Satan. Thus
the soul is tired by carnal reasons, temptations of Satan; now let the
evidence of the Spirit be never so plain, he cannot perceive it; be watchful
therefore in this case, if you hear what fear, or feeling, or suspicion
says; feeling says, I find nothing; fear says, it will never be; suspicion
imagines, I shall never see that day: but now command silence to every one, to
fear suspicion, feeling, and unworthiness, and say, now speak blessed
Spirit, then you will see the case cast presently: It is said of Abraham, he
considered not Sarahs barren womb; for imagine Abraham had thus reasoned, I
never had child, for me to bear a child, it is against nature; shall a man
that never begat, beget a child in his old age? I will never believe it: If
he had done thus, for ought I know, though he had lived unto this time, he
should never have had a child, but he never considered of any of these things,
and therefore the Promise was accomplished. Therefore be sure not to hearken
what failings, fear and doubt, and corruption says, for they will be ever
against thee; there is no mercy from corruption, no grace from fear and
suspicion, but consider not your dead barren wretched hearts, but attend upon
Gods promise, and you shall find Gods Spirit witness unto you the acceptance
of your persons before God.











comes in and speaks plainly, but it will do the poor man no good to hear
the witness, unless he understand it: so though we hear the Spirit, and do
not understand the language of the Spirit, it is as if we never heard it. Now
the language of the Spirit is nothing else but the tenor of those gracious
promises, which God has made to poor humbled sinners. Now if we be not able
to cast the sense and meaning of the promise, it is like an uncertain sound,
though the witness be good and plain, yet I cannot be comforted thereby. 2
Cor. 6.16, 17. This is the language of the Spirit: Now let a poor humble
hearted soul come and lay his heart level to the promise, one says, it is
true, if it were so with me, then God would be my God; that promise is made to
them that touch no unclean thing, but I am defiled with sins and abominations,
and carried aside by them; therefore no share in this promise. Now the meaning
of the testimony is mistaken, the witness is as good as can be, and will cast
the cause on your side; but you understand not the meaning of the witness,
therefore we will spell the words, what is it to touch no unclean thing, it is
not to be lightly acquainted with it; therefore art thou content to sue out a
bill of divorce to all thy sins, how ever heretofore thou were married to them,
yet now thou art resolved to bed with them no more: art thou contented God
should make known what ever is amiss in thy soul, and subdue every
distemper, that is the meaning of the promise, and if it be thus with thee, the
promise belongs to thee.

Prove. 3.3. mark what counsel God gives by wisdom, Let not mercy and truth
forsake thee: mercy and truth will forsake a man, Satan would pluck them away,
but suffer them not, says the Text, to depart from thy soul. Job 22.21. so
the original has it; have a daily intercourse to the promise, meditate
therein, and muse thereupon, see thou look a ready way, and have recourse to
the Lord upon all occasions.

news; but this will bear up a man's heart, if he can but look up to heaven,
and take good tidings and notice of Gods favor, this will joy and refresh a
man's soul.



pompous Cardinals, these were never humbled. How do I conclude this? why
thus; if Gods spirit only give notice of this favor to the humble, then all
other, be their parts what they will be, God does not inform them: the
humble are informed, they not instructed; therefore the other know not what
they cannot conceive. As suppose one dull block, and a quick wit, are both
set to one trade, yet if the dullard had an expert master, and did beat into
him the skill of the trade, and the quick spirit was with a master that could
not teach him his trade; we see that the dull block is more wise in his trade
than the other: so it is here, they have the Lord for their master.

I know my Redeemer lives, I am persuaded that neither height, nor depth, etc.
shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ.

The work of God upon the understanding, we have spoken of at large; now we
come to the work of God upon the affections: as the understanding apprehends
the truth of the promise; so the heart looks at the goodness of the promise:
Now therefore the Lord, he must teach all the affections to come unto the
promise, and the first affection that comes next in order, is the affection
of hope.



Secondly, it must be stirred up to do it; the spirit must stir up the heart
unto it: when a poor sinner is truly abased, and cut off from every thing in
himself, and is content to be at Gods dispose, yet the soul cannot dispose of
it self, it cannot carry it self to the affecting embracing of any
supernatural grace or good by the power of nature: look as it is with a
windmill, it is fitted for to go, and if the wind blow, it will go; but now
the sail will not stir the mill, unless the wind stir the sail: So here
though the soul be humbled and content to be at Gods dispose, yet I say an
humble broken selfe-denying heart is not able to stir of it self.

Thirdly, To hope groundedly, it is not a flashy hope, a vain hope, an idle
hope; as the wicked men, they hope for grace, they hope for mercy, but they
have no ground to bear them up, but the hope of such men will perish: but this
hope is upon good ground; the Lord calls the soul to wait upon him, to
expect him; this is hope which will not make a man ashamed, Romans 5.5. We have a
hope as an anchor of the soul more sure and steadfast; Hebr. 6.19. this is the
nature of hope to stand still and wait for mercy and salvation of God, and to
look when the Lord will have mercy upon the soul, and this grounded hope the
spirit of God must stir and work, or else there will never be any hope: the
proof of the point, Lament. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, that
is all the good, and all the comfort I have in heaven and earth; he is my
portion; life gone, and health gone, and friends gone, yet the Lord is my
portion for ever and ever; therefore will I hope in him, therefore the soul
expects that mercy, looks after it, waits for it, Hos. 2.15. I will
allure her in the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her, and give her
the valley of Achor for the door of hope: therefore the Lord will allure her
in the work of humiliation, and did speak comfortably unto her in vocation;
thou want mercy, mercy is prepared for thee; thou want grace, grace is
provided for thee; that staggering soul of thine shall be strengthened, that
troubled soul of thine shall be pacified; and then the soul comes to hope,
when the heart is thoroughly humbled and abased, then follows hope. Now for
the further discovery and explication of the point, we will show two things.

First, the reason why after a soul humbled, and the mind enlightened, the
Lord works upon this affection of hope. Secondly, the manner how the Lord
stirs up the heart to hope, what breeds it, what feeds it, and upon what
it grows, and what maintains it in the soul, and then the Doctrine will be
very clear.



I answer, the reason is this; because when the Spirit of God has enlightened
the understanding, and given evidence, that mercy is prepared for an humbled
soul: why (brethren) the fittest faculty of the soul, that ought to be
employed to lay hold upon this, it is the faculty of hope; it is the maine
office of this affection in the heart, to look and expect for a good to come;
for hope is nothing else, but that extent of the soul, whereby it earnestly
affects a good to come: it must be a known good and to come that hope
expects: if the good be present, we love it, and joy in it; but if it be
absent, the soul looks out for it, and waits for the same; it is a fine
passage of hope, 1 Phil. 20. according to my earnest expectation of hope: hope
is a faculty of the soul to look out for mercy; it is a similitude taken from
a man that looks after another, and lifts up it self as high as he may to
see if any man be coming near him, looking wishly about him, so here the
soul stands as it were a tiptoe, expecting when the soul will come: as the
man that is to meet another in such a place, they do set the time appointed,
and then goes up to a high hill, and looks very earnestly round about him,
wondreth he comes not, and yet he hops he will come: so an humbled sinner,
when the Lord says, mercy is coming toward thee, mercy is provided for thee;
now this affection is set out to meet mercy a far off, namely hope; this is
the stretching out of the soul. O when will it be, Lord? thou say mercy is
prepared, thou say mercy is approaching, the soul stands a tiptoe; O when
will it come, Lord. As now something that has a strong sent, a man that has a
good nose, can smell a good way off; though it finds it not, though it feels
it not, yet it may, and says hope, this sinful soul of mine, it may through
Gods mercy be sanctified, this troubled perplexed soul of mine, it may
through Gods mercy be pacified, this evil and corruption which harbor in me,
and has taken possession of me, it may through Gods mercy be removed.

Now for the second thing, how does God stir up the heart of an humbled broken
hearted sinner to hope? this is worth a while a little to consider of the
ground to get and maintain this hope may be referred to these three heads.

First, the Lord does sweetly stay the heart, and fully persuade the soul that
a man's sins are pardonable, and that all his sins may be pardoned, and that
all the good things he wants, they may be bestowed; this is a great sustainer
of the soul: hope is always of a good to come; now when a poor sinner sees
his sins, the number of them, the nature of them, the vileness of them, the
cursednesse of his soul, that he can take no rest; he sees no rest in the
creature, nor in himself, though he pray all day, yet he cannot get the pardon
of one sin: the soul is out of any expectation of pardon or power of mercy
in any thing he has or does; though all means, all helps, though all men and
angels should join together, yet they cannot pardon one sin of his, yet the
Lord lifts up his voice, and he says from heaven, thy sins are pardonable;
this is a voice a great way off, thy sins may be pardoned in the Lord Jesus
Christ: Look as a traitor, that does apprehend the anger of the King against
him, and that he is sent for to be attached, he and cry is made after him, the
Pursevant pursues him; the poor creature flies from court to country, from
country to city, and so to the sea coast, seeking for some shelter; the
Pursevant besetteth the sea coast for him, the poor soul is now almost in
despair of mercy from the Prince, he sees no hope of pardon from him; but
when he overheareth a man that says, in truth you had better open the door,
and yield your self to the King, there is hope, the poor soul is much
sustained; What, is there yet hope that my offense may be pardoned, will the
King receive me to mercy: So when the Lord humbles the soul, discovers his
sins, makes known his judgments, these are thy sins that thou have
committed, and for them thou shall be plagued; the great judgment of the great
God shall come upon thee, and the great God whom thou have dishonored will
come against thee, and to hell thou must. Now the poor soul sees no hope, no
help, no means of supply; now the poor soul hears a voice from heaven,
there is no hope in thy self, nor in means, yet in the Lord Jesus Christ thy
sins are pardonable, thy soul may be saved, thy heart may be quickened: that
place in the Psalmist, Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with him is plenteous
redemption: this upholdeth and sustaineth the heart of Gods servant, yet there
is plentiful redemption; and this may discover it self in three particulars.

to men; and it is said of Abraham, he hoped above hope, he looked to the
Lord, that was able to do what he promised, to supply what he wanted; he
considered not that he had a dead body, but he considered he had a living God;
not Sarahs barren womb, but the gracious goodness of God, able to make it
fruitful; nay he believed in the God that can make things that are not: thy
soul is not humbled, the Lord can humble it; thy sins are not pardoned, the
Lord can pardon them; thy soul is not converted, the Lord can convert it;
though I cannot see it, though man cannot imagine it, yet the Lord can do it.

Malach. 7.18. Who is a god like unto our God; we say, Oh if I could please
God, if I could walk with God: nay, but God says mercy pleases him, and that
place in Esaias, I for my own Name sake will do this, not for thy works sake;
I for my own sake, not for thy obedience sake: this is certain, as there is
no work in any poor creature can discover any mercy from God, so there is no
wickedness in the heart of a sinner, that can hinder the Lord, when he will
bestow grace and mercy in Jesus Christ.





Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, grace superabounded; he is the Father of
mercy, and the God of all consolation; Iam. 2.13. there the holy Ghost says,
mercy triumph above justice: justice cannot be so severe to revenge thee, as
mercy is gracious to do good unto thee; if thy sins be never so many, Gods
justice never so great, yet mercy is above all thy sins, above all thy
rebellions; this may support the soul. So then you have the first ground to
stir up hope, thy sins are pardonable, this is possible; what thy sins
be, it skilleth not; what thy iniquities be, it mattereth not; there is more
mercy in God, than sin in thee, to pardon; more power in God to show mercy to
thee, than power in sin to destroy thee.

Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden; I am weary, unless the
Lord intended good unto me, why should he invite me and bid me for to come?
surely he means to show mercy to me, nay he promises to releeve me, when I
come therefore he will do good unto me.

it, and carried mightily unto it, that it cannot be severed. It is the
letting in the riches of his love that turns the expectation of the soul
another way, it overshadoweth all outward good. Look as the covetous man is up
early to contrive his riches, the ambitious man his honor: now Gods letting
into the soul the sweetness of his grace, does turn the whole stream of the
soul thitherward.

It is a reproof, and meets with two things in wicked carnal persons:
First, those that will cast off all hope in point of desperation: Secondly,
against those that will do nothing, but hope without ground; and that is
presumption: both are here to be reproved and condemned.

If the Lord stirs up the heart of his to hope groundedly for his mercy; Oh
then take heed of that fearful and unconceiveable sin of despair: despair
we must in our selves, and that is good; but this despair which we now
speak of is mavelous heinous in the eyes of God, and mavelous hurtful to
thy own soul: therefore take heed of it, for ever I say this sin of despair,
when a man casts away all hope, casts away all carnal confidence. This
thou must do, and yet thou must hope; let Israel hope in the Lord, for in the
Lord etc. O the Lord takes this very ill at our hands, thou go to the deep
dungeon of thy corruption, and there thou say, these sins can never be
pardoned; I am still proud and more stubborn: this distress God sees not,
God succoureth not, his hand cannot reach, his mercy cannot save; now mark
what the Prophet Esaias says to such a perplexed soul, Esaias 40.27.
Why say thou thy way is hid from the Lord? The Lord says, why say thou:
so the young man shall faint and be weary, but they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength: is any thing too hard for the Lord? nay I say you
wrong God exceedingly, you think it is a matter of humility, you count so
vilely of your selves: can God pardon sin to such unworthy creatures? mark
that place of the Psalmist, they spoke against the Lord, Can the Lord prepare a
table in the wilderness? They spoke not against themselves, but against God;
so we speak against God, and charge God himself: it is true, says the
soul, Manasses was pardoned; it is true, Paul was converted: it is true, Gods
saints have been received to mercy, but can my sin be pardoned? can my soul
be quickened? No, no, my sins are greater than can be forgiven, says the
despairing soul: then me thinks Satan is stronger to overthrow thee, than
God to save thee: then it seems sin is stronger to condemn thee, than God
to do good unto thee; and thus you make God to be no God upon point, nay you
make him to be weaker than sin, than hell, than the devil: And this is most
injurious to God, to make the power of sin greater to condemn thee, than the
power of God to save thee: to make the power of Satan stronger to ruinate thee,
than the mercy of God to releeve and succor thee: and what can you say more?
and what can you do more against the Lord? Is not this to make God an
underling to Satan, and to sin? this is to say, the Almightinesse of God is
weaker than the weakness of sin: the Sufficiency of God is weaker than the
malice of Satan. It is true, a poor humble sinner many times will make bitter
complaints this way, and they think they speak against themselves: No, no,
they speak against the Lord: they spoke against God, when they said, Can the
Lord prepare a table in the wilderness: So you that speak in this desperate
manner, why truth Lord, this proud heart will never be humbled: if any thing
would have wrought, it would have been done before this day. How many sermons,
how many mercies, how many judgments, how many prayers? and yet this proud
heart, this stubborn heart, will not be reformed: you think you speak
against your selves now; no, no, you speak against the Lord, and brethren
think much of this; thou that think so, that say so, that concludest so;
this is one of the greatest sins thou committest, to say thy sins cannot be
forgiven thee.

Secondly, This sin of desperation, as it is most injurious to God; so in the
second place, it is extraordinary dangerous to thy own soul: It is that which
takes up the bridge, and cutteth off all passages: and there can no spiritual
comfort and consolation come into the poor soul of a poor sinner: Luke 3.15.
Luke 3.15.
Every ditch must be filled, and then all flesh shall see the salvation of the
Lord: what are these ditches? why, nothing else but those deep gulfs and
ditches of despair, and unless these be filled, no man can see the Lord
Jesus Christ. In a word, my brethren, suffer me to open my self; the truth is,
this despair of the soul is that which cutteth the sinews of all man's
comfort, and takes off the power and edge of all the means of grace: it
daunteth all a man's endeavors, nay it plucketh up a man's endeavors as it were
quite by the roots: for that which a man despaireth off, he will never labor
after. It is here as with a man in pangs of death; unto such a man all means
are unavailable for his good, his bed will not ease him, meat will not refresh
him, chasing will not revive; at the last, we say he is gone, he is a dead man:
friends leave him, Physicians leave him, they may go and pray for him, and
mourn for him, but they cannot recover him. So this despair of soul makes a
man cast off all hope, and lie down in a forlorn condition, expecting no good
to come: alas, says a man, what skilleth for a man to pray? what profits a
man to read? what benefit in all the means of grace? the truth of it is, the
stone is rolled upon me, and my condemnation sealed for ever: it is sure in
heaven, and therefore I will never look after Christ, grace, and salvation any
more, and press the means to him: let him come to hear the Word, mark how he
casts off all the benefit; it was mavelous seasonable and profitable, it
was the good Word of the Lord, very comfortable unto such as have any share
therein. Why may not you expect good? why may not you receive benefit there
from? why, no, says the soul, the time of grace is past, the day is gone, and
thus the soul sinketh in it self; if Christians would pray for him, and
Ministers would labor to do him good, why he bids them spare their
labor, for hell is his portion, and his condemnation is sealed in heaven: see
now and consider what desperate danger of despair brings to a poor heart,
and makes him to be beyond the reach of mercy, that no means can come at
him. It is a pretty passage of David, Psalm. 77.7. Will the Lord cast me off
ever? and will he show no favor? I said this is my infirmity, says the text,
the word in the original, this is my sickness; as who should say, this would be
my death, what, is mercy gone for ever? then my life is gone, then is all my
comfort and all my hope gone, therefore take heed of this, it takes off the
edge of our endeavors, and Gods ordinances that might do us good.

Secondly, it reproves and marvellously condemns that great sin of
presumption, a sin more frequent, and if possible may be, more dangerous; the
presumption of carnal hypocrites that boulster up themselves with mavelous
boldness in their course; I beseech you observe it, it is true here, as they
said, Saul has slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands: despair
has slain his thousands, but presumption his ten thousands: that men may
swear, and lie, and cosen, and break all commands, and yet hope to be saved,
yet they hope grace will save them; they resist grace, yet hope Jesus Christ
will show mercy unto them, they oppose Christ, this is that which, I say, has
slain many thousand souls amongst us, and they are few that have not split at
this rock; therefore, I say, this serves to reprove the baseness, the
vileness of such Hypocrites that boast themselves, and compare their hopes
with the hopes of the Saints: it is true, say they, I cannot walk so freely, I
cannot repeat a Sermon, I want those parts that they have, I walk not so
curiously, yet I hope to be saved as well as they: this is that which has
slain many thousands of souls that now are roaring in hell, and they may
thank presumption for it. Now this hope is not the hope of the Saints; the
hope of the Saints is a grounded hope, but these hopes merely hang upon some
idle pleas and foolish pretenses, and some carnal reasons: but I tell you they
will fall, and their hopes will sink, and they into the bottomless pit
before they be aware: it is the command and counsel of Peter, That every man
should be ready to give a reason of his faith and hope that is in him;
therefore let us see the reasons that carry you, the arguments that persuade
you to these groundless and foolish hopes; you hope to be saved, and you hope
to go to heaven, and you hope to see the face of God with comfort: let us see
the ground for these hopes of yours, good hope has good reasons, grounded hope
grounded reasons; you say, you hope to be saved, and have no reason for it; it
is a foolish hope, an unreasonable hope, the grounds therefore of Hypocrites
are mainly five:

can think it, he cannot conceive it, that God has created any man for to
damn him; sure the Lord is more merciful than so, and therefore though we be
sinful, and base, and untoward, yet the Lord will not damn us: I answer
therefore, it is true indeed, God did never preserve men for this same end that
he might damn them; though it is as true, he that made men, he will damn
most of men in hell for their sins committed against him; Narrow is the gate,
and strait is the way that leads unto life, few there be that find it: is
this the argument of thy hope? mark the folly, and observe the weakness of
it: if creation be a good argument, then all the damned should come out of
hell and be delivered; nay by this reason the Devil himself should be saved;
they are now in hell, they were created as well as you ignorant silly
creatures: think of these things how your hope will shatter and break under
you, and you with them will fall together into the bottomless pit, Esa. 57.11.
See how the Lord brings this argument and confuteth it, it is a people that
has no understanding, therefore he that made them will not save them, he that
created them will show them no mercy, the text says, the Lord says from
heaven, though he made thee, he will not show thee mercy, if thou continue to
be wicked and rebellious.

goodness, and he praises the Lord he never wanted any thing, his lot is
fallen into a good ground, and therefore he doubts not, but that God, who
has been his God from his youth will save him, and show mercy unto his
soul; this is the second ground, and it is a poor feeble ground to support
the soul in such a case as this. I answer therefore, thou art deceived, thou
take that for an argument of Gods love and mercy, which rather may be an
argument of Gods hatred and indignation: Psalm. 92.12, The wicked flourish,
says the text, then a man may say, they will all to heaven, they will all be
saved if they so prosper here, no, says the text, they flourish that they may
be destroyed, and perish for ever, the ox is fatted for the slaughter, so it
is here, thou art fatted here, thou have more than heart can desire, thy cups
are full, and thy table well spread, thy breasts full of milk, and thy bones
full of marrow, it is that thou might be destroyed, Psalm. 1.5. Prosperity
destroys the soul; it is like poison, like ratsbane; now would any man say
thus, such a man is most like to live, because he eareth most poison? nay
rather the contrary, so prosperity meeting with a sinful with a naughty
heart, it is poison to him; the text tells you, when Haman was invited, it
was that he might be accused; the truth is, these men of the greatest hope in
this life I mean for honor, and pomp, and respect, and preferment, many of
them are men of the least hope for heaven.

of God, many sorrows, many weaknesses, many troubles in their course, many
losses in their estate, these stays up their comforts, and upon these grounds
they build their hopes; I have had my hell in this life, and I hope to have
heaven in the world to come; I hope the worst is over, now I have been
troubled in this world, I hope I shall be comforted in another world, and here
is the ground of your hopes: I beseech you consider what I answer, I say this,
all the grievances, trouble, sorrow, sicknesses, be they what they will be
unless thy heart be humbled by them, unless thou be brought unto the Lord
Jesus Christ by them, they are so far from being an argument of grace and
salvation unto thee, that they are harbingers of those everlasting torments,
you shall endure in hell: Sodom and Gomorrah they burnt in brimstone, and they
shall burn in hell; a man would have said they had their hell here, and
therefore they should not have it hereafter; why? the text says they suffered
vengeance of eternal fire; why, brethren, I beseech you observe it, will any
man reason thus; such a man has had the earnest of the bargain, and therefore
he shall not have the bargain? will any man say thus, he that is attached,
arraigned, condemned, shall not be hanged? nay rather he that has the earnest
shall have the bargain, he that now is accused, condemned shall now be hanged,
so here.

regard of the duties they do discharge, and though they think they have
fair hopes and great hopes of heaven, why, say they, God will power down his
wrath upon those that know not God, and that call not upon his name, but what
do you make of us, are we heathen, are not we Christians, have not we been
baptized, and the Lord has enabled us to do something, we call upon his
name, and seek him by fasting and prayer, and therefore he that has done so
much for us, and has done so much to us, sure he will give us heaven: I
answer, that this bottom is not sufficient to bear up this hope, all the
privileges thou have, all the means, ordinances thou enjoyest, unless thy
heart be humbled, and thy soul brought to Christ, all these will fall under
thee, and thou will go to hell, Romans 2.28. He is not a Jew that is a Jew
outwardly, the Jews they bragged of this, they were circumcised, and the
Heathen were not circumcised; they were the seed of Abraham, but the Heathen
were not; Paul vilifieth all this, he is not a Jew, that is a Jew outwardly;
thy baptism, thy praying, and thy hearing, there is no profit by them, no
comfort in them, if thou maintain a wicked life, and a naughty heart,
therefore this will not serve the turn, you know it, and the Scripture
speaks it, Judas an Apostle, Judas called by Christ, he sat with our Savior,
and dipped his hand in the dish, he was a Devil then, and is with the Devils
now; the foolish virgins had a trim profession, as well as the others; thou
professest, and hear, and prayest; thou will lie too, and cosen too, and
swear too, thou art naught, and this bottom will never bear thee up.

Isa. 27.11. he that made them will have no mercy upon them, as who should
say, it is true, here is abundance of mercy, mercy enough, mercy that saved
a poor company of poor Jews, that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ; mercy
that saved Paul a persecutour, Manasses an Idolater, but I will show no mercy
unto thee, he that confesses and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy,
mercy owneth those, mercy does good unto those, but unto thee that love thy
sins, that embracest thy sins, that hid^st thy sins, the text says it,
thou shall never find mercy, delude thy self thou may, but thou never
shall have mercy; Luke 14.24. there was a marriage made, and a rich marriage
feast, enough to have fed many thousands, but those that were bidden did not
come, they shall not so much as taste of them, they shall have none of them; so
there are sweet comforts, strong consolations, admirable refreshings, able to
sustain a thousand souls, but you that would keep your sins, and have the
pride of your hearts, but you that stand it out with the world, and will not
yield to the authority of the truth, hear what the Lord says from heaven, he
that is the God of comfort, thou shall never be comforted; he that is the
Author of salvation says it, thou shall never be saved, thou shall never have
a crum of these dainties, nor a drop of these sweet wines of spiritual
consolation: what a world now of men are shut out by these trials, that are
found guilty of these particulars, you poor ignorant creatures, do not many
of you lift up your heads full high, and many a poor presumptuous hypocrite
bear up themselves upon rotten hopes? may comfort us, nor the experience of
Gods kind dealing with us may encourage us, nor the afflictions that we have
endured in this world, nor the privileges that we have enjoyed, nor the mercy
of themselves may give us any hope to receive mercy, why then it seems you
would have us despair, and cast away all hope of any good?



mercy from him; and hence Ephesians. 2.12. Without God, without Christ, without
hope; the Lord has said, the Lord has sworn it, that an unbeleeving, an
unrepenting sinner, shall never come unto heaven: he cannot save thy soul,
until he has humbled thy soul; he cannot save thy soul, as long as thou
retainest an unbeleeving soul.

sins, I say, every morning, and every evening, that yet you live, think
with your selves, Has God given me this hope, this liberty, and that my life
is continued, why now bestirre your selves to get mercy. I beseech you think
o^ it, if you be not wrought upon by the Word, if Heaven and Earth should meet
together to save thee, and an Angel from Heaven would speak comfort unto
thee, all would fail: therefore you see by this time in what case these are;
go aside and mourn for your selves and neighbors; this say, if you will
continue proud and wicked, there is no hope for you, all the hope is this, you
are yet alive, the Lord may humble that heart, he may enlighten your eyes, he
may work upon thy soul, else there is no mercy for thee.

Esaias. 40.18. The Lord waits upon his Saints to do them good; but mark what
the Text says, Blessed is every man that waits upon the Lord: he does not
say, blessed is the man that has sense of Gods favor, blessed is the man that
has assurance of Gods mercy, but blessed is that man that waits upon the
Lord: thou say thou can not do this, and thou can not do that; I say if
thou can but wait and hope for the mercy of the Lord, I say thou art a rich
Christian: if a man has many reversions, though he has them not for the
present, men that judge of his estate, will not judge him for his present
estate, but for his reversions which he shall have: happily thou have not for
the present the sense and feeling of the assurance of Gods love; away with that
feeling, do not dote upon it, thou have reversions of old leases, ancient
mercies, old compassions, such as have been reserved from the beginning of the
world, and know thou have a fair inheritance: this is observable; Romans 8 28.
We are saved by hope: now hope that is seen, is no hope: for why should a man
hope for that which a man has? we are saved through hope: now if you would
have hope to be seen, you have no hope in conclusion; though thou have it not
in thy eye, yet if thou do hope, it is enough, that hope will save thy soul.
It is the folly of our sinful proud hearts, that sometimes in the sense of our
own sins and sight of our own unworthiness, we almost disdain to look
upon what God has done for us, and we consider not the kindness of the Lord.
That place in the Psalmist, The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
and wait for him; it is the wretched distemper of the soul: we can fall out
with heaven and our selves, because we cannot have what we would; nay we
quarrel against the means of grace: what avail means and helps as long as I
have such a stubborn naughty heart: Psalm. 174.1^1. The Lord takes pleasure in
those that fear him, and wait for his mercy: alas brethren, out of the pride
of your own spirits, you fall out with God and your selves, and so deprive
your selves of this comfort.





The first is this, a grounded hope, it has a peculiar certainty in it, it
does bring home unto the soul in special manner the goodness of God, and the
riches of his love in Jesus Christ: this same grounded hope does not stand upon
Ifs and Ands, but it says, it must be undoubtedly, it must certainly be mine:
and this you must know, it is the nature of hope, to make a thing to be
certain. Hope makes things infallible and undoubted, and withal there is a
kind of speciality, a bringing home of Gods goodness unto the soul, in a
peculiar manner: hope always if sound, it has something to say for it self
always, it has a ward to hang and hold upon: Psalm. 130.5. I wait upon the
Lord, and I hope in his Word: and so Romans 15.4. All things are written for our
instruction, that through the comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope:
here is hope, not through your conceits, imaginations and dreams, but through
the Scripture: we might have hope, a grounded hope is a Scripture hope, it is a
word hope; and therefore those that cannot bring a word, and give a reason for
their hope, I would not give a rush, nor a farthing token for a hundred cart
load of such hopes: No, it is Law hope, it is Gospel hope, Scripture hope,
Word hope; so that the soul can say, the Word says, the Lord came to save
those that are lost, why I find my self to be lost, and therefore I hope the
Lord will seek me, though I cannot seek him; I hope the Lord will find me,
though I cannot find my self; I hope the Lord will save me, though I cannot
save my self. But the hopes of the wicked hang like a cloud, they are not
grounded upon the evidence of the Scripture, they crowd all in the general; I
hope to fare as well as others, and other had mercy, and why not I? And hence
the hopes of the wicked are unstedfast and wavering: but a man might here
demand, are not the hopes of the Saints so too? Do they not waver and stagger
many a time? Answer, It is true, but with this difference; the hopes of Gods
servants are like an anchor, which though sometimes it is shaken, yet it
holds the faster: but the hopes of the hypocrites are like the waves of the
seas, and they come to nothing: Prove. 8.28. The hope of the righteous shall be
glad, but the expectation of the wicked shall perish; as who should say, though
the waves be great, and the storms violent, yet the anchor shall be fast, and
the ship shall come safe to haven; but it is otherwise with the wicked, their
hopes do perish. What is become of your hopes now? you thought you should be
saved, and that you should do as well as others; but when the day of judgment
comes, and the last great day of account shall be, what then shall become of
all your hopes? You shall see, it is as if a man should plead for a man's
inheritance, because he did dwell in the same town, and were of the same name.
But now the Saints of God, when they come to lay claim to mercy, they bring a
hold, a word, Isay 61.3. He appoints them that mourn in Sion: will you have
a legacy of joy, mercy, and pity? here it is, the Lord Christ left it you, I
bequeath this and leave it to all you broken hearted sinners, to all you humble
mourning sinners in Sion: this is your legacy, sue for it in the Court, and you
shall have it for ever. Hence David ventureth all for this hope, he takes
this as a child's part, Psalm. 33. the last verse; Let thy mercy come unto us, as
our hope is in thee, not according to our sense and assurance, but according to
our hope; thy desires may fail, and endeavors fail, and the means fail, yet
let thy mercy come unto me according to my hope.

truth of the promise: the Spirit you know, we showed, stirs the heart to
hope: now he turns hope so to God, that the eye of the soul goes that way
and cannot be taken from it, but it will go promise-ward, and Godward. Hence
take a poor sinner, when he is at the weakest under water; when all
temptations, oppositions, corruptions, grow strong against them, the Lord
lets them loose against the soul, nay lets the poor soul come to join
side with Satan against himself, and the goodness of the Lord; and he says,
the truth of it is, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul: this proud
foolish filthy heart of mine, it will be my bane; it had better for me never to
have been, I shall never get power, strength and grace against these sins;
here is the lowest under of a poor soul. If a man should now reply, why then
cast off all hope and confidence, reject the means, and turn to your sins;
Mark how hope steppeth in and says, it is true, what ever I am and do, what
ever my condition is, I will use the means, I am sure all my help is in
Christ, all my hope is in the Lord Jesus, and if I must perish, I will perish
seeking him, and waiting upon him. Why, this is hope now, and I warrant that
soul shall never go to hell. Psalm. 119.81. My heart fainted, and my hope was
in thy salvation: Isay 8.7. I will wait for the Lord, who has hid himself
from the house of Jacob: the Lord hides himself, he does not show himself,
he has not manifested himself, yet I will hope in the Lord, that hides his
face: Psalm. 69.3. But the hope of the wicked is not so: 2 King. 6. and the last
verse, this evil comes of the Lord, and why should I wait any longer? Prove.
14.32. The hope of the wicked is driven away; that though a man stood upon his
bottom, and all the world could not persuade him to the contrary, but that he
should be saved, and he should go to heaven, though proud still, though vain
still, but his hope shall be driven away, but the righteous shall have hope in
his death: friends fail, life fail, and wealth fail, but yet he has hope in
his death.

old profits, the old contents, the old delights that he had; Heb. 11.13. All
these died in the faith, when they had saluted the promises. And observe here a
carnal hearted Hypocrite, his hopes be vain, idle and uncertain; the truth
is, if the world gives other hopes of honor, and profits, and delights, he
leaves his hope, and with Demas he embraces the present world; but the Saints
of God are not so, Heb. 11.25. Moses might have had great honor, but he
forsook his honor, and had an eye to the recompense of reward.

Psalm. 16.9. My flesh shall rest in hope, that is, hope will give a man rest in
the most miserable forlorn condition that may be, that when the heart is ready
to say, where is the means that I have had, and the good days that I have
seen? this dead heart cannot be quickened, I am as dead as the room where I
am, and the bed where I lie; why, hope will give a man rest in this condition,
my flesh shall rest in hope. Look as in the sea when the storms arise, and
the billows beat, and the tempests rage, then a little hope, yet the anchor
holds; so though the mast, the sail, and all sink, yet the anchor holds;
nay when all give themselves for lost, despair of all help, yet the anckor
holds; and here is the excellency of an anckor in this particular, that when
a man has nothing to sustain him, yet comes in this grace of hope, yet it
may be better, and it will be otherwise, this upholdeth when nothing else can;
it is not, but yet hope says, it will be, therefore cheer up that fainting
soul of thine, that love God will enlarge, that desire God will quicken, that
fearful heart God will establish, that dead heart God will quicken; thus the
anckor holds still from day to day, hence hope is said to be the nurse of the
soul, it nourishes faith, and it feeds faith, hope fetches the promise
from far, Lord thou have said it, and therefore it cannot but be: I beseech
you observe, look as it is with a man that cannot see a thing a far off, yet
with a prospective glass he may see it, so here, how ever eye cannot see it,
the heart cannot feel it, yet hope waits still, expects still, as a man in
a sounding fit, he cannot see and hear, yet there is some life in the heart,
and that brings him again, so when a man's heart would fail, and he is
overwhelmed with sorrow and despair, then yet the pulse of hope beats still,
there is this life of hope left still in the heart of a Christian; but it is
not so with the wicked, their hopes are not like the hopes of Gods servants. It
is a fine place, Job 11. last verse, The hope of the wicked is like the giving
up of the ghost, that though a man can lift up his head full high, and think
he shall be saved and go to heaven, though he carries a base wrethed heart
about with him: No, no, when the Lord shall come to lay thee upon thy
deathbed, let us then see your hope, if your hope can now keep life and soul
together, if it can cheer, comfort, and refresh you, let it, nay if all the
Ministers under heaven, and all the Angels in heaven, should come and reveal
the promises; why, a man will then tell you, Alas! I am a wretch, I never did
any thing, never had any thing, but that which cursed carnal Hypocrites have
had: I have prayed, and Judas prayed, and he is in hell, and so may I be too,
for ought I know: why, but the Minister replieth, comfort up your own heart,
cheer up your own soul in expectation of some favor from God, why? alas!
says the soul, there is no comfort for me: why? but says a man, there is
mercy in Christ, it is true there is mercy, but alas I have resisted mercy,
I have despised the offer of grace, therefore there is no hope, he was
graceless here, and he shall be damned for ever, he was stubborn here, and he
shall be for ever miserable hereafter: Look as a tree that is falling, there
are some strong sprigs in the root, and that bears it up, and it brings
sometimes a great deal of fruit, so it is here, though desire, endeavor be
dead unto the word and ordinances, yet there is a sprig of hope, and that
supporteth the soul, and the soul says unto the Lord, thou have said, the
broken hearted sinner shall have mercy, I am so, I am weary and heavy laden,
therefore refresh me, I have a dead heart, Lord, but weary of it, Lord, a
profane heart, but weary of it, Lord.

Exhortat.
let every one labor for this hope, Heb. 11.6. there says the Apostle, I
would desire you to give the same diligence to the full assurance of hope; I
desire you, I entreat you, I will not say I command you, though this may be
enjoined: if you have any hope in heaven, if you have any treasure in Christ,
labor to quicken this affection above all: here I am to show the motives and
the means.

Corin. 9.10. That he that ploweth may plow in hope, brethren, all our actions
must have hope go along with them, the man must pray in hope, preach in hope,
and hear in hope; what ever thou have, hope still, that God may bless it;
what ever thou do, hope that God will assist thee in it: when a man
preaches, he must preach in hope, though he does not do good now this day,
nor next day, yet hope what the Lord may do, yet hope what the Lord will do,
so in the time of our pilgrimage here we cannot live without this hope, so in
coming to the word of God, thou come one day, and yet the word of profits
not, thou come the second day, and yet the word prevails not, thou come
the third time, yet the word humbles not; come still, hope still, the Lord may
be pleased at last to set home some word, that may humble thy heart, and
quicken thy soul, and subdue thy corruptions.

Thessal. 5.8. I beseech you observe it, the Devil fights at the head
continually, which is the hope of salvation, the assurance of Gods love, this
is the head-peece of a Christian, if once this be gone, the soul is gone, and
a man's heart sinketh within him, Satan intends most harm this way, and
therefore we should be most careful to bestow the more pains for our help
in this particular: take a poor sinner, cut off his hope, and you cut off his
head, if a man's arms were gone, he might live, if a man want a leg, he might
still continue, but if his head-peece be gone, all is gone; a Christian may
want many inlargements, many comforts, many abilities, but if his head-peece be
gone, if his hope be cut off, alas! he has nothing to support and sustain
himself in the time of trouble.

Jude 21. Keep your selves in the love of God, expecting the mercy of God;
now this is nothing but the work of hope, and brethren, this is a rule,
unless we expect some mercy from God, we will never look after him, we will
never obey him, never walk with him, but when we expect some good thing
coming unto us, then we love him and follow after him: but some might here
say, it is true, we doubt not of the comfort and benefit that comes by it,
but what means are there that might help a man to hope in the goodness of
God, how shall a man uphold his soul in some measure in expecting mercy from
the Lord? Answ. The means are three.

office: Romans 8.24. You are saved through hope, and hope that is seen is no
hope; a man does not hope for a thing that he has, but hope always expects a
good that is to come; this is the mavelous sottish distemper of our wretched
hearts, that we will trust God no further than we see him: Acts 1.9. will thou now restore the kingdom to Israel, just now; so here, says the soul,
may I now have grace, may I now have assurance, may I now have the evidence of
Gods love? but I would have it now, where now is hope all this while? you take
away the work of hope, when you would have things present: we know the child
must wait for his portion before he has it, so you must stay your time, and
be contented with the dealing of the Lord toward you in this kind.

Romans 15.4. What ever was written was for our comfort, that through the
Scripture we might hope. Verse 13. That we might abound in hope through the
Gospel; as who should say, it is not in your power to support your hope, it is
not in any power here below, but through the Scripture; ye might have hope,
and through the power of the holy Ghost: brethren, I beseech you observe it,
while we look upon our own infirmities on one side, and the feebleness of
the means on the other side, this is the next way to dampe our hope, to dead
our hearts, and to take away all our comfort and assurance; this is not the way
to abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost; I beseech you observe
it, all these things here below cannot give any comfort, a man may as soon
wring oil or water out of a flint, as wring comfort out of these means. In
all these outward things there is no sound comfort or hope, there be these
three things, either we shall not find comfort or contentment in them, or
else not sufficient content, or else no constant, no continual content. It is
with the hope of a poor Christian, as with Noah's dove, she found no rest upon
the earth for the sole of her foot; so it is with our wretched hearts, we send
out our hope to our abilities, to the means we do enjoy, to our prayers and
performances we do discharge, and thus all our hopes break and fail us, for
in all these things there is no foot-hold for hope; we must ancker our
foot-hold in Christ, what I want Christ can supply, what I need Christ can
give, what is good for me Christ can bestow, what I have done amiss Christ can
pardon; though I barren, he is full, though I dull, he has enough grace and
enlargement for me; it is said of Naamans leprosy, Let him come, and he shall
know there is a God in Israel; though the King cannot heal, yet a God can;
though the means cannot, yet the Lord can; so it is here, the hope that a man
has in these things here below, and the hope in the Gospel: A man sends out
his hope, having a wounded conscience, he now goes to his gifts, that they
should pacify him, he sends out his hope to his prayers, that they should
ease him; mark what they say, are we God, we cannot help; but hear what the
promise says, though prayers cannot, though parts cannot, though outward help
cannot, yet there is a God in Israel, there is a promise that is able, here is
mercy enough, here is power and comfort enough.

Paul cutteth him short, what if God will? so when thou think the time long,
when Lord, and how long Lord, what if God will? he owes thee nothing, thou
deservest nothing, what if God will damn thee, and will send thee to hell? it
is a most admirable strange thing, that a poor worm worthy of hell should
take up state, and stand upon terms with God, and he will not wait upon God,
who must wait then? must God wait, or man wait? must the Creator wait, or the
creature wait? Acts 1.9. will thou now restore the kingdom to Israel, it is
not for you to know the times and the seasons; as who should say, hands off,
meddle with that you have to do withal, it is for you to wait, it is for you
to expect mercy, it is not for you to know: so I would have you to do, when
you begin to wrangle and to say, how long Lord, when Lord, and why not now
Lord, and why not I Lord? why? check thy own heart and say, it is not for me
to know, it is for me to be humble, and to be abased, and to wait for mercy,
but it is not for me to know the time.

Thus much concerning Hope:
Now follows next Desire.
headpiece
JOHN 6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto
me, etc.


IN this great work of vocation, there are two things considerable: First, the
call on Gods part by the preaching of the Gospel; Secondly, the gracious
answer to Gods call. Now as all the soul departed from God, so it must be all
brought back again to God. Therefore, first the understanding is enlightened,
and that gives notice to the soul that mercy is intended toward it; then hope
expects that mercy, and then desire wanders about from ordinance to ordinance,
and longs for that mercy.

The Spirit of the Lord quickens the desire of an humble and enlightened sinner,
to long for the riches of his mercy in Christ.

For the right conceiving of this Doctrine, three passages are to be understood:

desire is in the heart humbled and enlightened: if either of these two be
wanting, this desire cannot grow there.

desire is quickened by the Spirit; for though the soul be humbled and made
nothing, and be content to be at Gods disposal; yet it is not able through any
principle of life which it has of it self to be carried to any such
supernatural work as this desire is: therefore the Spirit must quicken and
move the heart thus humbled and enlightened to long for the riches of Gods
mercy, and this desire is called the lifting up of the heart after the good it
wants. As the Infant cannot go without the hand of the Father, so a poor
sinner (in himself considered) is as an Infant, and not able to lift up
himself to this desire any further than the Lord inables him by his grace and
spirit. The bowl is fit to run, yet it can run no longer than the strength
of the hand sticks upon it: So the humble in lightened soul is fit to come to
Christ, yet it will not, nay it cannot stir further than the hand of the Spirit
moves it. Note.
Let every poor broken hearted sinner take notice of it, for this will inform
you of a strange kind of truth, remember this, you must not think to bring
desire with you to the promise, but receive desire from the promise: It is a
vain thing to think that if the oars be in the boat, the boat must needs
go; indeed the oar will move the boat, but the hand of the Ferri-man must
first move the oar: The soul is like the oar, and unless the hand of the
Spirit moves our desire, it cannot move toward the Lord.

long for the riches of Gods mercy; the desires of the wicked are flashy, lazy
and feeble, and come to nothing. But even as the longing desire of a woman with
child will not leave her till her life does leave her, so the desires which
the promise works will never leave the soul till it be possessed of the thing
it desires. Our Savior says, Matthew. 12.20.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and that smoking flax shall he not
quench. Now we all know that flax will not smoke, unless the sparkles come
to it; but when the sparkles have taken the flax, then it does smoke, and will
not leave till it come to a flame. The soul is like the flax, and it will
never smoke in desire toward the Lord, till the Lord by his Spirit in the
promise does strike fire upon it: the Lord must first strike fire by the
promise upon the soul, before it can ever flame in a desire toward the Lord;
and when it does once smoke in a holy desire, the Lord will not let it fail
before he brings it to a perfect flame, and before it be possessed of Christ
and mercy which it longs for.

will, for these affections are as handmaids to serve the will. The will
says, I will have this or that good, and therefore hope wait you for it, and
desire, long you after it: Hope is the furthest and greatest reach of the
soul; for when the soul is doubting and quarrelling, and says, will the Lord
do good to such an unworthy wretch as I am: yes says the mind enlightened,
mercy is intended toward thee, then hope goes out to wait and look for this
mercy. Now when the soul has waited a long time, and yet this mercy comes
not, and he marvels at it and says, the Lord has said the weary soul shall
be refreshed: Oh where are all those precious promises? then the will sends
out desire to meet with that good which will not yet come, and so desire goes
wandering from one ordinance to another, till it bring Christ home to the soul.
As a gentleman does when he expects some noble personage, he sends out a man
to wait in such a place, and bring him word whether he sees him or no:
afterward when he returns and says he sees him not, the gentleman sends out
another messenger to meet him afar off, and so likewise to bring him and give
him entertainment: So it is with the soul of a poor sinner in this case.





Esaias 61.1.2. Art thou a dead soul? go to the promise, there is quickening for
thee. Art thou a weak soul? go to the promise, there is grace to make thee
strong. Art thou a damned lost soul? go to the promise, there is salvation to
save thee. Art thou a polluted soul? go to the promise, there is grace to
purge thee. Do you see your sins, and feel the burden of them? Oh away to
the promise, there is abundance of comfort in the Lord Jesus Christ: therefore
let desire be going and seeking up and down, and never return till it bring
the Lord Jesus to me to the soul.

Prayer, the Word, Conference are very good, and thou have had an old cankered
soul, and a wayward peevish spirit, and these sinful lusts stick upon thee,
and are still vexing of thee, and these are not quite purged out: Oh, says the
soul, these old recourses of base corruptions are ever dogging of me. Now if
any bid this poor soul pray, and hear, and use the means; yes, says he,
these are useful and good; but I may pray, and hear, and receive the
Sacraments, and yet go down to hell for all these: But oh that free grace of
God in Christ, that would bless all these means, and make all effectual to
me for my good. Oh that I had this grace above all the rest, Cant. 5.8, 9, 10,
11. Ioh. 6.34.

never to have known the excellency of the good in the promises, than not to
partake thereof; and the very consideration of this, that he has had some
hope of receiving the good in the promise, makes him say, why not I? why not my
sins pardoned? and why not my corruptions subdued? What, shall all my
expectations be void? What a fine pluck had I once for heaven? Shall I see
heaven, and never come there? this makes him mavelous sensible of his misery,
and mavelous watchful in the use of the means to recover himself again.

the sluggard desires meat and has it not; I am afraid all is naught: Why,
leave thou thy desire with God, and the time also, and be not weary of
desiring, and then thou shall enjoy the benefit of it if thou faint not; do
thou what thou should, and let the Lord do what he will.



Esaias 44 3. I will power clean wa^er upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground: thou have many and great wants, and much misery lies upon thee;
therefore God will not only drop a little comfort into thy heart, but he will
pour it in; and if a little mercy will not serve thy turn, then he will pour
floods of mercy upon thee.





endeavor will be; if thou desire earnestly, thou will work accordingly. Now
the labor that makes known the soundness of desire, discovers it self in
four particulars. First, he that labors from a longing desire, is content to
use all means which are revealed and made known to him, because he knows
not which will speed. Secondly, he is careful of improving all opportunities
in the use of the means. Thirdly, he will hold out in the use of those
means, his wants and desires are constant, and therefore his endeavors must
needs be so too: as Lament. 3.49. These three former will discover many
hypocrites, Trial of sound desires.
though most do not come thus far: but a terrified hypocrite, and a heart
that has been awed, may do all these, and yet be naught too. But there is
another trial of sound desires which will justle any Hypocrite under Heaven to
the wall, and that is this: Though the poor sinner uses all means, and takes
all opportunities in the use of those means, and is constant in the use of
them, etc. yet the soul that is truly desirous of grace and mercy rests not in
those labors; Alas, says he, I labor and use the means, but what is that to
me if I have no Christ and no grace, which I pray and hear for; the soul must
have Christ, and mercy, and grace, which it desires, or else it will not be
satisfied: a man hung up in chains, cries only for bread: so it is with a
poor famisht soul, he desires nothing but Christ, and nothing else will
satisfy him: this last sign none but a true sincere soul can have.



with his gold. So an hypocrite may be content to hazard riches and honor,
and all for his profession, because he thinks to gain more credit by that
hazard, but it is not for Christ himself. But a gracious good heart will part
with all for Christ, How to know whether we desire Christ for himself or not.
and he will not part with Christ for all the good in the world, only he that
desires Christ for himself, is content to take him upon the hardest conditions
in the world: if Christ comes, let what will be come besides, he is not like
those Jews, Mark 15.32.
that would have had Christ and his cross severed, there is no such Christ to
be had in the world.

Secondly, the soul that desires Christ for himself is careful to avoid all
those inconveniences that may hinder him from Christ, as Zacheus did, Luke 9.
this is the second thing.



reproof, which falls heavy: if this be so, that the Lord breeds a through and
sound desire in the hearts of those he intends good unto (not a flashy desire,
but) like the desire of a longing woman that must have her longing, or else she
dies, so an humble soul must have a Savior or else he dies, for what she said
in regard of children, the humbled soul that has a true desire after Christ
says the same, Give me a Savior or else I die. This then is a bill of
indictment against a world of men that lift their hands full high, and think
their penny good silver, and are termed professors; if a man be baptized and
comes to Church, this is that which upholds him in the time of trouble and time
of extremity, he desires to be holy, and he desires to please God. If the
Minister reproves him, and tells him his life is naught, and his conversation
wicked; You grace? no, no, you cannot have grace here, nor salvation hereafter
upon these terms, your speeches are unsavory, your life is unprofitable and
unfruitful, never think to have any grace if you thus continue: He then
confesses he has many weaknesses, and he cannot talk as he would, and words
will come sometimes from him before he is aware, but his desire is to please
the Lord, and his desire is to be holy, and this is the business that brings
most men into a quiet kind of calm, and so they go hudwinkt down to hell.
But what if I now prove that you never had a desire, I mean a true sound
serious desire; what then? will you then give up the buckler, and yield the
day, and say, If this be so, then (good Lord) I am in a miserable condition?
let your hearts be persuaded and yield to the point, are you come to the
conclusion? if it shall appear by the word and sound arguments, that you have
no true desire, then you will yield you are resolved of it, that this true
desire never as yet came into your hearts.

Now these men that never had any sound desires, I will refer to three
ranks: Unsound desires discovered.
the lazy hypocrite, the stage hypocrite, and the terrified hypocrite: All
these it shall appear there was never any true desire in their souls.

out as one that was never partaker of this sound desire, for he that endeavors
nor desires not, his desires are flashy, and his labor is answerable, it was
so in Balaam, it was hammered in Balaams forge; Oh, says he, that I may dye
the death of the righteous: but wishings and wouldings keep no house (as we
use to say) this was just Balaams fashion, Oh that I might dye the death of the
righteous! but yet he would not set one foot forward to walk with care and
conscience before God: these desires are bred in the brain and understanding
of a man out of some terrifyings of conscience, because knowledge says, a man
should do so, therefore he thinks he does so, but this is not desiring, it is
lying and dissembling; I beseech you be your own Judges, you that are masters
of servants, will you say that servant desires the furtherance of your estate,
when he will not set his hand to do your work; will you say, that messenger
desires to do your message faithfully, that will not stir one step forward?
you are so wise you will not be cozened after this fashion, you will not be
thus deluded: the master says, if you desire my furtherance, why do you not
labor then? and if you desire to do my message faithfully, why do you not
go about it then? O suffer not your selves to be deluded and cozened in those
things which concern your everlasting comfort, it is no true desire when a man
will not labor in the use of the means God has appointed, it is a delusion
that will cozen you, not a desire that will help you at the great day of
accounts; would any have a harvest and yet neither plough nor sow? this is the
practice of many in this point of desire, they think they desire Christ, and
grace, and mercy, and yet never endeavor after it: It is observable, Prove.
13.14.
the sluggard desires and has nothing, he desires meat, and yet he starves;
he desires clothes, and yet is not covered; he desires riches, and yet dies a
beggar; his desire never accomplisheth any thing, he could be content to have
this and that, but he will do nothing for it, therefore he has nothing, this
is the picture of a lazy professor, he desires mercy, and he desires that God
would pardon his sins, and he desires that God would give him grace against
his corruptions, but alas! the desire of the slothful is all in talking, and
because he does nothing, therefore he has nothing at the time of his death,
and day of his departure, he has neither mercy, nor favor, nor grace, nor
assurance, but perishes everlastingly: hence it is that the Lord deals with
the sluggard answerable to his desire: The desire of the sluggard kills him,
Prove. 21.25.
says the text, because he cannot get his hands to labor: some Interpreters,
holy, and judicious, do mavelous fitly express a sluggard by this place of
Scripture; it is not said, because he cannot get his heart to labor, but
because he cannot get his hands to labor; as if he should say, it is good for
a man to labor, it is good to hear and pray, but I cannot get my hands to it:
the sluggard says, prayer in his family is good and commendable, and the Lord
requires it, but thy tongue will not speak, his knees will not buckle, the
fault is not in thy tongue and knees, but in thy heart, therefore the text
says, his desire will kill him, and that will be his bane, for when the
sluggard shall think he has desired grace, and mercy, and pardon, and
salvation, and shall miss of that he thought he truly desired, when he lies
on his deathbed, and sees that his desire vanishes and comes to nothing,
this will slay him, because his labor was not answerable, his desire was not
profitable, his labor was nothing, therefore his desire brought him nothing.
These lazy professors you would think there were but few of them in the
world, but these lazy droanes swarm every where, and are the very
plague-sores of our families and towns, they could be content to be as they
ought, and do as they should, but they never labor to do that which God
requires, therefore let me enter into some particulars, and I will rank these
lazy hypocrites into four forms, that every one may see of which sort he is.

4 Sorts of lazy Hypocrites.
The first sort are those, who when they enjoy the means of salvation
mavelous profitable and plentiful, when wisdom has killed her fat things,
and refined her wines, and furnished her tables, every one may come and eat of
my meat, and drink of my wine, now these lazy professors esteem not,
receive not any benefit by these blessings which God offers, and wisdom
tenders to them, but complain of too much bread, and too much wine, and too
much manna, they will not take that mercy which is offered; a Minister cannot
force a power of grace upon their souls, or any of Gods precious promises upon
their hearts, these are lazy droanes indeed. Does that man desire a commodity
that will beat the Carrier that brings it to him, and cast it away from him?
No, all the world will say he prized it not, he desired it not, otherwise he
would have received it gladly, and given much money for it too. If a soul were
hunger-starved, would he not receive bread if it were offered him, or would he
not call the man to him that sold bread, and buy it of him to supply his wants
with the soonest, and say, let me be served first: So had these professors any
longing desire after the precious means of grace and salvation, when mercy
and salvation has been set upon the stall, and the Lord cries, Ho, every one
that will, let him take of the well of the water of life, and live for ever
freely; and, Ho, every one that thirsts, let him come and buy wine and milk
without money: nay, many a poor Minister would feign leave his commodity
behind him, and says, You must have it, and shall have it, and I will give
you the buying of it; we are feign to force Gods favors upon the soul, we
beseech you to believe, and we entreat you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake to
receive mercy, and humble your souls, we would force Gods favors upon your
hearts: But will any man take these favors now? No, beloved, these lazy
hypocrites will not prize this grace, they will not receive this mercy; many
sweet promises, and many admirable precious things of grace and salvation are
revealed, but they neither pass nor care to receive any benefit thereby; this
argues that such men have no true desire after Christ Jesus, For a poor
hungry sinner that is apprehensive of his own weakness and feebleness, he
longs; when will the feast day be? and when will the Lords day come? And when
he comes into the congregation to hear the word, how carefully will he
listen? and how diligently will he attend? and if the word comes home to his
conscience, or if he receive not comfort, he cries out, Oh when will the dish
come to the end of the table; I am full of doubts, good Lord resolve me; I am
in trouble, good Lord comfort me; I have a proud stout stubborn heart, good
Lord humble me: thus the hungry soul longs after these means of salvation,
and is willing to receive benefit by them, and a longing heart is at best ease
when the word works most: Note.
But a lazy Hypocrite is at best ease when the word works least upon him. And
therefore when he thinks the Minister will come to his soul, he will not be
at home that day, he will be sure to be out of town, he knows the Word would
have awakened him and affrighted him, and he cannot bear the blow; therefore
he keeps away, and shunnes the hearing of Gods Word which would awaken and
humble him.

not greatly care, and if they want one, they are not greatly troubled, but
they fit and are blind, and never saw any need of a Savior. All they can say
is this (in a good mood) they marvellously extol the goodness of God to such
a place, and say; Oh the Gospel is a precious Jewel, but they will not go
out a mile or two to receive that mercy they do so commend and want. I beseech
you observe it: the child that is almost famished, goes first to his father
because he hopes he will provide for him; but if the father be careless and
will not provide for him, he will either beg, or buy, or borrow; starve he
will not. So it is with the poor people of God, when they are famished for the
bread of life, they repair to their own Minister, (and they ought to do so,)
and they should comfort and encourage them in the way of well doing in the
preaching of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. It is said, Amos 8.11.
God will send a famine not of bread, but a famine of the word, and they shall
go from one sea to another, from one coast to another, and seek bread, but
shall find none, how far will men go to seek out bread in times of famine,
rather than they will starve; then they will find their hands and legs, and go
though it be never so far for comfort: So it will be with thy soul, if thou
have a sound desire after the Word of God, were it so as it is sometimes in
time of drought, that a company of cattle for want of water were like to be
spoiled, will not a man drive them a mile or two to water, that they may be
refreshed? Go thou then down into thine own conscience, and condemn thy
own soul: had thou as much care for the good of thy soul, as thou have for
the good of thy cattle, thou would go as far to hear the Word preached,
that thy soul might receive comfort and refreshment thereby. When the famine
was sore in the Land of Canaan, Jacob did not say to his sons, let us fit
still here till the Egyptians send us food, but, get you up thither, and buy
some, that we may live and not die. That which was in Jacob would be in thy
soul, if thou had a sincere desire after the riches of Gods mercy in Jesus
Christ.

professor, and yet be a secret drunkard. First, he sees his evil and
confesses it to God, and prays against it in the morning; yet he will
venture into that company, and seek after those occasions, whereby he may be
brought to commit the same sin again: And he says, alas, it is my fault,
and it is my infirmity; my desire is to abandon it, but all flesh is frail,
and alas, what would you have me do? I pray against it, it is not I but sin;
and therefore if I be overtaken and drawn aside with it, pity is to be
tendered, and you must pardon me; thus he heals himself. No, no, let such men
take notice of this: It was not a true desire as wrought in thee, it was only
a deceit. Is that man desirous to keep his money, that will go into such company
as he is sure will cousen him of it, or go in that way where he is sure to
meet with thieves that will rob him? No, experience teaches us how tender men
are to go in such company, or to travel that way where they may be assaulted.
So I say of these, had the Lord ever wrought effectually upon thy soul, and
had thy heart been enlarged with desire after the mercy which God offers, when
thou had good exhortations, admonitions, and many sweet promises made known
unto thee, thou would not go amongst thieves and robbers that should deprive
thee of the comfort which thy soul has received from the Word.

temptation surprising him, or occasion prevailing: But when a man is informed
and convinced in his conscience that he ought to do what the Word requires,
and yet will not set upon it, but carelessly neglect the same; this argues his
soul was never quickened with any sound desire after the thing, because he
would not labor for the thing he desired. He that is desirous to speak with
a man, is not content to go to one place only and ask for him, but he will
seek from place to place, from man to man, and never rest till he finds him.
So it is with a heart that is soundly desirous after grace: it will not only
take up some duty which God requires, but if there be any service which the
Word reveals, or any duty the Lord commands, he will take it up, and as he
is able set upon the duty. Sometimes a man may neglect a duty he knows not
of, but if he be informed and convinced thereof, he cannot but set about it,
if he desires to gain good thereby. Therefore if any man has wronged any by
false dealing, theeving, or pilfering; the servant, the master; the child, the
father, the chapman, the buyer, etc. let that soul know it is his duty, and
God requires it if ever he will have peace of conscience, and the evidence of
Gods love made known to him in the pardon of his sins, that he must make
restitution. We see Zacheus when God had opened his eyes, and given him a
through desire to come home and receive Christ, made an open proclamation; If I
have wronged any man, Luke 19.8.
let him come, and I will restore him fourefold. If there be any that I have
cozened by my false weights, and fair pretenses: If I have wronged any man,
not of four pounds, but of forty, a hundred pounds; not some man, but any man,
I will restore, etc. Beloved, this is a duty which God requires of every soul;
and this is a way whereby thou may get some comfort to thy self, if thou
art content to renounce thy sins, and receive mercy in the pardon of them. If
therefore any here present shall go away and hide his stolen waters, and be
loath to restore that which he has gotten by his cheating and false dealing,
but says his estate will be impoverished, and he shall be cast behind hand;
and what will the world say, I shall quite be shamed for ever: Why, if thou
be afraid of shame, deliver thy money into the hand of some honest and
faithful Minister, and let him make up the matter privately. But what, do
thou tell me of poverty? thou had better be cast behind hand, than be cast
into hell. Do thou desire grace and mercy? Hearken what the Lord says, this
duty must be performed, if ever thou receive mercy, set upon that duty then,
or else thou shall never get pardon of thy sins. So now we may see by these
particulars, that the world even swarms with lazy Hypocrites, and that there
is but little sound desire after grace. How many have the means and will not
use them? How many want the means, and will not seek out for them? How many
seek out for the means, but yet are not careful to avoid those hindrances
which may hinder them from receiving benefit by Gods Ordinances? How many are
informed and convinced of many duties, that ought to be done, and yet will not
set upon the performance of them? What can any one say against this truth?
Prove. 14.27.
Solomon says, in all labor there is abundance, but the talking of the lips
tends to penury: So say I, in all sound labor and sincere endeavor there is
profit; If thou endevourest truly after Christ, and if thou do labor after
grace in the use of all means constantly and unweariedly, there is a great
deal of benefit to be gained thereby; but all thy talking and wishing tends to
penury, it will be thy bane in the end. This is the first sort of those that
have not a sound desire, which I term lazy Hypocrites.

Ahab acted the part of fasting; for he humbled himself and put on sackcloth,
etc. Now there is the same difference betwixt a Stage Hypocrite, and a true
sincere professor, as is between a chapman that buys for gain, and a
chapman that buys for necessity: He that buys for gain, will have his
pennyworth, or else he will none of the commodity; he will have it worth his
money, or else leave it: But a poor famished soul and hunger-bitten creature,
that buys for mere necessity, must have it and will have it what ever he
wants beside: he stands not upon Ifs, and Ands, but give me grace and take
all; he cares for nothing else. Now of these Stage Hypocrites, I will set
down two sorts, because I desire to lay them naked.

Gospel, because it is a matter of credit, and great men cannot countenance
the Gospel so much as the Gospel credits them: but if thou will not be
content to be ruled by the same, thou art an adulterous professor, thou never
did desire Christ for himself, but for thy own aims and ends, only to make
a booty of Christ; but now a good heart, a gracious soul, that has this
desire, set on by the Spirit powerfully and effectually, will be content to
have all Christ, and nothing but him in every thing he enjoyes. A covetous man
desires wealth, and would he have but a little? no, he cries, more, more, and
has never enough: the ambitious man desires honor, and is never satisfied. So
he that longs for the Lord Jesus, will have all Christ, and every thing in
Christ, and Christ in every thing; he will have a Savior what ever he wants
besides. A child that longs for the meat on the table, when his father gives
him a piece, he eats it; his father cuts him another, he eats that too; then
his father bids him go down; no, but more of that, father, he still begs more
of that, and is never content. So it is with a soul that desires grace for
grace sake, and Christ for Christ's sake, he cries still, more of that grace,
and more of that Christ. If Christ comes to reprove him, he takes that; if
Christ comes to condemn him, well-come; if Christ come to reform his sins,
he rejoices, and would have more of that still; Oh more mercy, and oh more
grace, and more holiness, he can never be contented, he can never be glutted
with that.

Peter's folly, but it was in a temptation, when the damsel said, Thou also
were with Jesus of Galilee; he answered, I know not the man; he knew not that
Christ that was now in trouble. So when the Gospel comes to require suffering,
and contempt, and disgrace, we know not the Gospel, we have another Christ,
and another Gospel then. Carnal men deal with Christ, as Achish King of Gath
did with David, when he had remained some years with him. Achish was to go
to battle, and David was desirous to go with him, but the Princes were
against it, and Achish said, thou art upright, I have seen no evil in thee,
but only the Princes do not favor thee, and therefore David must not go.
This is the guise of this base, rotten, and sinful age of the world, they say
this and that holy course is commendable, and honorable, but they fear ill
times, and they are out of date, and so leave it where they found it; therefore
urge your great men with strictness, and they reply presently, what will the
world say then, and what will the world think then? here is their religion: It
is no matter what the world says, I will tell thee what God and the Word
says, thou that art a stage professor, a mere outside Christian, the Lord
never yet wrought any sound desire after grace in thy heart to this day; of
this sort were those we read of, that believed in our Savior, John 12 47.
but durst not profess him by no means, they wished things were better, but
because things are as they are, they will do as the times do: the text says,
They loved the praise of men more than the praise of God: so it is with these
men, they wear such and such fashions, because Gentlemen wear the same. I
tell you, you love the guise and applause of the world more than the mercy and
promises of God in Christ. It is that which is also observable in the young
man, he held out till Christ came to this, to sell all. So also in the other,
Matthew. 18. that professes to our Savior, I will go with thee whither so ever
thou go; Will thou, says Christ? but thou must know upon what terms then,
Matthew. 18.
The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of
man has not where to lay his head; if thou follow me, says Christ, thou must
have poverty, and shame, and disgrace, therefore thou had best look before
thou leap: away went he when he heard this, we never heard of him more. So
these men say, the profession of the Gospel is good and commendable, but when
we come once to selling all, then they are gone, they will not meddle with it.
Now had a man a longing desire indeed, he would not delay and demurre the time,
nor pass what men say or think, but he says, let me have what I need, and
let men say what they will; I pass not what the world esteems of me, let me
have that mercy I need, and that grace I want, let me have Christ, and let men
speak their pleasure. We have done now with the two first sort of hypocrites,
which discover, they never had this true longing desire wrought in their
hearts. I come now to the last.

guilt of sin is unsupportable, so it is admirable to observe what a man will
do to be rid of it: and the passages of a terrified hypocrite discover
themselves in two particulars:

Signs of a terrified Hypocrite.
First, he will be lingering and hankering after some corruption, he will be
playing with edged tools with the fly about the candle, and will venture
far upon those occasions that may draw him into sin; as a drunkard will be
content to be called into an alehouse, that he may have occasion to tipple;
but a gracious heart though he loathes all sin, yet he loathes that most
which he has most loved; as an adulterer flies from all loose thoughts, as
from a Devil, as from hell, and from all occasions that may give way thereunto.



now, and they care for no more, they have gotten their ease and quiet now, and
as for Christ, and grace, and holiness, they care no more for them, because
they have no more use of them: Nay, to go further (observe it) this poor
creature may in his own sense and feeling apprehend and think, that he does
renounce all sin truly, and that he puts the highest esteem and greatest
account upon the Lord Jesus Christ above all things in the world; if he look
into his own apprehension, he may think he does thus, and yet the union and
league between sin and his soul was never broken, all this may be in sense
and feeling, and an honest Minister, if he be not very wise in charity, will
judge so, as shall appear by this instance: Take water seething hot, though in
nature it is the coldest of all elements, yet while it continues on the fire,
it grows so hot, that a man shall feel no cold at all in it, but yet there is
a principle of cold remaining in it (as the Philosopher conceives) for pluck
the fire from the water, or the water from the fire, and it will return to
coldness again, and freeze the sooner, because when it is taken from the
fire, it beats out the heat with the more violence: Now the reason why the cold
was there, and yet not perceived, was, because the fierceness of the heat did
over-master it, and made it retire, and not express it self in outward
appearance. So it is with this terrified hypocrite in these pangs of
extremity, and horrors of conscience, when the soul is possessed with the
fierce indignation of the Almighty, when the flashes of everlasting vengeance
seize upon the heart of a sinner; this takes off the pleasure, delight and
content, which the heart had in sin: though the soul love it, and the heart
embrace it, and the spirit close with it, yet he can find and feel in his own
apprehension no pleasure at all in sin, nor no sweetness in his lusts, by
reason of the domineering vengeance of the Lord, which takes off all the
pleasantness that was in it before. And therefore the adulterer that has his
dalliances every morning, if God let the flames of his vengeance once into his
soul, as he has flamed in lust, all his sweetness and delight in sin will
vanish away in his own apprehension, but yet his soul cleaves to his base
lusts still, and his heart is knit to them, and the league and combination
between sin and his soul was never broken and parted. So that by this we
may see, why a sinner in his own apprehension may think he has no delight
in sin, and yet there is a league between sin and the soul still, and
this Hypocrite may thus continue all the while the sound of the stroke is upon
him. If happily his affections be stirring after some sin, then says
conscience, You remember what was done before, you remember what you did such
and such a time; would you fain be in hell again? I will arrest you for this
one day (says conscience) and so his soul flies off from his cursed
distempers, not that the union between sin and his soul is broken, but only
his corruptions for the present are abated for acting. By this time you see the
reason why I entered upon this point, which was this, to undermine the bottom
that bears up the souls of many carnal men in the world, and to cut off all
pleas, and to raze the foundation of all carnal confidence under heaven:
therefore I beseech you mark it, you will say this is mavelous hard, these
truths are mavelous terrible.



heaven? If the Lord has not yet opened mine eyes, and humbled my heart, and
enlarged my soul; If I never yet had a longing after a Savior, what not
desire heaven; how then can I dream or think that God will show mercy to my
soul in the pardon of my sins? If no desire, no Christ; no desire, no
Heaven; but I have no desire, therefore no Heaven, no Christ, no happiness.
The Lord settle these things upon your souls, that you may never give quiet to
your hearts, nor rest to your souls, till you find this sound desire wrought
in you. Beloved, what will you do for heaven, if you cannot so much as desire
to come to Heaven and Happiness?





remainders of those distempers, (that a man should rest upon the merit of
duties performed) are such remainders of sin, as will stick to us and
remain with us so long as we live on the face of the earth: But when once the
Spirit of the Lord takes possession of the soul, it counterworkes and digs
deeper than these distempers: for the good Spirit of the Lord that seizes upon
the heart truly humbled, goes between sin and home; it goes between sin
and the soul continually, and makes a greater evil appear in the soul, than
is the evil of punishment, and makes known a greater good to the heart than
ease, and the removal of the outward plague and horror: The Spirit of God
undermines these distempers and corruptions: the corruption of the soul would
feign have ease, but the Spirit says there is a better good than ease, that
says horror is terrible, but the Spirit says sin is more miserable. Look
as it is with a good Cordial, it will work out a distemper, though it lie
long in the heart of a man, yet it will drive it away at length. So it is with
the almighty work of Gods Spirit, which possesses the heart of the soul
truly humbled. (I would feign express my self more fully) You must know that
these shifts of spirit, and privy prankes of heart whereby the Devil winds
himself in upon a terrified conscience, they are the last cast, the maine hold
of Satan, he is now driven into his tren^hes, and therefore he will play fast
and loose a long time, and discover desperate subtilties.

Original corruption is like a fountain; now a fountain has many Conduits,
some nearer, some further: but if there be any water in the Fountain, the
nearest Conduit will have it soonest. So if there be any original corruption
(as there is in all) it will be sure to be seen in this Conduit of selfe-ease
and selfe-confidence in horror to be avoided, and duty to be performed. The
Naturalist observes, the heart is the last that dies; therefore though the eyes
be dim, and the tongue falters, and the hands be feeble, yet the pulse of
the heart will go still, so long as there is any life there. So it is here,
the pulse of original corruption will be seen in these base distempers of
spirit, which cleave unto us whilst we live in this world; but they are still
undermined and opposed by the Spirit of God.





mind is enlightened to see the beauty of holiness, and how thy understanding
comes to prize the excellency of goodness for it self, how thy heart stands
bent to entertain all the truth and goodness of God made known unto thee.
And (mark what now I say) if thou desire holiness for it self, and the
bent of thy heart is after holiness, so that thou can not be content to be
eased by holiness, unles thou be possessed, overpowred by holiness and the
virtue thereof: If it be thus with thee, judge thy self by this means. Suffer
me to express my self after this manner, that every one may understand:
Conceive two women, the one sick, the other in love, both desire the
Physician; the sick desires the Physician, to be healed by him, the other
desires him not so much to be healed, but she is desirous to be married to
him. So it is with the soul that is carried in a kind of love and affection
to godliness, he would not have Christ only to heal him, but he would be
married to Christ, that he may enjoy the God of all pardoning, that he may
enjoy the God of all purging and purifying. Take notice of it, sometimes men in
times of sickness use that for physic, which in the time of health they used
for common diet: So a gracious and holy heart in the time of terror and
vexation of conscience will embrace holiness, not for physic sake only to
be healed by it, but for diet sake to live by holiness, that he might take
possession of holiness, and that holiness might take possession of him: this
is the best judgment the soul has in time of extremity, for mark some
passages of this nature. It is possible out of self-love for the preservation
of a man's self, to desire ease and quietness; but he cares not by whom, if
God, or Christ, or Holiness, or Prayer, will ease him, let them do it, and
all this may be for mere self-love, not for any love of Christ or holiness
at all. But to have the soul carried with desire to a supernatural good, to
holiness in the beauty thereof, that it may enjoy it, and be possessed of it;
corrupt nature cannot, corrupt nature will not come to this, it is the Spirit
of the Lord only that can enable a man to do it.

Suffer me to express a passage or two this way: the extremity of Gods
indignation is a far greater evil than all the good things in the world can
be comfortable; it is a far greater evil than any thing here below, better
to be in beggary, better to be in prison, better to be persecuted, than to
be tormented, than to be set upon a continual wrack by the horror of
conscience: Now as the indignation of the Lord is a far greater punishment than
these; so the ease from this is a greater good than can proceed from the things
here below, the ease is answerably good, as the indignation is evil. A wicked
man would have ease for his sins; therefore his sins are a greater good
than his ease. But a gracious heart desires holiness beyond ease and sin, and
all, though he were in the greatest extremity. I express it thus: A gracious
heart if he had all the ease in the world, if he had not holiness, he could
not be satisfied; and if he had holiness, though he had not ease, he would
be contented: I say, had a gracious heart ease and quiet, and yet had a vile
and polluted soul, if his old distempers were still remaining, and his old
corruptions still continuing, he would complain and say, I have ease and quiet
now, but my heart is as bad as ever. If he had ease and not holiness, he
could not be satisfied if he were of a right stamp, and if he had holiness
and more power against sin, and the presence of Christ prevailing with him,
and purging him from corruptions, he would bless Gods Name: that is the second.

How Satan deludeth the soul.
I say, content not thy self with the mere notion of it, to say I see it must
be so, and so it should be so, and rest thy self contented in the performance
of services, and think to bring a Savior to be at thy beck, to do what thou will for thy soul; How Satan deludeth the soul.
this is a slight or secret that Satan has pinned to thy soul. Many think to
have a sovereign authority over Christ when they have performed holy duties.
So that an Hypocrite does not use the means to be led to Christ, that Christ
may dispose of him; but he takes up his duties to be commanders of Christ, that
he may dispose of Christ to serve his own turn: so that he makes Christ an
abettor of him in his wickedness, not a subduer of his corruptions. This is a
mavelous deceit, when men rest in their own abilities, and so abuse Christ,
not entertain him. An Hypocrite prays not for mercy, that mercy may rule
him, but that hereby he might command Christ, and dispose of him, to take away
the sting of sin, that so he may dally with sin. And this will appear in
two passages.

for my sin, and pray against it: Now (I beseech you observe it) this praying
and performing of duties, is merely to command a Savior to give allowance to
sin, that so he might commit sin freely. As who should say, I have
authority over my Savior, and he shall pardon my sins, and give me
allowance to commit sin. Oh the wretched villainy that is in a man's heart.
Fearful is thy estate (whosoever thou art) that make thy performances an
abettor of thy distempers, so that thou do thy duty not to enjoy Christ,
that he may help thee to prevent sin, but that Christ might take off the
venom and indignation of sin, that so thou might commit wickedness
without suspicion or distraction.

over his soul than ever he had before. So that the soul begins to quarrel
with it self, and lies down with shame, and says, What shall I think of my
praying and hearing? Where is the virtue and power of it? did ever Christ hear
my prayers, or come into my soul by his ordinances? where is the purging
virtue then to clear me of my sins? where is the purifyng virtue to cleanse
me from my corruptions? This is a ground of a gracious heart that places not
any confidence in holy duties, but only in the Lord Jesus Christ, it will
sink in regard of the failings in his best duties, and never be quiet before
it gain virtue and holiness from Christ









a pretense for it. Therefore abandon all those carnal pleas and foolish
imaginations, which delude thy soul, and persuade thy heart that thou have
desired, when indeed thou have not: for this I say, a false presumption that a
man has a thing, does hinder him as much from desiring of it, as if he
possessed it already. We find it in nature, Simile.
the stomach is pinched with hunger, because meat is wanting; now from this
hunger there follows a great endeavor to get succor and supply, but if there
come a cold wind, that overpowers the stomach, and takes away the hunger, and
the wind in a man's stomach deprives him of his appetite, though he has no
meat: So it is with the soul, there is a great want of mercy and comfort, and
assurance of Gods love, the soul stands in need of holiness to purge it, and
mercy to pardon it; Yet when a man has a fond fancy that all is well, and
all his desires are good, he fills his heart with a vain foolish desire, and
that takes away all his endeavors, and the presumption that he does desire,
does make him as well contented, as if he desired indeed. So that I beseech
you, be not careless, do not groundlesly cast away the word that would
inform thee, and convince thee.

When you heard the word of the Lord, your lazy hypocrite, stage hypocrite,
and terrified hypocrite applaud themselves, and clap themselves on the back,
and they know what they know, contenting themselves, and persuading themselves
as they did before, they care not for the Word, nor Minister, etc. which comes
to pass by cherishing these false pretenses, that they do desire Christ,
miserably deluding their own souls, and utterly taking away the edge of their
desire after grace and goodness. The Laodicaean Church was rich, and wanted
nothing; She wanted nothing, Revel 3.18. opened.
why? because she said, She was rich, and yet she was poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked. She presumed she was rich in grace, and therefore
wanted nothing; she presumed she had clothing, and therefore needed not to
desire white raiment, etc. So that a presumption that a man has a thing, makes
him careless to get the same. Therefore now yield the day, and give up the
bucklers; I would have every one that has heard the word, to yield and give up
himself to the authority of the same: And say, the truth is, I never desired
aright; say one to another, and inform one another, and question one another,
and confess, the truth is, my desires were deceits and fancies, no sound
desires; and it is Gods great mercy, that I and my flashy desire were not
flaming in hell long before this day. No, no, the truth is, I am a lazy
hypocrite, I am one of that nature, that will turn with the door on the
hinges; I say, I hate my base distempers, and yet continue in them; I pray
against sin, and yet live in sin; thus call upon thy heart and conscience,
and say, I am the lazy hypocrite, God has informed and convinced me of many
duties, telling me what I should do, but yet my heart could never be brought
unto it, to pray in private, and make satisfaction to those I have wronged: God
says, I must restore these ill gotten goods, and yet the truth is, I would
never part with them hitherto, but retain them still, therefore I never had a
true desire. Yet agine (I beseech you help one another) go home and reason
with your selves, the truth is, I am the stage hypocrite, I only make a booty
of Christ; even so much religion as will serve my honor, and my ease and
credit, I will take up, but when it comes to suffering once, that my life, or
liberty, or prosperity lie at the stake, then farewell Christ and grace: by
this it appears, that I never had any true and sound desire after Christ. And
if there be any terrified hypocrite here, I think there are but few come so
far, but the time will come you shall have enough to do that way, that
conscience of yours, whose mouth you have stopped, will be awakened one day,
and rend the kall of your hearts, if not here, yet hereafter; But if there be
any terrified hypocrite here present, go home, and reason with your selves, I
am this terrified hypocrite, the Minister spoke, as if he had been in my
bosom: In horror of heart I can call upon God, and seek to him, and pray in
my family, and humble my soul; but when the blow is off, I return with the
dog to his former vomit, and I think to heal all by my services; I am the
man, I am the woman, I beseech you, pluck one another on, and say, I lazy,
and you lazy, I terrified, and you terrified, I deluded, and you deluded;
therefore now labor to get out of this condition, if ever you mean to get
mercy to your souls, but if you will lose your souls, who can help it? go
to the proof, make the word good to your consciences; do I desire Christ for
himself? No, there is no such matter, therefore yield it before heaven and
earth, I did never yet attain to this sound desire; this is something yet, now
you see your wants.

the duty so weighty, and we so unable; then how had we need to bestirre our
selves, and frame our hearts to seek for, and attain to this blessed desire
after Christ?

the thirsty they are invited, the hungry they shall be satisfied; nay not
only so, but observe further the necessity of this, when desire comes, all
good works go forward, and our hearts are not only set upon the duty, but
the duty is crowned and credited by this desire. It is like the mill damme,
the fuller the damme is, the faster the mill goes; so get but desire, and all
will go forward; the more desire, the more pains in seeking after grace, this
gives a crown and a credit to all our actions; thou prayest, happily half an
hour, it is not thy tongue that the Lord accepts, but thy desire; thou
performest many duties outwardly, God cares not for that, he looks only at thy
desire to approve thy self to God in those duties, this is the thing that
gives credit to all our actions.

glory that is in the promises of God. Look wisely, daily, and judiciously,
upon them as occasion serves, and when thou see that admirable, and
incomparable virtue and beauty, that is in Christ, and in the precious
promises, and can but view them in their proper colors; Oh they will even
ravish thee, and quicken up thy desire. If a man carry a pack of never so rich
commodities, and never opens them, no man will have a desire to buy; Or if a
man have a cabinet full of never so precious jewels, if he do not unlocke it,
no man will be stirred with a desire after them. Even so it is with the
promises, all those unsearchable riches that are in the Lord Jesus, and all the
comforts, both of this life, and that which is to come, they are all shut up in
the promises: Now set open the Gospel, and unlock the cabbinet of the
promises, and then the soul will earnestly desire the same. I tell you God is
a God of comfort, and all the promises are yea and Amen in the Lord Jesus
Christ, read them daily, and examine the excellency and beauty therein, that
so thy heart may be brought to prize them, and the comfort arising thence. Thy
soul is discouraged, there is mercy to comfort; thou want grace, there is
grace to quicken thee. See the worth thereof more fully: Luke 24. When Christ
came and walked with the two disciples that were traveling toward Emaus, Luke
24.32. opened.
Did not our hearts burn within us, say they, while he opened the Scriptures;
the Latin word signifies to burn with desire; But how came this? they did
not talk a word, and away, but the Lord Jesus Christ opened the Scriptures to
them: the riches of grace and salvation were unlocked, and by Christ opened,
and then their hearts burned again with desire; Oh that Christ, and that
mercy, and that pardon, etc. So view thou the promises of Christ, and grace,
and salvation, you do not see the value and riches that are therein, but if
you will but talk and confer about them, your hearts will burn with desire,
do not cast an eye and be gone, do not look over a promise and away; no
wonder though your hearts are not affected, because the excellent things
therein contained are not opened and propounded to you.

And their complaint is this; What a wretched heart have I? Rachel, Let me have
honor, or else I dye. But I cannot buckle my heart, nor work this vile nature
of mine to be carried after, and long for, the unconceivable unsearchable
riches of the Lord Jesus Christ. And will the Lord show mercy to me? Shall I
attain any favor either here or hereafter?

David himself) had it not in his own power and sufficiency, it must come
from thy power, and thy promise, and thy grace, and blessing. Now, good Lord,
work this in the heart of thy poor servant, I would feign have a desire Lord
from heaven; thus hale down a desire from the Lord, and from the promise, for
there only you must have it, this is the course whereby you may partake of this
desire from the hand of the Lord. When the Church was lazy and sluggish, and
would not rise, Cant. 5.4.
the hands of her beloved dropped mirrhe upon the handle of the door, and this
raised and pulled up the heart of the spouse, and she lingered after him, and
followed him, and pursued him, and her heart was quickened and enlarged to seek
after him, whom her soul loved and prized, and from whom she expected that
good she needed. It ought to be so with our desires, they must proceed only
from the spark of the spirit; The smoking flax God will not quench, Matthew.
12.20.
all flax of it self will not smoke, but a spark must come into it, and that
will make it catch fire and smoke: thus lay your hearts before the Lord, and
say, Good Lord, here is only flax, here is only a stubborn heart, but strike
thou by thy promise one spark from heaven, that I may have a smoking desire
after Christ, and a longing desire after grace, that I may walk with more care
and more conscience with thee hereafter, using the means thou have appointed
for my good, that they may at the last work unto my good; this take notice of
above all the rest, for he that thinks to get a desire from himself, will not
labor to obtain from the hands of the Lord. Therefore labor to use all
means, and labor to see a weakness in all means, and expect this desire only
from the hands of the Lord. Thus we see the means how we may get this desire.

Thus we see how the Lord learnes every faculty his lecture, the mind has
been enlightened, we have done with that, hope has been stirred, and desire
quickened, these we have likewise finished. We come now in the fourth place to
treat of two other faculties of the soul, Love and Joy; which because they are
so nearly combined together both in nature and form, as we shall hear
hereafter: therefore with your patience handle them together, and read one
Lecture to them both. But before I proceed to meddle with the particulars, let
me premise something in the general, that we take all rubs out of the way,
and that none may stumble at that which shall be delivered. Therefore let no
man think it strange, that I come here to meddle with Love and Joy, as though
I would make sanctification to go before justification; for wheresoever we
find love and joy, they seem rather the effects that follow faith, than to be
the seeds and spawne to bring in faith: Methinkes these doubts should not
trouble any, if they did but consider what we have spoken already in the work
of preparation. But a little to take away these rubs, take notice of three
ensuing passages, which will clear the way to that which afterward shall be
spoken.

to persuade any to think that sanctification is before justification: for the
truth is, I conceive the thing is not agreeable to truth, taking sanctification
in a narrow strict sense, as it must be so conceived in this place; neither can
the Doctrines which I have delivered, if they be understood aright, according
to the explication thereof, show so much, this is the first.

Perkins) Nay the Spirit seems to me to intimate as much when it says, Ho
every one that thirsts, John 7.37.
come and drink: there must be first thirsting, then coming and believing,
which thirsting is nothing else but a saving desire. Therefore as there is a
saving desire by which God causes both grace to breed, and faith to spring in
the soul; by the same reason there may be a kind of Love and Joy, by which
as spawnes, and seeds of faith, faith may be communicated and stamped upon the
soul, for the same ground that is for the one, is also for the other: and it
is a thing to me incredible, that the soul of a man should fall and rest upon
the promise, and yet never desire it, nor hope for it, being absent, and
embrace it, love, and delight in it with joy when it is coming. For look with
what authority and right there is thirsting before coming, and a desire before
faith (for faith is all this while a hatching and breeding) by the same right
and authority there is a saving kind of love and joy before faith, whatsoever
we speak of the one, we must necessarily speak of the other.

it is there as the King in his privy chamber, it rules and commands all his
servants. Now the way being clear, if you meet with hope and faith, love and
faith put for one another, understand that they are not literally to be
conceived, but in a figurative sense. So then to proceed to the Doctrine I
mean to stand upon, which is this:





love and joy is kindled by the Spirit of the Father, he it is from whence come
all the sparks that must kindle grace in us. So that all other love and joy
which is not spiritual and from him, cannot be acceptable to his Majesty. It
is that in general which the Apostle Paul inferres, Romans 8.8.
They which are in the flesh cannot please God. So all the joy and love (as
well as any other action) that proceeds out of nature and flesh cannot please
God: But it must be heavenly love and joy, proceeding from the Spirit: Suffer
me to express my self after this manner Look as it is with a gentleman in
the country, he will be content to leave his habitation for a while, and give
up his house to the King for a while, because he is but a mean man, and not
able to entertain so great a retinue; therefore the King sends his own
provision before hand; (observe it.) So it is with a poor humble broken
hearted sinner; the poor soul is mavelous well content, the Lord should
come to him, and dwell in him, and dispose of him; but he is such a poor
beggarly wretch, Simile.
he is not able to make God a fire, he cannot love God, he has not that holy
heat of love and joy to entertain and welcome the Lord as becomes his
Majesty: therefore the Lord sends provision before hand, and kindles love and
joy in the soul, that by that love and joy he may be welcomed to the heart of
an humble sinner; or thus (to express my self more clearly;) Take a burning
glass that will receive the beams of the Sun, and heat and burn other
things, the glass of it self has no such heat in it, but when it has
received the beams of the Sun, it heats and burns other things, as flax,
and such combustible matter; but it is by the heat of the beams of the Sun
received, otherwise it could do nothing. So it is with an humble sinner, he
lies fit to receive the beams of Gods mercy, and waits when the Sun of
righteousness will shine from heaven comfortably upon his heart; and being
warmed with the beams of Gods love and favor effectually, he is able to
reflect the heat of love and joy back again: this is the second thing.

Judas had a hail Master, and the common people spread their garments, and
welcomed Christ, crying Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the
most High; and the young man pretended a dear affection to Christ, Master, I
will follow thee whither soever thou go; And the stony ground received the
word with joy, Matthew. 13.
and with love too, for they go both together, for he that joys in a thing,
cannot but love that he rejoices in: So that we see all these had a kind of
joy, but it is not that kind of joy that comes from the Father, neither will
it carry it self beseeming the riches of Gods mercy; for he that saluted his
Master All hail, in conclusion betrayed him: is this your joy and love you
entertain Christ withal? So that young man that would follow him
whithersoever he went, presently forsook him: And they that even now cried
Hosanna, Hosanna, blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Highest, anon
cry as fast, crucify him, crucify him; and they that received the Word with
joy, when temptation and persecution came, rejected it: This joy is a foolish
imagination hammered out of their Anvill, for base ends and by aims; but they
carry not themselves beseeming the riches of Gods mercy revealed to them. For,
He that loves father or mother, or brother or sister, more than me, is not
worthy of me, says our Savior: that is, he that priseth any thing more, and
delights in any thing more than Christ, is not worthy of him. Therefore
whosoever he be that bestows his love and joy more upon any thing in this
world, than upon Christ; it is not a love and joy beseeming him, nor brought
from heaven, but proceeds from a base rotten heart, and will fail us, and
bring no profit nor comfort in the end. This then suffices for the sense, and
proof of the point; we come now to open it a little; wherein for explication,
and confirmation thereof, we will handle these two things: First we will show
you the reason of the order, why after hope and desire, there comes this love
and joy. Secondly, we will discover the motives and grounds what it is in the
promise that will kindle and strike fire, and inflame these two affections, and
bring them to the Lord.

First, Reasons.
you will say how comes love and joy next after hope and desire? I answer, you
must know there is no more but two affections in the soul, God infinitely wise
having so framed it, and these two are hope and desire. The understanding says
such a thing is profitable and comfortable, if I had it, then hope is sent out
to wait for that goodness, and if it comes not, then desire the second
affection is sent out to meet the good; hope stands and waits for it, but
desire wanders up and down, seeking and enquiring after a Lord Jesus, and
goes from coast to coast, from East to West; Oh that I could, and oh that I
might, and when shall I, and how may I come to the speech of a Lord Jesus
Christ. As it was with the Spouse in the Canticles, when her beloved was gone,
she wandered up and down, seeking of him, and enquiring of the watchmen if they
did not see him: so desire wanders from this thing to that thing, from this
place to that place, and never cease, to see if it can gain notice of
Christ: It goes to prayer to see if that will entreat a Christ: It goes to
the Word to see if that will reveal him: It goes to conference to see if he
can hear of a Christ there: then it comes to the congregation, and to the
Sacrament, to see if it can hear any news of a Lord Jesus Christ, and of
mercy; and the soul thus continues wandering and seeking, till at last the
Lord Jesus Christ comes into the soul, when the soul has hungered and longed
for him. At length the Lord is pleased to show himself in view: behold thy
King comes; so the Lord says, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away thy
sins: Oh thou poor broken hearted sinner, here is thy Savior, he is come
down from heaven to speak peace to thy soul in the pardon of thy sins;
thou that hungrest for a Christ, here he is to satisfy thee; thou that
thirstest for a Christ, he is now come to refresh thee; thou that have long
sought him, he says, here I am, and all my merits are thine. Now when the
Lord Jesus is pleased to present himself to the soul; now desire has met
with the Lord: there are two other affections sent out by the Spirit to
entertain Christ, and they are love and joy. Suffer me (I beseech you) to
express my self after this manner, that I may discover the frame and guise of
Gods Spirit in this gracious work.

It is in this case with a sinner, as it is with a malefactor or traitor
(observe what I say) who is pursued with a Pursevant, and is fled to the sea
coasts, and has taken a hold, and he is there besieged. And now he sees
there is no hope of favor, nor no hope of escape; therefore he is even
content to submit to the Kings pleasure, Simile.
and yields his neck to the block, that he may receive punishment for his
offense. Now coming to execution, he hears an inckling from the messengers,
there is yet hope that this man may be pardoned; with that the poor
malefactor in the tower, his heart is stirred up to hope: Nay then he hears
another messenger from the King himself say, if he will come unto the Court
and seek unto his Majesty, and importune his Grace for mercy and favor, it is
like he shall be pardoned: this is the second voice: one says thou may be
pardoned, the other says, nay if thou will submit thy self, thou shall be
pardoned. Then he makes haste, and desire carries him to the Court, to sue for
favor from the King: So that he will be continually there, listening and
enquiring of every one, saying, did you hear the King speak nothing of me,
how stands the Kings mind toward me, I pray how goes my case? then some
tells him, the truth is, the King hears you are humbled, and you sorry for it,
you are like to hear more news hereafter. At last the King looks out of the
window, and sees the malefactor and says, is this the traitor? they say
yes, this is the man thar is humbled and entreats for mercy, and desires
nothing so much as favor. The King tells him the truth is his pardon is
drawing, and coming toward him: with that his heart leaps in his belly, and
his heart is enlarged to his Majesty; and he says, God bless your Majesty,
never was there such a favorable Prince to a poor traitor. His heart leaps
with joy because his pardon is coming toward him; happily it is not sealed yet:
Now when it is sealed and all, the King calls him in and delivers it, and that
is the last stroke of faith.

So it is with a poor sinner, he is this malefactor: you that have committed
high treason, you think not of it, but take heed, God will pursue you one day;
happily the Lord lets you alone for the present, but he will surprise you on the
sudden, and conscience will pluck thee by the throat, and carry thee down to
Hell. And now the Lord pursues him with heavy and terrible indignation, and
lets fly at his face, and sets conscience a work as Pursevant, and that
says, these are thy sins, and to hell thou must go, God has set me to
execute thy soul. Now the poor soul sees he can by no means escape from
the Lord, and to purchase any favor he sees it is impossible; therefore he is
resolved to lie down at Gods feet, and says, I confess Lord, there is but
one way, let me be damned, so thou may be glorified. If the Lord will show
favor, so it is; but he cannot desire it almost, because he has so sinned
against him. Now comes the great voice, he hears a noise afar off by the
ministry of the Gospel, thy sins are pardonable: with this the soul looks
up, and hope stirs the heart, and says, then it may be a damned creature may
be saved, then it may be a dead dog may live, and a traitor may be pardoned:
Then the soul hears another voice, if thou can see the excellency of mercy
and long for it, and seek after it, thou shall be pardoned. Why, go then,
says Desire, and he fills heaven and earth with his cries, and his closet with
his prayers, and the congregation with his tears, and will enquire of the
Minister of God, and other good Christians; Sirs, you are of the bedchamber,
you are acquainted with God, I pray how goes my case? will the Lord, think
you, pardon me? did you hear the Lord say nothing of me? how stands it with
me? Now the Ministers of God that understand the frame of the heart aright,
will say, The Lord hears you are an humble sinner, and that you long for
mercy, and lie at the court gate, and will not away without mercy; we hear,
God intends well toward you, you shall hear more hereafter: thus far now
desire goes.

At last, Christ presents himself to the sinner, and speaks to his soul by
the ministry of the Word, he looks down from heaven, and gives him a sweet
look of mercy, and that makes his heart leap again, and that is done in
this manner, (for still understand that God does it by the ministry of the
Word, do not now look for any strange dreams or miraculous imaginations) the
Lord speaks by his Word, and says, thou have a broken heart, thou have longed
for my salvation, go thy ways, I have heard those prayers of thine, and
observed those endeavors of thine, and thy pardon is granted, be it to thee as
thou have desired, and thy pardon shall afterward be sealed and delivered. Now
when the Lord tells the soul, It is done, it wants only sealing and delivering,
the heart of a poor sinner, when it finds some comfort and refreshment from
the Lord in the word, he says, The Minister said I was the sinner, and God
intends good to me, and that my sins are pardoned: as the Prince says, Fiat,
let it be done; so the Lord says, Mercy is coming toward thee, and mercy
is granted to thee: Now the heart leapes with joy, and blesses the Lord, let
my soul bless him for ever: How ought I to bless that God that has done so
great things for my poor soul? What, I pardoned? and what, my sins
forgiven? what, is the pardon granted, and now sealing, only it wants
delivering? why then if I never see more of it, but go down to hell, yet this
is my comfort, that I have seen a smile from God, this makes my heart leap
within me, though I burn in hell for ever; this is the next voice.

Now that brings in love and joy: See a passage this way, Esaias 40.2. opened.
Esaias 40.2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord, speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
and her iniquity is pardoned, tell Jerusalem she is accepted; tell her so,
says the Lord. So the Lord speaks to poor hungry broken sinners, after he
has seen their desires to be sound and through; the Lord says to his
Ministers, Speak to the heart of a poor sinner, tell him from me, tell him
from heaven, tell him from the Lord Jesus Christ, tell, from under the hand of
the Spirit, his person is accepted, and his sins are done away, and he shall
be looked upon in mercy. So Esaias 66. Esaias 66.2. opened.
the text says, The Lord looks to him that is of an humble and contrite
heart, and that trembles at his word. The poor creature cannot but observe
every word, and tremble at every truth: Here is salvation (indeed, says he)
but it is not mine; here is mercy, but that is not mine: and so he shakes at
the apprehension of it, that he should hear of it, and not enjoy it. The text
says, The Lord looks at such a trembling soul; that is, he casts sweet
intimations of his goodness and kindness upon him; and says, Thou poor
trembling sinner, to thee be it spoken, I have an eye toward thee in the Lord
Jesus Christ; this, as I take it, is the meaning of the place. Ephraim is the
picture of a soul truly humbled; we may see his behavior toward God, and
Gods dealing toward him; the text says, Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, (here is the heart broken, and thirsting, and what more) thou have
chastized me, Ier. 31.18, 19, 20.
and I was chastized, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me,
and I shall be turned; thou art the Lord my God, surely after that I was
turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I
was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
Here we see Ephraim lamenting himself, as if the sinner should say, I am the
wretch that have seen all the means of grace in abundant measure and beauty,
and yet never profited under the same; the Lord has corrected me, but I would
not be tamed; the Lord he has instructed me, but I would not learn; Lord
turn me, thou art my God, I have nothing in my self. Nay now I see the evils
which before I never perceived, and I observe the baseness of my course now,
which before I never considered; and I am ashamed of my former abuse of Gods
grace revealed; I am even confounded in regard of the abominations which my
soul has harbored; this is the mourning of a poor sinner: Now mark Gods
answer, Ephraim is my dear son, he is a pleasant child, for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him. The Lord kindled the fire
of his indignation in his heart, and spoke bitter things against his
conscience, yet he remembered him all the while; as who should say, I observed
all those desires, and considered all those tears, and heard all those
prayers, and took notice of all those complaints; and my bowels earne toward
a poor sinner that desires my mercy in Christ, and the truth is, I will show
mercy to him: thus we see the behavior of God to the soul, as also the
behavior of the soul to God: and thus you see the order of the affections;
when God is absent, hope waits for it, and desire longs after it; when the good
is in view, love entertaines it, and joy delights, and sports, and plays with
it: love is like the Host that welcomes the guest, and joy is like the
chamberlain that attends upon him, and is very ready and pleasing to
entertain the promise, and the Lord Jesus Christ: this is the very guise of
the heart, as I conceive.

The second thing observable, is the motives whereby the promise comes to
inflame these two affections, and to work this frame in the heart, namely, by
the Spirit of the Father, which kindles in an humble and enlightened soul, love
and joy, to entertain and rejoice in the riches of his mercy, as beseemes the
worth thereof.



The Lord shall command his loving kindness in the morning; Psalm. 42.18.
(a strange passage) it is a phrase taken from Kings, and Princes, and great
Commanders, whose word is a law. So that the Lord shall send forth his loving
kindness with a command; as if he should say, Go love and everlasting
kindness, take thy commission, and I charge thee, go to the poor humble
sinner, go to the poor, hungry, and thirsty sinner, go and prosper and
prevail, and settle my love upon his heart, whether he will or no, and let my
kindness be settled upon his soul that has longed for it. Experience tells us
this, the Lord does by an Almightinesse give a charge, and put a commission
into loving kindness hands, that he shall do good to a poor soul, even
then when he sinkes under the burden of his sins, and under the
apprehension of his weakness. What, shall I have mercy? No, no. Will the Lord
Jesus Christ accept me? No surely. Could I pray so, and had I those parts, and
could I perform duties after this and this manner, then there were some hope;
but, alas! there is no mercy for me. But hearken, I beseech you, what the word
discovers your estate to be; is it thus and thus with you? yes; then I speak
from the Lord, mercy is yours, and heaven is yours; No, no, says the soul, I
cannot beleeeve it, such a wretch as I go to heaven? No, heaven shall rather
fall than I come there. Thus the discouraged sinner knocks off mercy, and
shuts the door against it. Now when all carnal reasonings, and high
imaginations (as Paul calls them) have raised up strong holds against mercy and
comfort, when the word cannot do it for the present, God is feign at last to
command loving kindness, and send him with a commission from heaven, saying, I
charge you, break open the door of the heart of such a sinner, rend that
veil of ignorance, and tear that cursed veil of carnal reasoning; And I
command thee, go to that soul, and cheer it, and comfort it; go to that
soul, and refresh it, and fill it; tell him his sins are pardoned, his
person accepted, and his soul shall be saved; tell him his sighs and groans
are heard, and his prayers observed in heaven; make this good to his soul, I
charge you, before you come back again; this is the admirable goodness of
the Lord; the soul many times has so many tricks, and shifts, and windings,
and yeeldings to carnal reason, that no comfort will come in; So that the Lord
is feign to send loving kindness to cheer the soul: As it is with some
unruly fellows, who will not give a man possession of his right, till the high
Sheriff comes, and gives him possession by force whether they will or no: So
loving kindness is Gods high Sheriff; now when a company of base fellows, as
carnal reasonings, and the like, would keep out mercy and favor that is due
to a sinner, the Lord commands loving kindness to break open the door, and
speak comfort to him: and now take notice of what I say, as a good to come was
the ground of hope, and if there be any necessary excellency, desire longs
for it: So when the good is not only present, but expresses his presence, and
leaves some kind of remembrance, as it were, and discovers it self in some
manner effectually to the soul; that stirs up love continually, and that
must be done before any love can be kindled. (I open it thus:) Look as it is
with touching, which is a faculty of nature, if the thing lies upon a man,
leaves a strong impression upon him, then a man's touch will feel it; but if it
be mavelous light, then it may lie upon a man, and be present with him, and
yet not be perceived: as a feather, lay it upon a man's finger on the sudden, or
a mote in a man's face, because it leaves no impression, he feels it not; but
if there be any weight laid upon his hand, then he feels: so if it be water
that moistens him, or fire that scorcheth him, he is sensible of it; so love in
the soul is like touching in the body: now when loving kindness is not set on
upon the heart, though it be present with the soul, yet because it leaves no
impression upon the soul, hence it comes that the heart cannot be stirred with
any love toward it, nor be touched and affected with it, nor return that joy
and delight as becomes the favor of God. So that there must be the love of
God, letting some sweet intimations into the heart, and expressing it self to
the soul, and affecting the heart therewith; and then our love comes to be
kindled toward God again; Gods love settling upon the soul, draws and pulls
our love to God again.

This is the ground of that the Apostle speaks, We love him, 1 John 4.19.
because he loved us first. It must be the beams of Gods love that must fall
upon the soul, before the soul can return love to God again. Hosea 11.4.
So in Hosea, I drew them, says the text, with the cords of love, and with the
bands of a man: as who should say, God lets in the cords of his love into our
souls, and that draws our loves to him again. But most excellent is that
place of the Canticles, (mark the manner of the guise of the Spirit of God,
expressing himself to the soul) He brought me to the Banqueting house, Cant.
2.4.
and his Banner over me was Love: and what follows? Stay me with flaggons,
and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of Love. When the Banner of Christ's
love is displayed over the soul, the soul comes to be sick of love to
Christ again. In war when the Captain displayeth the banner, three things
are done by it: First, it argues the presence of the General: Secondly, it
commands all the Soldiers to come to it: Thirdly, all come under it. Now
observe the excellency of the sweetness of the sense of the Spirit of God;
when God displayeth the banner of his love, in the perfect colors and beauty
of it to the soul; then all the hearts of poor fainting sinners come in as
Soldiers, and they are sick of love to him; now this love of God begets love
in us again, in three particulars.

aqua vitae comforts him: Thy loving kindness is better than life (says the
Prophet David) there is aqua vitae indeed; the Lord lets in but one glimpse of
his love, and that warmes the souls. This is that observable in the Canticles,
Cant. 2.3. opened.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better than
wine; because of the savor of thy good ointment, thy Name is an ointment
powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Every poor sinful
creature, thou that drinkest water, if thou have Christ's love, thou think it
better than the best wine under heaven: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
lips, that is, with the comforts of his Word and Spirit: so that mark what the
soul says; Let the Lord Jesus Christ refresh my soul with the sweet comforts
and consolations of his Word, and it will be better than wine. But first he
must kiss him with the kisses of his lips, before his love can be better
than wine, that is, the Lord by the power of his Spirit in the ministry of the
Word, must express his love to the soul, and that draws the love of the
soul to God: and mark what follows, because of the savor of thy good
ointments, therefore the Virgins love thee: by Christ's ointments, are Christ's
graces signified. Now when the Lord Jesus Christ does communicate the sweet
savor of his grace into the soul, then the Virgins which are loosened from
sin, love the Lord Jesus; but first the savor of the ointment must be spread
abroad before they can love him.

Romans 5.8.
in that while we were yet enemies unto him, Christ died for us. The Lord sends
from heaven to a poor miserable creature; commend my love, commend my mercy to
such a poor soul, and tell him though he has been an enemy to me, yet I am
a friend to him; tell him though he has been a traitor to me, I have been a
good King to him: he has been a rebel to me, but tell him I have been a
good God to him; commend my love to him, and let him know that all his sins
are done away, for the Lord Jesus died for sinners, when they were sinners.
This is the argument of Saint John, If God so loved us, as that he gave his
only begotten Son for us, how ought we to love one another? I collect from
hence; But how then ought we to love God himself?

It was this that kindled the frozen heart of Saul, he had a heart almost as
cold as ice, and yet this did work upon him. Mark what the text says: When
David had taken Saul on the hip, 1 Samuel 24.19.
and had him at advantage, and might have taken away his life, and yet would
not: when he saw that David was so kind and would do him no hurt; David knew
Saul persecuted him, and desired to kill him, he was the most professed enemy he
had, and was the only man that stood between him and the kingdom: Now when
David had him in his hands, and spared him, this kindness of David wrought
even upon the heart of a Saul, and kindled a kind of love in him, as the text
says; Thou art more righteous than I, for thou have rewarded me good, and I
have rewarded thee evil, and thou have showed this day, that thou have dealt
well with me; forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hands,
thou killedst me not; for if a man find an enemy, will he let him go well
away? wherefore the Lord reward thee good, for that thou have done unto me this
day. So that we see a Saul is warned, and his love is kindled toward David
for his kindness. So when the soul considers, what, is the Lord thus gracious
to me? who ever found an enemy and slew him not? Had it not been just with the
Lord to take advantage against me? Had it not been just, that I which lived in
sin, should have perished for my sin? Had it not been just, that I which
loved my corruption, should have perished for my corruptions? But that the Lord
should find an enemy and not slay him, nay that the Lord should find an
enemy, and send his Son to save him, is wonderful. Let my soul for ever
love that God, and rejoice in that mercy; this would work almost upon a Devil.
If the soul had but the sap and sweetness of this, it could not but warm the
heart of an humbled sinner, and kindle in him an abundant love to God, who has
been so loving to him.

Ephesians, he desires that they may be rooted in love, that is, stablished
with mighty strong love, how shall that be? Why the text says, comprehending
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the
love of Christ which passes knowledge: as who should say, can you but once
comprehend the unmeasurable dimensions of Gods love and goodness; this will
kindle and inflame your hearts with admirable love to the Lord Jesus. When the
sinner thinks thus with himself, I that have done all that I could against so
good a God, that my heart even bleeds to think of it; there was no name under
Heaven I tore in pieces, but Gods Name: his wounds, and heart, and life, I have
torn all: nay there was no command in the world that my soul so much
despised, as the command of the Lord Jesus. There was no spirit that ever spoke
to me, which I so much resisted, as the Spirit of the Lord. Oh how many sweet
motions has the Lord let into my soul, that he might pluck me from my base
courses and sinful practices: but I have flowen in the face of his blessed
Spirit. If I had lien in a dungeon, and had been plagued with torments all my
life time; yea though I had another world of misery to live in, it is infinite
mercy, so the Lord would pass by these base dealings, and pardon these
rebellions of mine. But that God should send his Son to love me, so
incomparably, so unconceivably, that I could not hate him so much as he loved
me; I could not so exceed in unkindnesse toward him, as he has exceeded in
kindness toward me. Oh the height of this mercy beyond my desire! Oh the
breadth of this mercy without all bounds! Oh the length of this mercy beyond
all times! Oh the depth of this mercy beneath all miseries! Were my eyes made
of love, I could nothing but weep love; were my tongue made of love, I could
nothing but talk love; were my hands made of love, I could nothing but work
love; and all too little for that God that has loved me so admirably, so
unmeasurably. What shall I love if I love not the Lord? I love all things, but
I love God above all things. Psalm. 18.1.
I love thee dearly, O Lord my strength, says David: this is the last
particular, whereby the soul comes to be all on a flame, and has a burning
affection toward the Lord Almighty.

him, this is a work of grace, which grows not in our gardens: there is not
one spark of this holy fire and spiritual delight in our hearts. Nay we cannot
buy it, nor borrow it, nor receive it from any creature under Heaven, further
than the Father sends down some beams of his love to kindle this in us,
further than the blessed Spirit of God is pleased to blow these sparks when
they are kindled, further than the Lord Jesus Christ is pleased by the power of
his merits, to feed these sparks of love thus blown in our souls. It is
almost impossible, that any man in his natural estate should be so deluded, as
to think he can love the Lord or delight in him. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. opened.
The Apostle Paul tells us plainly, he was a persecutor, and a blasphemer, and
injurious: Paul could do this, and thou happily can do this; thou can be a
blasphemer against Jesus Christ, and thou can be a persecutor of Jesus
Christ; but Paul cannot believe in Christ, nor love the Lord Jesus; how comes
he to this? Why, the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and
love which is in Christ Jesus: (mark that) As if he should say, it was Gods
abundant grace that over-powerd my unfaithful heart, and made it faithful: It
was Gods abundant grace that over-powerd my stubborn injurious heart, and made
it a loving heart. But how comes this, that the grace of the Lord was abundant
in faith and love? Why, it is in Christ, says the text; from Christ this faith
was rooted, from Christ this love was kindled: As if he had said, I could
persecute, and blaspheme, and despise, and cast off God and his grace, I was a
wretch, a villain, that I could do: But that I should love the Lord being
injurious, and that I should believe the Lord being unfaithful, this was from
Christ alone. In experience we find it, the ball must first fall upon the
ground, before it can bound up again, and return from the ground: So the Lord
Jesus must dart in, and fling in this love of his into the soul, before the
soul can rebound in love and joy back to him again. We must receive the
Spirit of love from God, 2 Timothy 1.7.
before the Lord can receive any spiritual and holy love from us. In a word,
what the Lord spoke in some case to the Jews, is true of every man naturally;
I know that you have not the love of God in you: John 5.42.
As if he should say, you know not your selves, you think you have hearts
enlarged to God, and you pretend great kindness to God: but you are deceived
in your souls, and cozened in your corrupt natures: for I know full well that
the love of God is not in you. I pursue the point the rather for these two ends.

First, it discovers and confutes the carnal conceits of a company of carnal
Gospellers, that pretend they do not delight to set out themselves in show so
much, and they do not hear and pray and fast so much as these and these do.
But, say they, as for the soundness of our love to the Lord Jesus, we defy
any man in the world that speaks against us; they find no difficulty in the
matter to love the Lord, they are certainly persuaded they do that. Therefore
if the Minister shall press upon them, and challenge them of want of love to
God and his grace, they fly in a man's face presently; What, not love the Lord
Jesus Christ? why then it is pity a man should live upon the face of the
earth: they do love him, and they will love him, all the world shall not
persuade them from the loving of Christ. Oh poor silly creature, it is a great
argument that thou never had this love to God, because thou saw no
hardness to get it. It is an argument thou never did express any delight in
Christ, because thou think it an easy matter to delight in him. Most men
think it a matter of nothing; what, not love the Lord Jesus Christ? why, who
cannot love Christ? Who cannot? I say, neither thou, nor I, nor any man under
heaven can love Christ by any power in himself: Nay let me speak
peremptorily, thou art as able to save thy own soul, nay thou art as able to
redeem thy soul without Christ, as thou art able (unless the Lord by the
Almighty help of his Spirit-inable thee) to love the Lord Jesus Christ. Nay
mark what I say, you that love Christ, and yet do nothing for him, but
pretend great kindness inwardly, how ever you express not your selves in
outward appearance; I tell thee, if a man might have happiness by it, if he
might have heaven laid down upon the nail (as we say) if he could love
Christ, I say, upon these conditions, if thou have but nature in thee, thou
would never go to heaven, thou would never be happy. No, no, it will cost
thee more than that comes to, it will cost thee much pains, it will cost thee
many prayers, and many tears, before that day come. It is not an easy matter
to love the Lord Jesus; the Father from heaven must learn you that; you must
go to another manner of school, than ever you have been at yet, if ever you
learn this lecture: thou may pray till thy eyes sink in thy head, and till
thy heart fails; and yet thou can not love Christ, unless the Spirit enable
thee thereunto. Think of this, you that think it is nothing to love the Lord
Jesus Christ: If it were nothing but to talk of love, and to complement with
the Lord Jesus, to make a cursie to Christ, and to make a leg to the Lord, and
yet hate him inwardly, then it were an easy matter indeed; it is nothing to
buckle to him in this fashion, and in the mean time oppose him, and the power
of his grace: but to entertain and welcome a Savior, suitable and agreeable to
the worth of him, this nature will not, cannot do, it is the work of the Lord.

1 John 1.5.
God is light, and in him is no darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
says the text, at all: and, Ye were darkness, but now are light in the Lord:
A man naturally is nothing but darkness, and God is nothing but light; a man
by nature is nothing but unholy, and God is nothing but holy. Now darkness
will resist light, and not give way to it; and wickedness will oppose
holiness, and not give way to the same: this is thy condition, thou have an
ignorant carnal blind heart, and God is light, pure, and holy, and thou can
resist a Savior, but not entertain him, do what thou can.

they would not receive the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. opened.
that they might be saved; he does not say, They would not receive the truth,
but they would not receive the love of the truth. It is a phrase taken from a
man, which makes love to a party, so the truth of God makes love to many a
man, it makes love to thy naughty and corrupt heart, and would pluck thee
away from these things here below, and would draw thee from thy base haunts,
and filthy lusts, and sinful courses; and it would woo and win thy soul to
take place in it, that it may show comfort to it: the truth of God makes love
to the world, and the world will none of the truth: Christ came to the world,
and the world received him not, they were so far from seeking a Savior, and
coming to him, that they would not receive a Savior, when he came unto them.
Therefore know, thou have a heart that can hate the Lord Jesus Christ, but thou
have not a heart to love him, thou have not a heart that can delight in his
good Spirit, thou have not a heart that can take content in his rich grace.

and takes great pains to work his soul, and bring his heart to love Christ:
he falls out with himself, because he cannot love God, and he is ready to
curse himself, he cannot get his heart up to heaven, where is more riches
than is in the best riches of the world; where is more honor than in the
greatest honor upon earth; where is more pleasure than in the greatest delight
here below: they labor, and can find no good success; they take pains, but
their work does not succeed prosperously: the reason is this, they do not
begin at the right end, they work the wrong way: go to the sea of love, and
go to the sun of righteousness, and to the beams of Gods mercy, which
only can work thy heart to love God, and delight in him: do not go to thy
cold earthly frozen heart, and think to fetch love from thence, think not to
bring love to the promise, but look to receive love from the promise, but it
is the love of God toward thee, that must draw love from thee to God again.
It was the speech of Christ, when he was to send the Comforter to his
Disciples, John 16.14.
He shall receive of mine (says the text) and give it unto you: mark the
phrase, all graces and all spiritual abilities are Christ's; go thy ways
therefore, and press the Lord Jesus with this promise of his, and say, The
truth is, Lord, the heart to love thee and delight in thee is thine; and thou
have said, thy Spirit shall take of thine, and give to us; therefore give to us
of thine, Lord, that thou may receive of thine from us: Our hearts cannot
love nor delight in thy Majesty, but it must come from thee; give it to us
therefore Lord, that we may give thee of thine own.

abilities, happily thy understanding is not so deep to fadome the mysteries of
life and salvation, thy tongue is not so glib to talk so freely, and confer
so comfortably of heavenly things, thou can not be enlarged in holy duties,
thy understanding is mavelous blind, thy memory mavelous weak, thy parts
exceeding feeble, so that thou art even ashamed of thy self, and of what thou
have and do. But I ask thee this question, Can thou love Christ, and
rejoice in the Lord Jesus? me thinks many a poor soul replies, Yes, I
bless the Lord, that is all I have to uphold my heart withal; I think all
the profits, and pleasures, and friends in the world, cannot draw my love from
Christ, it is my delight to love him, and rejoice in him: Go thy ways then,
and the God of heaven go with thee; this spark is a spark of that immortal
Spirit of the Father which will never dye, it is a work of grace, which will
never leave thee, it is a badge, it is the cognizance, and the proper liverie
which the Lord Jesus Christ gives only to his Saints: there was never a
hypocrite under heaven that ever wore this, God intended it not for them; but
those, and only those, which the Lord has effectually called, and will
glorify with himself hereafter, wear this: and therefore thou that want
all, and yet have this, comfort thy self with this in the want of all, and
say, I love the Lord, and the Lord knows it, and my soul knows that I love
the Lord Jesus; I can say but little for Christ, my understanding is weak, I
conceive not, my memory is weak, I retain not, but yet the Lord knows I
love him, and delight in him. Yea, and know thou it too, and comfort thy self
therein; the Apostle provo^es us to love one another, John 4.7.
because love comes from God; now if the love to the brethren comes from God,
because we see Gods image in them, then the love of God has a much more
express work in it: therefore reason thus with your selves; The time was,
that this wretched, vile, carnal, worldly heart of mine, could find no relish
in the promise; I could not bring this naughty soul of mine to entertain the
Gospel of grace, nor the Spirit of grace, but they were tedious and irksome to
my soul, but the Lord (blessed be his name) has been pleased to help me, so
that I can do that which I never could do. I find the Lords promise and
goodness much more comfortable to me, than all the corn and wine in the
world, and my heart is cheared with the consideration of the same. The Apostle
says, Romans 8.28.
All things shall work together for the best to them that love God; namely, to
those that are called according to his purpose, that is, to those that so love
God, that their love came by calling, according to Gods everlasting counsel.
He called them in his good time from darkness to light, and he called them
from the love of the world, to the love of God; therefore all things shall
work together for the best to them: let nothing therefore discourage thee in
this case, but say, All things shall work for my good, because God has given
me a heart to love him: nay be cheared herein, I charge you, and let not your
hearts droope, and quarrel not with the Lord for a greater portion, but bless
God for that you have received, your lot is fallen into a fair ground, and the
Lord has dealt lovingly with you, you need no more for a childs part. David
desired no more, Look upon me, O Lord, (says he) and do good unto me: how?
as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name. As if he had said, I
desire no more for my life and everlasting happiness, and the comfort of my
soul; deal with me no otherwise, but just so, as thou do with those that
love thy name: I know thou will love them that love thee, I know thou will save
them that love thee; I know thou will comfort them that love thee; I know thou will glorify them that love thee: thus Lord do good to thy servant, I desire
no more, I crave no other, but as thou do, as thou usest to do good to
those that love thy name: if I have that, I have enough: David a King, a
glorious Saint, desired no more, expected no more: if thou have so much, know
that thou art beholding to the Lord, and be contented therewith. Happily you have
not that vain of talking and conference which others have, this is
commendable, but there is a great deal of pride and vanity in it now adays;
thou can not crancke up thy self in performances, but thy heart closes with
God, and thy affections are set upon him, and thy soul burns with love
toward the Lord; why? that is enough to bring thee to heaven, if there be ever
a Saint in heaven, thou art one now, and shall be in heaven forever hereafter.

But now here is the difficulty, if a man had that love which comes from God
according to his purpose, this would stand us in stead: but there is much
feigned, wild, hypocritical love, in the world:

love, whether it be true, of the right nature, or no?

love and joy upon the trial, and we will say no more than what we have ground
for out of the doctrine of the text. Examine thy love and joy by this, whether
thou welcomest, and entertainest the Lord Jesus Christ, as beseemes him;
whether thou entertainest grace, answerable to the worth of grace; for that is
the nature of this love and joy which God kindles and works. Now this appears
in five particulars:

The first is this, if thou will know the truth and soundness of thy love and
joy (for what I say of the one, I say of the other, if love be good, joy will
be sound, for they grow both upon one root, only the one has more sweetness
of Gods favor shed into the heart, which makes the soul sport with it, etc.)
I say therefore, to discover the soundness of this love of thine, observe
these trials:

love came, and wisely consider this, for it is a point of great weight, and
hard to discover, yet it is that which will never fail, it is the narrowest
search in the world; if thy love come from the right mint, it is current and
warrantable, it is such as our Savior approves of: It is Christ's royal
prerogative to mint love, and coin such love, as he will take for payment, and
accept of; therefore does thy love come from the Spirit of the Father? then it
is made fit to close with the Father, and to close with the Lord Jesus, and
with his good Spirit; and consequently the Father allows this, and will give
acceptance to it. You know great men must be entertained answerable to their
worth; for a man to have mean fare and scant provision, this may content a
poor man; but the choicest and best, dear bought, and far fetched, beseemes
men of great rank and place. So there is a kind of lean love, this earthly
and natural love, that grows only out of thy own strength and natural
parts, it is scant provision, it beseemes not, it suits not with God the
Father, it is not answerable to the place and state of the Lord Jesus Christ.
It is good enough for these base things here below, earthly love for earthly
things, carnal love for carnal things; it is good enough for these things.
But will you entertain the Father of heaven? Will you entertain the Lord
Jesus Christ? I tell you then you must have dainties, you must have spiritual
love to welcome a spiritual Father, otherwise it will not be suitable to his
worth. Look as it is with flowers, those flowers which are sown and planted,
and by the skillful hand of the gardener inocculated, are choice ones both for
sent and sight, are your province roses and the like, are of great account; but
your common hedge roses, no man cares for them: So it is with the work of Gods
Spirit, and all other common graces, there is province love, and province joy,
which is planted and wrought in the heart by the skillful hand of God and his
blessed Spirit, these make a sweet smelling savor in the nostrils of God: Aye
that love, says the Father, Aye that love, says the Lord Jesus, we cannot
better please them, than by entertaining them after this matter; but these
hedge roses, this carnal love and carnal joy, that grows upon the hedge of
our own natural hearts, the Lord cares not for this love and joy, it beseemes
him not in any measure, therefore observe this, can thou say, I love God
because he loved me; this is a love of the right coin, it came from the right
mint; and know it for ever, that that God which cannot but love himself, he
cannot but like that love of thine, which is of his own nature, which came
from his own self, who is the God of all love. I would feign have you
understand what I speak, is thy heart therefore affected and enlarged with
love to the Lord, because thou have found, and felt, and received, the
sweetness of the relish of the riches of his grace into thy soul, does love
and joy grow upon this root, namely, upon a grounded application (as I may so
say in special manner) of Gods favor to thy soul, settled, and sealed, and
made known in this kind, if thy love do grow upon this ground, upon the
particular application of Gods mercy to thy soul; so that thy soul can say,
the Lord has looked down from heaven; he has said in his word, that he
will look at them that tremble at his name; I looked for mercy, and I sought
for grace, and blessed be God, I have found that mercy and grace I looked and
sought for, the Minister spoke it, and his Spirit spoke it, that my name was
registered in heaven, and that my prayers were heard, and my desires satisfied,
and therefore how shall I love the Lord that has done all this for me? my
sins I have bewailed, my complaints I have powered forth, and the Lord has
looked from heaven, and given me a gracious answer; therefore I will love the
Lord for it, even for ever; I love thee dearly, O Lord, my strength, thou art
my support that have strengthened me; thou art my Savior that have saved me;
therefore my soul shall for ever love thee, for that mercy of thine; this is
a love now that comes from a right mint, it is current, and good pay.
Difference betwixt the love and joy of an hypocrite, and of Gods child.
But if a man love God from himself, this love will bring a man to himself,
and there leave him: as if a man have a love to his parts, or to his hearing,
or reading, or praying, or preaching, or conferences, if a man have a love to
his understanding, wisdom, and policy, he loves his wisdom and policy
well, therefore he would feign be beholding to Christ, to help him to
glorify this wisdom and policy, and these parts of his, that he might
receive honor to them: now the love of his parts brought all to his parts, and
Christ's honor in the mean time lay in the dust, and so I might instance in a
thousand examples of the like nature: Whereas now (mark what I say) that love
which is wrought from God, always draws the soul unto Gods love again, the
Lord lets down the cords of his love into the soul, and thereby breeds love,
and kindles love in the soul, to that goodness and kindness of his; and this
is the excellency of a Christian, and this love is of a right coin, and of a
right stamp: but love of my parts, that Christ may glorify my parts; and love
of profit, that Christ might promote my profit: I love my parts and profit only
now, and not Christ in this case: and this is the greatest difference between
the love and delight, which the cunningst hypocrite under heaven can have, and
the Saints of God: I express it thus; Meat that a man takes down inwardly,
Simile.
and digests, breeds good blood, and good complexion; but that which a man
takes, and digests not, but vomits out again presently, breeds neither good
blood, nor good complexion: So it is with the love of the heart that is rightly
wrought upon, to entertain and love a Savior, and delight in him, and welcome
him, as beseemes his worth: a heart that is foundly wrought upon by the Spirit,
feeds heartily upon the promise, and that feeding and taking down of the
promise, and that closing with the promise, breeds good blood and good
complexion; true love that breeds good blood, and true joy that breeds good
complexion, because the promise is fed upon: it is the work of Gods Spirit
which seize upon, and work effectually upon the heart, that bred this sound
love and true joy. But a carnal hypocrite, that only has a taste of the
promise, and a flattering apprehension of the promise in general, Christ came
to save sinners, etc. these are pretty things to tickle their conceits, but
they never go down, they digest not the promise of Christ, and therefore that
love which comes from hence, is but a fained love, and that joy which arises
from hence, is but a false joy, it breeds no good blood, it breeds no good
complexion, but mere vanities and overtures in a Christians course; here is
the difference between the love and joy of an hypocrite, and of a Saint of
God: this is the first trial.



So if thou set up any thing with thy Savior, thou do drive him away, as
well by thy base behavior, as by open profession: a man cannot receive
friendship with Christ and the world upon the same terms: James 4.4.
a wife that loves her husband, loves him only as a husband, he only has her
heart, and she loves none but him in that manner; she loves others as friends
and neighbors, and gives them respect so far as they keep themselves there,
but if they come to claim the love of a husband, she abhorres them: so a
loving heart loves Jesus Christ only as a bridegroom, and all things else
only as friends and neighbors: the soul that loves Christ, loves him only as
a Christ, and all the rest as friends: the soul will love riches that may
credit it, and parts that may advance it (as friends to speak for a man, and
to give occasion to a man, to come to a Savior) as the wife loves her husband
firstly, and the rest as friends and neighbors, that must further the match:
so the soul loves the Lord Jesus Christ in the first place, and all things
else, as profit, and riches, and parts, as friends and neighbors that may make
up the match with a Savior, and bring it into acquaintance with a Savior: the
soul loves prayer, and hearing, and Gods ordinances, as friends to speak a
good word to Christ for it; but if any thing come to steal away the heart, and
challenge the affection of a spouse, it abhorres it, it hates honor, and
riches, and all things in the world that will challenge any spouse-like love,
Christ only shall have that.

Luke 14.16. opened.
Our Savior says, He that hates not father and mother for my sake, is not
worthy of me: that is, if father and mother stand between thee and Christ,
if they would be married to thy soul, hate and abhor them, love them so
far as they lead to a Savior, but when they step into the place of a
Savior, abominate and hate them.

Difference between a sound and false heart in the entertainment of Christ.
This I take to be the difference between a sound and false heart, in the
entertainment of the Lord Jesus; a sound heart entertaines a Savior, as a
favorite entertaines a Prince, he comes into his house, and disposes, and
orders every thing as he sees fit, what he will is done, and no more: but now
an in keeper, he entertaines him that comes next, he will take any man's money,
and give welcome to any man, for he loves the gain of all, but loves the
person of none: so a gracious soul entertaines Christ as a Prince, all give
attendance to the Lord, and all the courtiers are welcome, because they are
serviceable to his Majesty; but if a man be an enemy to his Majesty, he will
rather imprison him, than entertain him; he will rather punish him, than
welcome him: but now an hypocrite entertaines the Lord Jesus, as a stranger
into an inn, if honor, or profits, or riches come first, they are first
served, all are welcome, they and Christ, and Christ and they, but loves not
Christ, but he loves himself in all.

must be with every Christian heart that is truly humbled, and has this
affection kindled, beseeming our Savior; the soul that thus entertaines him,
is studiously careful, and mavelous watchful, lest it do any thing that
may grieve the Lord Jesus, and discontent his Spirit, and send the good Spirit
of the Lord sad; or in any dislike to Heaven; it is careful, lest the Lord
Jesus should be displeased with him, and offended at him, or go away in anger
and displeasure; the heart fears, lest he should do any thing that may cause
this, and it would be almost death to him, if he should do this. Mark the
guise and behavior of the Spouse, she never left seeking of her beloved, till
she had found him, Cant. 3.7.
and when she had found him, she lays hold of him, and when she has done so,
she brings him home, and when he was there, she gives charge to all the
house, I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and the Hindes of
the field, that you stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please. Look as
it is when men of great place come into a man's house, there is a great charge
and warning given; see there be no noise about such a place, lest such a man be
raised before his time. What baseness is this that we should have our hearts
enlarged to any thing but Christ? A good heart will do as the spouse did here;
when the soul has received the Spirit of a Savior, and found the mercy of a
Savior, it keeps watch and ward within it self, and gives peremptory charge
to all in the family; I charge you profits, and pleasure, and riches, and
honor, and all the things of this life, love and joy, and all the faculties of
the soul, (it gives them warning) I charge you that you stir not, I charge
you that you grieve not, I charge you that you disquiet not the Spirit of the
Lord, let there be no motion but entertain it, no command but obey it; no
advice but receive it; thus the soul gives peremptory charge, not to grieve
the Spirit of the Lord, or to do any thing that may distaste it.

See this in Lot, who when he had received the two Angels into his house, the
cursed Sodomites came to the door, and thought to abuse his strangers. Now
(mark it I beseech you) Lot could be content that rather any hurt or distaste
should befall himself than them: therefore observe how he pleads with those
base people. Lot went out unto them, and shut the doors after him, and said;
Genesis 19.8.
I pray you brethren do not so wickedly; Behold now I have two daughters which
have not known man, let me bring them out unto you, and do to them as is good
in your eyes, only to these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the
shadow of my roof. This was kind honorable entertainment. As Lot deal with
the Angels, so a loving heart will deal with the Lord Jesus: let my soul be
wounded (says the loving heart) but let not Gods Spirit be grieved; let my
honor be laid in the dust, but let not God be dishonored; let temptations,
oppositions, persecutions, and disgrace befall me, but let Gods glory be
advanced. The soul is willing and content to bear any thing, but it will do
nothing against Christ, it will do nothing against the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus. The soul says, you may do what you will with me, my life, and honor,
and wealth is in your hands, but to the Lord do no harm; blaspheme not his
Name, resist not his Spirit, do no dishonor to his Gospel, do not contemn
his grace what ever betides me: This is the frame of the soul that truly loves
Christ.

They that entertain Persons which they highly respect, are inquisitive of
those that appertain unto them to know what their mind is, what likes your
master, and what takes he most contentment in? this they do, that they may
prevent him with a kindness, though he ask not for it; what ever will best
content him, they seek for it, and what ever will distaste him they labor to
avoid it: So a gracious loving soul never satisfies it self, but labors to
give content to the Lord Jesus, that he may have his will only. Therefore
such a soul will come to a faithful Minister and ask him, how must I order
my family? What shall I do in regard of my self and children? How may I
please the Lord better? And how may I entertain the Lords Spirit better? What
duty is to be performed? What service is to be discharged? What course is to
be taken, that I may please Christ? You are acquainted with Christ, you know
what will content him; I pray you tell me how I may pray so; and perform
duties so that nothing may distaste him, or be offensive unto him. This I take
to be the difference between an honest sincere heart which entertaines Christ
as beseemes him, and a naughty hypocritical spirit that would fawn upon
Christ Jesus: this is the difference between faithful true love and joy, and
dissembling love and joy. There is the same ods between them, which is
between a man that entertaines a servant, and another that entertaines a noble
friend, or a King into his family. A man entertains a servant, that he may
please him, Simile.
and not that he may please his servant: he sees he is wise to order his
occasions, and diligent to dispatch his business, and therefore he receives
him, that he may get contentment from the servant, not that he may give
contentment to the servant: but if he finds any inconveniency in his estate,
or receives not that satisfaction from him which he desires and expects, he
turns him out of doors. But now he which entertaines a Noble man after a
noble manner, and he which entertaines a King after a kingly manner, labors to
give him all content, he will not please himself, nor fulfill his own mind,
but studies how he may give content to the Noble man, or to the King. Nay it
is admirable to see what men of great place will do in this case: When they
entertain a King, they themselves will be servants while the King is there;
happily he is a man of great estate, and has many to attend upon him, yet he
gives charge to his servants, I care not what becomes of me, but be sure let
his Majesty be pleased; and if any comes to speak with him, he tells him he
cannot possibly speak with him now, he must attend upon his Majesty.

So it is between a sound faithful loving soul that entertaines Christ, and
an Hypocrite; the one receives Christ into his soul as a servant into his
family, and all the while Gods Gospel or Grace may promote his honor, or
ease, or credit, so far as these may serve his turn, so far as profit, and
honor, and riches come in by this means, welcome Gospel, and welcome Christ:
But if he sees danger will come, or inconvenience befall, or misery betide;
then he turns Gospel, and Christ, and profession, and all out of doors,
because he entertained the Gospel only as a servant to content himself. But
he that entertaines Christ and the Gospel, as a King into his soul, labors
to give him all content, he will not please himself, or his lusts, or his
pride or vain glory, or any thing in the world: Nay when Christ comes once to
be received into the soul, he which before had his retinue, and all to attend
upon him; they must all serve Christ now, nay he will not give Christ distaste
in the least thing, he cares for no honor now, but to honor him, he cares for
no advancement now, but to advance him, he esteems of no riches now, but so
far as they may credit the Gospel: Nay to go further, they that were his
nearest and dearest friends, if they come and desire his company, he tells them
no, he cannot, the Lord Jesus must be pleased, and the Spirit must be
contented: Nay his old lusts, and his old acquaintance, his old base haunts of
heart, and his old sinful courses, that have been at inward league with his
soul, though they come and plead for acceptance, the poor sinner regards none
of all these, he respects Christ only: Nay he will displease a fashion, rather
than he will displease Christ; he will displease all the great men under
Heaven, rather than he will displease Christ. Nay all that same glory and
pride of his which has been so much beloved of him, the soul that has been
truly humbled, and brought to an apprehension of Gods goodness, will rather
displease that than displease the Lord Jesus Christ.

This is an entertainment that beseemes the Lord, and this is the guise that
beseemes him which gives contentment to a Savior: You must now and then
receive the Gospel when it pleases you, and anon fling out the Lord Jesus,
and currishly behave your selves toward him; but you must give all content
unto him, and bestow all attendance upon him. It is admirable to see what love
will do, how men will square their minds and hearts to the minds of those
that are tendered by them; they will be where they please, do what they will,
Psalm. 40.8.
and talk of what they will: I delight to do thy good will, O my God, (says
David) the original carries it thus, It is my good will to do thy good
pleasure: So it is the good will of the soul that loves God to please him
above all things, we should so speak, and work, and walk, as beseemes the
Lord, as will give sweet contentment to the Lord, that he may delight to love
us, and walk with us, and be a good GOD unto us for ever.

love indeed. But see a pattern of love, and a blessed mirror of a heart
enlarged with affection: When David was anointed to the crown, and Saul pursued
him heavily, and thought to defeat him of the Kingdom, and dealt wretchedly
and cruelly with him; 1 Samuel 23.17.
Now Jonathan meets him after an heavy affliction, and labors to cheer up the
heart of David, and says, Fear not, for the hand of Saul shall not find
thee, thou shall be King over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee: A man
would think, why should not Jonathan rather labor for the crown himself,
he was next heir apparent thereunto; he might have said, Saul is my father,
and why should not I succeed him in the crown? why should David start in
before me? No, this comforted his heart, and rejoiced and cheered his soul,
David shall be King, and I shall be next unto him; he loved David dearly,
and therefore this refreshed him, thou shall be King in Israel, and it is the
comfort of my heart, that I shall be next unto thee. As who should say, it
contents me more that thou shall be honored, than if I my self were honored.

So it is with a good heart that loves Jesus Christ, and his Grace, and his
Gospel: Oh, the happiness of the Gospel, and the promotion thereof, is the
greatest good and comfort that can befall him. The Christian says, let God be
honored, though I be disparaged, it skils not: Is the Lord advanced, and does
his Gospel thrive? Is his Glory promoted? Does the work of grace go forward?
It is enough, what becomes of my honor, or parts, or liberty, or case, it is
no matter. Let it go well with the Gospel, and let honor be given to the
Lord Jesus in the use of the means, and ordinances which he has bestowed upon
us; let Gods cause find that acceptance amongst his servants which it ought,
it is sufficient, it rejoices my heart. See this in John the Baptist, when
Christ began to set forth the Gospel, and to baptize, and many came unto him;
the Disciples of John grudged at it, and said unto John, John 3.29.
Rabbi, He that was with thee beyond Jordan, of whom thou barest witness,
behold the same baptizeth and all come to him: (Now mark how John speaks) His
Disciples were stirred because they thought the honor and credit went away
from them. As if they had said, Master, there is one now that carries all
before him, every man's eye is toward him, and every man's heart is after him.
Now John loved Christ, and mark how he replies, He that has the Bride, is the
Bridegroom, but the friend of the bridegroom, which stands and hears,
rejoices greatly, because of the bridegroomes voice, this my joy therefore is
fulfilled. As who should say, Christ is the Bridegroom, I am but the friend of
the Bridegroom, who labor only to prepare hearts for Christ. Is the Lord
honored? Is the Lords work prospered? if this be so my joy is full, I have
enough; let the Lord increase, though I decrease; let the Lord have the praise
that is due unto him, and what ever befalls me, I care not.

This also was that of Mephibosheth, when he was dealt falsely with, and some
false reports had been suggested to David against him, he was content to put
up all the wrong; and when David returned in peace, and he saw the Kings face,
and that he had gained the day, and got the field: David began to comfort and
refresh him, 2 Samuel 19.30.
and bade him divide the land which he had taken from him, between Ziba and
him: now mark how he replieth, Let him take all, for as much as the King is
come again in peace to his own house: as who should say, as for the land it
skils not; as for my self, and the field, and my life, I pass not; for as
much as you my King are come home in peace, it is enough, it is sufficient that
I have seen your Majesty in peace; this was better to him, than the field, or
any thing else, whatsoever could befall him.

Beloved, many a man is all a mort, because his honor falls to the ground, and
because his credit lies in the dust; but if he may have his own honor and
credit, he is not troubled, though Christ and his Gospel, and Gods honor and
glory lie in the dust; this man loves not the Lord: for he that loves the Lord,
makes him his portion and his glory; it is enough Christ is mine; it is
sufficient that his glory and Gospel prospers; what ever befalls me, I care
not; let the world take my ease, and liberty, and life, and all, let the
Gospel be advanced, I care not.

Brethren, such are the base dispositions of too too many amongst us, they can
tread upon Christ's shoulders, and lift up him, that they may appear above him;
they can labor to lift up Gods Gospel, that they may lift up themselves
thereby: this is a base disposition, that harbors in the heart of most men:
but (I beseech you) lie down in the dust, and be content that the Lord may be
advanced, though thou be disgraced; be content that the Lords name may be
praised, though thou be dishonored: what though every man's mouth be against
thee? and every man's hand opposite unto thee? yet if God be honored, let that
comfort thee: nay if any of Gods people advance God more than thy self,
rejoice in it: and let this be the aim of all our endeavors for ever.

is the best of all other things, which the soul can desire, or the heart
possess. 2 Branches.
There are two branches of the point; I will handle the one largely, and only
touch the other.



When David had been doting on the things here below, at last he came to see
better things in God: and see how he stays his heart: Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth that I desire in
comparison of thee: he bids adieu to all other things, and mark what follows;
It is good for me to draw near to God. As if he had said, let the rich man
have his wealth, and let the ambitious man have his honor, let the drunkard
have his cup, and the adulterer his sweet dalliances: let them drink, and
swill, and whore, and go down to hell, much good do it them with their sops,
let them have what their hearts can desire; but it is good for me to draw nigh
unto God: Oh the pleasures that are at Gods right hand! Oh the mercy and
holiness which he has prepared, and will bestow upon those that are upright!

When Marie had been seeking and weeping for a Savior, Christ said unto her,
Woman why weepest thou? John 20.16.
Whom seek thou? Mark now what Marie did, being moved with love to the
Lord; she conceived Christ to be the Gardener, and she spoke thus, Sir, if
thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take
him away: She would be content to have the body of a Savior rather than want a
Savior, she would have a dead Savior rather than none: but when our Savior
revealed himself to her, when she saw that he lived, and was risen again,
she flew upon him and with mavelous violence embraced our Savior, (for so
the words must of necessity be understood) for Christ says, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended: the meaning is this, Marie was very eager of her
Savior: Have I again seen my Savior? And do I again possess him? I will
never part with him more: Christ says unto her, Marie, and so discovers
himself: she says unto him, Rabboni, that is to say, Master; and there she
holds, as if she would never leave him more: now Christ checks her, because she
depended so much upon his outward presence: He says unto her, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended; as if he had said, I shall live many days upon the
earth, and thou shall be satisfied with my presence, therefore do not cling
so fast unto me; for the word touch signifies as much; and the same word is
used in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.1. opened.
It is good for a man not to touch a woman, that is, to cleave and to cling
unto her; and it is taken from those pieces of buildings, which are let one
into another: her affection was such, that she would not part with her Savior,
when she had met him.

This is a lively picture of that love which many a poor soul possesses,
when the Lord lets in the glimpse of his love into the heart; when the soul
has waited long for mercy and comfort, and the Lord is pleased at last to
refresh it, and cheer it therewith, and to let in some sweet incklings, and
intimations thereof; many of Gods Saints begin to be light headed, because
they are so ravished therewith, they are always cleaving thereunto, insomuch
that many times they are almost besides themselves.

Look as it is with parties that live in the same family, Simile.
and their affections are drawing on one toward another in marriage; they will
cast their occasions so, that if it be possible, they will be together, and
have one another company, and they will talk together, and work together,
and the time goes on mavelous suddenly, all the while their affections are
drawing on: so it is with the soul that loves Jesus Christ, and has this holy
affection kindled, it thinks every place happy, where it has heard of Christ,
and thinks that hour sweet, wherein it put up its prayers to the Lord, and
enjoyed love-chat with him; he thinks the Sabbath mavelous sweet, wherein
God is revealed in the power of his ordinances: any glimpse of Gods goodness,
and notice of his mercy in Christ, is mavelous comfortable to the soul.

And it is the desire of the soul to fit by it: as the drunkard does in
another kind, so the loving soul would fit by this mercy and love of God,
that he may be more acquainted with it, and more quickened and cheared by it;
the soul is ravished therewith, and overcome as it were with the apprehension
thereof: Psalm. 84.
David envyed the porter that kept the door of Gods temple, where Gods
presence was, and the very birds that built their nests there: as if he had
said, You have liberty to see the sacrifices offered, and you may hear the
voices of Gods people, and you may build your nests in the temple of my God,
and my Lord; and Lord am not I as good as birds? therefore his heart was
inflamed with the want of these ordinances of God. Nay old Simeon when he had
seen our Savior incarnate, his heart was so enlarged therewith, that he would
have been content to have left his body, that he might have had his full of
his Savior; Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation: as if he had said, stand by body, let me come to my
Savior, let me be for ever with him, I have been long enough in this
sinful world already. A spouse that is contracted, thinks every day a year,
and every year twenty, till that day comes; she blesses the very place where
the bridegroom is, and she thinks the parties happy that talk with him, and
she takes every token that comes from him mavelous kindly, but yet she
thinks, if that day would once come wherein she might possess him, and be
possessed of him, that she, and she alone might enjoy her husband; Oh this
would be a happy day, her heart would be cheared, and exceedingly refreshed
therewith: so a loving soul that has been truly humbled and enlightened in
the apprehension of Gods love and mercy, and is contracted, as I may so say,
unto Christ, has many thoughts; when will it once be, that I may be married to
Christ, and possess him, and be possessed of him? to be with Christ is best
for me: such a one thinks every token mavelous welcome, and every promise,
and every word, that reveals any intimation of Gods kindness; but yet, oh when
will the day come, that I shall be forever with the Lord Jesus; this is the
highest pitch, that Saint Paul speaks of, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
We that are alive, and remain, says he, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, and meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever
with the Lord: thus the soul thinks, when will that day come, that I may
never be with sin more, never with the world more, never with corruptions
more, never with base company more? but with that mercy, and that Spirit, and
that grace, and with that Christ, for ever and ever; this is the guise of the
soul, and the frame of the heart, that is kindled in sound love to the Lord
Jesus; nay such is the strong and gluing nature of true love, that it will make
a man be with the thing beloved, though he be in never so great misery. When
Jacobs sons came, and told him that Joseph was slain, Jacob was grievously
distressed, because he loved him dearly; now mark what the text says, All
his sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be
comforted; and said, I will go down into the grave to my son Joseph; he
would rather be in the grave, than not to be with Joseph; and he will go
down into the grave, that he may be with him: so the wife that loves her
husband, when he is in prison, she will be there with him, she is sorry
that it should be so with her husband, but she will rather be in the prison
with him, than want his company: so an humble soul that has his heart kindled
in earnest and sound affection to Christ, is content even to go into the grave
with the Lord Jesus, yea into prison with the Lord Jesus; let me be with
Christ, says he, though I be in persecution; let me be with the Lord Jesus,
though I be in dishonor: it is a grief to the soul if Christ be so; but a
greater grief, if he may not be with him where he is: Cant. 2.6.
when the spouse had wanted her bridegroom a great while, and at last the Lord
was pleased to reveal himself unto her, she fastens upon him, and rests
contented with him and desires no more; my beloved is mine, and I am his; as
who should say, thou art mine, and I am thine, let the world think what it
will, I am thy wife, and thou art my husband: so says the soul, Christ is
mine, and I am his, and if I may have more of that grace and holiness which is
in Christ, I have enough, I desire no more, but without that I cannot be
contented, I cannot be satisfied.

Secondly, there is a holy restlesnesse and impatience in the soul till it can
attain this, it will take no nay at the hand of the Lord, but sues for the
match though Christ seem to forbid the banes; and it were worth the while to
observe how restless the soul is, and how it be stirs it self to attain
nearer union with the Lord Jesus, even when he seems to absent his presence
from the soul; but we cannot prosecute that, so that by this time then it does
appear what it is to love the Lord trul^, and we have laid down the trial
whereby we may know whether we have this love or no.

professors among us; they love not Christ, they rejoice not in him, yet they
will not be persuaded of it; therefore give a little attendance I beseech you
to what I shall say.

This is the cunning that Satan has to deceive poor souls withal, because
these holy affections are inward and retired, as hope, and desire, and love,
and joy; because I say they are secret things in the soul, and do not
discover themselves outwardly to the view of the world, further than the fruits
thereof manifest the same: Therefore men not knowing these affections
themselves, and not conceiving of the nature of them, that is the cause that
many lean upon the expectation of what they have in frame of heart, though
they want in the course of their lives: this is that which every man almost
does challenge to himself, as that whereby he will bear up his heart in time
of trouble, and cheer up his soul in the day of distress. Wicked men when
every one cannot but see and behold their base courses, and loath their sinful
practices, nay when they themselves cannot but confess their filthy
behaviors, etc. Why they confess they fall foully, and they fall daily and
scandalously; but that which heals all and helps all is this, they say it is
true it is so with their lives, but yet they love the Lord Jesus with all their
hearts; every vile varlet will say thus when he has sworn by a Savior, and
torn his flesh in pieces, his blessed body, his blood, his wounds and all; yet
when he has done this, he loves a sweet Savior still. Oh poor deluded
miserable sinful wretch: that I may apply my self particularly to such a one;
I beseech you give me leave to do two things. First, I will make it good that
most men have not this love of God: Secondly, I will plead the Indictment, and
then when I have laid out the Indictment and pleaded it, and showed who they
are that have not this love of God, the point will be clear.

First it is sure and most certain, 1 Most in the world have no love to God,
but hatred against him.
that most in the world that live in the bosom of the Church have not their
hearts carried in any love of God, but in a hatred and desperate opposition
against the Lord Jesus Christ, In him was life, and this life was the light of
the world, and the light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not: the meaning is this, the Lord Jesus Christ was the life of the promise, in
him was life, the promise of life was in Christ, and that promise of life was a
light to teach men the way to life and salvation; but when this light of the
promise of grace shined to the world, the dark world comprehended it not, they
knew it not, Christ came unto his own, John 1.11.
and his own received him not. There the Lord speaks of the Jews that were
his chosen people, and his own by covenant: His own by reason of the
privileges and benefits, and ordinances which he bestowed upon them: His own
by profession, they took the Name of Christ upon them: Christ came not to
heathens and pagans, but to his own, and they received him not. How many are
there amongst us who profess the Name of the Lord Jesus, and take up the
Gospel of Christ, and yet being Christians in profession, will not entertain
the love of the Lord Jesus Christ which should make us Christians in d^ed.
Christ comes to many a man's door, and knocks, and calls, and entreats
entrance, but few will entertain him when he comes; nay let me say more, my
heart trembles to speak it, nay my heart, were it as it should be, would
grieve to think it: Wicked men are so far from prising Christ and loving the
Lord Jesus, that they hate him more than sin; nay I had almost said, yet I am
loath to speak it, my heart shakes to think it, but that I hope you are
willing to hear the worst; why then I will speak it, and they are the words
of the Scripture, wicked men hate Christ more than the devil himself; the
Lord be merciful to such poor sinful creatures, good Lord that ever men should
be created by the Lord, and enjoy mercy and means from the Lord, and yet love
sin and the devil himself more than God.



Hazael in another case* I know, says he, the evil thou will do to the
children of Israel, their strong holds will thou set on fire, 2 King. 8.12.13.
and their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their
children, and rip up their women with child* but Hazael said, what, am I a
dog that I should do this? the Prophet told him, the Lord has showed it
unto me: I know, says the Prophet, the cruelty and venom of thy spirit though
thou know it not: So when I speak of these things, men will be ready to
say, what, are there any such dogs to deal thus with the Lord Jesus: I tell
you the Lord knows this, and the Word sees all thy venom and spite and
hatred against Christ, the Lord sees and knows it. Most men in their hearts
do hate Christ, though they see it not: beloved, your hearts are more vile
than you can conceive, and more base than you can imagine, the Word will make
it clear. The greatest evil of all we know is sin, the Devil is not to be
loathed but for his sin; and the reason why he is so loathsome, is because
he is so sinful. Now mark what the text says, this is the condemnation,
John 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more than the
light: the Lord revealed light (that is, Christ) to the world, but the world
loved sin and the temptations of Satan, and the corruptions of their own
hearts more than Christ, and more than mercy that was tendered to them in the
Lord Jesus; it is clear therefore it was so, it will be so, and it is so to
this day; Men love their base lusts and sinful corruptions more than the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the power of his grace which he expresses to their souls,
and consequently they love the delusions and suggestions of Satan, more than
the motions of Gods Spirit, and the comfort thereof. Thus now we have laid
down the Indictment, let us also plead it a little; we see there be many in
the Church that do not love the Lord Jesus Christ, but who are they? of that
we will now speak, for when we lay the charge, we must name the man; the
Indictment in general is nothing, we will therefore refer these men that
love not Christ to three ranks. The first are open enemies to Christ: The
second are the glozing newters of the world: The third are the fawning
Hypocrites that are fair in show, but false in heart; all these are guilty of
this Indictment, we will therefore plead it against them, desiring the Lord to
convince their consciences thereof.

Isaiah speaks of, ye stiff necked and hardhearted, ye have resisted the
Spirit of the Lord: Those which set their mouths against Heaven, and stand in
open defiance against the Lord Jesus, and against the power of his Grace, and
the work of his Spirit in the hearts of his, and in the ministry of the Word,
and these we refer to two heads.

the Householder let out his Vineyard to Husbandmen, Matthew. 21.33.
and when the time of the fruits drew near, he sent his servants to the
Husbandmen that he might receive the fruits of it, and the Husbandmen took his
servants, and beat one, and killed another, and sto^^^ another; at last he sent
his son, and said, surely they will reverence my son; nay when he came
they all combined and conspired together, and said, this is the Heir, come let
us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours; this was an intimation of the
Scribes and Pharisees, the Chuch was the Vineyard, and it was let out to them,
and God sent his Prophets among them, they persecuted them; then he sent his
Disciples, they stoned them, and when his Son came, they conspired against
the Lord Jesus, with one open mouth, with one joint endeavor; Come, said they,
this is the Heir, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours: And do
you think that the Scribes and Pharisees are dead, and have left none of their
cursed brood and generation behind them? I tell you beloved, there are many
persecutors of Christ and his Gospel to this day, which are the leaders of the
camp, which stand in open defiance of the God of Heaven; but if you ask me
what entertainment their lusts have among these men, they find all welcome:
possible temptations whisper not, occasions come not, corruptions stir not so
soon, be the company never so base, the course never so vile, the practice
never so wicked, but these miserable sinful creatures give audience and
attendance, and acceptance, and entertainment to these base courses, nay they
invite them and provide for them, nay they bestow a great deal of cost for the
entertainment of their lusts, they seek out occasions to commit their sins;
the adulterer goes in the twilight to meet his queanes, and the drunkard goes
to the Alehouse to meet with his base companions; thus they invite their
lusts, and provide for their lusts; this is that the Apostle disswades us from;
Romans 13.14.
make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: yet these men
make provision for their base lusts, their minds are plotting, and their
endeavors laboring, to provide all courses that may give entertainment to
their lusts; therefore no marvel they find such long continuance in their
sins, because they make such provision for them: but now if you will observe
how these men entertain Christ, you may discover it by these two passages.

Luke. 19.27.
Bring hither mine enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, and
slay them before my face: the word would pluck the cup from the drunkards
mouth, and the adulterer from enjoying his dalliances with his mate; but their
hearts swell, and they groan to be under that truth, and under the rule
thereof, and to be swayed thereby; nay they do not only withdraw themselves
from yielding obedience to the holiness of the word, but they will not so much
^s acknowledge the truth of the word, which the Devil himself did: when Paul
was preaching the grace of life and salvation, the text says, Acts 16.17.
The damsel that had the spirit of divination met him, and the Devil said,
These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation: the Devil acknowledged that this was the word, and the very truth;
the Devil acknowledged these were the services which God commands, and these
were the duties which ought to be discharged: but wicked men will not be
persuaded of this, they will not believe that they must be holy, as he is holy;
neither will they believe, that they must be pure, as he is pure; these men do
not give God so much honor, as the Devil did: but die out, and say, I will
never be of that opinion, all the world shall not persuade me to it, five
hundred Ministers shall not make me think so: Beloved, this is professed
opposition, and desperate hatred against the Lord, not only to withdraw ^he
heart from obedience, but the understanding from the acknowledgement of the
truth, which ^he Devil himself confesses: Lord, what hearts ^ave these men,
and what distempers are in their ^pirits? who will not do that, which the
Devil ^imselfe will do.

hate a Christian, because Christ has humbled and brought him home, then I
hate Christ infinitely, then I hate his Spirit infinitely, then I hate his
grace infinitely much more; if I hate the lantern for the lights sake, then I
hate the light much more: a thief cannot endure a lantern, if it be a light
lantern, (if it be a dark one, happily he can away with it) but if it be a
light lantern, he loathes the lantern, and he loathes the man that brings
it, but he hates the light much more than the lantern: so is it with every
sinful opposer of the practice and profession of Gods grace: a Saint of God
has a rush candle light of Gods grace, and purity, and uprightness, and he
carries this among a company of blasphemers and opposers of God and his grace,
now when they see this light of holiness, they hate the man that bears it,
much more holiness it self, which is in him, for which he is so opposed an^
resisted.

To this rank also belongs your poor, ignorant, carnal creatures, and
civilized carnal Gos^elers, however they will not do, what these ^en do, yet
they will approve of what they do; poor silly things that know nothing of God
and grace, and can do nothing against the truth of God of themselves; though
they are not brought to this height of wickedness, to be profe^^ opposers
against that which is holy, yet they will join sides with the wicked, and what
they do they commend, and appl^^d, and approve of: ^f a poor Christian be
banded from one place to another, to the loss of his liberty, and grief of
his heart; nay, say these poor deluded creatures, and carnal gospellers, it
is no matter, they must be more holy than others, and they must be more precise
than others, it is no matter now, see what they get by it; these men now
approve of what a company of persecutours do, and their heart is the same,
though they do not do the same they are guilty of it, because of their
approvement of it; as the Scribes and Pharisees conspired against our Savior;
the soldiers they took our Savior, Pilat he condemned our Savior, now the
poor crowd, they cried below, Crucify him, crucify him, they did not
condemn him, nor take him, but they were guilty of crucifying Christ, because
they gave their consent and approvement thereunto, as S. Peter says, Ye have
crucified the Lord of life, so there are a company of poor creatures, Acts 2.
you know you old poor husband, and your old poor father, though poor
fools, they can do nothing against the Gospel, yet it does their hearts
good, when it is opposed, and they say, it is well, it is pity but it should
be so: I tell thee thou a^ guilty of opposing Christ, as well as he that
persecutes Christ; mark what Christ says to the Scribes and Pharisees, Your
Fathers slew the Prophets, and you build their sepulchers; that is, th^^
approved the practices of their fathers, so th^^ look as it is with a camp,
there are some lead^^ and commanders, and there are some soldiers and there
are others which are followers of the camp, and carry the baggage; now though
(...) be not leaders, and captains, and soldiers, yet all are of the same
camp; so there is a great long train in the Devils camp, there are some
leaders, and professed opposers of Christ, which the sun is weary to behold,
and the earth is weary to bear, these are the soldiers, and captains, and
commanders, and poor ignorant creatures, and carnal gospellers that follow
the baggage, they are of the black guard too, though they are the tail of the
army, yet they are of the army of the Devil, and they are all young Satan's,
though their talents be not so long, and their claws so sharp, as others are;
they have not learned the skill to make a prey of a poor man, as others have,
but yet they will approve of that which others do: consider this then all ye
that stand in open defiance against Christ, all you that join sides with, and
give a kind of allowance to such ungodly courses, you are guilty and found
tardy in this case, though the sin be not yours by action, yet you make it by
approvement: thus the open enemy to Christ is gone, as also the poor ignorant
creature, and carnal gospeller, and civilized person, who though the will not
do a thing, yet it is roast meat to him to see it done.

glozing neuters, these also love their sins more than Jesus Christ, and love
not him in truth; these are those that halt between two opinions, your
linfie-woolsie men, (as we speak in the proverb) these tame fools that will
do no body no harm, provided that no man hurts them; the highest pitch of
these neuters is this that they may procure safety among all men, and gain
some respect amongst the best; they wish all should do well, but their
resolution is this, they will not trouble themselves, nor be troublesome to
others, they say, hurt comes by meddling, and he that meddles lest is best at
ease; they dwell like civil good neighbors by Christ and the Gospel, and now
and then they will do Christ a good turn, provided they may not hazard
themselves, and that they may serve their own turn; they will welcome all
persons of all ranks, if a blasphemer or riotous person comes in, they will
suit with them, and welcome them, if they be never so vile and base, they will
say nothing; little said is soon amended; they will not reprove them, because
they should not censure them again: nay if they will take up sinful courses
(though they will not do the same with them yet) they will stand by and look
on, and secretly give allowance thereunto: nay further (I beseech you, observe
it) as they will welcome such persons, so they will often invite a Minister to
their houses, and entreat him to preach on the sunday, and they: will strain
marvellously: ^o^ some holy talk, because they know the heart of a poor
Minister cannot brook idle conference, but this neuter likes those Ministers
best, that will not meddle with any personal fault in his family; but if a
Minister will speak only in the general, he has what he would, and he
commends highly the judgment of the man, he thanks him extraordinarily for
his pains, and desires much more of his company, and commends him for a very
discreet man, and one that knows how to carry himself; (I and he knows how
not to meddle with him, you must understand that too) if the Minister will
preach doctrinall things only, and take up points, and lay them down, and have
half a score points in his sermon, then he extols him for a judicious and
learned man in the Scripture, and he gathers the very cream of the Scripture,
but if he come home to the conscience, and apply personally, and discover
particularly the baseness of his heart, and the baseness of his life, he
then takes his Bible and falls to reading, he cannot hear with that ear, but
wishes that men would follow their text, (and I could wish every one did so)
Now this neuter intrencheth upon articles of agreement between him and the
Gospel, for he made this covenant with the Gospel, that he will not trouble
the Gospel, not persecute it, neither will not have that to meddle with him,
but if the Gospel come home to him, and would drive him out of his pace, he
wishes the Minister would keep his text: this man counts zeal in a good
course, like a fever in a man's body, and he thinks it dangerous to be sick,
and therefore he will keep a cold temper in his body for constitution, and a
cold luke warm temper in his profession, and then he is admirable healthful;
and ^he will be talking much of the customs of men in the world that are in
great place, and if there be any thing which is naught authorized by great men:
he takes much upon him those two words, Church and state, and holds them up as
ensigns, and he thinks it a strange thing, and thinks it to be high
treason, and false Latin, that any man should question on what he speaks in
this case, the English of it is this, he is resolved to see the strongest side,
and he will be with that side, whether it be with the Lord Christ, or the power
of his grace, he cares not, but he will be sure to sleep in a whole skin; so
that these base sinful men care not for the power of religion, they love
themselves, and love not Christ: these men deal with profession, as the
neuterall towns in the Low countries deal with the armies and soldiers of
the Emperor and the King of Denmark, they will lean to both, that they may
be subject to neither, they will not take sides with the Emperor, nor yet with
the King of Denmark, but they will be content for to live at ease, and they
will do any thing that they may not be troubled, but if any of both sides
begin to set upon them, they turn head presently, they will do no harm to
them, if they will not hurt them; but if they seek to bring them under
authority, they are not able to bear it, but resist them: so it is with these
neuteralists in a Christian course, they will fashion themselves to the world,
that the world may not despite them, and they will fashion themselves in
profession to the better side, that they may not distaste them; a man will pray
in his family in the morning, and leave Christ there, and pays tribute that
way, only Christ must give him leave to cousen in his shop at noon; ^et him
have what he would, and he will pay tri^ute to the Gospel, and Christ, and
all; he will pay ^ribute of all hands that he may not be troubled. This is
observable of men in great place, a great man will have one or two good
servants in his family, to credit himself that way, and he will ^ave a knave
and a drunkard too, that they may ^lose with those of that rank, and so get
credit ^n both sides: but if the Gospel besiege this man, and the power of the
Word flies in the very face ^f him, and he must lay down his own aims and
ends, and he must lay down his applause of ^he world, and his own credit, and
his civilizing ^ourses; then they turn head presently, and are ^ot able to
bear the authority of the truth, to ^oope thereunto, and be framed thereby
(for the ^ords sake think of it) these men entertain Christ in this case, as
sometimes men do their ^eighbours, they entertain them lovingly if they ^ill
keep within their bounds, and look to their own ground, that he may suffer
no harm ^y them, but now to entertain him as a Land^ord, and as a Conqueror,
that he should take all ^om them, and they depend upon him, this they cannot
bear. Now the Saints do this, they can ^ntertaine the Lord Jesus as a
Landlord, and as a Commander; but these newters entertain the Gospel and
Christ as good neighbors; all the ^hile the Gospel troubles them not, and
puts no ^azard upon them, they will welcome it; but if the power of the truth
will by force press in upon them, and make them either better or worse, they
cannot bear it with patience, but are in a devilish fume with the power of
the Gospel that is revealed with evidence unto them: Let these men know that
they which are not with Christ, are against Christ in his account, though a man
stand still and do nothing, and therefore thinks all shall be well with him,
and all shall be quiet with him; let him know that all the wrong which is done
to Christ and to his Gospel, which he sees and assents unto, and is not an
helper against, the Lord will require it at his hands, and they are guilty of
it before the Lord: C^rs^ ye Merosh, curse him with a bitter curse, because
he went not out to help the Lord against the mighty; It is nothing for a man
to say I did not such a thing, and I was loath to put my finger in the fire
before I was called, I tell thee thou were called to it; such a man, such a
Minister, that saw the Gospel lie at the stake, and had not a heart to grieve
for it, and a hand to succor it, he is guilty thereof: the Lord will spew
such new^ets out of hi^ mouth, Revel. 3.16.
I would thou were either hot or cold, because thou art neither, therefore I
will spew thee out of my mouth; that is, either openly profane, or soundly
sincere, be something, appear in your colors either a Saint that may be
saved, or else a Devil that may be damned; otherwise the Lord will vomit you
out of his mouth: cold water is best digested, and a man's stomach by hot water
is least offended, but luke warm water is most loathsome; so the Lord hates
and abhors a lukewarm Laodicean fool that is of no side, because ^he is not
sincere hearted of any side.

fawning Hypocrite, who pretends extraordinary zeal for Christ, and expresses
outwardly much love to goodness, and will speak for a good cause, and hazard
himself therein; and yet when he has done all, and showed himself a friend
to Christ in profession, he proves in conclusion a most bitter enemy: Saul was
just such a fawning Hypocrite, God commanded him to go against the Amalekites,
1 Samuel 15.3.
and destroy all: Now Saul pretends great matters what he would do, and what
he had done for the Lord; and when Samuel came to meet him, Saul said, Blessed
be thou of the Lord, I have performed the Commandment of the Lord: as if he
had said, I am glad you are here, that I may give up my account, I have done
what the Lord enjoined me to do, and am glad that I may approve my heart unto
thee herein; but Samuel presently convinced him and said, What means then this
bleating of sheep in mine ears, and this lowing of Oxen which I hear? As who
should say, have thou done the commandment of the Lord? No, though I were
silent, yet the lowing of Oxen, and the bleating of Sheep can testify that
Saul is an hypocrite and a dissembler, and has not discharged nor performed
the duty God commanded him; he bade kill all, but thou have saved some. But
leaving these, I come a little to discover diverse other sorts of Hypocrites
amongst us, and they may be ranked into four sorts. First, there is a whining
Hypocrite: Secondly, the wrangling Hypocrite: Thirdly, the glorious Hypocrite:
and fourthly, the presumptuous Hypocrite. I shall hardly peruse any of these at
this time, I will only touch the second a little, which I think to be
seasonable, and that is the wrangling hypocrite: There are a company of
wretched men in the world that fawn and flatter, and pretend to do great
kindnesses, and they profess they are at your command to serve you, to do
what you will, and perform what you please; but try them and prove them, and
you shall find it otherwise, they will not openly profess that they will not
do the thing, but when all comes to all, they pretend these and these
inconveniences will follow if they should do it: they will not professely say
they will not do the kindness, but they will make a plea that they ought not,
that they should not do it, and it is against reason that you should require
it: so these Hypocrites they resolve to live no longer, they resolve that they
would not enjoy any thing in this world, they would not be any thing, or do
any thing, but only so far as the Lord Jesus may be honored, and his
Gospel promoted: If they think they should promote the Gospel of Christ more
another way than this, they would not undertake it: but when it comes to this
pass that a man must leave his honor, and livings, and profits, which so
nearly concern him, for Christ, then (his trick is this) he does not
profess ^y say, I will have pleasure or profit and not Christ, but he will
wrangle with Christ, and stand upon terms with God, and say, he ought not to
do this, it is not fit he should do it, there is no command for the thing.
Beloved, it is admirable to observe the spirit of these men when the word comes
clear to them, when the duty is revealed and required at their hands; Oh how
they will search far and near to invent arguments, to make it no duty, and
turn over all books, and (as he spoke wittily) rake the Devils skull, that so
they may have some shift not to do that which they ought. It is a pretty trick
to be observed amongst great men that follow the fashion. First, they resolve
to conform themselves to the Word of God revealed, but when the fashion comes
up, they will plead for that too: and now the question is not what they must
do, but what they will do; for all fashions must be lawful, because they
are resolved to use them. I will propound one truth only to these men (observe
it in thine own soul) do not think to wrangle out the truth, and to
quarrel with the Gospel, or to make any pretense against that way which God
has chalked out before thee, and against any duty God commands thee: But art
thou in good earnest, content that that should be true which God will have to
be true? Art thou willing those things should be naught, which the Word of
God says are naught? Men may talk what they will, but they have their
reservations still, and there is a league between them and their base courses
which they will not be convinced of: There is a secret way of sinning which
they will not leave, but plead for it, that their Conscience may not fly in
their faces, and that they may not go professely against the evidence of the
truth. Beloved, these men give no contentment to Christ, but to their own
corrupt hearts. One gives content to the fashion and wears that, another gives
content to his liberty, he will not be hazarded: Therefore he will do any
thing rather than he will be undone: now this man loves freedom, and not the
truth of Jesus Christ, he will not suffer imprisonment for it. This gracious
work of the Spirit was never wrought in these men's hearts.

JOHN 6.45. Every man that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto
me.


WE are now come to the work of the will, which is the great wheel as it
were, the great commander of the soul; we are now come to the chamber of
presence: the former affections I told you, they were but as handmaids to usher
in Christ and the promises. The mind says, I have seen Christ; hope says, I
have waited; desire, I have longed; love and joy say, that is here which we
have received, and entertained, here is that which will supply all wants, that
will overcome all corruptions, that mercy that will pardon all our sins: then
says the will, content, it shall be so, and this makes up the match; for now
the match comes to be made, when the will says Amen to the business: and
this is that great work of the will, the spawn and the seeds of faith went
before, now faith is come to some perfection, now the soul reposeth it self
upon the Lord; and Divines say, that here comes in faith; what the mind has
known, and hope expected, and desire longed for, and love embraced, then
comes in the great wheel, the great commander, the will, which says, I will
have it: Go no further, it is the best match we can make; you saw the seeds
of faith before in the affections, but now you shall see the root of faith, and
the full growth of faith in the will. So from hence the point of Doctrine is
this.



For the better clearing of this Doctrine, consider these four particulars.









For by faith we come to have a title to all that ever Christ purchased, and
God has prepared for his people; and as by infidelity we went from God, so
now by faith we come again to God.



Jeremy says, Ierem. 8.5.
They hold fast to deceit, and would not return; so when a man will hold his
pride and his corruptions, that man is careless of Christ, and not only so,
but also opposite from going to Christ, he will not go to Christ, that he may
receive power for ^he subduing of his corruptions, because he is resolved to
keep his sin still, and therefore know, that it is not possible to receive
Christ, and to ^leave to sin too.

perish in my way; now when the soul is come to this, if the heart will yet
shift for it self, and think to recover it self, seeing it must need^
change, it will change it self, it will hinder faith; for whatsoever it is
that keeps a man in himself, that always hinders the work of faith, for
faith ever goes out to another for grace and power to ease him of corruption,
and for strength to subdue his sins; if the soul say, either I need not
change, or if I must change, I will change my self, and save my self, what
need have I of a Savior: these hinder faith, therefore if ever faith be there,
the heart must have thi^ wrought, he must see himself in a lost condition,
that is, that by all the means under heaven he^ cannot succor himself, this
is the meaning of that phrase; Luke 19.10. The Lord Jesus came (...) seek and
to save that which was lost; a lost man, indeed every man is lost under the
power of sin and dominion of Satan, but he must see himself lost; how the
guilt of sin is condemning him, and therefore lost in regard of pardon to
save him, and also how he is polluted, and therefore lost in regard of power to
subdue corruptions, and when he sees this indeed, that nothing can help him
but a Christ, then the soul makes out for a Christ, this is the meaning of
that place; John 1.12. To as many as received him, he gave, etc. so that we
must receive a Christ, when we are gone o^^ of our selves by humiliation, then
are we fit to go to God by vocation.

to believe, unless a man be thus humbled?

John 4.44. the Lord Christ comes to the Pharisees, and says, I know you will
not come to me, that you may believe: nay in the next place he says, How can
ye believe that receive honor one of another? how can thou believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ to subdue thy lusts, and yet would be unclean still, and
live in thy lusts still? how can thou believe in Christ to master thy
rebellious heart, and yet would be rebellious still? it is impossible;
heaven and earth cannot meet together, no more can these two stand together;
therefore set your hearts at rest; a man must be truly humbled and broken
hearted, ^f ever he believe.

Psalm. 119.10. They that know thy name shall put their trust in thee; it is
against common sense, that the soul of a man, that is reasonable, should fall
upon any thing, and rest it self there, and yet never sees whether it be a
sufficient help or no: this is by the way of preparation.

Father, to rest it self, etc. this I add in the second place upon the same
ground, because a man has no legs of himself to be carried to the Lord Jesus
Christ, to believe in him, further than God does convey this, and communicate
to the soul, a man naturally is as well able to keep the law, which is do
and live, as he is of himself, (in himself so considered) to believe in the
Gospel, and to keep the second covenant of grace, which is believe and live:
but the difference is here, the Gospel requires ability, and gives it; the
Lord calls us to come, and inables us to come; whereas the law reveals a man's
corruptions, but never gives him power against them; but as the Lord called
Lazarus, so the Lord gave Lazarus power to rise; so when the Lord calls a poor
sinner, he gives strength and spiritual ability to come, according to the call
which the Lord reveals, that he may come by that saving and precious faith,
(as S. Peter calls it) therefore it is of necessity required, that as the soul
believes, the Lord must give strength that it may believe, and therefore it is
effectually persuaded.

Now that I might meet with that erroneous opinion of Pelagians, consider what
I say, they say it is of necessity required, that a poor sinner have his mind
enlightened, but the will of man is unaltered, and left free to refuse or choose
grace if it please; so that they put a kind of ability in the will, to take or
refuse Christ and grace when it is offered; but here is a deep mistake,
because the will of man is as far averse from God, as the mind is blind,
nay it is more averse from God than the mind is blind, and it is more hard to
be framed: therefore there must be this effectual persuading, as the
understanding must have the truth cleared to see a Christ, so the will must be
persuaded, that it may receive power from him: as it is with the sea and the
thames, there is ebbing and flowing; now the natutall Philosophers observe,
that the ebbing and flowing comes not from any inward proper principle of it
self, but the light and heat of the moon leaves its beams upon the water,
and draws the water after it; this makes it to flow, and when the moon is
gone, the water returns back again, and this is ebbing: just so it is with
the soul of a man humbled and enlightened, there is no power in the soul to
go any further than it self, to flow unto a Christ, and to go toward the
promises, further than the Lord lets in, by the power of his Spirit, the beams
of his mercy, upon the soul, and sheds in the freeness of his grace into the
heart, and that makes the soul flow again, so that as it ebbed and went away
from God by sin, so it now flows and comes to God again; but it is by the
power and Spirit of God.



enlightened, to see this mercy of God, so there comes in a stream of the
freeness and riches of Gods grace, and does affect the heart with the
sweetness and relish of Gods grace, that it finds a mavelous sweetness in
it.

Matthew. 13.21. The seed grew up suddenly, and perished suddenly: why? because
it had not depth of earth; the seed of the promise had not the depth of his
heart: but there was a stone in the heart, and the world lay next the heart;
and a stone of lust and pride was between the word of the Lord and the heart,
so that the promise had not root: and hence it was slightly affected with the
truth, but never thus powerfully, to have it go down to the roots of the
heart: the good word of the Lord in this case comes to the heart, not as an
owner, but as a travellour; this is the meaning of that place: Hosea 2.14. I
will allure her, and draw her into the wilderness, that is, by preparation,
and then I will speak comfortably to her; that is, I will speak to her heart;
so it is in the original: there is a kind of prevailing sweetness of the
grace of God in Christ, that will be at the roots of the heart, that it may
give allowance unto it: now mark what follows from hence, and this is the
first part of the effectual persuading of the heart, when the heart says,
away with profit, and the world, and all, let me have the Lord and his grace;
Oh that goes to the bottom of the heart! hence it is that the soul thus
prevailingly is sweetened with the goodness of the promise, can taste nothing
in the world without this; it is now out of love with all other things, it had
loved and doted on before most immoderatly, the sweetness of the promise has
stolen away the heart of a poor sinner, and gotten the good will of the soul
to be only for Christ, and to have his heart to close with Christ, and to be
nothing in the world without him; this effectual persuading, it is the meaning
of that place: Act. 3.19. Amend your lives, repent and turn, that your sins
may be done away; repent and be converted, that is, be truly prepared in the
work of humiliation; and be converted, that is, have a through heat of the
heart for grace in vocation, that your sins may be done away in
justification: so then when the soul is first humbled in preparation, and the
heart now all for the Lord Jesus Christ, and can taste nothing but Christ, and
nothing in regard of him, and God has gotten his good will, then follows
justification, that your sins may be blotted out: this was the practice of
the repenting Church, when the Lord had hedged her way, and built a wall that
she could not find her old lovers, Hos. 2.7. at last the Church says, I will
return to my first husband, for then it was better with me than now; as if the
Church had said, Oh the mercies of God, and the consolation of Christ, are
better than all my delights in sin! the soul comes now to see a bettering in
Christ; Oh to have my heart purged, and my sins remitted, it were better than
to wallow in my lusts still! now the heart is going out of the world to the
Lord Jesus Christ, when there is an overpowering virtue of the sweetness of
the promise, that prevails with the soul above all, and affects the heart
with the good thereof, more than all the rest, this is then to be effectually
persuaded. Now the will and the heart is gone that way, let all the temptation
and the darling delights of sin come in never so fast: yet the prevailing
power of the promise out bids, and goes beyond all these, and affects the heart
more than all these: I would have you retain those things, that ye may try
whose hearts are sound: many pretend to have a lingering desire after Christ,
and to seem to be for Christ, and yet the work was never sound, they were
never persuaded, powerfully, as I now speak: and as there is a strong and
effectual persuading so there is a kind of hourly and feeble persuading, and
a slight motion of it: the heart may seem to make out toward Christ, and yet
never get ^ut, because it was never effectually persuaded; ^hese slight motions
and hourly persuasions are ^ike the untimely birth of a woman, that vanish^th
away, and comes to nothing in the end.

Many a man has had his eyes opened and the sweetness of the promise
revealed, and the soul ^ad begun to purpose, and to be at a hay, now ^ay, and
then he will go to Christ, and yet sinks ^owne again and falls back and
perishes ever^stingly. As it is with a wagon that passes by a ^angerous pit,
being well laden, which if it pass ^ot by, he is undone, he is at a set:
well, they will use their skill, they pull with might and maine, and now it is
going, and then it is coming; it (...) ever at a hay, now hay: at last the
traces break and it falls down irrecoverably. So it is with a ^arnall false
hearted Hypocrite, that has had ma^y of these feeble persuasions to pluck a
base ^ile heart from his corruptions: the Lord has ^id some hand upon him by
the terrors of the ^aw, and let in some intimation of mercy, and ^t him see
what good he might have if he would ^art from his sins, and he has many good
re^lutions; the drunkard will be drunk no more, ^e adulterer will be unclean
no more, and the ^roud person will never be proud any more; it is ^et at a hay,
now hay: but because he is not ^fectually persuaded, he falls off from his
half ^odging with God, and is wholly overcome with ^nne never to be recovered
more: this was the practice of Agrippa, Act. 26.27. where Paul showing his
conversation, and what God had done for him; when Agrippa heard this, he was
even at a dead lift and said, Thou have almost persuaded me to become a
Christian, almost holy, and almost humble, and almost to forsake my sins. I
will never be more malicious against God, and as the original word says, Thou
have almost persuaded me in a few things, but he never came to any good at
all. This is the guise of many that come to some outward reformation, and get
some knowledge, and some parts, and some duties performed, so that a man would
think they were making forward toward Christ, and yet they recoyle and fall
back again to their old base courses most fearfully. Of this generation was
this spoke, Heb. 6.4. that had a taste of the Heavenly gift, that is, saving
faith; they liked the promise, but it was never at the heart roots. Oh, said
they, comfort, ease and salvation is good to be had; but they did not take
down the promise and digest it, and make it good blood, they wanted this
sound persuasion, somewhat was nearer to the heart than the promise, and
therefore it came to nothing. An Hypocrite that is tickled and has some flashy
desires as the stony ground was, is a little affected with the Word of God.
This man may entertain i^ some kind of hourly persuasion, somewhat of the
promise for some respect: the promise is this, that God will pardon the
iniquity of his poor children, and ease them of all their miseries, and
glorify them for ever. The Hypocrite hears this that there is salvation to be
had, and grace is now offered: (Oh it is pretty, says the soul) then I hope
it is possible for something to come to my share; in conclusion he entertaines
the promise to pardon him; but the promise and the prevailing power of it go
not deep enough to loose him from his corruptions, and to purge him; he would
sip of the promises, but make a meal of his lusts: But a good heart does the
contrary; the promise is the standing dish, and the Lord jesus Christ to be
loved and embraced, that is his meal: only he may sip now and then at his
lusts and corruptions. The Hypocrite will have his ^ase haunts and his
corruptions still, but in the mean time he could be content to think on
Christ to pardon him, and that these evils might ^ot befall him.

John 4.29. When Christ had opened ^er eyes and showed her the vileness of her
heart, and also told her that she had seven Husbands, saying thou art an
adulterous woman; now when she had heard this, away she goes to the City, and
said, Behold, a man that has told me all that ever I did, is not he the
Christ? Just so all the affections come to the will the great commander, and
plead in this case, and thus begin to strive with the heart. Oh, says hope, I
have waited for this goodness of the Lord, and my eyes have failed with
looking for it: And desire says, I have longed for this goodness, and says
love, I have received it; and joy says, I have felt the sweetness of it: is
not this mercy worth the receiving? Then the will says, is it so indeed? have
thou waited for it, hope? and have thou longed for it, desire? and have thou
felt the sweetness of it, joy? then we will all go to that mercy and seek no
further. Let base corruptions and lusts do what they will, we will go to
that mercy, Four things or Acts.
and repose our selves therein. Now this resting of it self discovers a
fourfold act.

John 6.35. He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes in
me shall never thirst: the phrase of coming and believing they are both one:
Ier. 3.22. there the Prophet makes the answer of the humble sinner, the Lord
calls upon by his Spirit, and sets on his mercy effectually, and says, Come to
me ye rebellious sinners, and I will heal your rebellions. Though a poor
Minister speak the word, yet the Lord from heaven says, come to me ye loose
hearted, etc. Now this voice coming home to the heart, and the prevailing
sweetness of the call overpowring the heart, the soul answers, Behold we
come, for thou art the Lord our God. The soul goes out and falls and flings it
self upon the riches of Gods grace thus settled and revealed: Come to me all
ye that are weary (says Christ:) when the Lord says come, I have mercy,
though thou have none; and I have comfort, though thou have none; nay, I not
only have it, but am ready to bestow it: and come to me thou poor burdened
sinner, I have undertaken for thee, and I will ease and help thee. Now as for
you that were never humbled nor brought low, God will pull down your proud
hearts, and make you stoop: but you that have been burdened, and have seen
your sins, and mourned under the loathsome burden of them, to all such the
Lord says, Come to me thou poor broken hearted sinner, I will heal thee,
and I have undertaken for thee: we go then (says the will) to that Christ,
and that promise, and that mercy, and that grace that will pardon all, and
subdue all whatsoever is amiss. It is with a sinner, as it is with a
Seafaring man that is tossed with the winds, and driven to a hard set with
the tempest, he labors to betake himself to a shelter, and to land at some
Haven.

This is the nature of believing in the Hebrew phrase, as Esa. 25.4. Thou have
been a strength to the poor and needy in trouble, a refuge against the
tempest, and a shadow against the heat, etc. Now when a poor sinner is
weather-beaten, and can see no comfort, and find no evidence for the pardon of
his sins; the Lord is pleased to make known the goodness of Christ through
the promise: then the soul shrowds it self under that sh^dow and that
goodness thus offered and revealed: Psalm. 118.11. David's soul had gotten away
from God, and he began to quarrel with Gods providence, saying, I said in my
haste, all men are liars; see what an hasty spirit is, he hoysed up sail upon
the maine Ocean, and he had imaginations and conclusions of fear and despair:
At last he got the Haven again, and said, where art thou, Oh my soul? thou
have gone from God, and from his promise; Return to thy rest, O my soul, let
us go to the promise, and keep us there to see land, and make haste to it,
and labor to hold the heart close to the Lord Jesus Christ: now the soul is
come to Christ.

Come my Love, my Dove, and come away; behold, I come (says she) and when she
is come, she fastneth upon Christ and says, my Beloved is mine, and I am his:
When she is come to Christ, she will not away again. In the Hebrew phrase, to
believe is nothing else but Amen; the Heathen say that the answer of a man is
this, let it be done, which thou have promised, that is faith. So after the
soul has walked a great while in horror and vexation, and the soul sinks in
the apprehension of it; the Lord lets in the comfort of his promise, and says,
thou poor burdned heart, thy person is accepted; thou art unworthy, but Christ
is worthy; thou art sinful, but he is merciful. Now when the soul hears
this voice, it says, even Amen Lord, let it be so Lord. This is the hold of
the heart, hope and desire, love and joy have discerned a world of mercy; and
the will says, so be it, let us stay and hold here, and go no further. Esaias
64.7. There is none that calls on thy Name, neither that stirs up himself
to take hold of thee. Faith lays hold on the Lord, and will not let mercy go,
but cleaves unto it; it is sweet to see faith in conflict with the Lord. When a
man has it, as in Job, see how faith holds its own, God makes him even the
Butt of his wrath (as it were) but Job says, though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. Me thinks I see how the Lord makes his hand all goare blood, and
yet faith holds his own; it is able to fasten it self upon the promise of God
in Christ. 1 King. 20.32, 33. when Ahab was deeply provoked with a drunken
Benhadad, who said, take him alive, etc. they entered the combat: now when the
day went against Benhadad (for he had dealt basely with Ahab) and he could
not with any face look for any favor from him; yet when he was driven to a
stand, his servants (being worse than their master) came to him and said, We
have heard that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings, we pray thee let us
put ropes about our necks, and sackcloth on our loins, etc. Because the poor
servants were like to come into danger as well as their master, they went to
Ahab and said, thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live: and Ahab
said, is he yet alive, he is my brother; and the servants catched at that word,
and said, he is yet alive, and they went away rejoicing. This is a lively
picture of a broken hearted sinner, after he has taken up arms against the
Almighty, saying; shall he be at Gods command? he will never do it whilst the
world stands; but he will have his lusts, his profit and ease, etc. and the
Lord and he are at open wars; and now the Lord lets in justice, and he
sees the anger of God bent against him, and even frowning upon him, and the
wrath of the Lord dogging him from day to day, saying thou art an enemy to me
(says the Lord) and I will be an enemy to thee. Now the soul sees that he
cannot avoid justice, neither can he bear it, and therefore the soul reasons
thus: I have heard that though I am a rebellious sinner, yet none but sinners
are pardoned; he is a gracious God, and therefore the soul falls down at the
footstool of the Lord, and says, Oh what shall I do! What shall I do unto
thee, Oh thou preserver of men! and the broken hearted and terrified sinner
craves that he may yet live in the sight of the Lord. And at last when the
soul has been sufficiently humbled, the Lord lets in his sweet voice of
mercy, and says, Thou art my son, and thy sins are pardoned: with that the
soul catches at that mercy, and says mercy Lord, and a son Lord, pardon
Lord, and love Lord, the soul is mavelous willing to hear of that
consideration: But it will not away from the Lord again: as they catched at
the words of Ahab, and said, thy brother lives; so the soul says
beleevingly, and ^eccho-like, pardoned Lord, accepted Lord, love and mercy in
Christ Lord: the heart holds it self there. It is the fashion of a drowning
man, when he sees himself going and sinking, if any man come to help him,
when he has taken hold, he will rather die, than leave him, he holds for his
life: Just so it is with a drowning sinner, that is tossed up and down with
the floods of Gods indignation.

He that formerly made nothing of all, and a mock of Christ, and thought he
might go to heaven with all his lusts, now the Lord opens his eyes, and sets
upon him, and tosses him up and down, that the heart smites with it; and he
sees himself lost, and going down to the pit, and he expects nothing but
damnation; and at ^ast the Lord lets in a record of mercy, and the promise of
grace and salvation; when the soul ^eares hereof, he catches it greedily,
and knows if that fail, his soul must needs fail, and therefore he will
never let it go.

weight of all its occasions and troubles upon Christ, as the porter that is
weary of his weight, and has no way to help himself, but to be eased of his
burden: so when the soul has fastened upon Christ, it lays all the weight of
all its guilt and power of corruptions upon the Lord Jesus Christ: Christ has
promised to give ease and power to pardon; and the soul now lays all upon
him, as Psalm. 35.7. Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in him; commit thy
way, that is, the weight of all thy occasions: roll thy way upon the Lord, as
it is with a barrel that is tumbled up and down; the earth bears the weight
of the barrel, but some body moves it: so the soul casts the weight of all
its disgrace, dishonor, temptation, and all upon Christ: Esaias 50, 10. He that
walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay upon hi^ God; that is, if any man be in extremes, hopeless, in
misery, and sees no help for himself, neither in himself, nor the creature,
and walks in desperate discouragement, and has no light of comfort; let him
trust upon the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God: as when a man cannot
go of himself, he lays the weight of all his body on another; so the soul
goes to a Christ, and lays all the weight of it self upon Christ, and says,
I have no comfort, all my discomforts I lay upon Christ, and I rely upon the
Lord for comfort and consolation: and when the soul has thus leaned upon
Christ, it leaves it self there, and sucks and draws all the good that it
needs from Christ. Cant. 8.5. Who is this that comes up from the wilderness,
leaning upon her beloved? the party coming is the Church; the wilderness is
the troubles and vexations the Church meets withal; and the beloved is the
Lord Jesus Christ: now the Church comes out of trouble, and out of her self,
and leanes her self all upon her husband the Lord Jesus Christ: she only
walked with him, but he bare all the burden for her: and as the Jews after
their Passover had their feet shod with sandals, and staves in their hands;
the promise to the soul is like that staff, which did testify the promise:
when we are going to the land of Canaan, the promise of grace and mercy is the
staff which we lean upon; and it is not a broken staff that will fail us,
but a strong staff which a man may trust to, and lay all the weight of life
and happiness upon it, and the subduing of his sins also; 1 Pet. ^.7. Cast
all your care on him, for he cares for you: the original is, hurl your care
upon the Lord; as ^f a man should say, suffer not your care to rebound back
again, but hurl it upon the Lord, as a man does with a ball, when it rebounds
he beats it back again: the Lord will not thank you for carrying your cares
and troubles about you, but he requires you should hurl it upon the Lord, for
he cares for you.

All that faith would have the soul do, is this: all means when it has
gotten them: now that it may be able to do this, faith lays all the weight
of the work and burden of the day upon the Lord Jesus Christ, so that I shall
know what I should do, or the Lord will pardon what I do not know; and either
I shall be able to do what I know, or else God will accept of my poor
endeavors; and either I shall find success in that I do, or else God will
make me contented; so that all the burden is gone: therefore what if thou do
not know what thou should do, seeing God will pardon thy ignorance? and what
if thou do not that which thou know, if God will pardon thee in it? and
what if thou have not that success thou desire, if God will accept of thee
without it? and therefore David chides his own heart, and rocks his own soul
asleep, where it was golling; Psalm. 42. Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
etc. I am banished from my house, and from my friends, and especially from the
house of my God; and have not I cause to be disquieted? no he had not; but how
shall I amend my self in all these troubles? still trust in God, for he is yet
the help of my countenance, and my God, and I will yet give him praise: as if
he had said, thou shall not need to be distracted, discouraged, nor vexed
inordinately; still trust in God, and cast all thy care upon him: the faithful
soul viewes all his sins that he has committed, and all the miseries that
are intended and inflicted; and when it has done all, it conclude thus with it
self, and says, It is not in my power, nay it is not my duty to determine of
all these troubles; I lay all the weight of my sins upon Christ to pardon
them, and all the weight of my corruptions to subdue them, and then I know he
will care for me, that has undertaken mercifully for me; all my care is to
lean upon my Savior, and this is my comfort, he will look to me, though I
cannot do it for my self.

Mat. 9.21, 22. Oh, says she, could I but touch the hem of his garment, I
should be whole; and so she did, and virtue came from him, and she was healed
of all her grievances that lay upon her: so it is with a faithful soul that
touches the Lord Jesus Christ, it lays hold but a little on the promise, and
there is sap and virtue communicated to the believing heart, whereby it comes
to be helped and comforted in the way of God: Esaias 12.3. it is said, With joy
ye shall draw water out of the wells of salvation; the fountain of salvation,
and all the waters of life, and grace, and mercy, are in Christ: now it is not
enough to let down the bucket into the well, but it must be drawn out also:
the waters of life are in Christ, now it is not enough to come to, and to look
to Christ, but we must draw the water of grace from Christ to our soul; as
Esaias 66.11. They shall suck and be satisfied with the breasts of the
consolation, that they may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of
her glory; the Church is compared to a child, and the breasts are the promises
of the Gospel; now the elect must suck out and be satisfied with it, and milk
it out: the word in the original is, exact upon the promise, and oppress the
promise, as the oppresso^^ grinds the face of a poor man, and will have his
goods what ever become of his wife and children: so a man must wrest the
promise for grace and power from the Lord Jesus Christ. Ah beloved, this is our
misery, we suffer abundance of milk to be in the promise, and we are like
wainly children, that lie at the breast, and will neither suck nor be quiet; so
we suffer this to be in the promise, and yet employ not our selves to get it
out, and to suck it out: therefore brethren, suffer not your faith to come to
the promise, and to lie at it; but hale mercy from thence, and with a^ holy
kind of oppression exact upon it, and get what good you may from it, the Lord
allows it.



Threefold Act.
faith draws virtue by a threefold act; or faith improves the promise three
ways: Paul says, Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I
am chief, he would be sure to have a share in the mercy; as if a man should
say, I will cut something before the dish go away: Psalm. 48.14. when the Lord
had so much care of his Church, and how terrible he was to the enemies, and how
merciful to his people, etc. in the end the Church says, This God is our God,
and he will be our God even till death; she does appropriate God to her self,
and engrosseth God, and says, our God is not as the Heathens god; and there
David would have God all his own, and says, whatsoever God has done for any
of his people, how terrible for them, and how merciful to them, the same God
he is to my soul, and he will be my God for ever: and hence the Scripture
says, Esaias 55.1. Come buy, and eat, etc. all these places are nothing else,
but the act of faith; to come, is to repair to the promise; and to buy, is to
take possession of it; and to eat, is nothing else, but to embrace it for our
good and comfort: it is not enough for me to go to the market, and stand
looking on the commodity there, but I must lay down my money, buy it, and take
possession of it, and bear it home; so the Lord says, Come to the waters, buy
wine and milk, etc. the Lord sets open the shop of grace and salvation every
day where the Gospel is preached; and therefore not only cheapen, but come to
the agreement and buy; offer like chapmen, and stand not hagling, but say, I
will lay down all my lusts, and part with all for Christ; and when ye have
done thus, take mercy and comfort, it is yours, you have bought it: so that now
the faithful soul enters upon the promise as his own; as a man that comes to
take possession of house and land as his own: so the faithful soul reads of
all that mercy in pardoning of sin, and all that God effects to save, and
all that mercy offered to the poor man, out of whom the Lord cast seven
Devils; and then the soul says, all that mercy is mine: Manasses was an
idolater and a monster, yet the Lord humbled and saved him; and all that mercy
is mine: Paul a persecutour and an oppressor, and yet the Lord opened his
eyes, pardoned his sin, and he is now a glorified Saint in heaven, etc. all
that mercy is mine: hence I take that phrase to be, John 3.33. where faith is
said to set its seal to the promise; He that believes, has set to his seal,
that God is true: now observe that, as it is amongst men in their agreements,
it is not enough that the articles are drawn and made, but they must be
sealed; if they are only made, we use to say, they want nothing but sealing;
now when they are sealed, every than takes his own, and the bargain is
through: Just so it is between the Lord and the soul; the Articles of
agreement, whereby God passes over his promise to a poor sinner, are these:
If we will part from our selves and our sins, the Lord Jesus says all this
grace and mercy is yours: you that are thus burdened, Christ will ease you;
and you that are thus lost, Christ will find you. But now if a man will not
set to his seal, and if the soul do not take all this to it self, and enter
possession of it in this kind, and seal and deliver (as we use to say) it
will never prove authentical; but when it is sealed and delivered, then it is
authentical: So when the soul makes an application of the promises to it
self, then it is authentical, and the soul feeds upon it, and refreshes it
self therewith for ever.

expect a blessing; so faith is the condition that God requires, and the means
that he has appointed, whereby he will convey all good to the soul, and as
all grace and mercy is conveyed from God through the promise; so if we will
believe and lay our hearts to the promise, we are under the power of the
promise, to convey all grace and mercy to us: As it is with a Pump or Well;
there is water enough in the Well, but yet a man must draw and pump it up
before he can have any; and when he draws, then the water does come: So the
Fountain of all grace and goodness in Christ, and the promise is the pump;
now faith must jog the promise before any grace can come: this I take to be the
reason of all those passages in Scripture, where the Lord is said to give away
himself to believing souls, as Matthew. 15.28. Oh woman, great is thy faith,
be it unto thee as thou will: Christ gives her leave to go to the treasure of
mercy and grace, and to take what she would: he does not say, be it unto thee,
as I will, but as thou will: look what health thou will have for thy daughter,
and what comfort for thy conscience, go and take it, the Lord denies her
nothing. This is the meaning of that place, Math. 9.29. Be it unto you
according to your faith; not according to your wit, or pride, or strength, or
sturdy spirits; as if a man would go to Heaven, and be proud and stout
hearted too: no, no, there is no such matter, not according to your parts and
gifts, but according to your faith; Genesis 17.7. God makes a deed of gift to
Abraham, saying, I will be a God to thee, and thy seed after thee; take all
Abraham: so that believing sets Gods grace a going, and puts Gods power and
providence forth for the good of the soul. Now imagine the Lord did yet deny
that soul that mercy which it seeks and begs, and does not answer the desire
of the heart, and let in that good and sweetness the believing soul expects
from him; what will faith do then?

This is the third Act of faith in drawing virtue from Christ, faith urges God
with his own word, and presses Gods promise, and challenges God on his
faithfulness and truth, not to be wanting unto him, for the acceptance of his
person, and the pardon of his sins. Faith enters into suit with God, Psalm.
143.1. Hear my prayer Lord, and in thy faithfulness answer me: as if he had
said, I confess I am base, vile, and sinful, and deserve ^o mercy; therefore
not in my worthiness, but in thy faithfulness answer me. I cannot be but
^ile, and thou can not be but faithful; and if thou can cease to be
faithful, I am content to be miserable; and so you may, for he can as well
cease to be faithful, as cease to be God. It is a ^aw-case between God and
Jacob, Genesis 22.10.11. see how he presses God in a point: Oh, says he, I know
my brothers maliciousness and dogged spirit, and I expect hard measure from
him. O Lord therefore remember thy servant, for I fear my brother Esau, and
thou have said thou will do good to thy servant, etc. As a man that has a
good cause at the Assizes or Sessions, though he has a great enemy, one that
over-powers him, yet being confident that his cause is good, will bring it
about again, and will not rest till he has an equal hearing. So faith when
the Lord frowns upon him, yet the heart puts him in suit, as it were, and does
expostulate the cause with the Lord, saying, Has the Lord forgotten to be
gracious, and will he be no more entreated? This expostulation of the soul
that the heart presses in upon God withal, when it is upon a good ground, it
argues the pursuit of God, that he will not leave till the Lord give that he
has engaged himself to bestow. Thus to gather up all, faith goes out to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and lays hold upon him, lays all the weight upon him,
draws virtue from him, as in all the former particulars.

The fifth and last thing wherein the great work of resting consists is this;
faith leaves the soul with the promise, and after all desires (happily) and all
denials, and all the discouragements of God; and yet the soul sees not the
way of God; but that God frowns upon him; and though God comes not, yet faith
leaves the heart with God. This is mavelous needful, and it must needs be
the work of faith; for it is the maine tenor of the work of the covenant of
grace, and the covenant of works, in the covenant of works made with Adam,
when he said, do and live: If Adam had done that, he should have received
constant assistance, and God would never have denied to help him: but now in
the covenant of grace, because it must be, and is free, and that a soul may
and must know that it is only the goodness of God to us; therefore the Lord
reserves this prerogative royal to himself, that howsoever God will bestow
what he has promised, yet he reserves the time to himself, and what time he
will do it, and after what manner, and by what means, that is only of Gods
free will: and hereupon the soul acknowledges that it is of Gods free grace;
as if the Lord should say, it is mercy that I give, and therefore it is
according to my own mind, and I will take my own time.

Now in this dead lift the power of faith is this; it leaves the soul with the
promise, it takes up its standing there, and says, I will go to none other,
and I will seek no further, Esaias 28.16. He that believes, makes not haste, he
makes haste to use the means, but he is content to stay till the Lord please,
because he knows the Lord only must do it: and if the heart be given to
murmr and repine, saying, I pray, and the Lord does not answer; I have
grapled with my sin, and the Lord subdues it not: now faith says, we must
go to God for mercy, that he may order all our occasions; and we must not
order Gods grace according to our humors: but the Lord seems to frown upon
the soul, and to reject the prayers of a poor sinner, and to beat him away
from the door, as the Lord Christ did, when he called the woman a dog; yet
faith will bring on the heart still, and it will be sure to lie at the gate,
and it keeps the soul with the promise, what ever befalls it, as Psalm. 119.
Mine eyes failed for looking up for thy word, Oh when will thou comfort me! his
heart and all failed him, and yet he would look toward heaven. Oh, says he,
when will this sinful soul be humbled, and this distressed conscience
pacified? he would look toward heaven till he had no heart; and therefore
excellent is that passage, Genes. 32.36. when the Lord and Jacob were
wrestling, and the Lord would have been gone, Jacob said, I will not let thee
go, until thou have blessed me: so the faithful soul lays hold upon the
Lord for mercy, pardon, power, and grace, and though the Lord seem to give him
up to the torment of sin and corruption; yet the soul says, though my soul
go down to hell, yet I will hold here for mercy, till the Lord comfort and
pardon, and subdue graciously these cursed corruptions, which I am not able to
master my self. As it is with a sun-diall, the nature of the direction is
this, the needle is ever moving, and a man may jog it another way, yet it will
never stand still, till it come to the north-point: so when the Lord leaves off
a believing heart with frowns, and with the expression of displeasure, yet the
soul turns to the Lord Christ, and will never leave, till it go Godward,
and Christward, and grace-ward; and says, let the Lord do what he please, I
will go no further, till he be pleased to show mercy: then the issue is
this, faith goes out to Christ, it lays hold upon Christ, and lays the weight
of all upon Christ, and draws virtue from Christ, and it leaves the soul with
the promise, and this is in every faithful soul under heaven, howsoever the
sense is taken away: if the soul once come to Christ, it will never away, but
ever cleaves to the promise, and is toward God and Christ, whatsoever befall
it.



him. Now faith is appointed as that only means whereby the soul may be
succored, and the heart furnished anew: and it is faith that does all these,
and this is the excellency of faith, and the good of it, and the benefit that
belongs to faith in a peculiar manner, above all other graces in the world:
now that ye may see how faith suits a man with all graces, take notice, that
there are three ways, whereby the heart went away from God; and the spiritual
wants, which by this means befell the soul, 3. Sorts of spir. wants.
are three, all which faith supplies to the soul answerably.

which phrase the Septuagints never used, as they are observed: for it is one
thing to believe, that there is a God, and another thing to believe into God:
faith faste^^ upon the Godhead, firstly, as 2 Corin. 6.11. where the Apostle
says, He that joyneth himself to an harlot, is one body, but he that
joyneth himself to the Lord is one spirit: the Spirit of God sets a frame of
soul upon the poor sinner, that it flings it self upon God: that which
firstly must be the object of faith, that faith must firstly rest upon, as that
which is able to give that succor which it wants; now because God only is
infinite, he alone is able to succor a man according to his wants: therefore
faith must first go to him: we need pardon, and therefore faith goes to God,
who only is able to pardon; and we need power, and faith goes to God, who is
able to succor us; thus it is an infinite God only, that must create this
power in us, and therefore nothing but God must firstly be believed in; we
believe in the promise, because God is there, and because ^n the promise only
we find a fullness of sufficiency, to supply what ever we want or need:
therefore why should faith go to any thing else? now nothing can save a man,
but God infinite, and therefore faith goes to none but him, and makes an end of
all controversies between God and the ^oule, it takes away all divisions, and
brings the soul into favor again, and makes it acceptable ^o God through the
merits of Christ, so that now ^he anger of God is appeased; Act. 26.17. when
God sent Paul among the heathen, he gave him this commission, saying, Go
preach the Gospel, and open the eyes of the blind, that they may turn from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God: every man by nature is
gone from God, and you go all sin-ward and hell-ward, and away you go from
God; now that you may be for God again, faith goes to God; Ioh. 1.12. To as
many as received him, and believed in his name, to them he gave this
privilege, that they should be the sons of God; God will not only be a
friend to them, but a careful, loving, and tender Father: thou by nature art a
child of perdition and destruction but do thou believe and repent? now then
(...) the controversies between God and thee are ^^ded, and of a fiend of
hell, thou art made the so^^ of God; and the Lord is a tender hearted Father to
that poor soul of thine; Ioh. 3. He that bel^veth, shall be saved; but he
that believes not, t^^ wrath of God abides upon him; so that an unbeleeving
soul has God up in arms against him: Oh that God would persuade your hearts
of th^^ this is a great misery, when thou lie down, t^^ wrath of God hangs
over thine head, and thy ey^ may close up, and the Lord may send thy so^^ down
into the pit: and when thou go fr^^ home, the wrath of God abides upon thee,
th^^ may never return home again: go what thou will, and do what thou
can, while th^^ abidest in thy sins, the wrath of God abides (...) thy soul,
body, and what appertains to thee, (...) thou art an unbeleever; but if thou
art a bel^^ver, the wrath of God is gone, and thou art p^^^^^ from death unto
life: Ah, what a happy condition is this? that a man may say, Lord, I was a
child of wrath, I wonder that God cut me not off, and I admire at it, that God
sent me not down to hell every night that I went to bed! but now the Lord
has made me to believe, and has accepted me; I was under the curse of God,
and now God has delivered me, and now I have believed in the promise, and now
I have a right to the promise, and all the mercy and goodness in it; thus the
soul has a supply of this first want, and is brought into favor with God
again.

Adam; the Lord gave him wisdom and righteousness in Adam, and in him to all
his posterity; but now being gone from God, God has justly taken all from him:
so that now the poor sinner is dead, and though he lives, because he has a
natural life in him; yet he lives not spiritually, because he has no
spiritual life in him, and therefore can do no spiritual good; he can
neither do well, nor live well, that thereby he might please God for his
comfort.

Now faith steps in like a friend at a dead lift, and lends help this way; it
not only brings a sinner to God, but it is as a hand to communicate from God
to a sinner, whatsoever spiritual good it needs, and this only faith can do.
Mark it, I beseech you, a man that is dead in sin, and should be brought to
some spiritual good and life, he must either live by himself or by another,
but by himself he cannot, because a dead man cannot live by himself: but
every man is spiritually dead by nature, and of himself he cannot live, and
therefore he must go to another, which is God; he must give life, and
therefore he must believe in another, and receive the spiritual grace and
power from that living gracious God, to walk more clearly in a good course;
this i^ the intent of all these phrases in Scripture, Gal. 2.20. the text
says, I live, but how? it is by faith in Christ, Christ lives in him, and he
in Christ: faith is not so much the soul of a Christian, but faith inables a
man to live by Christ, whom it apprehends: therefore Saint Paul to the Hebrews
says, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God: it is said of
Enoch that he walked with God, and did thereby please God; but how came he to
do it? by faith he did it. Now no man can yield obedience to Gods
commandment, and thereby please God, except he go to God by faith, and
receive power from God, thereby to please God: I take this to be a truth, that
in proprieties of language and speech, faith (as we now speak of it) is not
any part of the spiritual life and soul of a Christian, but a spiritual
instrument and engine, whereby the soul goes to God to fetch a soul, whereby
he may live: thus it is punctually, the soul in vocation goes to God, and
being come, it receives the spirit of adoption, brings in the image of
sanctification, which Adam had lost: and now the sinner is enabled to live in
obedience unto God; so that in vocation we go to God, and in adoption we
receive the spirit, the image of sanctification from God, and by sanctification
the spirit brings new spiritual powers from God to the soul: and so the soul
is enabled to love God above all, and his neighbor as himself: now whether
Adam had this faith or no, I will not stand to dispute in this popular
congregation, but only speak so much as shall be seasonable and profitable.
Therefore for the thing in hand, this I take to be the excellency of faith, to
go out to God to fetch a spiritual new principle of life and grace: faith
says, thou art dead, and must have life, and thy life is to be had only from
God; and therefore go out, that thou may receive spiritual life from God:
so then, when no other can bring it self life, faith brings all other graces;
now faith does all these, not so much because it goes to him that has all life
in him: faith is the field, and the pearl is in it, and the hid treasure is in
Christ; and faith goes to God from whom it received all things, from the
consolation thereof; this is the meaning of that place, 2 Cor. 3.18. and to
this it is to be referred, But we all with open face beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
even by the spirit of the Lord; this discovers how faith brings in a new soul,
and a spiritual life into the soul: by the glory of the Lord is meant the
glorious attributes of the Lord, as his holiness, justice, righteousness,
patience, etc. by the glass is meant the Lord Jesus Christ, as a m^^^ face is
seen in a glass, so all the attributes of the Lord are clearly seen (as in a
glass) in the Lord Jesus Christ: now how do we behold them (...) him? the
heart being made to believe by faith, it looks upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and
in hi^ sees all these graces; and what follows thereby? we are changed, that
is, we are transformed from one degree of glorious grace to another; Jesus
Christ, God and man, has all graces in himself; now by faith the soul eyes
the Lord Jesus Christ, and then answerably it receives grace for grace; eying
his patience, by the self-same spirit it is made patient; and eying the
holiness of God, by the self-same spirit it is made holy; and eying the
meekness of Christ, by the self-same spirit it is made so: thus the soul
looking upon the glorious grace of Christ, it receives gra^^ for grace: if thou
would be patient, see that by faith in Christ, and by that spirit of patience
i^ Christ, that it imprint the like grace upon the soul, and it will do it.

God has put into his hands: this is a great want, and it was in Adam; he had
a fair state, and lost all, and undid himself, and his posterity too: now the
soul fears this, but faith steps in, and lends succor herein, as thus faith
maintains a continual influence of Gods grace and power into the soul upon
all occasions; so that howsoever many wants and weaknesses may be in the
soul, faith goes to heaven, and brings new succor upon all occasions to
releeve it: this is the maine difference between the first and second
covenant: Adam had the stock in his own hands, and the fountain and roots of
it was in himself: yet howsoever it is true, a man's grace is weak, and would
come to nothing, and may easily be overcome; and yet the fountain of grace
and goodness that is in Christ, will never be drawn dry; and faith goes to
that daily, and so draws supply and succor: and from hence it is, that faith
is called the protector of all graces; Ephesians. 6.16. there faith is called a
shield: now the nature of a shield is this; It not only covers the body, but
all the armor of the body; so faith not only covers the soul, but all the
graces of the soul, and succors them all; and it is not only the protector
of all graces, but it is also a victorious conqueror in the behalf of graces;
so 1 Ioh. 5.4. This is your victory, even faith: so that faith makes a
Christian soul a conqueror, and keeps him safe and sure: now it is true
indeed, that man's corruption is too strong for his own grace in himself, and
his temptations are too strong for all his spiritual abilities in himself:
yet faith goes for n^^ power and might from Christ, and with this might and
power from Christ, makes him strong as Ephesians. 6.10. Be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might: 2 Timothy 2.1. My son be strong in the grace that is
in Jesus Christ; he does not say, be strong in the grace that is in thy
self, but in the Lord Christ, as for instance thou have many p^^vocations to
kindle thy patience and choler, and many occasions to injurious dealings, and
th^^ have an impatient and peevish heart of thi^e own too: now these
corruptions are too strong for this patience, yet faith says, I will be strong
by that might and power of that patience which is in Christ, and that subdues
all impatience, and bears all injuries, and faith brings that patience in
Christ, and makes the soul strong with that patience; hence we are said to be
preserved through faith unto salvation; faith keeps the soul to God, and God
keeps faith, and soul, and all: so that it is the power of God by the means
of faith, clasping the soul to God: you that are weak Christian consider
this, you complain that you are so proud and peevish, that you cannot subdue
these corruptions; now set faith on work, and that will make you strong in
Christ, and make you able to stand against all temptations and occasions; as it
is in the natural frame of a man: the Philosophers and Physicians observe
these two passages in it; there is not only a soul and a body in a man, but
there is an heavenly heat and a natural spirit, either animal or vital, that
lies and knits the soul and the body together, and look how strong this is,
so strong is the bo^y; but if this band be once broken, the body ^omes to
nothing: just so it is with the soul, God himself is the soul of this soul,
I mean Gods free grace in Christ, the heavenly heat and ^pirituall spirit, and
the blood that binds God and the soul together, is faith, and whiles this
^aith holds, a man's good condition holds even for ^ver: I conclude with that of
the Apostle, ^ Corin. 1.24. where he says, by faith you stand, it is faith
that gives foot-hold to all graces; we have weak patience, but faith gives
patience strength and foot-hold; for it goes our to the Lord Jesus, and
receives sap and life from him, whereby every grace comes to flourish in the
soul; 1 Pet. 1.9. Receive the end of your faith, even the salvation of your
souls: as if he had said, faith will be with you upon all occasions, in
temptations, and distempers of heart, and do you service, and go to Christ
for strength and power, and uphold you, till it has brought you into heaven,
and shut the gates upon you, and if you cannot ^hift for your selves there,
then perish: this faith puts a man into possession of everlasting happiness,
and never leaves him till then; this faith furnishes the soul with a supply
in spiritual wants.

Now to sum up the point, 4. Causes of faith.
take notice of the ^ength and breadth of this blessed grace of faith, that you
may see how it is made up of the causes; which are four:





that I have heard thou art a merciful God.





Phil. 3.12. we are said, To be comprehended of God, and not to comprehend God;
so we know God, because we are known of him: now give me leave in a word to
describe the cause of it; what it is in the promise, that thus effectually
persuades the heart, that it may believe, and herein I will go no further than
the promise, and therein show the motives in the promise, and how the heart
comes to believe, and these will discover the reason of the point.

There are three things in a promise, 3. Things in a promise.
whereby the will of man is drawn to believe.

First, the all sufficiency of the freeness of Gods favor, that is an
admirable cause to persuade the heart to come on cheerfully, it is the
special prerogative of the promise to answer the soul wholly in all the
desires of it; nothing under heaven does or can do this, but the promise:
happily a man desires wealth, and when he has it, this cannot make him
honorable; and the ambitious man desires honors, and when he has them, they
cannot make him rich; so each thing of it self has but a particular help:
but the promise has all sufficiency to answer all the heart would have: the
will of a man naturally desires good, and so consequently all good; now the
promise has all good in it; as in that place, open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it: there is a fullness in the promise to answer all the pantings and
desires of the soul: thou say thou art a poor dead sluggish creature; and
the promise calls upon thee, as the Angel did, and says, come hither, and here
is life that will quicken thee; and thou art a weak creature, come hither
(says the promise) and I have grace to make thee strong; and thou art a damned
creature, come hither; then says the promise, here is mercy to pardon all
sins of all kinds: the consideration of the rich provision in his fathers
house, carried the prodigal home: so there is mercy, grace, pardon, and
comfort enough in the promise: you poor hungerbitten sinner, away, away, away
for shame, to that enough of the promise, and there refresh your selves for
ever: it is that which Elisha said to Naaman, 2 King. 5.8. Let him come hither,
and he shall know, that there is a God in Israel; and that there is a healing
God, though not a helping King: so the promise says to every fainting,
languishing, and leprous soul, if thou art a truly humbled heart, and art sick
of thy sins, and even drawing on to despair, and all thy prayers and days
cannot prevail, nor do thee good; but still thy sins, thy sorrows, thy
corruptions prevail, and thy condemnation sleeps not, but is drawing on apace
upon thy soul: now see what the promise says, let him come hither, and he
shall know that there is a God in Israel, that is able to cure all, and to
loose him from all his corruptions.



Esa. 61.1. Christ came to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort all that
mourn: John 12.47. God sent not his Son to condemn the world, etc. Nay,
Christ being sent of his Father, freely came to this end: 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; that is, humbled, and broken, and
meek hearted sinners; and not some of them neither, but all that are broken
hearted, and all that are lost sinners; but never a proud, stout-hearted, and
sturddy sinner under heaven; he came not to call the righteous, that is, those
that trust to their own righteousness, but sinners to repentance.

ho, every one that will, let him come to the waters of life, etc. and behold,
I stand at the door and knock, if any will open, etc. and the Lord entreats
you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. All that the Father gives me, shall come to
me; and be that comes, I will in no wise cast away, Ioh. 6.37. the original
says, cast away: no, no, thou poor distressed soul, though thou art never so
mean in parts or g^fts, or never so much distressed in the world, though thou
wear a leatherne pelt, and though happily great men may despise thy society, yet
the Lord Jesus Christ will not cast thee away; thou may cast away thine own
comfort if thou will, through thy pride and peevishness; but the Lord Christ
will not cast thee away, if thou come to him, he will never do it.



whereby thou may be made to believe, and thou shall be able to believe;
first that sufficiency which is in the promise, and which God intends for thee.

Now the Lord strikes up the match, 2. Things.
and that the Lord does this, it shall appear if you consider the manner of
Gods work in two things.



John 6.44. No man comes unto me except the Father draw him, and I will raise
him up at the last day: I will make him believe, and in the grave I will love
his poor body, and not lose so much as his ^shes, but will preserve them
there, and raise him up from thence, and at last I will bring both body and
soul to honor, and make both happy in Heaven for ever: for Christ his sake
think on this earnestly, that every broken hearted sinner is given to Christ,
as if God the Father had said, Oh my Son, look well to such a man, he lives
in a base world, and has many corruptions in his heart, but look thou to him:
John 10.16. Other she^pe I have which are not of this fold, and these I must
bring home says Christ: there are many of Gods people called and converted,
but there are many yet which are in the gall of bitterness; and I know such a
drunkard, and though he be a woolfe now, yet he is one of my sheep, and him
I must bring home: It does my heart good to think that there is many an enemy
of Jesus Christ, and many that hates grace and goodness, many a wretched
drunkard, many a covetous and unclean wretch that shall be brought home: One
goes up and down this way, and another that way, as a company of poor sheep
that wander up and down, one falls into this ditch, another into that, and
another in such a grove: so there is many a poor sheep that goes away from
God and all goodness; the Lord give us hearts to pity them: howsoever God
has opened your eyes, and brought your hearts, and my heart home to himself;
yet there are many other sheep that as yet go from God. Oh, what a blessed
mercy is this? If Christ has once undertaken for you, he will seek you out
wheresoever you are. The Lord seeks you out many times in the congregation,
you might come home then if you would: well the Lord will make the fire of hell
to flash upon the conscience of a man, and drag him home, but it is no matter
which way the Lord brings him home, so he come to heaven at last. John 17. Thou
gave them to me, and I have given them eternal life. There is no more
difference than this, the Father gives the sheep to Christ, and says look to
him; and Christ says, you are given to me; take you everlasting life between
you, and take eternal glory; I give it to you as freely as ever God the Father
gave your souls to me. Secondly, God the Father gives Jesus Christ to the
poor soul, and says, I give thee him freely with his blood and all his
merits, his grace and goodness: Oh (says the poor sinner) blessed be God,
that Jesus Christ has undertaken for me, and that God the Father has given
me Christ; but alas, I cannot pay the price, I am notable to purchase the
pearl: as in a marriage, when the parties are both agreed, if there be a
quarrel about the feffment, all breaks off: so it is in this case, the soul
is now enabled to rest upon Christ, but what will the Lord require? for I am
base and poor; well, says God the Father, I will not sell my Son, but I
give him to thee, and thou must not think to purchase him; Ioh. 19.26, 27.
when Christ would commend Marie to the care of John, he says, Woman behold
thy son; and to John he says, Behold thy mother: so God the Father says to
Jesus Christ, My blessed Son, behold that poor, broken, humbled, sighing
sinner, behold thy son, take him for thy own; and thou poor sinner, behold
thy Savior, take him to thy self: and the soul receives that gift at the
hand of God the Father; Ioh. 10. So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. that is, God so set his heart upon those whom he would
save, that he gave Jesus Christ to be received from him, and to do all good
for them, according to all their necessities: thus I hope the heart has no
starting holes, the promise is sufficient, says the soul, if I had it, and
God sadly intended it, therefore I may take him, and God has given Christ the
care of me, to make me to believe: now the will is fully persuaded, and says
to hope and desire, and all the other affections, here is good enough: and come
hope, expect it for ever; and come desire, here is mercy enough that thou have
desired: and come love and joy, here is that mercy whereof you have felt the
sweetness: nay, says the will, let us rest here, and settle our selves upon
the freeness and favor of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ; as our Savior
said to the Disciples, Ioh. 6.27.28. Will you also go away? oh, says Peter,
whither shall we go, thou have then words of eternal life: the world calls,
and our lusts call, and pleasures call, and the more they call for our hearts,
the more we cry after thee out Christ; whither shall we go, if not to thee?
for there is none so gracious, none so merciful to sinners, none so ready to
do all good for us: and as there is sufficient in the promise, and as here is
sufficient in thee, and enough for sinners: so upon thy mercy we will hang,
upon thee our Savior we will live and dye; and upon the promises will we put
our selves, to receive all the comfort and good they will afford, and upon
this will we feed for ever. Thus much for the opening of the point.

is this; saving faith is no part of that holiness which Adam had, nor no part
of that image to which we are restored by sanctification: in a word, faith is a
work of effectual vocation, and no part of sanctification, neither of the
image in which Adam was created, or to which we are renewed, and this follows
from the Doctrine thus: If it be so that faith is the maine especial
^nstrument, whereby the soul goes to God to fetch a principle of grace, and
the Image of grace whereby we may live, then it is not the image which
formerly we had in Adam, nor to which we are renewed again in sanctification.
But the first is true, namely, that it is faith that goes to fetch that
spiritual power from God, which we ^ost in Adam, therefore it is not that
spiritual power, this is the point of information: Beloved ^n our Savior
Christ, I am not ignorant that many learned godly judicious Divines, whose
parts I reverence, are of another opinion, yet I remember their different
opinions, and therefore I hope ^o man will be offended with me, though I
dif^er from some, for I must needs differ from some; and it has ever been my
care not to trouble a ^opular congregation with any matter of dis^ute, and I
hold that it rather should be the care of Ministers to win men to faith,
than to trouble them with matters of this kind, and I hold it the greatest
part of zeal to get them to holy hearts, and to exact lives and conversations:
Therefore I am mavelous hardly drawn on to the least dispute in this kind,
and yet at the earnest request of some, and also because this is the proper
place where this question falls, and to clear some doubts according to my
promise, and because happily some good m^n may stumble at some things, therefore
let me deliver those thoughts which I have many times heretofore intended to
impart, and I should be very willing to hear of better arguments, if any
shall be suggested, these are spiritual passages, and hard and difficult,
therefore this I would tell you.







Adam in his innocence did not believe in a Savior, he needed it not, only
here lies the maine point of controversy, that though Adam did not believe in
a Savior, and God did not require it, yet men conceive, and some judicious
Divines too, that Adam had ability, that if Christ had been revealed he could
have believed; for they say thus, a man is able having a clear eye to see but
one world, because there is no more, but if there were five worlds, the same
eye that sees one, the same eye would see them all if they were visibly made.
So Adam did not believe a Savior, because the Lord Christ was not revealed,
and administered to him; but Adam had that spiritual power of faith, if the
Lord Jesus Christ had been revealed, he was able to believe in him and so to
rest upon him, as men do now in the time of the Gospel; this is the
controversy which we flatly deny.

Adam had not this, grace of faith: The reason is this, this believing in the
Lord Jesus Christ ^is that which does directly cross the estate of Adam in his
innocence; and the innocence of Adam wherein he was created, and therefore
cannot by no means agree to him, and that appears thus: for a man to have a
principle of life in himself which Adam had, and to fetch a principle of life
from another, which we do by faith, these are contrary the one to the other,
he lives well, and to be saved by living well, and to be saved by another,
and to live well by the power of another, these are contraries one to the
other, to have all in himself as Adam had, and to have all from another, and
not in himself; these are contradictions the one to the other, and therefore
cannot stand together, and therefore observe it, the manner and phrase of
Scripture is this, and it is very strange, Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, as if he should say, Adam in his
estate of innocence was in himself, and had his own righteousness, he had a
power to please God, and to save himself by it: but now in the time of the
Lord Christ, the case is clear, we are not, nor cannot ^he found in our own
righteousness, or in the works of the Law, but in the righteousness of God
by faith imputed to us, and of his grace bestowed on us, so that these two
cannot stand together. So then I reason thus, that which is cross to the
innocence of Adam, and contradicts the estate of Adam in his innocence, that
can never agree to the estate of Adam, but for a man to believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and to have all from him if it had been revealed, this had been
cross to the nature of Adam, and therefore it is not possible that he should
have this faith in him; now I come to answer some objections.

Adam had not this faith, and if the Lord did not require it at his hands, then
it seems that not believing in Christ is not a sin against the Law of God,
for God commanded it not i^ the Law.

John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ: the want of this faith is a sin not so much against
the ten Commandments, as against the Gospel properly, as Romans 3.28. By what
Laws boasting excluded? by the Law of faith; so that there is a Law even of
faith, not only a law moral, but a law of faith.

Adam then trust in God, and put his confidence in God:

Adam had, but it is not that which is of faith, and which we now speak of in
vocation, and Divines do truly say that we are bound to trust in God by the
first Commandment, but that trust is not this faith, but it is of a mavelous
far different nature: Know therefore that to trust and be^eeve in Christ
savingly is thus much, when the soul is wholly plucked off from it self, and
goes wholly to another for that which it has not of it self: this Adam had
not, for Adam could not seek to another for a principle of life, for he had
it in himself, neither was ^t sin in him, for the Angels themselves do not
believe in Christ, neither is it required of them. Again, Adam had a kind of
trust and confidence in God, but not this trust, nor this faith; but it was
this, so far as the creature being a second cause, should stay and move it
self according to the first cause, and to concur with the first cause unto
any work: This Adam had, and the Angels have it in Heaven, which believe not
in Christ. The blessed Angels have a power spiritual in themselves, and they
say that all power is firstly in God, and that he does govern them and all the
Heavens too, and stay themselves upon God firstly, and so co-worke with God:
but this is far different from saying thus; the Angels stay themselves first
upon God, as being the first cause of all created substances, and to go to
God, to fetch a principle of life from God, these are contraries.

Adam never had power to believe, and so believing in Christ was not in the
state of his innocence; then why does God condemn (...) for not believing,
seeing they have not this power, and Adam had it not? It is all the difficulty
that lies upon the point: The answer is plain, open, and naked, and therefore
I answer it by distinction thus:

are want of this confidence, there is an aversnes ^f heart, and a crossenesse
of soul, to the means of grace, and the Gospel, and against the Spirit ^f
grace, that would work faith, and draw my ^^ule out of my sin, and pluck my
soul to my ^aviour (...) sinful soul is fastened to his folly, and ^ettled
upon his base corruptions, and he rests here with a kind of resolution, not
to go off ^om his distempers, and he will hold his corrup^ons, and maintain
his lusts, so that when mer^e is offered, he says, I will not have mercy, but
^y sin; and the Spirit of God shall not pluck ^y corruptions from me, but I
will have my ^nne rather than a Christ, thought I perish for it; ^is resisting
against the means of grace, the pro^ise, and mercy, and the most blessed
Spirit of ^^ace, this flows from original corruption, and ^^refore Adam never
had this, and coming ^om sin, and being a fruit of sin, a man shall and
must justly be condemned for it: though ^dam had not faith, yet he would not
have oppo^d the Spirit of grace, it would have wrought upon him: this is the
infidelity which the Scripture so often makes mention of, because the ^eart is
proud and sturdy, and settled upon his ^es, and says, What, shall Jesus Christ
come to ^fer me grace, and to pluck away my sins and ^rruptions, and to give
me grace? I will none (...) this Christ, not I; if thou do want grace,
be^use thou have resisted grace, thou art justly to ^e condemned as a sinner:
this is the whole ^urse of Scripture, Ioh. 3.19. This is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men love darkness better than light, because
their ways are evil; that is, they love their sin, lusts, and corruptions,
and choose them, and fasten to them, and will have them, and will not have a
Christ; this is the ruin of a sinner, and this is the infidelity which the
Lord speaks of, and this is nothing else but the resisting the grace and
mercy, which would work grace in him, and this is properly unbeleefe; to see
how unbeleefe banks the way to heaven, a man that is a covetous wretch, close
hearted, the word reveals this, and condemns this, and says he, I will not
forsake the world; and the adulterer says, I will not forsake my lusts, and
the drunkard faith, I will not forsake my companions, he is staked down to
his corruptions, so that all the Angels in heaven, and all the promises of the
Gospel cannot persuade him to forsake his corruptions, but he is staked down
to his corruptions, and hugs them, and says, I will hug my sin in despire of
all the world, and God himself; this is a cursed fruit of original
corruption, this is sinful and fearful, and a man is justly condemned for it;
so then no man is condemned for want of power to believe, but because he
resists grace and mercy, and will not receive power to believe.

the fourth; therefore we will only propound the two former to make way for
the rest.

I know that in my flesh dwells no good thing; and our Savior, John 3.6.
Whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh; whatsoever comes from man, from
corrupted flesh, is unclean; so Romans 8.7. The carnal or the fleshly wisdom
is not subject to the law of God; so that a man not only has no good in
himself, but he is not able to receive any good, but rather oppose it.

Ioh. 6.44. No man comes to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him;
the Lord binds the strong man in preparation and humiliation, for the Devil
will not go out by entreaty; no, the Lord Jesus must bind him, and then the
Lord Jesus is pleased to separate the soul from sin to himself, and he
takes possession of him, and in vocation he persuades the soul effectually,
and brings it home, and when he is brought home, he gives him his good Spirit
to sanctify him.

Tim. 1.14. That excellent thing which was committed to thee, keep fast, how?
by the Spirit that dwells in us; this excellent thing was the doctrine of the
Gospel; now Saint Paul persuades us, to keep it by the Spirit that dwells in
us, this is a matter which blindes many a poor ignorant man, that otherwise
would bestow himself upon the free grace of God; we truly say, that all grace
comes from Christ, hereupon many a man thinks that he must first be in Christ,
before he can have any grace; we receive Christ by faith, and therefore we must
have faith, before we can have him, and we come to Christ by faith, and
therefore we must have faith before we can come to him: now the Lord Jesus is
the Author of all grace in the hearts of his own; the Lord works some grace
upon us to bring us himself, as the work of preparation and vocation, this is
a saving work of Christ, but yet it is the work of the Lord to bring us home
to himself, but now when we are come by faith, then God conveyes another work
to us, he does justify a sinner, and adopt him, and sanctify him: as in this
similitude, the first Adam by way of a natural generation, must beget a
child, before he can imprint his image of corruption upon him, and he must be
the son of Adam, before he can receive corruption from Adam, so that
generation is the way to corruption, else it is no corruption, as in that
place, Adam begat a son in his own image, that is, as blind, as stubborn,
as proud as Adam, so that generation is the way by which we receive corruption
from the first Adam: so it is in the second Adam, he does by spiritual
regeneration, and after a special manner work upon the hearts of his, to
bring them home to him, before he will imprint his image upon them, which is
the image of sanctification; the Lord Jesus will by the work of vocation and
preparation, as by a spiritual union, bring the soul to himself, before he
will imprint his image upon him sanctification; now preparation and vocation
go before sanctification, and yet they are not sanctification in the strict
sense; as generation went before the imprinting of the fathers image, so
vocation to Christ, is before the image of Christ can be imprinted: I use to
express my self by this similitude, look as it is with a clock that has
the wheels turned the rong way, what must a man do to make these wheels go
right? First he stops the wheels, and the wheels do not stop themselves, and
then he turns the wheel, and the wheel does not turn it self, and when he
has done so, then he gives it a poise or pl^^^, and by virtue thereof the
wheels run right, and the clock strickes right, all these are several worke^
upon the wheel, the stopping is not the turning, and the turning is not the
striking: so it is with the soul of a poor sinner, the heart of man i^ like
this wheel, it was made for God to please him, and to serve him, and was
altogether heavenward, but now it is hell-ward, and sin-ward, and world-ward,
and it is quite unjoynted: now how must God work upon this heart, to bring it
into the right frame again? First, the Lord stop^ the poor sinner, and that
is by preparation, he shows him his sin, and the punishment of it, and when
he is posting on to hell, the Lord writes bitter things against him, and says,
friend this is not the way to happiness, friend if you go that way, there is
the pit of destruction before you, and so with a mighty strong commanding hand
he stops the sinner by godly fear, and sorrow, and hatred, and turns it from
wickedness. Secondly, the Lord turns the heart to himself in vocation, and
the Lord says, come hither thou poor sinner, do not go to thy lusts, they
will kill thee; but go to the Lord Christ, and he will save thee; go not to
the world, it will delude thee; but go to the Lord Christ, and he will enrich
thee; thou art filthy, but go to Christ, and he will purge thee; thou art
miserable, but come to Christ, here is happiness, and that will save thee: by
thi^ time the wheel is stopped, and also turned the right way, and every
wheel is where it should be: and then the Lord justifies a poor sinner, and
is well pleased with him, and is reconciled to him, and he gives his Spirit in
adoption, and that is as the poise, that so he shall no more be ruled by the
world, nor by his lusts, but by the good Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the hand of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ does assist that poor soul
for ever. Thirdly, the soul having received the Spirit by faith, as Gal. 4.5.
receives hereby the adoption of sons. Fourthly, now the whole frame of the
heart runs right, and is toward God, and for God, and loves God, and has the
spiritual power, and a new principle of it self, and this is the maine work
of sanctification: if you will take sanctification in the stricktest sense, all
the rest are saving works, but this is the maine work of all. Fifthly, as the
clock when it is thus framed, strikes right, and when it is two, it strikes
two, and when it is three; it strikes three: so the soul is thus led by the
Spirit of God, as Romans 8.14. and then it obeyes God, and does every good duty,
and loves God above all, and his neighbors as himself, in truth, and in
uprightness, so that the soul is stopped in humiliation, and is turned in
vocation, it receives the poise in adoption, and renovation in sanctification,
and it obeyes God in all things: then the conclusion is this, all these are
saving works, and such as do undoubtedly accompany salvation, but all this
while, one is not another, for two of these are wrought upon us, that is,
preparation and vocation, and these are by a passive work: the wheel works
because it is moved, and in the other three the Lord conveyes his Spirit to us,
and mercifully works the power of sanctification in us, and makes us able to
serve him and obey him; Acts 26.18. Paul was sent to the Gentiles to open their
eyes, to turn them from the power of darkness to God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance amongst them that are called and
sanctified: mark all the passages of it, from darkness and Satan, that is,
in preparation; to God and to light, that is, in vocation: and as Saint Peter
says, Acts 3.19. Repent, and be converted, that ye man receive the
forgiveness of sins; repent, there is preparation; and be converted, there
is vocation; turned from Satan, and the power of the Devil, that they may be
under the power of the Lord Jesus, and lie at his footstool: as a soldier is
turned from such a captain, when he is content to be under another; so the
soul is turned from sin, and is content to take press money, and to become
a soldier of Jesus Christ. Thirdly, that he may receive forgiveness of
sins, that is in justification and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified, that's in sanctification, and all these are done by faith: the scope
of the holy Ghost there, is to discover the frame of grace in the heart; and
therefore it is not to be understood of the nature of Sanctification, but of
the work of it; that a man should receive his sanctification by faith, and yet
is but sanctified in part, these are contraries.

The fourth is only the work of sanctification, and lastly from the question
thus resolved; from hence that question falls to the ground, and from hence,
first a man may see it clearly that sanctification comes after justification:
and secondly, whether repentance is before faith, or whether repentance is
before justification, or justification before faith and repentance: and
thirdly, whether there be any other instrument to believe in Christ, but faith;
No, there is no other, for they all concur by faith: Thus much for the first
use; a word of confutation, and information.

robbers, because shame will come to them; but not to believe the promise, and
to despise the Lord Jesus Christ: you make nothing of this, you draw the
harrowes lightly after you, you confess this sin, and the other sin, and
you do welcome it: but in the mean time no man looks to his unbeleeving
heart, and yet this is the greatest sin of all other, and brings the greatest
misery; as Heb. 3.12. Take heed, why? what is the matter? For the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake, take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbeleefe, to depart from the living God: this unbeleefe makes you depart from
the Lord God, you will take heed of whoring and drunkenness, and you will say
you are not so and so, but I say thou have an evil and unfaithful heart, and
thou art a dead man, and a miserable man, and thou art gone from the Lord God,
the God of all happiness, and therefore thou art but a damned man: This is the
root and the worst of all, take heed of an unbeleeving heart, it departs away
from the living God; this is the nature and misery of this sin. What is the
estate of the damned in Hell? and this shall be the sentence that is past
against the wicked in that day, when the Heavens shall melt, and the Goats
shall stand on the left hand, and the Sheep on the right hand, and when ye
shall see all the Heavens on a flame, and you shall hear that fearful voice,
saying; arise you damned unbeleeving wretches, stand forth and hear your
doom; what will be your greatest misery in that day? even this, Depart from
me ye cursed, into everlasting flames: this is the upshot of vengeance, and
the sharpest sentence; would you not think this terrible, if you did hear it?

Now therefore away thou varlet, be gone to Hell; I doubt not but the very
proudest wretch in hell would then be content to hang upon mercy before he
went to Hell, and he would beg that he might yet breathe to call after mercy:
If thou would take heed of this sentence, then take heed of an unbeleeving
heart; for by unbeleefe, thou passest the sentence against thy self, thou
need none other to condemn thee. Oh therefore get you home and humble your
selves in secret, and say thus; The Lord has given me a heart to see the
evil of my heart: I bless the Lord, thou have kept my hand, my eye, my life,
but good Lord I never saw the horrible nature of sin, which will be my bane;
to this day I was never burdened with it: Oh that I might now take heed of it,
what shall I say to mine own heart? depart thou wretch to Hell, the Lord
forbid. Oh strive mightily with God, and with your own souls, and rest not
till you get some strength from Heaven, and say if that voice should come
again, Oh, woe to me for ever, well my unbeleeving heart does this, and has
past the sentence upon mine own soul; you hear these, and if you would but
take home these truths, they would make you stagger: See what our Savior
says, John 5.40. You will not come to me that ye may have life: but I know
you that ye have not the love of God in you: coming is believing, is this
sin so heavy, the Lord fasten it upon your hearts: what, shall any man go
away and say, I will not believe there is such a generation, whither will you
go? If the world calls, ye run; if the devil calls, ye go presently; but
will you not come to the Lord Jesus when he calls you? then Hell is to good for
you, bear witness of it; many a soul here this day is still resolved to go
on in his sins, and says, I am resolved to have my own courses, and I will be
as proud as ever, and swear, and drink, as much as ever, and I will not go
to Jesus Christ, whither will ye go then? Will ye go to destruction? I call
the Angels and all the Saints to record, you will not come, then you must to
destruction, there is no other way to come to Jesus Christ, but by believing in
him.

Now further to discover the fearfulness of this sin, and the misery of them
that continue in it, let me lay it open by four particulars, whereby it shall
appear, that howsoever unbeleevers make no great matter of it, yet if they
have the hearts of men about them, they shall see the misery of their own
souls, and that in th^se four particulars.

sinner that he cannot look out, nor look up toward Heaven, and that's the
reason why when the Lord chains ups poor sinner under the power of his chief
displeasure, he gives them up to hardness of heart, and unbeleefe, Romans 11.32.
He has shut up all in unbeleefe: it is a comparison thus to be conceived, as
it is with a heinous malefactor that has conspired against the King, and when
he is taken they put him into little ease, or some such close dark dungeon,
and clap cold irons upon him, and if any friend come to bring him any thing,
he cannot speak with him, nor he cannot receive it because he is close
prisoner: So the Lord does in his heavy displeasure, he locks up the soul in
unbeleef, and holds the heart in the chains of unbeleef; that howsoever
judgments pass up and down the world, yet all these judgments cannot awaken
him, nor all mercies; why? because the unbeleever is sure enough he cannot so
much as look to that mercy prepared, and offered in Jesus Christ; and that's
the reason why when the Lord comes by in all his glory, and mercy, as he did
Exodus 33.6.7. saying, the Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful and glorious. When
all these pass by, the unbeleever fits in his seat, but his heart is locked up,
that he cannot look up, and that's the reason why the Apostle says, Romans
11.8. He has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see,
and ears that they should not hear to this very day; that though he has all
the calls of mercy, yet he has eyes and sees not, and all is still, and
nothing stirring in the soul, nay, it is not only shut up and cannot come to
God, but unbeleefe bars the doors, that Jesus Christ cannot come to it:
therefore, John 1.11. He came to his own, and his own received him not; but
in the 12. verse, to as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the
Sons of God: this unbeleefe bars the doors, and raises Forts against him,
and closes every crevis of the heart, that not a beam of mercy, not a glimpse
of pity, can be let into the soul, so long as it is in this condition. I
beseech you observe it, unbeleefe is a fin, not so much of one faculty of the
soul, but it is that as carries the whole man with it: as when a man sets
himself in any unruly will, and will be ruled thereby, so that it stops every
passage, and there is no entrance for mercy; for look as it is with faith, the
root of it is in the will, but the rule of it is over all the whole man, and
therefore faith carries all the whole soul to God; love, and hope, and joy,
and all goes toward God, and the very same nature unbeleefe has, to carry the
soul from God; the root of it is in the will, but the rule of it is in the
whole man, and keeps the soul under the power and authority of it, as by
faith we go home to the Lord Jesus Christ, and are content that he should do
what he will with us; so unbeleefe keeps the soul under command, and will
dispose of all at his own pleasure, this is the poison and venom of this
corruption, it stops all the passages of the soul, that Christ cannot come at
it, nor it at Christ, so that if eternal life and happiness were laid down
upon the nail, yet unbeleefe will not suffer the soul to stretch out a little
finger to it; and says love and joy, I charge you, delight not in that mercy,
and desire, look not out after it; nay, if the wrath of God be revealed from
Heaven against the soul, yet it stops the soul that the wrath of God moves it
not, because unbeleefe rules; and says fear, tremble not at Gods judgments;
and sorrow, mourn not you for sin; come all this way and sorrow for the
loss of profits and pleasures, and because my will is crossed, but I will not
have you so much as look after God. This is the cursed nature of unbeleefe,
that there is nothing of God, of grace and happiness, can come near the
soul, unless the iron gate of infidelity be plucked off the hinges, and the
bars be broken asunder: this is that which the holy Prophet speaks of Isay
7.9. when the Lord would express the power of himself in an extraordinary
manner, he bids Ahaz that he should look for a miracle; and yet he says, If
you believe not, you cannot be established: so that though God expressed never
such miraculous power of mercy and goodness, yet so long as the heart is locked
up in unbeleefe, there is no mercy can come at him; nay, which is worse if
worse can be, unbeleefe not only shuts the door against Christ, and will not
receive him when he entreats for entrance, but it sets open the door to all
base lusts, to sin and Satan, than which there can be no greater indignity
offered to the God of heaven and earth, as Ier. 2.12.13. Oh ye heavens be
astonished at this; why, what is the matter? my people have committed two
evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and dug to
themselves broken pits that will hold no water: This is not only unreasonable,
but unnatural, and the heavens they shake at it; it is against the course of
nature, that a man should depart from the Almighty that would strengthen him,
and to rest upon his own folly, and go from the wisdom of God, that would
direct him in every good way; nay it chooses a man's own base corruptions and
lusts: and in the mean time departs away from the Lord, and his grace, and his
mercy; and it preferres sin and the Devil before the Lord, and all that
sufficiency of good that is in him; and therefore the Prophet wishes the
Heavens to be astonished at this: weak things naturally incline to that which
may strengthen them, and heavy things will not rest, until they come to the
earth, because that will sustain them. Oh what a baseness is this, the
Heavens are weary of a base wretch, that will trust to his own corrupt heart,
and renounce grace and Christ, and happiness and all: this is the first
passage.

never so precious and powerful, and though they have done never so much good
in quickening the hearts of others, yet they never do these men good, this
unbeleefe makes all means to be spilt upon the ground, and they never do good
to an unbeleeving heart; as Heb. 4.12. let us fear therefore, lest at any time
by forsaking the promise of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to
be deprived of the grace and mercy of God; for the word was preached first to
us, as also unto them, but it did not profit them that heard it, because it was
not mixed with faith, there is the cause; be the reproves and threatenings
never so fierce, that it would almost affright the heart of a Devil, and the
comforts never so sweet, and the heart of a poor Minister never so enlarged,
to work upon the hard-hearted, yet infidelity is as the buckler that bears
off all, and he says, I will never believe it, all his words fall to the
ground, and enter not unto the heart; no reproof terrifies, no exhortation
prevails; the heart is unbeleeving, it beats back, and shuts out all; this is
the reason why the Devil labors to make up this fortress above all the rest,
because he knows, if any man have an unbeleeving heart, it will make all
means unprofitable; the Devil is content that men have parts and gifts, and
these will carry a man to hell that has an unbeleeving heart: and therefore
many wicked men that are the Devils factours and schoolmasters, the first
lecture they read to a poor soul that is coming on, because they fear that
he will be wrought upon by the word, and the light of the word is come into
his mind, and his eyes are enlightened, and he says, If this be true that
the word says, then he says, I am a miserable man, the Lord be merciful to
me: now see what the carnal wretch that is the Devils familiar, says to him,
I hope you have more wit, than to be persuaded of whatsoever he says, he
speaks out of passion, and he must say something, and threatened men live long,
etc. thus nothing works upon him, and the Minister had as good speak to the
pillars, for all comes to nothing, and we find it in nature thus, that the not
believing of any thing, keeps the heart from being affected with it, as for
example thus; let there be never so many threatenings, as that the Spanyard
has an invincible navy of so many ships set out, the merchant that
understands any thing, knows that the Spanyard cannot make such a navy, and
therefore they believe it not; but in eighty eight every man's heart begins to
shake, and every man begins to bestirre himself: nay, let the promise be never
so fair and sweet, yet if we are not persuaded of it, we never care for his
kindness, and we look not after it, and say, these are good words, and fair
words make fools feign, but we believe it not: just thus it is with an
unbeleever, when he comes to receive all the means of grace from the Lords
hands, and when all judgments are denounced from heaven, and the wrath of God
against sin; and the word says, Be not deceived, God is not mocked; if you
so^ to the flesh, and walk after it, you shall reap everlasting perdition:
and again, No adulterer nor drunkard shall enter into the kingdom of heaven;
they hear these, and consider of them, and make a small matter of it, and will
not believe it, and therefore they tremble not at it, and are not affected with
that cursed condition, in which they are; Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19. when the Lord had
denounced all the judgments that could be expressed, all the mercies that
could be revealed; in the end he says, Take heed lest there be in any of you,
any root of bitterness; so then, when ye hear the words of this curse, ye
bless your selves in this estate, and say, I shall have peace, though I walk
in mine own ways; as if he had said, if any man come to this, that he can
hear all the flashes that come from hell, and see hell gaping for him, and
here the thundering of Gods judgments, and believes nothing, but blesses
himself, and says, the Prophets and Ministers must say something, and they
must have leave to speak, but yet I shall be blessed for all this, this wipes
of all the authority of the truth of God: look as it is in nature, that
physic which the stomach is not able to retain (though it be never so good)
it will never purge; and the meat though never so comfortable, yet if the
stomach cannot take it down and digest it, it will never nourish a man: so be
the word never so physical and cordial, yet if a man have (...) unbeleeving
h^^^t, that he will not take down the truth, it is mavelous certain, that
that word cannot profit an unbeleeving heart; and that^ the cause of that curse
which Jeremiah speaks of, chap. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man,
and he that makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord,
for he shall be like the barren heath in the wilderness, that it shall not
see when good comes; as it is with a barren heath, though the seed be never
so good, and the seasons never so comfortable, and though the sun shine never
so fairly upon it, and though the dewes come from heaven never so sweetly, yet
there will not be a grain of good corn, because it is a barren heath; so it
is with that unbeleeving heart of thine, thy heart shall be like a barren
heath, and thou shall never see when good comes, much good will come to thy
family, it may be, there will one child be humbled, and it will come to the
same chamber; one servant is hardened, and another saved; the wife converted,
and the husband is hardened; and the husband is converted, and the wife is
wayward and froward still: now though the dewes of heaven be never so
comfortable, so that one poor soul is strengthened, and another poor heart
cheared, yet thy unfaithful heart is like a barren heath, no good shall come
to thee in it, there is no mercy nor consolation for that soul, in all the
means that God continues and vouchsafes, this is the maine cause of all the
inconveniences that come upon us, that after all the means continued and
multiplied, there is almost no good at all done, every family is (...) a barren
heath, there is no good comes to such a child, nor to such a servant, they are
all infidels, I do not mean Pagans, but unbeleevers, and they receive not
that mercy which Christ offers; nay it is just that it should be so, that thou
should never get good, though all the Angels from heaven should come and
reveal Gods mind, and though all the Devils should come from hell to terrify
thee, because unbeleefe draws away thy heart, and pluckes away the soul, and
makes the power of the truth not to prevail with it, so that when the Lord
would come in upon the heart, unbeleefe pulls away the heart from the truth of
God; Romans 11.20. The Jews were broken off, because of unbeleefe; they were cut
off from b^ing Gods people, and from enjoying the means of grace; that when
the Lord would lay hold upon a poor soul, unbeleefe plucks the soul from the
word, that it may turn from it.





is the mother of all corruptions, and breeds many, it nurseth and nourishes
them, so that they are fat and well liking, and they come up mavelous well;
that's the meaning of the Apostles phrase, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. That we may be
delivered from the hands of unreasonable and absurd men; how came they to be
so? because all men have not faith; that is, he that wants faith, will never
want him; and he that wants faith, will ever be unreasonable and absurd:
drunkenness stares men in the face, and out-faces the officers, and contempt
of God, and profanation of the Lords day, and the world carries all before
them, as if they were the only commanders of the world; what is the reason of it?
all men have not faith, they do not believe the word of God that condemns
those sins, and which would direct them to cast away those sins, and
therefore they go on with mavelous violence; let the word of God come in
public or private, they make nothing of all these, but they will have their
own ways: I use to call unbeleefe the protector of the estate of corruption;
as it is with some lower states and princes, as in the Low Countries, and in
Germany, they are not able to subsist of themselves, and therefore they are in
league with some other, that they may be protected by them, and receive succor
from them, and if they defend them, they hope to make their parts good with
any: so this unbeleefe maintains any sin, good in its rank and state; indeed
restraining grace, may curb corruption, and keep in the distempers of the
heart; but there is nothing that can kill corruption, but only the Spirit of
the Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of his grace; Romans 8.2. The law of the
Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of sin,
and of death; sin sets up a law, and rules in the heart, as you shall find
it in your own hearts; pride says, you shall be proud, there is a sovereign
rule, and a tyranicall authority, which pride expresses in the heart; now the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, sets up another law, and there is more commanding
power in that, than in the corruption of the soul; and the law of the Spirit
takes away the power of sin, that would prevail against a poor sinner; the
law of meekness in Christ, takes away the law of anger in the heart; and the
law of patience in Christ, takes away the law of impatience; and the law of
courage, takes away the law of cowardice; and the law of chastity, takes a way
the power of uncleanness: so that there is no sin can be subdued, but by the
power of Christ, and the work of his Spirit: now unbeleefe keeps the heart
wholly from Christ, therefore it can receive no good from Christ, and from
hence it is that all sin is maintained in the soul in the full vigor of it,
there is no unbeleever in all the world, but he has all sin strongly in him,
and not one sin that ever was slain; it is strange to see, when unbeleefe
previles but a little in the heart of a poor Saint, how all other sins put
out their heads, and show themselves a maine; as Luke 22.32. Simon, Simon,
Satan has desired to sift thee, as wheat, but I have prayed, that thy faith
fail thee not; Satan labored to shake the hold of Peter's faith, and
thereupon many corruptions were expressed in his life, because Peter did fail,
and did not believe that which Christ had said to him; so soon as unbeleefe
prevails, then false-heartednesse expressed it self, and he presently denied
his master; and then base cowardlinesse says, I know not the man; and his want
of reverence to the name of God discovers it self, for he falls to swear that
he knew him not, and there was self-love in all these: thus you see, when a man
will not believe, every corruption breaks forth, and that amain, and this
unbeleefe will fat all corruptions in the soul, and all cursed distempers, and
makes them fat and well-liking; as it is of faith in the spiritual man, so it
is of flesh in the corrupt man; 1 Pet. 2.11. The flesh lusts against the
soul; there is a kind of armor of the flesh and of corruption, as well as
the armor of the Spirit, which procures comfort to the soul; sin has its
armor as well as grace; now look as it is in the spiritual armor of a
Christian, faith is a shield, a shield defends not only the body, but all the
armor of the body; so faith, it defends not only the body, but the soul, and
all the graces of the soul: so it is also with this infidelity, in regard of a
man's corrupt nature, corruption it is maintained by infidelity, as by a shield,
it is the shield of a man's corruptions, as faith is the shield of the
spiritual man; I confess that reformation, and the means thereof out of the
ordinances of God, and the powerful work thereof, may marvellously snub and
wound sin; but infidelity will heal it again, and will restore life to it
again. I compare reformation to the retreat of an army, when one side is
weak, and the other side is too strong, and they are not able to make their
parts good, then they make a retreat, and go home again to their trenches,
and he that wisely retreats himself, though he may lose the day, yet he
loses not a man, and the Commander says, such a man was wounded, and such a
man was hurt a little, but we came all well home; they retreat into the
trenches, and get more strength, and then they levy our their forces again. So
it is with outward reformation, happily a man lives under a powerful Minister,
under a good master, and in a good family, and all these make sin retreat; and
he dares not swear, and he cannot walk in his wicked ways, his master curbs
him, all this while his sins make a retreat; but there is none of them gone,
the life of never a one of them is gone, so long as he has an unbeleeving
heart: let the unbeleever enjoy never such means, and live in never so good a
family, yet he has not one sin killed, they are only retreated, and so
unbeleefe nurseth them, and makes them grow out with greater violence. This I
take to be the reason why many a man that has professed the Gospel, and has
had much horror of heart, and many good resolutions, and much care expressed
outwardly after many years, his corruptions break out again and get ground,
and they are armed afresh, and they run violently, and for any thing a man
knows, they go down to hell: how many professors have turned to be unclean
persons, and to be drunkards, because their old sins were but only snubbed
by good company and the word, etc. But they never had their hearts thoroughly
broken; the root that nursed all, was still the same, and therefore they break
out notoriously, to the dishonor of God, the scandal of the Gospel, and the
confusion of their own souls, if God be not merciful.

Heb. 3.18. There the Lord takes a solemn oath, that they that would not
believe, should never enter into his rest: to whom did he swear thus? to them
that believed not; God never takes an oath that he that keeps not the law,
shall not be saved; or that he that cannot perform to keep all the
Commandments, shall not be saved, and never see happiness: no, but he takes
an oath, that they that believe not, shall never see happiness, and when God
once swears, the thing is unchangeable. God never swore that if Adam did not
do, he should not live; but if he had not believed in that Christ that was
promised, he had never been saved; but though we cannot live by exact doing,
yet we may live by believing, and we may go to another to do what God
requires of us; and this is the reason of that peremptory curse which God
seal^s down upon the hearts of unbeleevers, John 3.18. He that believes is
not condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned already; he has one
foot in hell, but why is it so?

I answer; look as it is with a man that has a case to be tried, if it be
tried in all the courts of England, and he cast in them all, there is no more
trouble to be made, nor no more hope of recovery: So it is in this, he that
believes not, is cast in all Courts in Heaven and earth: Law and Gospel both
condemn him; justice will not save him, for it must be satisfied; and mercy
will not save him, for he is an unbeleever; so that there is no trial to be
looked for, the sentence is passed upon him in heaven and earth, only there
wants a Jailer to bring him to the gibbit, that is death and the devil, who is
the hangman to turn him off into hell for ever, there to plague him: nay,
unbeleefe binds Gods hand, and hinders the power of God, as may be said with
reverence; he may justify a sinner, but he will not justify an unbeleever in
his estate of unbeleefe: Mark 6.5. He could do no miracle there, because of
their unbeleefe: the text does not say, he did not great works there: So S.
Matthew has it, but he could do no great works there; so the Lord, he can
do mighty works, he can justify a sinner, and comfort the discomforted, and
cleanse the polluted, and save the polluted, but he will not save the
unbeleever, he cannot work this mighty work upon him; and therefore do not
trouble thy self so much for mercy toward thee; if thou be an unbeleever,
never dream of comfort, for God cannot save thee: will God go against his
own words? then he should not be truth; he has sworn that an unbeleever
shall not enter into his rest, this word and oath shall stand for ever.
Therefore go to God, that he may give thee a believing heart, and then mercy
will come, and pardon and glory will come to the soul; but remaining in
unbeleefe, he cannot save thee, he will not deny his Word, nor his oath, for
never an unbeleeving wretch under Heaven. Now if you do conceive the nature of
your sin, and your misery thereby; then for the Lords sake, you that hear
the Word this day, all you unbeleevers that never had this work of faith in
your souls, hie you out of this miserable condition, go your ways, and give
no quiet to your souls, nor no comfort to your consciences, before the Lord
show mercy to you in removing this corruption from your souls, and show mercy
to you: Now whether you have true faith or no, I shall show afterward when I
shall come to try every man's evidence: and that ye may come out of this
unbeleeving condition, labor to see the danger of it in three particulars, and
establish thy heart with these considerations, that thou may never be in
quiet, till thou have some power against them, and grace to come out of them.

Haman did of Mordecay, Ester 5.13. when the King had granted him all that his
heart could desire, and his requests were ever made good, and his malice ever
satisfied, and the posts dispatched it to root out the Jews, and was invited
to the Queens feast; yet one thing took away all the contentment of the
other, when he saw Mordecay sit in the Kings gate and reverenced him not; this
overthrew all: as he did sinfully and foolishly, so do thou wisely and with
great judgment, and reason thus, and say, good Lord what availes it me to
hear, and pray, and live unblamably, so long as I see this unbeleefe perking
it self in this corrupt heart of mine. So long as this remains, all my
prayers will do me no good, these will bring the wrath of God upon me; nay,
the wrath of God is upon me, and I am condemned already, in my fasting,
prayer, and all my holy duties.

brethren think of these things, it is good to hear of this now, and better
it is to know them now, than to know them when it is too late: now you have
your houses, and beds, and pleasures, to comfort you, but you have an
unfaithful heart, go thy ways poor wretch, thou have enough, thou have that
about thee that will sink thy heart for ever. Oh, let this be written upon the
palms of your hands; and graven upon the testures of thy bed, and say this is
a goodly house, and I have goodly riches, but I have an unfaithful heart too:
labor to be affected with this for the Lords sake; you know what Esau said
profanely, when he was like to die, What Is my birthright to me, if I die for
hunger? Genesis 25.32. I tell you it will be as gall and wormwood to you; when
the drunkard is in his cups, and the adulterer in his dalliances, you may say I
have this and that, but what availes these when I have an unbeleeving wretched
heart about me, I carry my bane, and that which will be my breake-necke.

not be taken for a jayle-bird, thou art ashamed of these: were thou but a
witch, or a traitor, or a man condemned, would thou not be ashamed? had
thou but reason in thee, thy soul would shake at it, and say, Oh wretch that I
am, that I should live to bring such discredit upon my self, and all good men:
Oh go thy way, and look into thy heart, and say, I may thank an unbeleeving
heart for all these, if I had not had an unbeleeving heart, I had not been
overtaken with any of all these sins, nor dishonored God by this sin, as I
have done: unbeleefe is the author of all, and therefore to be hated more than
all: I would feign have people look inward; thou have stolen such a thing
from such a man, and thou art ashamed of it; now infidelity can rob God of his
honor, and by this sin thou have refused the Lord Jesus Christ; and thus dog
thy own heart ever and anon, and when thou have done so, be earnest with the
Lord, to take these cursed corruptions from thee, sigh especially under this
sin, and labor above all to be freed from this sin, and then all the rest
will dye and decay in thee. I would have a poor unbeleever do as the
prisoners do in Newgate; what lamentable cries will they utter, saying, good
your worship, remember the miseries of poor prisoners; good Gentleman spare a
farthing to the wants of poor prisoners: so thou art shut up in unbeleefe,
therefore look out from the gates of hell, and from under the bars of
infidelity, and cry, that God would look on thee in mercy, and spare Lord, a
poor unbeleeving wretch, locked up under the bars of unbeleefe, good Lord
succor and deliver in thy good time; and as the Prophet David says, Psalm.
79.11. Let the sighing of the prisoners come up before thee; though that was
meant of the bodily imprisonment, yet the argument prevails much more, in
regard of the spiritual thraldom; good Lord let the sighing of the prisoners
come before thee, so go thou thy way home, and humble thy self in thy secret
closet, and cry out of the prison of unbeleefe, and say, Let the sighing of
poor distrustful souls come up before thy Majesty, send help from heaven,
and deliver the soul of thy servant from these wretched distempers of heart:
deal in this case, as men that are engaged for prisoners, so do thou with the
Lord Jesus, Esa. 49.8, 9. it is the office of Christ, and for this end he came
into the world; and the Lord says, In an acceptable time I have heard thee,
and in the day of salvation have I helped thee, that thou may say to the
prisoners, go forth; and to them that are in darkness, show your selves; the
Lord Jesus came into the world in an acceptable time, and he had this covenant
made with him, that he should draw poor souls out of darkness, and say to
the prisoners, come forth: God the Father has sent him for this end, and has
promised to hear him when he calls for mercy in the behalf of poor sinners:
you poor creatures remember this; for I doubt not but here are some that have
faith, though no question, there are many of you in this place that are yet
unbeleevers, and mark this, if you were never yet sensible of your unbeleefe,
in some measure, I say, you never took one step toward grace nor Christ; we
cannot help our selves, we cannot go to Christ, and Christ cannot come to
us, so long as this iron bar is between us, therefore entreat him, for his
covenants sake, to accomplish that he has said: and tell him, that thou art a
poor prisoner, and that Christ came for this very end; plead hard with him,
and say, Blessed Redeemer, it is but one word of thy mouth, say to a poor
prisoner, and an unbeleeving heart, rest thy self upon the promise, plead thus
with the Lord, and this is the only way to obtain this mercy of the Lord, it
is a sin that undermines all our comforts, and makes all means unprofitable,
whatsoever we have, and yet we never look after it, nor care for it; Oh hate
all sins, but hate this infidelity above all other sins.

mean spiritual power, then let us all know it, and conclude it, that it is
not only hard and difficult, but also impossible for man, from any power of his
own, to rest upon Gods promises by the work of faith; it is true indeed, we
can do thus much, we can settle our selves upon our own bottomes, and rest
our selves upon our own sufficiency, and if a man have parts and gifts, we
can, we do naturally stay our selves upon these broken props, and our souls
go that way naturally, as heavy things naturally go downward, this we can
do out of the power of corrupt nature, thus we are our selves, and we rest
upon our selves; in a word, when a man finds parts, and gifts, and means, and
then to rest upon God, and to cast away all carnal confidence, and to cast our
selves upon the free grace of God, it will cost us much work to do it, nay it
is beyond all our power, it is the work of God to do it: I speak this the
rather for these two ends; First, to crush that vain conceit of a company of
poor ignorant creatures, that make it a matter of nothing to believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and think it is all one to believe, as to say they believe,
Oh they believe in their sweet Savior, and man nor Devils shall not persuade
them to the contrary: hence is that speech of a poor creature, standing by a
man ready to dye, when a Minister of God, who was there, did exhort him to rest
upon the promise, and urging him to many things that way, and the poor
creature complaining much that he could not believe, here upon his carnal
friend standing by, said, Believe thou fool, can thou not believe? A man
would not imagine it almost, but that experience has made it good, and others
have informed us of it, that many wise judicious men are not ashamed to speak
it, that if people knew the current of the Scriptures, and were able to
understand the texts of Scripture, it were not so hard a matter to believe as
men would make it; but men are not able to dive into the nature of Scriptures,
and to conceive of the mysteries thereof, which if they did, it were an easy
matter to believe; this is the conceit of a company of poor deluded creatures,
though otherwise learned and judicious; follow these men home, and you shall
find this true, that either they are careless in their families, or else they
have some tang of some strong corruption: now to overthrow these two, let me
do it upon these two grounds; First, see the difficulty of the work of faith,
in regard of the feebleness of all that a man has or does to make him
believe: Secondly, in regard of the extraordinary greatness of the work, that
may hinder a man from doing what he may; for the first, that which may
dis-inable all those things that a man expects comfort from; there are but
four things that a man can put any confidence in; first, the excellency of
his parts; or, secondly, the height of his privileges; or, thirdly, the
performance of his duties; or, fourthly, the powerfulness of those means that
he has: to sum up these briefly, and to overthrow them; first, had thou
that strength of judgment, sharpness of wit, and quickness of memory, and
all natural abilities, none of all these can make thee able to work faith in
thy self; Matthew. 11.25, 26, 27. when Christ had considered the hardness and
difficulty of the work of faith, and had upbraided the Pharisees because they
believed not, at last he says, I thank thee heavenly Father, Lord, because
thou have hid these things from the great and wise of the world, and have
revealed them unto the babes; it is so, Oh Father, because it seemed good in
thy sight; if wisdom, and prudence, and skill in arts and sciences, would
have carried men to Jesus Christ, the Scribes and Pharisees would then have
gone to him; but God has hid these things from the wise and prudent; so it
will be in every man, be his parts and abilities never so great, for the work
of faith, it is not in thy parts and gifts, but in the Lords revealing, it is
not thy self, but the Lord that must work it; babes themselves shall have
these things revealed, and shall be made able to believe, when thou with all
thy parts, and gifts, and wisdom, shall be cashiered, and thrown down to
hell; and then he shows the reason of it, All things are delivered to me of my
Father, and no man knows the Son, but the Father, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him; so then, it is not what we have or do, but what the Lord
Christ can and will do for us; all the wit in thy head, and all thy skill and
parts, will never make thee able to know the Father, unless the Lord Christ
will make thee able to know him; if Christ make thee know him, then be must
choose thee; and this we know, that he chooses the weak and mean things of
the world; nay all these excellencies are so far from interesting a man in
the Lord Jesus Christ, that it is a great suspicion, I do not say, in always
certain, but I say, it is a great suspicion, that the Lord Jesus Christ will
never reveal himself to thee, because be reveals himself to the poor and
weak, therefore thy parts cannot make thee believe, if thou had all that
ever any scholar under heaven had, because it is the work of grace: Secondly,
all thy privileges are weak, and cannot reach the work; as Saint Paul by
experience proves it, Philip. 3.7.4. verses, The things that I accounted gain,
they were loss unto me; If any man might be confident in the flesh, much more
I; what soul could say any thing for any outward excellency, but Paul could
say much more? were they circumcised? so he was; were they Hebrews? so was he;
were they zealous? so was he; did they live unblamably? so did he; now were not
all these able to carry him to heaven? no, says he, I thought my self to be
upon a good bottom, but I found them all to be loss; that is, they were all
causes and hindrances, why he did come unto Christ; so far were they from
being an encouragement to come to Christ, that they were bars to keep him
from resting upon a Savior: if this could not profit Paul, no more will they
profit thee, thou may hear, and fast, and pray, and read, and come to the
supper of the Lord, which are appointed as a means to nourish the soul, and
yet have an unfaithful soul, and go down to hell.

Thirdly, all thy duties, though they were never so glorious in the eye of
another, and never so great in thine own apprehension, yet they are all too
weak to work this grace of faith in thy soul: Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in
at the strait ga^e, for many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able:
There are four or five passages or aggravations, to help on this point; he
does not say that idle and lazy people shall not enter in, but those that seek
and take pains, and think they are at great cost too, and not a few of them
neither: but many shall seek, and he does not say they shall not be able to
run on in the ways of godliness, but they shall not be able to enter into
that gate, it is beyond all their power and ability to make them enter in: So
that were a man able to attend with never so much care, and hear with never so
much reverence, and judgment, to reform with never such conversation, and
were a man able to do much in the profession of the truth, yet he might go
to hell, and never get faith, nor Christ: It is possible to go thus far, and
to do all these services gloriously in man's fight, and yet never come at
Christ, and so perish ever: If ever man might have thought it to have done it
of himself, then Paul might have done it, as Acts 23.2. I am verily a man,
which am a Jew, borne in Tarsus a famous City in Gilicia, but brought up in
this City, at the feet of Gamaliel, and instructed according to the perfect
manner of the Law of our fathers; and Gal. 1.14. He profited in the Jewish
religion exceedingly, and yet all this while he confesses that he was an
unbeleever, 1 Timothy 1.13.

Lastly, the power of means are not able to frame the soul to this blessed
gift of believing: a man would think that if a man's pains were great, and the
means powerful, that this would undoubtedly work faith, but yet this will not
do it neither: for then Jerusalem that had all the Prophets to foretell a
Christ, and all the proclamations of John Baptist, and Christ himself
preaching, that spoke as never man did, and besides all these, she had
miracles expressing the power of God, to confirm that doctrine, yet she falls
short of the work; as, John 12.37. Though they saw many miracles, yet they
believed not in Christ: they had all the Prophets and Apostles, and all the
sacrifices and services, and thither the Tribes went up, and all the help that
ever any had, and yet they believed not: and therefore it is that Christ
upbraids them heavily for their fearful scandalous hardness of heart, Matthew
11.16. He compares them to little children sitting in the market place, and
calling unto their fellows, saying, We have piped to you, and ye have not
danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented: that is, no means
in the world would work upon them: John Baptist came in the way of
humiliation, and Christ came in the way of comfort, but all would not prevail
with their hearts, no Law, nor Gospel.

able to believe, then what will it avail a man to do any duties, or to use
any means?

Acts 18.27. The Apostle confirmed those which had believed through grace: So
that the Word of God, and the mean of grace, and all the duties that we do,
these are but as Conduit pipes to convey what God is pleased to bestow; he may
stay the Conduit when he will, he may work with means and without means, but
let us wait upon God in the use of them. The Lord in them may and happily will
work upon thee: So that if the best means, and the chiefest privileges, and
the best duties cannot work faith, then I presume it is not only difficult,
but in regard of parts, and privileges, and all duties and means of themselves,
it is impossible ever to have this faith wrought, and therefore it is not easy
to get this faith into the soul.

Secondly, as the weakness of the means that should do this work, shows
that it is difficult, so also the greatness of the work hinders us, that we
are not able to compass it by all the means we do enjoy: Now the greatness
of the work of faith will discover it self in three particulars: First,
because there must be several hindrances removed, before there can be any
room for faith; and these hinder the power of Satan, that takes possession of
the soul naturally, and the supreme sovereignty of sin, it carries the whole
man according to the lusts thereof, and the soul must be brought from under
both these, before it can be brought to Jesus Christ: the soul must be brought
from under the jurisdiction of sin, and the dominion of Satan, before it can be
translated unto the kingdom of God, Acts 26.18. the Apostle was sent to the
Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God. Every man by nature is in darkness, and under
the power of sin, now the Apostle must turn them from the power of sin, before
he can bring them to God, and all this must be done before a man can receive
remission of sins, and justification by the blood of Christ. Now darkness, and
sin, and Satan, express their dominion over the soul, and we cannot have
sin and Satan to be our Lord, and have Christ our Lord too: This must be
wrought in preparation: Matthew. 12.29. The strong man must be bound, and cast
out before another strong man can come to take possession: Satan is the strong
man, who by the power of sin takes possession of the soul: now the power of
sin and Satan must be east out by the power of preparation and humiliation.
Now for a man to pluck a poor soul from the power of sin and Satan, and to
wrest the keys from the hand of the devil; and to rescue a poor soul from
the malice of the devil, a^^ to break that le^g^^ and combination between
sin and the soul, and to withdraw the heart from these corruptions, and from
that power which sin and Satan and Gods justice would express in the soul,
no man can do it, but only he that has a greater power than both these,
which none but the Lord Jesus Christ has, Revel. 1.18. which has the keys of
hell and of death: now the key is a sign of command: now the Lord Jesus Christ
only has the key of hell and death: it is he that has led captivity captive:
it is he that triumphed over all his enemies: therefore he only can pull the
soul from the government of sin and Satan, and so prepare a way for faith, and
thereby bring the soul to God.

Secondly, consider the glorious nature and the excellencies of this grace of
faith, look upon the surpassing excellency of the work of faith above all
other graces; for we have made it good by argument heretofore, that faith is a
work above man in his corrupt estate: so that a man may truly say, that this
work of faith is more than natural: now for nature to work above nature, it is
above common sense: that a tree should see and walk, and a beast to reason,
these things nature abhorres. Now because faith is above corrupted nature,
therefore it is impossible for man to work it in himself: this I take to be
the reason why this gracious work of God finds more contradiction in the
heart, than any grace I know. A man finds a greater do with his own heart,
and a greater hardness and crosnesse in the heart to come in and believe, than
to do any thing else; a man will hear, and read, and pray, and do any thing,
and mourn, but to believe it is that which a man scarce considers of; and this
is the reason of it, because not only corruption opposes the work of faith,
but even a man's gifts, and self, and sufficiency which God gives him, that now
and then seems to be the hinderance of faith, its through our corruptions
indeed: in other things it is not so; we would feign get sorrow, and therefore
we labor for it; and we would have love, and therefore we labor for it; But
all this is out of our own power or abilities; we would keep us in our
selves, but faith would have us go out to Christ: and our parts would work
this in us; but faith says we must go to the Lord Jesus Christ, or else we
are not able to do that which he commands.

So now you see that a man's parts and abilities are sometimes great hindrances
and bars to keep a man from believing; and this is the reason why, if God
opens a man's eyes, and discovers a man's corruptions, by nature we fall to
doing, to repenting formally, and all this while never see a need of a Christ,
but rest in our selves and our own abilities, and will never go to Christ:
Thousands go to hell this way; the most that profess the Gospel, and perish,
they perish upon this point. So then the work is more than natural.

Thirdly, if we consider the manner of Gods working upon the soul in
believing, the Lord does not concur in an ordinary common kind of
providence; as meeting with some power and ability in the soul to help
forward the work, as God moves, and we move, and we are co-workers with God
in several passages; and so it is in all the works of sanctification which
comes after faith. There is still something that concurs with God in the work,
but now it is a true miracle, he finds nothing in the soul, but mere fears
and oppositions at first; and therefore Divines do truly say, that it is more
to make the soul believe, than to create a world, for in the creating of the
world, the Lord had no oppositions, he only spoke the word, and all was made;
but now sin and Satan, and the world and all, set against the poor soul. If
a man gets a knock by the Ministry of the Gospel, and begins to be humbled,
then carnal friends begin to persuade, and every man has a blow to hinder him
from receiving the powerful impression of the Word of God; so that the Lord in
this work finds more fierce oppositions, than in any work; and moreover,
when these oppositions are opposed and removed, and the Lord comes into the
soul, the soul is very empty, and cannot receive nor close with any grace.
As it is with a dead man, he has no power to quicken himself, as. Ephesians.
19.20. What is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward, who believe
according to the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead: the same Almighty power which raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead, the same power the Lord puts forth in bringing a dead
soul to believe: So that as the dead body has no living virtue in it self to
quicken it self, so the soul has no ability to believe of its own self:
but see how the Apostle cannot content himself to speak of this work of God,
you shall see five degrees in it, what is the exceeding greatness of his power
to us that believe. First, the power of God: Secondly, the greatness of it:
Thirdly, the excessivenesse of this greatness: Fourthly, the excessivenesse of
that mightiness: Fifthly, the working of all together: so that there is the
exceeding greatness, and the excessive greatness, and the mightiness of that
excessivenesse, and then the work of all: as if he had said, view you the
heavens, search all the stories, and behold all the miracles that ever God
wrought, and there is none equal to his, to be compared with this work of
believing. I say of faith as Jacob did of Reuben, Genesis 49.3. Reuben thou art my
first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of
dignities, etc. So I say of faith, it is the first borne of all other graces,
it is the might of God, and the beginning, and the excellency of the might and
power of God: for as the first borne has a double portion appointed by God, so
this is the first borne, and has a double portion of that Almighty Spirit of
his.

So then if it be so, that all the parts that ever a man had, and all the
highest privileges, and means, and duties, cannot reach this work, and are
not able to work faith, but are too feeble to work faith: and if it be so,
that this work is extraordinary great, and so are the hindrances to be
removed, and none but Christ can do it; and if faith be supernatural, the
opposition against this work of God be so fierce, let then every man that
hears the word of God this day, yield that it is unconceivable how it is done,
and therefore much more out of our power to work it in our own souls:
therefore you that have heard, and understand the mind of God, that out of
ignorance have been deceived, to you I now speak, you are to be entreated in
the name of the Lord, to go home, and say, and take shame to your selves, and
confess your own folly; thou that have made it a easy work to believe,
saying, if people were but judicious to understand the Scriptures, it were
easy to believe; now take shame to your selves, and say thus, Lord, the truth
is, I condemned such and such a poor soul, I heard such a man a mourning, and
saying, he could not believe; in the mean time I thought it was easy, or
else they wanted wit; but I thought that by my parts and abilities, and because
I was able to see the depth of Scriptures, that therefore I could believe, and
that it was an easy matter to do it: but poor deluded creature that I was, I
see now that I am no more able to believe out of my own power, than to pull
the sun from the heavens: consider it sadly, and know, that he that believes,
must believe through grace, therefore parley with the promise, and say, Lord, I
must believe through grace: it is not parts nor privileges, means nor duties,
I must believe through grace: if I could meditate till my eyes sunk into my
head, yet Lord it is through that grace that I must believe, through that grace
of thine; enable thy servant, and strengthen him in hearing, prayer, and all
means, that I may receive the good and benefit of faith to my comfort: and
brethren, whenever ye appear before the Lord in the use of the means, do
not stick upon the means, and say, now I shall believe, but look to him,
that by all these can do more than thou can do; and say, Good Lord, thou
have appointed the ordinances to work faith, and the messengers have knocked at
the door of my heart, and would feign have had me come home to the Lord Jesus;
but alas! this heart would not yield, I will not believe, nor rest upon the
promises, nor go to Jesus Christ, nor deny all carnal confidence in parts,
and gifts, and the like; therefore good Lord, thou that have the keys of hell
and death, do not only stand and knock, but Lord shake off these iron gates
of unbeleefe from the hinges, it is thy own work, do it Lord, for the good
and comfort of thy servant; this we must do, or else it will never be done, it
is the Lord that must do it: you know, a little before my text, the Scribes
and Pharisees said, How did he come down from heaven? Let no man, says
Christ, be offended with this, for no man can come to me, except the Father
draw him; and in the 28, 29. verses, they said, How shall we work the work of
God? This is the work of God, says Christ, that ye believe in the Son of
God; this is the Master piece, and the firstborn of God, and the exceeding
greatness of his mighty power: and in the text, He that has heard and
learned of the Father, comes to me; and Christ says, I have called you out
of world; the Disciples were settled upon the world, and Christ calls them; now
if all the Angels in heaven had called, they would not have heard; but Christ
says, I have called you from the world, and from that evil, and sin, in
which ye were, etc. when you hear of there works, treasure them up in your
heart, and plead thus with the Lord, and say, Lord thou have bidden us come
unto thee, and it is our duty; but no man can come unto thee, though he have
never so many parts and gifts, except thou draw him; Lord draw this heart of
mine to believing: no man can know the way to thee, except thou teach him; Oh
therefore teach thou this blind mind of mine, it is not our work can make us
believe, it is not in our power to frame our hearts to this blessed work; Lord
do thou it, and let that excessive greatness of thy mighty power be
manifested, in making me believe, and draw home this soul by the greatness
of thy power; Lord here are great hindrances, and great sins, and mighty
great baseness and loosnesse of heart, Lord thou have that exceeding great
power to do it, Lord work mightily upon my heart, and overpower this
greatness of sin, with the greatness of thy power; and overpower this
mightiness of corruption, by that mightiness of thy power: you must go to
God for this power, or else it will never be, for though you had all the
means and helps, that ever any had, yet this carnal confidence will never
out, before the almighty power of God come down from heaven, seek for that
power, and never be in quiet till you have it, that you may have this work of
faith to your comcomforts for ever.

it, and brings most delight with it; there is no life under heaven more free
from tediousness, and has more ease and liberty than a Christian course; let
a man's condition be what it will be, faith makes a man's life most easy: I
use to compare the conditions of them that want faith, to the cart that is from
his wheels; they draw heavily, and they are in great extremity, and they tug
and toil, but it will not be drawn with any ease or good success: so
unfaithful souls sinck in their sorrows upon every occasion, and their lives
are tedious and wearisome; but faith sets the cart upon the wheels, and
carries all away easily and comfortably: you must know thus much, it is the
hardest matter in the world to get faith, when we want it; but it is the most
easiest life in all the world, and has the most delight in all the world, if
we have but skill to use it wisely when we have it, and it gives most ease and
quiet to a man in all his conversation: and this faith does two ways; First,
because faith has a skill, and a kind of slight, to put over all cares to
another, that whereas the unfaithful heart bears all the cares in himself,
and so he sinckes under them; this is the cunning of faith, to put over all to
another: we take up the cross, but faith hurls all the care on Christ, as
Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and you shall find rest to your souls;
faith makes a man rest, and go on easily in a Christian course, and all his
troubles are removed, and therefore he may go on easily in a Christian course;
all his troubles are removed, therefore he may go on with ease; whereas the
unfaithful heart is as Saint James speaks, Chap. 1. 15. Like a wave of the
sea, tossed to and fro: and Esa. 57.20. There is no peace to the wicked, but
they are as a raging sea, which cannot rest; faith sets us to the work, but it
lays all the weight of the work upon another; it is an easy matter to lie
under the burden, when another bears all the weight of it: this is the
difference between a faithful soul, and a man that lives by his wits and
shifts; look as it is with two ferry men, the one of them hals his boat about
the shore, and cannot get off, but tugs and pulls, and never puts her forth to
the tide; but the other puts his boat upon the stream, and sets up his sail,
and then he may sit still in his boat, the wind will carry him whither he is
to go: Just thus it is with a faithful soul, and an unbeleever; all the care
of the faithful soul is to put himself upon the stream of Gods providence,
and to set up the sail of faith, and to take the gale of Gods mercy and
providence, and so he goes on cheerfully, because it is not he that carries
him, but the Lord Jesus Christ; whereas every unfaithful soul tugs and pulls
at the business, like the ferryman with his boat upon the shore, and can
find neither ease, nor cheer, nor success, because he thinks by his own
wits and power to do what he would; but faith will keep a man upon the
stream of Gods providence, and labors for the blessing of God to carry him
along, and so he rests himself upon the free grace of God: this makes the life
of faith mavelous easy and free from trouble, and makes the soul go on
wonderful cheerfully: though the child were naked, yet if the father would
buy cloth, and see the garment fitted for him, he only to take it and put it
on; were not this easy? and though the child were even hungerstarved, yet if
the father would provide meat and drink, and set it before him, he only to
eat it; were not this easy? when the Lord had made a marriage for his Son,
Luke 14. the text says, He has killed his fatlings, and drawn out his wines,
all things are ready, come therefore to the marriage; this is all that God
looks for at our hands, all the dainties of life and salvation, peace, pardon,
power against corruption, whatsoever we can want, they are all prepared, only
come unto the marriage: take this mercy, and feed upon these precious comforts
that the Lord Jesus Christ offers unto us: if you want grace, and if you want
wisdom, and power, and holiness, and patience, you may go to Jesus Christ,
and take it, it is bought and paid for already, only take it and put it on; is
not this an easy life? what would you have, brethren? nay, yet more, if more
may be added, all that the Lord requires in this case, is, in a manner, to
stand still, and see what the Lord will do for him; as in the 2 Chronicles. 20.15.
to the 20. when Iehoshaphat was in a great straight, and knew not what to do,
the Lord says to him, The battle is not yours, but Gods, stand ye still, and
see the salvation of God; it is easy conquering, when a man may stand still,
and overcome by looking on the adversaries; then in the 19. verse, the Levites
the Sons of the Kohathites, fell to singing and to praising of God, when as
yet they had not struck one stroke in the battle; but the truth is, they had
the victory by faith, they believed the Prophets of God, the Prophets had
spoken it, and therefore the King did believe it, that it should be done; and
it was not only so in that extraordinary case of his, wherein the power and
life of faith was expressed, but it is that which appertains to all the Saints
of God in their spiritual combats, and what God did for the King in that case,
the same he does for all the Saints; therefore Romans 8.38. The believers are
more than conquerers; and why so? there is no man can conquer before he come
into the field, and contend with his enemies; but we overcome before we
fight, how? through him that loved us: if we look upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
and keep our hearts by a holy bent to the promises of life and salvation, we
shall overcome our enemies; this is the first ground.

H^^^^ and Mordecai, Haman had the Kings favor, and all his desires granted
him, and the posts were dispatched, and yet he was more troubled in plot^ing
this evil against the Jews, than Mordecai was in bearing it, because faith
made the life of Mordecai easy and comfortable, and therefore ^e says,
Salvation will come, I see not the way, ^or I know not the means how it should
be, but ^alvation will come; therefore David in the 119. ^salme, 75. verse,
says, I know that all thy judge^ents are just, and that thou of very
faithfulness have ^fflicted me; he drunk nothing but mercy in that bitter
cup which God had tempered for ^im: when the patient takes bitter pills, if
they ^ee well sugered, they go down the easier, and ^he bitterness never
troubles him: so it is with ^aith, it takes away the harshnesse of all
inconve^iences, which are bitter pills in themselves, but ^hey are sweetened and
sugered over by the ^aithfulnesse of God, for the good of the soul, and
therefore it goes on cheerfully: so the issue of the point is this, if the
burden of the work ^e laid upon another, and if all cares be put over ^o
another, and if all the harshnesse of all troubles ^e taken away by faith, then
faith must needs make the life of a Christian easy and comfor^able.

therewith: Oh, says one, I would feign have contentment in the world, then
the life of faith brings full content to the heart of a believer, so that he
shall say, I can desire no more; 1 Corin. 3.22, 23. when the Apostle would
still the divisions that were risen amongst the Corinths, (for every man was
not content with what he had, but would have even what he list) he says, All
is yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all is yours; and will not all content you? would
you have the world? it is yours; would you have things present? take them;
would you have things to come? expect them; they are yours, and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods; Christ has what God has, and the believer has
what Christ has; nay, sin, and hell, and death, they are but your servants,
and he that has Christ, and all good in a Christ, he has all working for
his good; therefore he that has a Savior, and all good in him, he cannot be
discontented.

Now faith works a man's full content three ways:







pride and unquietness, for these rack the soul with a restless discontent,
all the inordinate desires and the like: these lusts and corruptions ought not
to be quieted, nay it cannot be; for spiritual things will not satisfy a
corrupt heart; and worldly things cannot quiet it: Now faith divorceth the
soul, and withdrawes the heart from under the power of those boisterous
distempers, and makes the soul resign up it self to the good will of God,
and when faith has done these, then in the second place faith makes the soul
say, the good will of the Lord is better than any thing that he shall deny, or
than all the good things that an inordinate sinful heart can crave: faith
makes the soul apprehend that whatsoever God does, and whatsoever Gods
pleasure is, is better to him, than whatsoever he can desire, though God deny
what he desires: if God will have a man poor, faith says, it is better than
if he had given him riches; and if it be the will of God to lay shame and
disgrace upon a man, faith says, it is better that God lay shame upon me than
honors, because it is his good will and pleasure so to have it, and so the
heart is quieted and fully contented, and the want is supplied, because the
will of God is better than to have what we desire. The Patient that trusts to
the skill and faithfulness of the Physician, is better content to take pills
from him, than all the best Cordials that can be desired.

Thirdly, faith either obtaines what we need and desire, or else procures a
far better thing than what we desire; art thou in trouble and misery? faith
will either fetch from God what thou need, or else bring that which is
better from the hands of God; by this means the Lord Christ cures all the
coffeehouse that might creep in upon the hearts of his Disciples: Matthew.
19.29. There is no man which shall lose father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or friends, for my Names sake, but he shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit eternal life: whatsoever we lose for a Christ, we shall
have a hundred fold recompense for it; as if a man for the cause of Christ
suffer persecution, or imprisonment, and loses peace here, thou thou shall
have peace with God, and thy soul shall prosper in grace; and if friends happily
forsake thee, and the father is against the son, and the husband is set
against the wife, thou shall have the favor of the Lord God of heaven, which
is better than the love of all earthly husbands or friends; for all these
things here below are but as it were the shell, but this is the pith and
kernel, the love of God in Christ: and if a man lose liberty for Christ, he
shall have a thousand times more liberty in the peace of a good conscience,
and a free heart to serve God: and in the 63. Psalm in the beginning of the
Psalm, David was in the wilderness of Judah, when Saul had banished him from
his house, and deprived him of friends and means, and all, yet see how David
supplies all in the 3. verse, because thy loving kindness is better than life,
my lips shall praise thee; and in the 5. verse he says, My soul shall be
filled as with ^^^row and fatness: now marrow and fatness is the chief of
all you know; as if he had said, Saul has taken away my means, but thy loving
kindness is better than all the world, it is that which fully satisfies me:
Saul has taken away my liberty, but thy loving kindness is better than life
it self, and therefore my soul shall be fully quieted therein: Thus faith
brings a supply of all good to the soul. In the 73. Psalm 25. and the last
verse, compare them both together, and see how David makes the conclusion:
David was almost disquieted, and his heart disquieted with the prosperity of
the wicked; therefore he said, if this be so, then have I cleansed my hands
in innocence, and washed my hands in vain: yet mark how he recovers
himself again, saying, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in
earth that I desire in comparison of thee; therefore it is good for me to draw
near to God. Let the wicked take the world, and their profits, and their
pleasures, yet there is nothing in the world that I desire in comparison of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and his grace and goodness: Consider it sadly, the wicked
have much wealth, and friends, and means: Oh thou beloved faithful soul, thou
have the rich treasury of grace and mercy to enrich thee, all this whole world
is nothing to that rich treasury of mercy which faith brings in: as Solomon
says, in Ecclesiastes, Money answers all; if a man have money, he may buy meat
to feed him, and cloth to apparel him, and cover him: If money will do so
much, what will mercy do then? thou have not wealth, nor friends, nor means,
but thou have mercy from God in Christ, and this will answer all: it is better
than friends, and means, and all: therefore if thou have this, let thy heart
be contented, and know that thou have a child's part, and thy lot is fallen into
a mavelous fair ground.

Psalm 7. He shall not be afraid of any evil tidings, why? for his heart is
fixed, and he believes in the Lord: for although heaven and earth may shake,
yet God, and Christ, and the promise will never fail, and he casting his
heart there by faith, he must needs hold. What is it that a man may fear? we
fear the power, and policy, and malice of the devil and his wicked
instruments; now faith outbids these, and faith rests upon the precious
promises of God in Jesus Christ, and faith persuades the heart that they have
no power but from God, and they cannot use that power further than God gives
leave, and they cannot have success further than God goes with them, they can
go no further than God gives a Commission. Now, says faith, that God which
orders the power of all these, he is my God, he is the God of Hosts; and none
of all the armies can either command peace, neither can they hinder peace;
therefore I add a little more, faith levies new forces from heaven, against
all the sorces of earth; are the wicked politic? then says faith, the Lord
is much more wise, and is able to dash all their enterprises: and are the
wicked fierce, and violent? then faith looks to God, where there is more power
to defend him, than they can have to hurt him: do we see the wicked
maliciously bent, and full of spleen to wrong the people of God? faith sees
mercy and goodness in the Lord, that is more able to releeve us, than all the
wicked can be to hurt us: faith says, if hell gates were open, and all the
devils were about thy ears, they can do nothing further than God gives them
power, and gives a Commission to them; therefore I may be quieted, because God
is more able to keep me, than they are to hurt me.

Paul contents his heart withal, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through the
power of Christ which strengthens me: I can be poor and bear it, and I can
be rich, and yet not surfeit of the world; I can do all, but how? through the
power of Christ inabling me: therefore famous is that of Abraham, Romans 4.18.
God had promised Abraham a child, and yet his body was dead, and his wife
barren, and it was even against nature for him to beget a child, or for her to
bear any: Now how does God provide for this? Abraham under hope, believed
above hope; and in the 21. verse because he was fully persuaded, that he that
had promised it, was able to make it good: there was no hope in nature, that
Abraham should beget a child, his body being dead, and no hope that she should
bear any; therefore faith goes to God that was able to quicken them: have thou
a barren and a dead heart as theirs was, and therefore thy soul complains,
and thou say, I shall never be able to go through the work required? I know
it is the complaint of many poor souls; Oh send faith up to Heaven, and
believe in him that is able to succor you, and to quicken you, to whatsoever
he requires; content thy heart in this manner, and say when thou find thy
heart dead, I am ignorant, but the Lord is able to inlighten my blind mind,
and I have a dead barren heart, but the Lord who is the God of power, he is
able to quicken me, and to releeve a poor dead blockish sinner. He believed
in him (says the Text) which calls things that are not as if they were;
Abraham is not lively, and Sarah is not fruitful, but the Lord can make them
so; and therefore faith goes to God; so thou shall be wise, and have thy heart
quickened to whatsoever duty concerns Gods praise and thy own comfort; so then
he that has what he will, or can desire, or stand in need of; and he that
has all his fears removed, and is enabled to do all duties commanded:
nothing more can be added to this man, therefore why should not he be
contented? what would you have, you poor believers?

Gedeon said; so if faith thus contents the soul, then how comes it to pass
that those poor silly creatures are so troubled with discouragements and
discontentments, and none so cast down with their own baseness and vileness
as they; they hang down their heads, and go drooping all the day long; either
(says one) I have not faith, or else if I have faith, then why is it thus with
me?



that it brings such contentment, how may a man that has faith improve it to
have this contentment from it?



and their miseries, because they see not their title to mercy, nor their
evidence of Gods love; in 2 King. 6.16, 17. when Elisha was beset with an army
of his enemies, the servant of the Prophet said, good Master, what shall we
do, they are many, and we are few, they are armed, and we are naked? then
said the Prophet, Lord open his eyes, that he may see, and God did it, and then
he saw those hills full of fiery charets, and then he saw that there were
more with them, than were against them, and then he was quiet: now the armies
and the chariots were there before, but he saw them not, and therefore he
could not be quieted: so it is with every faithful soul, the Lord has caused
his Angels to pitch their tents about the elect, we have God on our side, and
Christ, and the Angels, but we see not our privileges, and the interest that
we have in the mercy and goodness of the Lord; we cry out as he did, good
Master, what shall we do? so many sins, and so many corruptions, how shall
we be succored? the Lord open our eyes, that we may see the free riches of his
grace, and the fullness of his mercy: this is all ours, that we may see his
love to us, and his Angels waiting upon us, and his blessing going with us;
this would quiet our hearts: I will not now add, how you may do this, and how
you may make your evidence clear, that you have a title to mercy; this were
to multiply a division upon a division: only judge your estate by the word, and
take one evidence from the word, as good as ten thousand; this is the fault of
people: it may be some evidence fits them mavelous well, but because they
have not all, they will have none at all, in truth, but throw away all: and
therefore, I say, judge your estates by the word, and not by carnal reason,
and if you have but one promise for you, you have all in truth, though all be
not so fully and clearly perceived; this is the first rule.

Luke 12.32. when the Disciples were in great trouble, and expected more and
further misery after the death of Christ, the Lord Christ says to them, Fear
not little flock, it is your fathers pleasure, to give you a kingdom; if you
find hand measures, and fear troubles, and expect persecutions on every side,
yet fear ye not, you shall have a kingdom, and that will carry you through
all occasions; are you imprisoned, and persecuted, and disquieted? fear not,
you shall have a kingdom, and then you shall be comforted and quieted for
ever: you little ones that are poor and mean in the world, and you lie as
stepping stones for every base wretch to tread on, you are persecuted, and
despised, and scorned, but fear not, you shall have a kingdom; the want of
this is the cause of all that coffeehouse, that is in the hearts of Gods
own people, which are beloved of him, and respected by him. Take a poor man
in misery, his children cry for meat, and the mother says, go to bed poor
babes, you shall have meat, when the Lord sends it; brethren, this is hard I
confess, but now if a friend should come and give him two hundred pounds a
year for ever, this would make him go away contented, because this would
provide for him and his: now I propound a promise to this man, the Lord has
said, he will never fail thee, nor forsake thee; what is this worth of your
money? one man offers him two hundred pounds a year, and I offer him a
promise, now could thou, thou poor miserable creature, be content to take
this two hundred pounds a year, and leave the promise, and be content that
the Lord should not pardon, nor comfort, nor save thee; I presume thou would
not do thus: now will a thousand pounds content thee, and will not the
promise? the reason is, thou prisest the money because it is temporal, and
thou see it, and thou prisest not the promise, because it is spiritual, and
thou see it not: take a man in contempt, and disgrace, and scorn, and no man
looks after him; if this man were regarded and honored of men, all were well,
and the man were healed, and fully contented: now the Lord accepts of thee thou
faithful soul, he has honored thee so far as to make thee his son, and
to give thee a kingdom, why should honors comfort thee, when the honor of
Gods love and favor in Christ will not do it? the reason is, because we are
carnal, and see not these; if a man could but see his privileges, and say, the
world shames me, but God accepts me, this would quiet his heart for ever;
therefore take special heed of those earthly and carnal affections, that take
off the price of the promise, an earthly heart would have more than it ought: I
say, take heed of these affections, and know that thou have a title to the
promise, and know that one promise, and the sweetness of Gods mercy in
Christ, is better than all the honors in the world to advance thee, better
than all the riches in the world, or than all the parts that ever any scholar
had; prize these at this rate, and then thou can not but be contented with it.

swound and dye, because he knows not where his waters are: so thou have a
title to the promises of grace, and thou set not a high price upon the
promise, but out of thy carelessness, leavest one promise here, and another
there, and thou have taken up thy heart with the world, and when misery comes,
and thy heart is surcharged, thou say, Oh some comfort to bear up a poor,
fainting, drooping soul, my troubles are many, and I cannot bear them; Christ
and a promise would have done it; but you throw them in a corner, it is your
own carelessness, and that breeds all your misery; keep the promises at
hand, and let them be within your reach; he that is ready to faint often, will
be sure to carry his bottle in his pocket, and will set it at his beds head
every night, that whenever he should faint, he may find it presently: now
for the Lords sake, let me entreat you to be wise for your poor souls, there
is many a fainting and aguish fit and qualme comes over the heart of many a
poor Christian, persecutions without, and sorrows and corruptions within,
therefore keep your cordial about you, and be sure that you have it within
your reach, and have it not to seek when you have need to use it: I would have
a poor Christian acquainted with the promise in the dark, that so at
midnight, when God frowns, and the Devil threatens, and corruptions boil
within you, you may have it ready at hand, set the promise ever at your beds
head, take one, and bring another, and be refreshed by another, and go singing
to your graves, and to heaven for ever; in the 63. Psalm 5, 6. verses, mark
the connection of those two verses, My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness; but when shall this be? look the 6. verse, When I remember thee
upon my bed, and meditate upon thee in the night watches; he was now in the
wilderness, but when he left his house, he took the promises with him, he
would not leave his cordial behind him; my soul shall be satisfied; enough
Lord, enough, I am satisfied as with marrow; but when is all this? when I
remember thee upon my bed; he remembered well where he had set the promise,
when I remember the mercy of the Lord; that though all my friends be gone, yet
I remember thy mercy; that does all, and thy faithfulness and goodness that
satisfies all fully: I Will warrant you that the promise will fetch you again,
though you were fainting and going away.



Now lastly, be sure to drink a hearty draught of the promise, if a man
drink a little, and spet it out again, it will never do him good; therefore
stand by the promise, feed and drink heartily of the promise; and as Eliphaz
said, Job 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God; bestow thy self upon the promise
every hour, whenever thou do find the fit coming, this is the only way
to find comfort, it is the counsel that the Lord Christ gives to his spouse,
Cant. 5.1. the Lord has fitted all things to refresh his poor children, and
mark what the manner of feasting is, and what every man that comes to this
feast must do, Eat, Oh friends, and drink, yea, drink abundantly, Oh well
beloved; the word in the original ^s, in drinking drink, ye cannot be drunken
with ^he Spirit, as ye may with wine, therefore drink ^bundantly; look as it
is in nature, were the greatest dainties in the world prepared, and the tables
furnished, send a hungar-starved man to the place, if he only take a bit and
away, he must needs go away an hungered; the fault was not in the meat, for
there was enough for him, but the fault was here, he did not feed heartily,
he did not drink it down; think of it sadly, you faithful Saints of God;
they come now and then, and take a snatch of the promise, and then comes fear,
and temptation, and persecution, and all is gone, there is enough in the
promise for thee and all thy posterity; but to take a snatch and begone, and
to think of the promise, and fly off again presently, this is the cause why
you come ^hirstie, and go away thirsty; you come discomforted, and so you go
away; it is your own fault, brethren: experience tells us thus much, take a
poor distressed soul, much burdened and pinched, and he wants the sense of
Gods love, and is not worthy the ground he goes upon, bring this man to the
word of God, and to holy confe^ence, and the like, and he will say, I bless
God, my heart is very well quieted now; and h^s trouble is over, and his
temptation is gone, yet he is no sooner gone from the congregation, or from
the place of conference, but he is the same man that he was before, still
doubting of Gods love, and quarrelling with himself and his own comfort; and
the fault was here, he only took a snatch and away: but remember this, the
same promise that you heard in the public, keep it, and be ever sipping of
it; I confess, says he, my heart was cheered, and when I heard such a
Minister preach, and such a Christian pray, I was exceedingly comforted, and
had sweet assurance of Gods love, but now all is gone; the fault is your own:
for if you would cleave to the promise, it would do you as much good in the
private, as in the public; it would comfort you at one time as well as at
another: many times it thus befalls us Ministers, when we preach of consolation,
and when we pray and confer, we think that we are beyond all trouble, but
by and by we are full of fears, and troubles, and sorrows, because we take
not full contentment in the promise, we drink not a deep draught of it:
therefore take heed of these two things, whereby poor Christians are
marvellously couzened; First, take heed of attending to the parlies of
temptations, and of making a pursuit of every temptation of the Devil; if you
will listen to his chat, he will make you forget all your comfort, for the
Devil casts in a bone of dissension, and we snarle at it, and parley with him
about it, and so lose the comfort of the promise: therefore talk not with
Satan at all, but hold your hearts to the truth of the promise, that is
revealed to be yours.

Secondly, be not always quarrelling and cavilling with carnal reason, but
when you have any evidence, keep it, and let it not be taken out of your
hands; for it is certain that there are many poor Christians, that cannot but
confess that they have faith, and are wonderfully comforted; but when they are
gone from the Minister, their old carnal reason comes again, and they attend
not to the promise, but to their carnal reason, and from hence the devil gets
mavelous ground against a poor soul: therefore when you have the promise
cleared from the Word, hear nothing from Satan against that, but from the
Scripture, but throw away all cursed carnal suggestions, hold you close to the
truth; and if the devil can say any thing against the truth so it is, if not,
then hold to it. Now is it so, that faith makes the life and soul of a
believer full of comfort and contentment? then you faithful souls take heed
of ever repining and murmuring against the Lord, and when you find these
distempers rising in your hearts, still them, and suffer not your hearts to
murmr against God, nor to be discontented with his good providence. Oh,
says one, I have no sense nor feeling of his love, nor I cannot do this nor
that, and would you have a man contented in this condition? how now soul? why,
did God never give thee any grace, nor stir up thy heart to believe? yes it is
true, I have a little faith, if it were not for that, what should I do? it is
all I have, I have nothing but that: Oh for shame hold your peace, nothing but
that? is it all come to nothing? is Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, and mercy,
and all come to but a so much? has God given thee faith, and will thou not be
content with it? seem the consolations of God small unto thee? is it nothing
to thee that Christ and Heaven is thine? is it nothing that God has given you
his Son, and that Christ has shed his heart-bloud for you, and made you able
to rest upon him? is all this nothing? It is as much as if a poor man had a
thousand pounds given him, and he were angry with his friend for his
kindness: Oh, g^e your ways cheered and comforted, and murmr no more, but
say as good Jacob did, I have not this nor that, but I have a Joseph in Egypt,
my son i^ alive, I will go and see him ere I die: He is better to me than
friends, and means, and all: so go your way, and take heed how you offend the
riches of Gods free grace: nothing but a heart to believe? Oh, for shame bite
thy tongue when it says so, and say, Lord I have not friends, nor means, nor
this nor that, but I have a heart to believe, and to rest upon thee; Lord,
cause me to rest upon thee more and more; it is enough that I have a believing
heart, though I never see a good day besides. It is enough that I have seen
Christ my Savior and my Redeemer, etc. It is a m^rvellous folly, and shame,
and trouble, we dishonor God, and Christ, and all, and make the wicked people
say, that swearers and drunkards go on merrily laughing and rejoicing; and
these Christians they go drooping. If this be grace, says one, God bless me
from it; there is a struggling and a striving to get a little grace, and
assurance, and power against corruption, and yet for ought I see, they have no
more comfort than I have. Oh, walk humbly, yet cheerfully and comfortably;
have thou any wants? faith will supply them; have thou any fear of trouble for
the time to come? faith will cure all fears; art thou weak and unable to do
this or that duty faith will enable thee to every duty required; do but
believe, and rest upon Christ, and grace and strength will come, and thou shall
be able to do all things through Christ that strengthens thee. Oh, says one,
this is a lesson for a Paul, and for the great standers, the Cedars in grace: I
answer, Paul does not say he did it of himself, but by the power and grace of
Christ strengthening him; and Christ has as much strength and grace for thee,
as he had for Paul, if thou believe in him, and rest in him: therefore go
thou thy way, and let us all be comforted; thou and I, and every poor Saint of
God may do well through the grace of Christ that strengthens us. Thus much of
the fourth use.

have received this grace at his Majesty's hand; they ought to be wonderfully
comforted because they have it, and so to be thankful to him that has
wrought it; you see the difficulty of faith, and the benefit of it: Now has
the Lord wrought this in thy soul? then go thy way comforted for what thou
have, and be thankful to him who has given it thee. The Lord gives one man
riches, and another man advancements, and another has great parts, and another
large revenues; thou see all these, and thy teeth begin to water at them, and
thy heart begins to bubble and repine at this, and thou say the Lord has
given riches to this man, and honors to that man; well, but has he not given
thee a heart to believe and to rest upon the riches of Gods free grace in
Christ? then go thy way for ever cheared, and know that thou have a mavelous
great child's part: therefore be thankful unto him, and droope no more, nor be
dismayed no more: thou say thou have not riches, nor honors, nor parts, and
thou have not what others have, nor thou can not do what others can do: but
have thou a heart to believe? be cheared then, and snarle no more, murmr no
more, thou have a good part, and wilt do pretty well; every day thou risest,
and every nigh^ thou go to bed, bless God, and down upon thy knees, and
praise him for ever that has given thee a grain of this precious faith, be
for ever thankful and rejoice, as David says, Psalm 92.1. It becomes upright
men to be thankful: Let the wicked those that have no share in these g^^ces,
let them be discouraged, but the Saints of God cannot go away dismayed, it
becomes the righteous to be thankful. If the soul be inwardly settled and
established by faith in the promise, there cannot but come some savor of
comfort to it: 1 Pet. 1.9.
In whom though ye see him not, yet have ye believed, and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious: therefore observe it, believing rejoices and says,
Good Lord, is Christ mine, that have abased him; and is Heaven and the Spirit
mine, that have so abused it; and the heart leaps at the remembrance of it, and
wonders at it, and can scarcely believe it to be true: but yet he is
wonderfully thankful. It is a duty to rejoice for mercy and grace received, as
well as to be humbled for sin committed: all those phrases of Scripture run
thus, and those joys that may make us rejoice, they all belong to that man
that is brought home to believe. Men rejoice as those that divide the spoil,
you know this gives much joy to the soldiers that overcome: so when the rich
merchant gets a prize, what rejoicing is there? So there was never any poor
soul that believes in Christ, and comes home to Christ by the promise, but he
is a great conqueror, and has gotten a rich spoil: one promise is better
than all the Rubies and Diamonds of the Indies. When the Prodigal had been
pinched with famine and poverty, when he was returned from his misery to his
father, mark what a deal of mirth there was; the friends were feasted, and
the father rejoiced: but if they were so comforted, what was the Prodigal
then? surely his joy was incomprehensible, and unconceivable: if they which
were only the beholders of the Prodigals good did so rejoice, then what was
he that was the gainer of all that good, to come from such a deal of misery
to such a father; nay to come from such a base course, not only to be
entertained to the family, but to the affections of the father, he must needs
be full of joy for the same: Oh then, how great is that joy and that
consolation which is spiritual, and which every faithful soul which has
been a Prodigal, now receives, when he is come home to God, and is come home
to him who^ he has formerly dishonored? This Prodigal is nothing else but
the picture of a poor sinner that runs riot from God, and from his truth: as 1
Pet. 2.25. We were as sheep going astray: we are the Prodigals naturally, and
we follow our own ways, and the corruption of our own hearts, and we have
spent all our patrimony, and are gone away from God, and grace, and life, and
all; but the broken hearted sinner now comes home to God the Father by faith:
Now if the Prodigal, when he found his home, was so cheared, and if his father
rejoiced, and the friends feasted, much more then when a poor sinner comes
home to God the Father: there is joy in Heaven for one sinner that repents;
therefore thou may justly rejoice in earth: God the Father rejoices to see
thee coming home; and God the Son rejoices to receive thee poor and meek,
and the Spirit of God rejoices to welcome a poor sinner, that art brought
home by true repentance, and faith, to the Lord: The Saints of God rejoice to
see thee, and the Angels of Heaven glory in it, and it is the greatest comfort
that they have; the Angels fing Hallelujah^ when any poor Saint is humbled,
and brought home to the Lord, and they make it holyday in Heaven. It is a good
day to those glorious Spirits, nay all those that were friends and favorers of
thy poor soul, they all rejoice: were thou a wife or a child that went away
from God, and art thou now brought home to rest upon the Lords free grace in
Christ? thy tender hearted Father that has often prayed for thee with many
tears, he rejoices; and thy mother that has sighed many a groan for thee,
nay all the people of God with one joint consent, many of whose hearts thou
have sadded by thy ungodly practices, they have sought for thee, and said, Lord
break the heart of that poor creature, Lord humble that wife or that child:
when they hear that God has answered their prayers, and humbled thy heart,
their souls leap within them to hear this, and they say, there was such a
Prodigal, such a wife, such a child, such a vilde wretch, but now he has
forsaken his vilde wicked courses, and he is now come home to the Father, and
they all rejoice at it.

Now do all the Saints, and all the Angels in Heaven rejoice, and all thy
Friends think it a happy day, that they live to see this day; that thou art
humbled, and broken, and brought home to the Lord Jesus Christ; then go thy
ways for shame, and bless God that ever thou have lived to be possessed of all
this goodness and mercy from God: If the standers by do so rejoice, how ought
thy heart to be enlarged in thankfulness to that good God, who has been so
gracious to thee? Let me persuade every faithful soul who has found this, to
humble himself before the Lord, and to tell the Lord in this manner, saying,
Lord, I was vilde, and ignorant, and rebellious, and went away from thee, but
now I am come from the world, and from my lusts and all, to a Savior, to a
Father, to a Spirit of comfort, and blessed be this day that ever I came home
to thee, that I may receive this mercy at thy hands. You know in Exodus 15.1.
when as Pharaoh had pursued the children of Israel to the red sea, and they
drowned themselves in the red sea, and that the Israelites were come safely
upon the shore, then the text says, they believed the Lord, and feared him,
and hi^ servant Moses: then Moses and the children of Israel sang this song
to the Lord, and said, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously; so Revel. 15.3. there the same song is recorded again, saying,
great and mavelous are thy works; and in the 107. Psalm 8. when the Prophet
had showed the great works that God had done for his people Israel, he says,
Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare his
wonderful works before the sons of men. This was also a type of our
spiritual coming home to Christ; we are all slaves to the Devil, and in
spiritual bondage, under sin, hell, and death; but faith sets a man upon the
shore, and brings him home unto Christ; as John 5.24. He that does believe, is
passed from death to life; Lord, says the poor soul, I confess, I was in
the mouth of hell, but now I am passed from death to life: faith sets a man
beyond sin, and death, and all, therefore the soul should be thankful, and
sing a song of praise unto the Lord his God.

Now there are two bottomes from the former Doctrine, which give foot-hold to
your comfort:

Ephesians. 3.17. Christ dwells in our hearts by faith;so Coloss. 2.3. In whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; now gather up all, and the
sum is thus much, and there you may see how the comfort comes by faith; I lay
hold upon a Savior, in whom dwell all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
and so I lay hold upon these: what would you have? and what is it that may
comfort you? thou art beggarly in wisdom, and in consolation, and in all the
graces of Gods Spirit, but if thou have faith, thou have a Christ, and in him
are all the treasures of wisdom and mercy: take your treasure, and be
enriched for evermore; you may do it, it is your own.





discover in the next use of reproof: but that thou may be undoubtedly
persuaded of the truth of this grace, that though thy faith be never so little,
yet it is saving justifying faith, I will therefore lay down some trials: I
will not now entrench upon any of the particulars that come afterward, but
only lay open such particulars for trial, as are in the doctrine: I know
faith purifies the heart, and works by love, etc. and faith makes a new
creature; but these come too far off; I will only gather somewhat from the
point in hand.

Job speaks of wisdom; nature says, it is not in me; and eloquence says, it
is not in me, I know not the way to it; all these say, I have heard the news
of faith, but I am not acquainted with it, God only knows the way thereof,
and is the worker of it: the text says, Every man than has heard and learned
of the Father, comes unto me; the Father must first teach this lesson, or
else no man can understand it; except the Father give thee a heart to know
Jesus Christ, there is no power in thee, that is able to give this grace to the
soul: have thou thy faith from heaven? then it is like to be of the right
kind, but it must be from thence, it arises not from the earth, it comes not
from parts, and gifts, and learning, it must come from heaven, or else it is
not of the right kind: all the coin that is current, is minted in the tower
by authority of the King, if not, it is not current; in 1 Pet. 1.7. the
Apostle calls it precious faith, it must be stamped by the Lord Jesus Christ,
by the hand of the Spirit, it must come from the tower of Zion, or else it is
copper faith, and not saving justifying faith, nor that which will stand in
steed in the day of trial here, or in the day of judgment hereafter: as we
say in nature, the Alcumists are grown to that skill, that they will make
Alcumie appear to be perfect silver and gold, and much of it will bear the
touchstone, insomuch that a man can hardly discover some of it, it is so
cunningly made but when the fire and the hammer comes, it will bear neither of
them: but the true gold comes from the gold oar, and will endure the fire and
hammer; the alcumie gold comes not from the right place where the gold is, it
comes not from the minerals, from the golden mines: so there is a great deal
of this alcumie faith, for the world is come to this pass, that they have a
faith of their own faining, and it is ready to cosen the touch, I mean of
able judicious Christians; but now this faith never came from the right place,
for if it were right, it must come from the mine of mercy, and from God, and
the work of his Spirit; from thence thou have it, if thy faith be sound; Romans
10.17. Faith comes by hearing the word; faith is not in us, it comes to us, it
is not wrought or purchased by our own worthiness or power, the word is the
conduit to convey it, but the Spirit of the Lord Jesus is as the fountain that
sends it into the soul; so that you must not think to have faith here first;
but have thou found faith here first, then it is not of the right, but if the
good Spirit of the Lord has wrought upon thee, if it be so, then thy faith is
right: but some will say, we hear the word diligently, and we do attend upon
God in his ordinances, and have we not faith? I answer, hearing is the means
to convey it, but it is the Spirit of the Father that conveyes it by the
means; and that Spirit thou must receive by the means, if ever thou have it,
there is the pitch of the point.





sinner, that he has no faith, nor no abilities (...) work it of himself,
this the word works first, but we are not yet at the bottom.

Job speaks, namely thus, The Spirit of God in the word drives the soul to a
restless disquiet, and makes him see that h^e must not stay here, but he must
seek out, and go from hence, and seek for another condition, or else he
must perish for ever: rest not here, says the Spirit, you must be gone; and
the soul says, If I rest here, I am an undone man; therefore he will out and
seek for another condition.

John 16.9. when the Spirit of God comes to bring faith and peace to the
conscience, the text says, He shall convince the world of sin, because they
believed not on him; this place implies two things:





wholly of Christ, and resolves to match with Christ only; the meaning is
this, it chooses Christ wholly, for now the match is made up, when once the
soul comes to believe; the preparation to the match, was before in desire,
etc. but now the match is made up, and now the soul makes choice of Christ, as
he on whom he will bestow himself: he chooses Christ wholly, and that you
shall perceive thus; when he is thus called home by faith, whatsoever it is that
Christ brings, the soul chooses all of that; whatsoever belongs to a Christ,
and is of Christ, and in Christ, he chooses all Christ: Christ is not only the
Savior of all his, but he is the God of all grace, and has grace to bestow
upon the souls of all those that believe in him: now faith chooses the
holiness of a Christ, and whatsoever grace is in Christ, the soul chooses
that as much, if not more, than p^^don of sin, and removing the guilt of
sins: there is the authority and rule of Christ, and faith chooses that, and
had rather to be under the government of Christ, than under any other Sc^p^ in
the world; and faith chooses the life of Christ, whatsoever life Christ lives,
that life faith will choose: the woman is now content to conform her self to
the estate and condition of her husband, she must not think to live as she
list, and to be in this place, and that place, and that fashion: therefore
think of it, that thou did never as ye^ believe in a Christ, except thou
did choose the patience, and holiness, and meekness of a Christ, and the
rule and life of Christ: many Lords have ruled over us, says the text, when
thy cursed corruptions come, and would rule thee, if then thou art content to
be ruled by a Christ, and to live, and converse as he did, this is an
undoubted argument, that thou chusest Christ aright: nay thou must choose the
shame, and disgraces, and the cross of Christ, and the crown of thorns too,
that is, that whatsoever it is that comes with a Christ, thou must make choice
of it, and say, I will have Christ, and all that comes with Christ; as it is
with a woman that marries a man for better for worse, with all wants, and
faults, and miseries; so the Lord Jesus Chiist does with us, he chooses us with
all our miseries and disgraces, a poor mean Christian, a man of no parts nor
place; yea howsoever you be, Christ chooses you with all these, and he loves
you never the worse for these: and if thou choose Christ aright, thou will not
say as the Jews, Come down from the cross, and we will believe in thee:
thou must not think to have a Christ, and no troubles nor disgraces with him,
no thou shall never have a Christ upon these terms, but thou must choose
Christ wholly, and all that comes with him; this cuts the throats of many that
do not choose Christ aright, but their honors and ease; this is no believing,
but a mere delusion: in Heb. 11.25.26. when Moses was there to make his choice
whether he would be the son of Pharaohs daughter, and have honors, and
delights in the Court, or be a persecuted Saint of God; the text says, He
chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, than to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter, he chose them out of judgment, and accounted
the reproaches of Christ greater honors, than to be so and so: He did not
choose an honored and an advanced Christ; and an enriched Christ; but he chose
afflictions, and the like; nay he accounted them greater honors, than all the
honors of Egypt: so will thou do, if thy faith be sound and right.

Secondly, as thou will choose all Christ, and whatsoever comes with Christ; so
there must be nothing on thy part that must hinder the match, but thou must
forsake it, and cast it away, and let it rather be taken from thee, than thou
to be takes from thy Savior: As a man will not choose his lusts if he were an
adulterer before, because they will hinder him from receiving the chastity of a
Savior: Therefore he that will bestow himself upon a Savior, he cannot but
refuse that adulterous course which would hinder him from matching with a
Christ: and the ambitious man will not now choose his honors, but he will cast
away his pride and ambition, and advancement, because these will hinder him
from receiving the humility of a Savior. As a woman will be content to take
her husband for better for worse, so also she must be content to cast away
whatsoever may hinder her from him, and she will forsake friends or honors,
or any thing that may hinder her from her best beloved; so if thou will choose
Christ wholly, as thou must take a Christ, and all that comes with him, so thou
must cast away whatsoever may hinder thee from receiving him; as Ruth said to
Naomy, Ruth 1.16. Entreat me nor to leave thee, or to return from following
thee; for where thou go, I will go; where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy
people shall be my people, and thy God shall be my God; so says the soul: If
lust and pleasure, or the world, or any darling delight come and persuade thee
to set up thy self in stead of Christ; the soul says, I have chosen a
Christ, and therefore entreat me not to forsake the humility, and chastity,
and meekness of Christ: for I will live and die with him, he shall be my
Savior and Lord for ever. The Saints of God first gave away themselves to God,
and then to the Apostles; so faith chooses all a Christ, and bestows it self
upon a Christ, to be ruled by him, and to enjoy whatsoever he has, and to
embrace whatsoever comes with him, and to remove whatsoever may hinder the
soul from him.

nor parts, nor abilities, nor any outward thing, but in the promise, and the
promise is the portion of the soul, and that by which it lives, and the stock
of commodity which the soul trades withal; as a man's trades and his lands
are his livings; though happily a friend may give him something else sometimes,
yet he lives by his own means. So the faithful soul will take what God
gives, but it lives by the promise, and by the loving kindness of the Lord,
that is the maine life and maintenance of the soul: as it is with a woman now
married to a man; you would account it a strange thing if she should go away
to another woman's husband to ask for her relief, this is an adulterous
wretch, but the wife goes to her husband, and if there be any provision to be
made, she goes to her husband to provide it; and if any debts be to be paid,
her husband must pay them, and he must pay all, and do all, she relies her
self upon her husband: So when the heart pretends great matters that it loves
Christ, and yet will have his backdoores, and he must live by his wits and his
shifts, this is an adulterous heart: It is rather of a harlot to his lusts,
than of a holy chaste man, that is espoused to Christ: so it is with a
faithful soul; if he has any wants, Christ shall hear of him; and if any
trouble or distress, faith sends to her husband, the Lord Jesus Christ in
heaven, and lays all the weight upon him; if any succor comes in by the way,
the soul takes it thankfully from God; and in the mean time he lives by the
promise: as in the 1 Samuel 30.6. when Zicklag was burnt, the wives and children
taken captives, the people much grieved, and David much distressed, yet the
text says, that David comforted his heart in God, there was faith indeed: so
the wife, happily her father or her mother dies, yet she comforts her self in
her husband; so the soul says, the Lord is better than all outward comforts,
and all honors, and all friends and means under heaven: in a word, these two
passages will be of great use.



contented and comfortable, though all honors, and the like had been taken
from thee; but alas, this is our misety, we sit down Rahell^ like, and will
not be comforted, because honors, and friends, and means are not; well, go
thy way, thy faith is naught, it never as yet rested upon a Christ: who would
have continued any comfort to thee? The conclusion is this, the soul must be
persuaded by the spirit of the Father: therefore nothing is the author of
faith, but the Lord. Faith must come from Heaven, and from the Spirit of God,
in the Word, if ever thou have that faith which will do thee good. Secondly,
the soul was effectually persuaded, and therefore chooses a Christ wholly.
Thirdly, it rests upon his free grace, and therefore is fully contented with it.

look high, and profess gloriously, and think their penny good silver; yet
the former truth I say, is that which testifies to their faces, and to their
consciences, that there was never one dram of saving faith wrought in them:
Woe therefore to their souls for it, and to all such, whose conditions shall
be found to be so; yet this is not the greatest of their misery, for althouhh
they are in this condition, yet they will not see it, nor be persuaded of it,
when their own lives can testify to their faces, and also proclaim to all
the world, that there is no faith in their hearts, and Gods people mourn for
them, and cry to God for them, and sink under the burden of their misery;
yet it is strange to see how people will bear up themselves with a blind
boldness, and a wretched carnal confidence; and conceits that they have
faith: It is true say they, our lives are not so holy as they ought, and our
works are not so good as they should be; therefore we trust not to our works,
but to Jesus Christ; he came to save sinners, and we trust in him: and all the
worid, nay all the devils in hell shall not persuade us to the contrary, but
we will believe in our Savior. If we should go from man to man, and from
house to house, and call at every man's door and say, are there any believers
here, they are at daggers drawing presently, and say, are not we all believers?
and we hope to go to heaven, as soon as the proudest professor of them all:
many souls perish this way, and go down to hell hoodwinckt, and never know
where they are, until they come in the bottomless pit, past hope, past help.

I hope you will confess this, that to believe is more than to say so, or to
think so, or conceive it in a man's mind: nay it will cost you much labor
before that day come, that those proud hearts of yours be humbled, and those
distempered souls of yours that are fastened to your lusts and corruptions, be
brought to believe, and to be effectually persuaded by the Spirit of the
Father, and that those doubting and staggering souls of yours be brought to
rest upon free grace in Jesus Christ. Oh, how few find this work, I can
scarcely tell whether to make it a matter of lamentation, or of reproof of
those that think they have faith, and have it not: I am afraid that too many
of you will find the want of it, when it is too late: If ever Doctrine were
needful to be pressed, then now especially in these times; that so if it were
possible me might shake the carnal confidence of most men: Suffer me
therefore to go on plainly in this use of reproof, and let me do it in two
particulars.





First, let me lay the indictment, and show that many that live in the bosom
of the Church want this saving faith, Scripture and reasons are pregnant here:
for the first, that many, not only pagans and heathens, but you which live in
the bosom of the Church of England, have not faith; as Esaias 53.1. Lord who
has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? this
believing spoken of, is saving faith, and it was so hard to be found, that
though Esaias were a man of admirable parts, and one that spoke in a most
admirable manner, yet faithful men were so few, that he could see none;
therefore he goes up and down, as it were, to inquire for believers; is there
any one in this family that believes? therefore he says, To whom is the Arm
of the Lord revealed? that is, the power of God in the Gospel, that's the thing
you must take notice of: you that are wise, ask this question, did God ever
reveal himself to thee, to pull down thy proud heart, and the heart of your
wife, or your husband? etc. Christ found hard measure here, John 1.11. He came
to his own, and his own received him not; the Jews were called his own
people, he did not come to strangers, to pagans, and infidels, but to his own,
upon whom he had bestowed many means, and whom he had carried upon eagles
wings, and to whom he had communicated many rich tokens of his love; yet how
did they use him? even they received him not, not only some few of them did not
receive him, but the whole body of the Jews, the whole nation and people of
the Jews did not receive him; indeed some few did receive him, but the whole
mass of the Jews did refuse him, nay they confess it themselves, as John
7.48. when the rulers had sent to take Christ, and in stead of bringing him,
they return wondering at him, and said, never man spoke as this man does, but
said they, do any of the rulers, and of the Scribes, and the Pharisees believe
in him; it was then the fashion not to believe in Christ, it was the common
road, and the common case; nay the sin and curse that lies upon the Jews,
proclaims it at this day, they that were his own, and are his own by
election, Romans 11.20. even they have rejected him, the rout, and crowd, and the
whole frame of the nation refused him, reserving only some few: now did they
refuse Christ, and do you think, that we are privileged from this sin? are
we exempted from it? no surely, the Jews for the maine body of them were
unbeleevers, and are we better than they? we have the same corrupt natures,
and they had the same means that we enjoy; nay of them came the law and the
promises, and of them Christ came, yet they believed not in a Christ, therefore
they are broken off, and so are gone from Christ, and so from eternal life; it
is very true, Christ has his time, wherein he will reveal himself to these
again, but as yet they are fallen off from Christ, though they had the truth;
therefore what may we think of our selves, and if any man think that we are
better than the Jews, consider then what the Apostle prophesied of these
times, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses, In the last days shall come perilous
times, for men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, etc.
disobedient to parents, unthankefull, unholy, having a show of godliness, but
denying the power of it; this is our times right, having toys, and trifles,
and deny the power of godliness, it is made good in our ears, and in our eyes
this day; and so it was in all the earth, as Luke 8.15. there were four sorts
of hearers, leaving out the stragglers, that would never come to the hearing of
the word, for these were constant hearers, and yet but one sort good, and yet
there were three times so many more of all these three sorts, as there were of
the good hearers; and therefore there is scarce one to ten in that proportion,
nay in this last age of the world, when men shall be full of the knowledge of
God, Ezech. 47.4. and when the waters of the Sanctuary shall run from the
anckles to the chin, and men shall abound in knowledge, and when God shall
bring home the people of the Jews and Gentiles both together; yet even then
mark what our Savior says, Luke 18.8. When the Son of man comes, shall
he find faith on the earth? speaking of the power of prayer, and the virtue of
it, when it comes from faith, he says, shall he find faith on the earth? a
man would think, that that there should have been many faithful people, and
many praying hearts, but if there had been any, Christ would have found it;
but the text says, shall Christ find faith on the earth when he comes; so
Matthew. 24.38. as it was in the days of Noah before the flood, men did eat and
drink, marry, and give in marriage, and knew nothing till the flood came, and
took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be; how?
namely thus; this text opens the former, there will be such a common kind of
luke-warmnesse, and formality amongst people, that all shall have the name of
profession, and a show of godliness, and yet all almost want the pith and
kernel; for as in the days of Noah, they would not be persuaded that the
flood would come, though he preached and gave warning 120. years together,
they knew nothing, that is, they believed nothing; so also shall it be in the
coming of the Son of man, they shall not believe the truth of his coming,
nor that which might fit them for his coming; therefore as Jeremy says,
chap. 5.1. Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and know and inquire in
the open places thereof, if there be any that executes judgment, and seeks
the truth; so may I say, is there any that believes? I know God has his number
every where where the Gospel is, but there are many places where a man shall
scarcely find any one that has true and saving faith or grace: the reasons
which especially make the case clear, are three, in which it is plain, that
this great work is hard to be found, even amongst those that enjoy the
means; the first reason is this:

he is far enough from it: this sin of unbeleefe is bred, and has his
abode in the bottom of the heart, and does not so much express it self in
the next work, but in some baser works, and yet the root of unbeleefe is hid,
the fruit, and leaves, and branches of a tree are seen, but the root and sap
of it is hid in the earth; so it is here, other corruptions break forth
amain, as the drunkard staggers in the streets, the angry man railes and
rages against Gods people, and the blasphemer echoes and breaths out his
oaths, that a man can scarcely have any wholesome breathing by him; and the
covetous man oppresses, and the poor complains of it, these are all outside
sins, and because every man can see these, therefore he is the more easily
convinced of these, and says, I confess, it is so and so, but yet no man is
without sin; etc. but unbeleefe is like a cankar in the heart, it is bred in
the bowels, and therefore a man is hardly convinced of it, and hardly made to
set down himself this way, and to confess, that he wants faith: and as this
sin is most secret, so it is a kind of spiritual wickedness, and it has a
kind of refined villainy, and has secret passages of its own, as a man knows
not the way of a ship in the sea, or discernes the sliding of a serpent upon a
stone: so also there is a kind of spiritual sliding away from God, and from
the promise which is not seen to others, nay, scarcely can it be known to a
man's self, all other corruptions are very troublesome, and disquiet a man most
wonderfully, as envy eats out the heart, and the adulterer burns and boiles
in his lusts, and the covetous man cannot sleep, and so forth; these are
boisterous in a man's soul, therefore a man cannot but see them plainly, and so
it carries the heart to outward things; but this unbeleefe slides off secretly
from God, and from the promise, and from the truths which are spiritual, so
that a man cannot see his sin; this is the cause of that speech, John 16.9.
it is the cause why our Savior Christ does challenge that sin, where he
says, I will send the Comforter to the earth, and when he is come, he shall
convince the world of sin, because they believed not on him; a Minister may
happily convince a man of his drunkenness, and the Magistrate may convince him of
his swearing, but the Lord from heaven, by that almighty power of his, must
set down the heart, and convince it of this sin, or else a man cannot see
that he believes not: nay, let a man go from pole to pole, and ask all the
drunkards, and all the vile rakeshames, and tell them thus, You are a drunkard,
a swearer, and the like, they say, I confess, it is true, it is my infirmity,
and I confess it; but tell them of unbeleefe, and they will not acknowledge
that, but this fine spun wickedness, and this spiritual wickedness of the
soul, is a mere turning off from God, and so from Christ, and the truth, and
the promise, and therefore not easily discerned.

come from this grace; nay, we are more ready to be persuaded of the need and
benefit of any grace naturally, than of this grace of faith; as an ignorant
man, and a weak man, when he is asked a question, and a point of dispute, he
says, Oh that I had learning, and were able to dispute; the reason is, because
he is sensible of his want of knowledge in that kind; and when a poor
Christian comes to join in prayer, and in conference with others, it may be
his abilities are small, and when he hears such a man pray so holily, and able
to give such wholesome counsel, he says, Oh that I had that gift in prayer,
and those parts and abilities, what a happy man should I be, he is sensible
that he wants the power of prayer, and abilities to confer, and all this
while he says not a word of his unbeleefe, he complains not of that; the
reason is, because all those abilities that carry a man to his duty toward
men, we are more sensible of the want of them, because that our credit and
respect lies upon them; because a man thinks, if he want these, it is a
discredit, and he shall want that respect that he might have, therefore
because these carry a man to his duty toward man, and make for our credit, we
are sensible of the need and use of them: but faith in the next work of it, is
to close with God, and to fasten upon him, and to rely upon the precious
promises, all these are beyond the reach of the world, and unbeleefe is the
withdrawing of it self from God and Christ; now because unbeleefe does not so
much hinder us in our duties toward man, and because faith, I mean, in the
next work of it, (for faith does fit us for duties, and the like) but because
faith in the next work of it, does not so much furnish us with abilities to
carry us outwardly toward man, and also because unbeleefe hinders us not in
the same, therefore we are not sensible of the need and use of faith, nor of
the hurt and the danger of the other.

confess and cry out of his sin, and resolve amendment, and the drunkard
loath^ his old company, and the adulterer will not go after his lusts any
more, and the covetous m^^ in the horror of conscience, will rid his hands of
all his il^ gotten goods, and send for one man, and call for another, and make
restitution, and all this while not one word of faith, nor of going our of
himself to a Christ for mercy and succor for him; ^ay, those that have been
desperate persecutours of God, and of his much and grace, upon their deathbeds
they will turn to God, and love his people, and now those will pray, which
formerly have scorned prayer, and they will do this and that, and yet all this
while not one word of this precious faith: the reason issues from the ^wo
former things, because they are not convin^ed that they want faith, and do not
see the ^eed and use of faith, and therefore do not desire nor look after it:
so gather up all, and the sum is this, if all men by nature are mavelous
^ardly convinced that they want faith, and see the ^^rtle, and if all men
bestow least care how to get his faith, then the case is clear, and it is no
mar^ell though the most men want faith: now we have laid the indictment, and
it is mavelous ^aire, you see and you cannot but confess it, for (...) is
against reason to deny it, as some stu^dy hy^ocrites do, that will believe
nothing, but what ^hey list and yet they will be believers too.

Now let us come to plead the inditment; ^ow me thinks every man's heart
should tremble within him, and ^^e thinks your very countenances do suggest
what your hearts do desire; let every man cast his head up and down, and
pa^ly wi^^ himself in this manner, and sa^ Good Lord, is it so, that many
families in the kingdom are unbeleevers, and many people in the bosom of the
Church want faith, then why not my family too? if most parents want faith, th^^
why not my parents too? and if many children want faith, then why not my
children too? and if many souls want faith, then why not my soul too? nay, it
is ten to one, that many that hear the word of God this day, and many that
live^^ the bosom of the Church, want faith: me thinks I hear some say, and
am not I an unfaithful man yet, and do not I, and my wife, and my family want
faith yet? Oh that I could know who they are in particular that want faith,
th^^ we might know what to hold our selves to no^ I will refer them to these
four sorts:







hear the fire and the hammer; so there is a great deal of copper faith in
England, not that I speak against the Doctrine of faith of the Church of
England, for we are to bless God, that has given the King a heart to
maintain it, but I speak of that copper and counterfeit faith, which many
have framed to themselves, which is not good, for if trouble, and days of
persecution should come, they would forsake God, and Christ, and the Gospel,
and all.

come home to their families, and catec^^^ them, Oh, say they, we are past
children, we are not schoole-boyes ever, you cannot help your selves nor you
will not suffer us to help you, you are thus ignorant, and this ignorance and
faith cannot stand together; be not it is that the promises of God, and Christ,
and grace, as these substantial truths of salvation, and the truths of the
Gospel, they are as a sealed letter to them; take away the name of Christ, and
the name of sin, and the name of faith, and the truths that are under these
names, and the most ignorant creature understands them not, it is almost
impossible to think that men should be so desperately ignorant; you that are
masters of families, when you come home, catechize your families, and see
whether they are thus or no; this may be where faith is not, yet faith cannot
be, where saving knowledge is not in some measure, I mean where the knowledge
of spiritual truths is not, which may reveal to the soul the way of grace,
and the means how to get it.

I take it, that these three things must bee^ some measure apprehended of every
man that has any faith:

First, he must have a through knowledge of (...) sin, and of the want of
faith, and of Christ, and all.

Secondly, he must have the knowledge of the excellency and goodness of a
Christ, which he wants, and he must know the Lord Jesus Christ, and the good
things in the Lord Jesus Christ, which the soul now informed of sin, and
feeling himself lost, he finds a supply there.

Again, he must be thoroughly informed in the way, how he may come to Christ.

All these three must be, and are learned of every faithful soul that ever
did or ever shall believe; for that which a man sees not, nor knows not of, he
can never believe, and when a man knows not the excellency and goodness of
Christ, he will not rely his whole life and salvation upon him, specially if he
be wise and judicious, and faith is a judicious grace: They that know thy Name,
will trust in thee, says David; and therefore those that know not Gods Name,
cannot trust in him, and therefore see what Christ says ^o the woman of
Samaria, John 4.10. A silly woman she was, and therefore see what our Savior
says to her; thou poor silly creature, that ignorance of thine is the cause
of thy pride; for had thou known the gift of God, and who it is, that says
unto thee, give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee water of life: had she known this, she would have asked it; it is
such a knowledge as will bring in faith. You that are ignorant, be humbled for
this great sin of yours which does bar out faith: you that know not Christ,
though you meet him. Look as it is with men in darkness, Exodus 10.23. When
the Lord sent that plague of darkness upon the land of Egypt, the Egyptians
saw not one another, neither did any man remove from his place for three days,
there was no passage all that while: so it is with an ignorant man that sits in
Egyptian darkness, he se^s not the way, nor he cannot find it, nor he has
no power to go on in it; he sits still, and yonder is Christ and grace, but he
cannot stir one foot, for he is fastened to his sin, and riveted to his
corruptions, by reason of his blindness: See what the Apostle says, Ephesians.
4.18. They were ignorant of the life of God: from all that goodness and
holiness that is in God, for that is Gods life, his mercy, goodness,
wisdom, holiness, etc. but how came they so? through the ignorance that is
in them: you that know how ignorant your husbands are at home, and how ignorant
your children are, go home and mourn for your selves and them, and say, we
are strangers from God; there is a great deal of mercy and grace in Christ,
but we are all strangers to it; why? because we are carnally ignorant, we are
a thousand miles off from him, and we shall never have any part in him,
continuing thus: you that are thus, be humbled and ashamed of it, and give no
rest to your souls, before the Lord awaken you, and let you see the want of
this blessed grace, and make you labor to get it: an ignorant heart is a
wicked heart, and if you be ignorant, it is certain you have no faith; for
except you will deny the Word of God, you cannot but confess it.

another will be tipsee in a corner, and bear some good will to the truth, but
fall off grossly; another cheats, and cousens, and keeps false balances, and yet
professes the Gospel, and thinks it a high dishonor, if he be not respected;
now though these will come to the means of grace, yet if the word of God do
but reveal these men's sins, and sharpen a reproof against them, and come
somewhat keenly upon their conscience, they are all up in arms, and make
defiance for their sins, and their great Diana of Ephesus is like to fall,
and they will rather part with Christ, and Gospel, and all, than with their
lusts; these men think they have mercy in a string, and Christ at command,
and power to believe, and you cannot persuade them that they do not believe:
What? a swearing faith? and a cheating faith? and a drunken faith? the Lord
keep me and all Gods people from it: you cannot persuade them, but that they
believe in a Savior, and Christ must save them: this Doctrine will dash all
their vain hopes, they that believe, will submit to the Spirit of grace; they
that believe, are effectually persuaded by the Spirit of the Father, in the
promise, and they are plucked away from their lusts and corruptions; but these
take up arms, and are in open defiance for their sins; they that believe are
humbled, for faith will not grow, but in a heart that is humbled and contented
to part with sin, and self, and all; but these keep both sin, and self,
and all: they that have faith, rest upon the freeness of Gods grace, and
depart from their corruptions, and only cleave unto, and rest upon Christ; but
these rest upon their corruptions, and go from God, and Christ, and grace: few
of these people come into the congregation; but if there be such a fellow here
this day, Oh that God would meet with him, and let him see that he has no
faith; What, thou faith? faith comes by hearing and not by resisting; faith
comes by yielding and submitting to the Spirit in the word, and not by opposing
it: therefore know, that faith never came in that wretched heart of thine; 1
John 3.6. Whosoever sins, has not known him, nor seen him; and in the 8.
verse, He that commits sin, is of the Devil; that is, he that makes a
daily trade of sin, and whose occupation is nothing else but rebellion, he
that commits drunkenness, and adultery, and makes a trade of them, shall
never see God, nay, he is the child of the Devil; but he that believes, is
not the child of the Devil, all the world knows that; now if thou trade thus
in sin, thou art the child of the Devil, and therefore never had faith;
and continuing thus, thou shall never have it; John 5.44. How can you believe,
says our Savior, which seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes of God? so say thou to thy own soul, how can I believe, and yet
harbor my lusts, and attend to them, and do not yield to the truth of God
revealed, and made known to me? me thinks these owls should not abide the
light of the sun: brethren, all that we intend toward you; it is, that you
may see sin, and what mercy we desire for our own souls, the same we
desire for you; but you must see your want of faith, before you can know the
way to get faith: therefore suffer us to trade freely with you.

Oh, get you home and howl you drunkards, and swearers, and enemies of God,
and of his grace; get you apart as the leper did, and cry, I am unclean, I am
unclean: Oh that the Lord would work upon thy conscience, and make this truth
good to thy soul this day; get you now into your corners, and there cry and
say, I have an unbeleeving husband; you wives join with your husbands, and cry
with your children, and say, we are all unbeleevers, and he that believes not,
is condemned already. Now if any cavil be cast in upon thee, and if the devil
would make thee presume, and if some carnal friends come to thee, and say, if
you believe the Minister, he will make you go out of your wits, and no man
must have faith, but they that are of his sect: therefore say, as it is spoken
of Esau, Hebr. 12.16. He sold his birthright for a few pottage; and so Judas,
he sold Christ for thirty pieces of silver: so when the devil would cast in
some temptations, and make you to presume, reason thus with thy own heart, and
say, Esau sold Christ, and Heaven, and Grace, and all for a few pottage, and
Judas was a wretch, and is now in Hell this day, and as his heart was full of
covetousness here, so it is full of horror in hell; but I have sold Christ
for a base lust, and for my pride and envy, and abominable lusts, and
drunkenness, which I get nothing by: What, I faith? nay the devils have as
much faith as I have. When Pilate said to the Jews, whether will you that
(...) let loose to you, Barrabas or Jesus which is called Christ; they said,
not Christ, but Barrabas: did they believe in Christ, which would have a wretch
and a murderer before Christ? let your consciences speak^ plainly, nay they
loathed, and crucified Christ, and did not believe in him: thou say true,
thou that do refuse the Lord Christ, and chusest thy murder, and pride, and
spleen, and envy, and all, do thou embrace a Christ and rest upon him? the
Lord persuade your hearts, and make you know that you are these carnal
Gospellers, and such as have no faith: You that have been brethren in
iniquity, and you that have been drunk together, and adulterous together, if
any of you have hearts to pray, go and pray together, and if you cannot pray,
then cry together, and say, we are these carnal Gospellers, and these
ignorant persons that have no faith: If any of you have more gifts than others,
go and pray for poor drunkards, and say, Good Lord, we have been led by our
lusts, and have made a trade of sin, and to this day we have no faith. Oh go
home, and as you have been sinful together, so howl together; who knows but
the Lord may be gracious to you? If the Lord would but give you one dram of
faith, it would save you from all that drunkenness and adultery of yours, is
it not worthy the having? Oh, stir, stir, for the Lords sake; and as you
have provoked one another to sin and wickedness, so now provoke one another
to goodness, and go seek God one for another, and every morning and evening
pray for those sinful souls of yours, that have been polluted by others, and
never rest till you get this blessed grace of faith, that you may be happy by
it for ever.









up in his imagination, that he could almost undertake to teach Ministers how
to preach, if any man out of weakness would condescend to him: but if you
follow him home to his family, there he prays but once a week, and if misery,
and sorrow, and affliction come, then happily he can pray twice, unless some
carnal base friend come into his family, which happily would scorn him and his
profession, then he prays once, and scarcely that, because he would not
offend his friend: and hence it is that poor people make this man an oracle,
and this man's words, and judgment, and determinations, they are of great
weight: and if a poor soul which can dive deeply into his own heart, comes
and questions his faith, and to make some doubt of his graces, all is in an
uproare presently; what, say they, such a man have no faith? the Lord be
merciful to us then: if a man of such judgment and parts has no faith, then
what shall become of us? this man's words cast the balance any way, and his
words are of great weight amongst the vulgar sort of people: and hence it is
that the poor ignorant creatures bear up themselves upon this man's judgment,
and say they, for a man to pray twice a day, it is not required, and it is more
than is needful; and if a man have a mind to stay at home, may he not read
the Word in his own house, and get as much good by it, as by going to Church?
wiser than we think so; and if it were not so, do you think such a man
would profess it, a man of parts and good judgment; and many times Gods own
servants, out of the sight of their own weakness, and the discouragements of
their own heart; and when they see themselves so far outbidden by their
parts, then they have such a one in a high account, and prefer him above
themselves by many degrees: now see the guise of this man; hence it is that
this man falls in love with himself, and is lifted up into a fools paradise,
and he begins to admire at himself, and for any matter of faith, he does not
question it, what a man of such wisdom, and such understanding, what not he
faith? he makes no question, he cannot miss of faith, and so he goes away
comfortably and contentedly: thus you see the faith of this man.

from saving faith: therefore that the indictment may lie clear, and that we
may outbid him in his book learning and all, know thus much, the maine ground
of this man's mistake may be discovered thus: there are two things in the nature
of faith: First, illumination: Secondly, application, as we term it;
illumination not only is, when a man has the common rumors, and intimations
of the truths of God, in the Gospel, and knows the reason of the texts, and
the meaning of the scriptures, this the reprobate may have, and this he has;
but there is also an operation of the Spirit upon the affections, and then
there comes an application, wherein the soul goes out to the promise, and
takes that for his good, which is thereunto appointed: now observe this
judicious man, he has a general apprehension of the truths of the Gospel;
but as for that special working upon the will, and to enter in upon the
promises of God, and to have the sap and sweet of these, and to go out to
Christ, and to take all from Christ, he is a stranger to this, and it goes
beyond all his book learning; and hence it is that when the Minister comes to
handle these points, he says the Minister was something confused to day; and
the reason why he faith so, it is because he did not understand them; these
men are ignorant in the spiritual turnings of the heart, John 3.8, 9. when
Christ came to teach Nicodemus, he was at a loss, and thought that Christ
spoke without book: therefore Christ reads the lecture again and says, I
speak of the spiritual work, that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit: Oh, says he, how can these things
be? he could not gainsay Christ, and yet because he could not understand it,
therefore he would not yield: so it is with this man, it befalls this man as
it is with some wise Lawyer, he reads over a man's writings and the leases, and
he rehearses the tenor upon which the lands are holden, and what right the
man has to them, he lays open all the questions of the law, and he reads his
name in the will, and yet he never reads his own name there, nor any right
that he has to them: Just so it is with this judicious professor, he is able
to dispute of the maine points of the Gospel, and shows that others have
right to them, and he reads the writings, but never comes to partake of them
himself; as it was with the wise men that came to inquire for Christ, Matthew.
2.1, 2. verses, the Scribes and Pharisees could tell you where Christ was to
be borne, and bid the wise men go to Bethlem, but they would not go
themselves: so these men have wisdom enough to say, here is the way to
Heaven; but their own hearts are not humbled nor framed to walk in that way,
and to go home to Christ, nor to receive mercy from him. Know therefore you
that are weak, that believing carries two things with it in the phrase of
Scripture: First, the assent of a man's judgment to the truth, when a man is so
far convinced that he sits down, and acknowledges that whatsoever the Word
has revealed, his judgment says it is all true, and yields fully with the
whole stream of his mind, this is that which the Scripture sometimes calls
believing, and it is nothing but the bare assent to the truth, saying it is so.

Secondly, when the will embraces that good in the promise formerly revealed,
when the will of a man claims Gods Statutes, and casts his heart and hope upon
the goodness of the promise. Now the judicious professor has faith in the
first sense, he assents to all the truths of the Scriptures, and acknowledges
that they are true; the devils in hell have this faith too, and all that have
no more than this faith, shall go to the devil too, as James 2.19. in the 14.
verse, the Apostle says, if a man say he has faith, and has not works,
will that profit him: and in the 19. verse; thou beleevest there is one God,
thou do well, the devils also believe and tremble; that is, they assent to
all the truths of Scripture that God reveals, and this is the believing of this
great man which we have discovered in his fashion, when a man can dive deep
into the Scriptures, and understand all the texts, and unty every knot, and
dispute all questions, and is able to judge of the reasons of them, is this thy
faith? the devil himself will outbid this faith: If cunning, and judgment,
and knowledge be thy faith, the devils have this faith, they know the Lord
Jesus Christ is the Son of the most high God, they know that the mercy of the
Lord Christ is great, and that they shall never taste of it; they know that the
Lord Jesus shall be the Judge of all the world, and that he shall condemn
them, they assent to it, and tremble at it. Mark 5.8. when our Savior came
amongst the devils, they said, We know thee who thou art, even the holy one of
God; and Acts 16.17. there was a Devil in a woman, which was a Diviner and a
Witch, and she said, These men are the servants of the living God, which show
unto us the way of salvation; it was the Devil in the woman, therefore the
Apostle bad him go out of her, because he hindered their work: I wish that
the Devils in hell might not rise up in judgment against many of our
unbeleevers, which will not yield to the truth of God; this is the bottom
which bears up that kind of boldness, which many carnal creatures have upon
their deathbeds, which never had the power of grace in their souls. Come to a
carnal man that knows nothing savingly and sanctifyingly, and he will say, I
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ with all my heart, I have admired at it, and
sought to know the bottom of it, and it is this, they think this is
believing, to acknowledge that Jesus Christ is come into the world, and that
they are not infidels, they assent unto the truth, and yield unto it; in their
judgments they think this is faith, and that it is sufficient too: Oh you
poor creatures that have your friends, or parents, or husbands, that thus lay
hold upon Christ, and are persuaded that this is faith; understand what the
meaning is, they only assent to the truth, but never make application to their
own souls. What Is that to thee that thou know the way to life and
salvation, and never walk in it? and what is that to thee, to hear that the
Lord Christ came to save sinners, and to know that there is mercy enough in
him, and yet never partake of it?



Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for the gate is narrow that leads
to life, and few there are that find it; and so the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.5. Give
all diligence to make your calling and election sure; yet this man makes it a
matter of nothing; nay, when many seek and labor, and take much pains, and
never attain it, by reason of their former strength of it, as Prove. 1.28. They
shall call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me; yet this man thinks to have it with a wet finger: that
faith which is wrought by the Spirit of God in the soul, and is thereby kept,
it has daily opposition in the soul, so that every godly man that has faith,
he must fight against the Devil, and all enemies and oppositions, yet this man
never comes to blows, the Lord Christ found it thus by experience, and thus
the Apostles and the Saints of God found it, yet this man has found out a
shorter cut, and an easier way to heaven, and he is not ashamed to confess it,
and say, If a man were exercised in the word, and if men had but his skill, and
were but trained up in his school, it were not such a hard matter to get
faith, and so it is true, for they may easily get that faith which thou have.

with a tree, the tree that has much sap in the root, will have much fruit in
the branches, and the more sap it has, the more fruit it will have: look as
it is with the floud-gates, the wider the sloud-gate is, the greater is the
stream which comes through it; so were thy faith the faith of Gods elect, then
the more faith a man had to lay hold upon the Lord Jesus Christ, the more sap
and grace he would receive from Christ, and the greater would be the stream of
grace that would run out in all holy obedience, to the Lord Jesus Christ; but
when a man brags that he has much faith within, yet if his conversation be
without pith and savor, it is nothing but a conceit, and an apprehension; as
for the power of Christ, and the life of Christ, this man never knew it, nor
never had it.

The fourth and last sort is the counterfeit, that has a forged kind of
faith, in such a manner, that they will sometimes be ready to cousen a holy
judicious man, and themselves too; they exceed all the former, and there is no
disputing of the difference between those two that are past, and this man that
follows; I told you that he was a Chynicall, and an Alcumie man, and one that
has something to say for himself; he has the picture of faith drawn
mavelous curiously, and he has the appearance of some plea for himself, and
he has the resemblance of this blessed work, and that pretty lively too: of
these there are three sorts; one exceeds the other in degrees, and yet all falls
short of this blessed work of faith:

First, the temporary believer, we take him as the lowest form; a man is
called a temporary bleever, that believes for a time, and is hot at first
hand, and admirable fierce in the pursuit of the truth, for the present push,
but he slides off, and goes away, and you shall see him no more; now that we
may deal home in the business, for he that will search in a narrow case,
cannot do it suddenly: therefore suffer me to lay this man open in three
particulars: First, we will give him audience, and hear what he can say for
himself; he shall come as it were into the open court, and plead his own
cause. Secondly, I will show where he fails. Thirdly, give you the reasons why
he falls short.

For the first, he shall discover it himself.

And for the second, the word shall lay it open.

And for the third, I will show you, how, and what he is.

For the first of these, let the temporary speak in his own language, and put
his plea in his own behalf, and give him but a fair hearing, and you shall
have thus much of him; he professes clearly, that he has not only, as the
judicious man had, an apprehension of the truth only, and an assent that the
Scriptures are clear and true; but he says thus much, that his affections
are carried on in a kind of longing after it, and they are taken aside, and
stirred by the Word of the Lord, and both his heart and affections have a
relish of the goodness of Gods word; this is his profession, and he will make
it good to you too; this comes something near faith, and there is some color
for him to plead, that he has some confidence in God; there are three things
in Scripture that he says for himself, as Luke 8.13. the stony ground there
is the temporary, and the text says two things of him, That he receives the
word with joy, and believes for a time; these two things are there averred,
and are in the heart of this man; the receiving of the word with joy, is the
tickling of the affections, with the apprehension of the sweetness of the
truth; and his believing, is not only a bare assent to the truth, but a work
of the will in a kind of hourlinesse in application; these fall short of the
spiritual work, namely thus, when the treasures of wisdom and holiness are
laid open before the soul of a poor sinner, and when the unsearchable riches
of Gods love in Christ are let in, and come home to the heart of a stony ground
hearer, the will is tickled therewith, and his inward man is stirred, and
bedewed hourly with the sweetness thereof, this is the believing for a time;
John 15.35. our Savior says, John was a burning and a shining light, and you
were willing for a season to have rejoiced in his light; one man that is at a
loss, and out of his way, or another that is benumbed and set with cold, the
one sees the fire, and is content to come to it to warm himself, but when it
burns him, away goes he; so they delighted in the ministry of John, and it was
pretty good while it was new, but when it begun to scorch, then they would
hear him no more: thus it was with those temporaries that flew off from
Christ, John 6.34. when Christ told them, that Moses gave them not that bread
from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven, for the true
bread is he which came down from heaven; and gives life to the world, and
they said, Lord evermore give us this bread; but they that would ever have of
this bread, they soon after vomitted him up again, and said, This is an hard
saying, who can bear it? the second instance of Scripture is this, Heb. 6.4,
5. It is impossible for those that were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted
of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, etc. this is such
a kind of taste, as may be and is in such a man, as shall never have share in
life and salvation; as the Apostle afterward makes it clear, the heavenly
gift is the grace of faith, and the good word of the Lord, is the goodness of
the word; I will open my self thus, observe that this taste cannot be the
taste of the understanding properly, for if he were once enlightened, and has
tasted, says the text, to say, enlightened, and enlightened is without sense,
and makes a kind of unreasonablenesse in the dispute of the Apostle, and
therefore it is something more than the work of judging and assenting.

Secondly, it is not the disgesting of the heavenly gift, for this man has
only the taste of the heavenly gift, now a man may taste of a precious liquor,
and a man may sip of a cordial, that has no power to make perfect use of it.

Again, thirdly, it is a work and stroke of the will and affections: here you
may see the carnal hypocrite even almost at heaven, and yet he falls short, and
when he is in hell, he shall say, I had thought I was in heaven, and yet
because I have no faith, I am now cast down to hell; it is thus much, when the
Lord lets in a glimpse of the exelencie of the grace of faith, and the glory of
heaven, and the sweetness of the pardon of all the sins of the faithful,
and the Lord lets in a glimpse of all these, which goes home to the top of the
affections, and will that the Lord by a spiritual kind of flash, suddenly
passes by the will, so that he leaves some kind of dew, and some remembrance
of those glorious things, which are thus let in upon the mind of a poor
sinner, insomuch that his heart is marvellously tickled and ravished with it: I
express it thus; as it is with the water in a standing poole, and the water
that runs through a pipe; the standing water soakes and goes down-ward, and
settles inwardly in the earth, but the water that passes by suddenly, leaves
only a little dew behind it, but soakes not at all; so it is with this
temporary believer, the stream of the heavenly truths of the Doctrine of
Christ passes by suddenly, as namely, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, and that Christ came to take away the iniquity of his servant,
this does pass by suddenly, and leaves a little dew behind it; so that he
says, Oh this is good, this is sweet! I may be saved too, may I not? Oh I
never heard a man speak so comfortably: this word bedewes the heart a little,
but it soakes not down, it goes not to the root of the soul, and therefore
observe it: this is a work which the hypocrite may have, only observe thus
much; he sips of grace and salvation, and makes a meal of his corruptions; but
the gracious man only sips of his corruptions, and makes a meal of grace, of
holiness, and mercy in Christ, Look as it is with seed that is cast into the
womb of a woman, the seed is enough to beget some fruit; but if the womb be a
miscarrying womb, it comes to nothing: so it is between the stirring of the
Word in the heart of a poor Saint, and in the heart of an Hypocrite; the
Spirit of the Lord works in the heart of a Hypocrite by the Word, and is able
to moysten him; but the heart miscarries in the work, and resists, and
gainsayes, and never comes to any good, he never comes to be a faithful man
rightly proportioned, whereas the same Spirit of God, working rightly upon the
heart of a believer, it makes him a very proportionable Christian, the other
remaining but a confused lump. Now see what this man may do when he comes to
this, let him be thus bedewed with this taste of the excellency of faith, and
never have faith strengthened and rooted in him, yet he will be very eager in
the pursuit of the Word, and mavelous constant in attending upon the Word,
because it is his delight, and he will be mavelous painful to get the
Word; for a man will do any thing to get his delight, and he may be angry
with such as would hinder him in the pursuit of the Gospel, which is his
delight; this a man may do, and yet all come to nothing, and so may perish
everlastingly; for look what joy and delight will do for a push, the same a
carnal temporary may do. But that this man will do all this it is plain; of
this kind was Balaam that wretched man, of whom you may see diverse passages in
the 23. 24. chapters of Numbers: he was a witch, as Divines hold, and he was
going to curse the people of God; but the Lord stopped him, and how did he it?
why, he let him see the excellency of the condition of the Saints of God, and
said, Oh thou wretched man, lo there and behold the happy condition of my
people, and see all the good that I have given them, and will thou curse those
that I love so dearly? Now see how he was taken up with it; Oh that I might die
the death of the righteous! this was a glimpse of the glory that was let in
upon him, to stop him and to awe his heart, yet he returned to his old byas
again: the third Scripture is in Matthew 25.8. I know Interpreters vary in it,
but I will be bold to suggest what I think; the five foolish virgins said,
give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out: they had lamps but no oil,
how could they kindle their lamps except they had oil? they had a little oil
in their lamps, but none in their vessels; their lamps was their excellent
and glorious profession, and the oil which they had was nothing but the taste
of the heavenly gift, they had so much stirring of the will and affections as
might carry them on to profess the truth, but they had not oil in their
vessels which might sink down into their hearts, to subdue their corruptions,
and to quicken up their grace, they had not this power to frame their hearts
strongly toward the Lord, and to feed their profession with constancy and
perseverance to the end: so that you see what he can say for himself; and me
thinks he speaks mavelous probably: The Lord be merciful to us, if a man
go thus far, and come to nothing, it is wonderful, he is far beyond the
judicious professor: Oh, says he, I had a relish of the sweetness of the
good Word of God, and a taste of the heavenly gift, and my heart was ravished
with the sight of the glory of it, and I could even have gone to Heaven; now
you see the best of him.



First, when he se^th the bitterness, and misery, and affliction, and vexation
that accompanies the Word, he is weary of the Word rather than he will bear
those afflictions that do accompany the Word; he will follow our Savior no
longer than prosperity follow him: for he will rather forsake Christ, than to
forgo these: he was made a professor all upon a sudden, and he receives the
Word suddenly with joy, when he hears of the glorious grace and mercy of God,
he faith, Oh, that Jesus Christ should come from Heaven to save sinners, and to
wait upon poor drunkards, and adulterers, and vilde wretches: Oh sweet and
admirable mercy, says he, and so all upon a sudden he turns Christian and
Professor; but if afflictions and trouble come for the truth, then he turns
off all, Christ, and truth, and his profession and all: Oh says he, I have
heard of much comfort and peace, and that the Lord would be good to his, and
would save and deliver those that trust in him: you told me so, did you not?
Had you told me of shame and disgrace, and miseries which I now find, I could
have told how to answer you, and how to order all my occasions; when the Sun
rises hot upon him, and troubles and afflictions befall him, then he leaves
Christ Jesus and all, rather than he will part with his comforts and ease, and
the like: thus it is in Matthew 8.19. A certain Scribe seeing Christ like to
prove a great man, and thinking to have a good booty out of him, he said, I
will follow thee whither soever thou go: he thought Christ would be
preferred, and if I can but get under his wings, I shall be a made man for
ever. Take heed what thou do, says our Savior, if thou will follow me,
thou must take all miseries that come: I have not a bed for my self, and
therefore if thou want one, thou must be content: The Foxes have holes, and the
Fowls of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his
head: so he was gone, and we hear no more of him.

The second ground upon which he commonly departs is this; when the good Word
of the Lord comes home close to his heart, and reads the black side as well as
the white side; when the Word of God pursues him home to his conscience, and
shows his sins, and discovers his base practices, and tells him thus; it is
true there is mercy and salvation enough to be had in Christ, but there is none
for such as will not part with all for Christ, nor for those that will not lose
all to find and entertain Christ. Now when the Minister comes to shake this
man's hold, and to tell him, you follow after Christ for the loaves, your
profession is fair, but your heart is naught; there is no sound work nor
saving grace wrought, all that you have done is lost and come to nothing; then
he is profesly at daggers drawing with the truth of Christ, and says, what is
it all come to this? This man does not preach as he was wont to do; what
mercy was he wont to discover, and what consolations would he reveal to all
the poor servants of God? he preaches now as if he would vex men, and not
comfort them: as John 6.34. The Disciples were very desirous to have their meat
dressed for them; and Christ says to them, I will do it for you; the bread of
God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world; Oh,
said they, Lord evermore give us of this bread; well, says Christ, you shall
have enough of it, I am that bread of life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never thirst; he that eats my
flesh shall never hunger: the flesh profits nothing the words that I speak,
they are Spirit and they are Life; this must be done by faith spiritually: now
mark these men in the 60. verse, they fall to open quarrelling and opposing;
this is an hard saying, who can bear it? as if he had said, you desired
evermore to have of this bread, but you must be humble and feed upon me by
faith, and lay down all confidence in parts and gifts: Oh, then they loathed
this bread, and care not for it, it will not down; this is bread that no man
can digest; what, thus holy and thus heavenly minded, to man can endure it: So
from that day forward they went away. So Gal. 4.15, 16. the Galathians there
did entertain the Word of the Lord mavelous contentedly, and their hearts
were ravished therewith, insomuch that they could have been even content to
pluck out their eyes to do the Apostle good, and yet presently after, they
would have plucked the soul from his body, and all this was because he would
not dally with them, nor nourish them in their sins, but spoke the truth
which would have plucked away their corruptions from them. When the Prophet came
to the widows house, and bade her take meal out of the barrel, and draw oil
out of the cruise, all the while that this lasted he was welcome; but when the
child died, she says, Oh, thou man of God, art thou come to call my sins to
remembrance by slaying my son? when she conceived that he had seen her
sins, she falls out with him: so it is with this temporary believer; all the
while the meal and the oil continue, and while a Minister will tell them of
ease, and liberty, and prosperity, and preach smooth things, and fawn upon
them in their base distempers, and daube them up, all this while the Ministers
are welcome; but if a man come to shake their hypocrisy, and when they begin
to say, what, a dissembler and a cheater, and yet a professor; then they say,
Oh thou man of God, art thou come to shake the hold of all the hope we have;
we are not able to endure it: it is known by experience that commonly such
persons turn the most bitter enemies against that truth which formerly they
have professed, and seemed to love.



whereas he did receive the Word suddenly with joy, he should have received it
leasurely and with sorrow, as Ier. 50.4. at that time says, the Lord, The
Chilren of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going
and weeping shall they go and seek the Lord their God, and they shall ask
the way to Zion with their faces thitherward: If ever you would seek the Lord,
and have your faces toward him, you must go weeping and mourning; and this
was the way that God led them, and that wisely too: as Ier. 31.9. They shall
come weeping and mourning, and with mercy will I bring them: Again, I will
lead them by the rivers of waters, etc. There are even rivers of supplications
in their mouths, they powered out their hearts there, and what came afterward?
their hearts were filled with comfort and consolation, it is that which you
shall observe; the Lord appoints this, and it is the portion which God the
great Householder of heaven and earth prepares for his; he prepares it for
them, and therefore all you proud and stubborn wretches, and unbroken hearts,
meddle not you with comfort: first he discomforted before ever you can be
comforted; as for this temporary believer, his eyes were never opened
convictingly to see his sins, and his heart was never burdened with them,
nor loosned from them, that so the Lord Christ and his comforts might be settled
upon: therefore in Hosea 2.14. I will allure her and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak friendly to her; and I will give her vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for the door of hope; first in the
wilderness, and then in Canaan; first in sorrow, then in comfort; the valley
of Achor is the valley of consternation, and then the door of hope, this is
the way toward Zion, but this temporary has invented a new way to Zion, he
does as Ruffians do, they will go in the ^oad way so far as they find good
way, but when they come into bad way, they break over hedges, and find a new
way, whether lawful or unlawful, they care not; so does this man, he takes
his comfort as soon as ever it comes, he snatches at all the comforts of the
Gospel, and thinks they are all his own, and all on the sudden he is a
forward professor at three or four days warning, and his heart snatcheth at
every Sermon of mercy, and he is as good a Christian by and by, as many a
poor soul which has tugged hard for it many a year, but his conscience was
never awakened, he never felt the burden of his sins, nor the wrath of God
against him for his sins: this temporary promises to himself nothing but
ease, and peace, and prosperity, therefore when sorrows, and troubles, and
miseries come, he goes away with as much speed as he came, like Ionahs gourd,
that came up suddenly, and withered as suddenly: so in the beginning of the
year he is a hot professor, and before the fall of the leaf he is gone
again; the wound of this man was this, he wanted the work of the law, not
only that through-worke of the law, which none shall have, but such as have
faith, but also that legal work of the law, which should break and hammer
his heart, this is the stony ground-hearer, he wanted depth of earth; what
that was, we shall dispute anon when occasion serves; the meaning is thus much
in the general; the plow which should have given earth and mould enough, it
was the sharp law, which should have torn up his proud sturdy rebellious heart
all in pieces, but this man never had this work, and therefore his proud heart
beat back the work of the promise, that it never had room in his heart;
comfort and consolation will never stick nor abide upon a proud heart, nor
upon a stubborn and unbroken heart, which was yet never broken for sin;
plasters may be made, but they shall never find ease and comfort by them as
they desire; you may go away comforted, and say, God is merciful, and Christ
is gracious, and he came to save sinners; and though our works will not
justify us, yet the Lord Jesus Christ will save us; your plaster will not
stick; thus he fails in the entrance to the promise.

Secondly, he fails in his application of the promise, for the ground upon
which he goes, or the cause and reason which carries him to roame after the
promise, it is only the general notice of mercy, and of the salvation that
God offers, the glimpse and the shine whereof being let in upon the heart, and
passing by, jogs the soul, and so the heart snatcheth at it, he comes to hear
the abundance of mercy, and the rich redemption, and plentiful goodness of
Christ to pardon all sins, (the sin against the holy Ghost only excepted)
and the freeness of mercy to all sorts of sinners, be they never so many for
number, never so vile for nature; yea, he hears that there is a fountain set
open for all to wash in; when he hears this, he says, that's well, then I may
come to heaven too, and there is some hope that I may receive mercy, never
considers the conditions upon which God promises, and bestows mercy,
whereas the man that is a true believer, has not only a common kind of
apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ; but he has a particular
application of it; I will open it thus, that every man may take something; the
temporary has a common hearsay of mercy, and the common hearsay of mercy
in the bare letter of them, as that Jesus Christ came to save sinners, it is in
the bruit of it only, but the humbled soul has it under the hand of the
Spirit, and the Spirit seals it, and makes it good to him, the promise of life
slides and passes by the temporary believer, but now the Spirit of God settles
it, and it takes a deep and a through impression in the heart of a believer by
application, the Spirit of God only, as it were, jogs the heart of a temporary
believer, but he sets it on deeply upon the heart that is humbled and fitted
for it, as the Angel said unto Gideon, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant
man; so the Lord faith to every humbled soul; not only that the Lord is
gracious and merciful, for thus he says to the temporary believer, but he is
gracious and merciful to thee, and he will speak peace and comfort to thee,
which have spoken trouble and terror to thine own heart; as in the 1 Cor.
2.12. We have not received the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are given to us of God; God not only
gives us good things, but he has given his Spirit, that we may know, that it
is he which has given us these good things.

the world, and he sees more certainty in the good of the promise, than in
all the good things here below; and therefore he will rather lose all than the
promise, and will rather trust to the goodness of God in the promise, than to
any thing else besides; though riches be never so great, and honors never so
glorious, yet the faithful soul knows that the world promises much, and
performs little, and it cousens us; but the Lord is true in all his promises,
and what he has promised, the soul believes: therefore says he, though my
sense, and taste, and all fail, and if many sorrows and miseries come, yet I
will rest upon the promise; for there is a greater good in the promise, than in
all the world besides: to this I may add the other, which I call the
discouraged hypocrite, as there are too many of them in these days, such as
heretofore have carried a fair sail in the ways of godliness; but when his
honor and credit dies, he goes away: some have died for grief, they are all
to be referred to this ground; so long as the wind lasted he stayed it out,
but now he is not able to hold up his head, unless he be lifted up by the
chinne, and by the comfort of his profession: but he that is a gracious man,
though all the frame of Heaven and Earth stagger, yet he is supported and
bears up himself upon the promise, if it be a saving work: I know he may
stagger, yet he recovers himself, and at last lifts up himself upon the
promise. A skillful swimmer uses his bladders, but yet if they fail, he
recovers himself upon the stream, and bears up himself upon that: so the
gracious heart is content to use comforts, and contentments, and whatsoever he
has to bear him up with more ease; yet if all these bladders break, and if
all friends, and means, and honors go, and if heaven and earth meet
together, yet he is able to cast himself upon the stream of the promise, and
so to go on cheerily, as Psalm 73. the Prophet says, I am thus and thus, the
bread of affliction is my meat, and tears are my drink, and I am buffeted
every morning; if the wicked rout and revell it, and have more than their
hearts can desire, then have I washed mine hands in vain, it is better for me
to be as they are, than to be as I am; he began to staggar, and he was at a
stand, yet he says, God is good to Israel, though persecuted and afflicted,
yet God is good to Israel: nay, in the 26. verse he says, My heart had failed,
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever; as if he had
said, the heavens and the earth may happily shake and shrink, yet so long as God
is strong, my heart is strong, and so long as he remains, my comfort will
continue even for ever: though a man, especially if he be ingenuous, may
shrink under disgrace, yet he bears up himself upon the promise, and though
he lose his life, yet he shall not lose a Savior, therefore he stays
himself upon him: thus you see where this temporary fails, there is no great
matter in him, but that it is stange to see what a man will do for a push; we
leave him, and only entreat the Lord to be merciful to him, and let him see
himself; if there be any of this kind here this day, do not go away, and
say, to heaven I must, all on the sudden, because I have a little taste of the
word: no, no, that's not the way, it will cost you dearer than so, rather go
and see thy sins, and break thy heart for them, and then there may be
comfort and consolation for thee: God has the garment of gladness, but you
must be in heaviness first; you may go on as you are, but then you shall
never come to happiness.

Aqua vitae, and his cordials of comfort ever with him, and God must provide a
dish of comfort for him, or else he shall never have his custom: but this is
a sturdy hypocrite, and one that will not out of the pit for a small matter,
but he will stand his ground, as a man does in war, and will undergo much
trouble, and stand stoutly in the profession of religion, and yet though he be
somewhat stout in his way, yet his heart is naught too; and that you may know
him, and that he may know himself, let us do three things:

First, let us see what he can say for himself.

Secondly, wherein his falsenesse appears, and the evidences of it.

Thirdly, the difference between him and a believer indeed.

cannot better plead for him, than he can plead for himself, and what he
says, you may believe him, he professes it is true indeed, the temporary did
merely cosen himself, because he was cheared, before he was humbled and
abased: but for his part he knows how he came by his faith, it cost him hot
water before he had it, he had his evidence with much labor, and therefore
this is his comfort, he hopes it is good, and of the right kind, for, says
he, the Lord has opened mine eyes to see my self, and to discover my sin
unto my self, and made known the vileness of my sin, and my misery by
reason of the same, the word of the Lord was as a hammer to this stubborn
heart of mine, I had almost the heart of a Devil, but the Lord met with me,
and broke me in sunder: nay, it was a fire to let in the flames of hell into my
conscience, thus I came by my faith: so that seeing my sin and my vileness,
I see a need of a Christ, and I see such a worth in a Christ, in so much that
he hopes and professes, that all the shame and disgrace that can befall him in
a good course, shall never daunt him from that good way which he sees chalked
out before him: nay, and that which is the pinch of him, he hops he shall
rather dye, than renounce that fruit of the Gospel which he has received, and
which has comforted his soul: thus now he has been humbled, and has seen
a need of Christ, and he may dye in the defense of the religion he professes,
and yet never savingly believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, nor partake of the
mercy and goodness in him: 1 Cor. 13.3. there the Apostle says, though I
give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing: it is a
rule in Logic, those disjunct propositions both parts whereof are true, the
whole must needs be true; if either part be false, then the proposition must
needs be false; if the position be true, then both parts are true; as in this
position, I am not a rich man, and yet I am a poor man, both parts are true;
so it is in this position, I may give my body to be burned, and yet I may want
love, both parts are true; then it is plain that a man may dye in the
profession of religion, and yet be damned when he has done: thus much for the
proof of it by Scripture, the reasons that do confirm it besides many other:
the maine argument is this, there are many things in the heart of a wretched
man, which will make him die rather than forgo his profession. A man sturdily
proud may give way to be burnt, and to dye for faction, etc. he dies only to
content his own proud heart, not because God requires it, and that God may be
honored, but only in sturdinesse of heart, and because he will dye in that
profession wherein he has been brought up.

and all: Thus the devil hits him in the right nicke, the devil could not
dampe him with troubles and with persecutions and disgraces, but the devil
provides dainties for him, and there he eats and surfets, and kills himself;
these take off the soul from Christ, when all the persecution in the world
cannot daunt him. Take a man that is ingenuous and has a stout heart of his
own, happily he is called to battle, and he scorns to be outbraved by any man;
but when you cannot prevail this way, yet by fawning and flattering, you shall
turn him which way you will; the only way is to flatter him. This is the
reason why many a man that has gone far in the profession of religion, and
has stood strongly for it, yet when some have come and given him a bait, he
lies down upon his belly and will do any thing: as it is in fishing, a man
does not catch the fish, by beating the water with his rod, but by baiting his
hook; so it is with this man, the bait catches him, when the hook could not.
We have an old parable of a traveller; the wind though it blew and blustered,
yet it could not pull away his cloak, but he held it so much the faster; but
when the Sun shined hot upon him, he threw off his cloak and coat and all:
when a man has no honors, then persecution makes him hold the closer to the
truth, but when the fine gleames of honor and profit come, and a man is lifted
up into fools paradise, he puts off all religion and honesty: the sturdy
hypocrite may die for the truth, and yet all out of a sturdy spirit, because he
scorns to be subject. It is said of the thorny ground, that the thorns did
choke it, the Sun did not parch it, he could have gone to a prison, or to a
stake, but when prosperity, and honor, and pleasure came, they choke all that
he had, that so he has not a word to say; thus it was with Demas; I doubt
not but he had many a storm with Paul, and shared with Paul in all his
troubles; but when he had gotten good means, he left Paul; and because he
could not attend those, and go with Paul too, therefore he left Paul, for he
thought with himself that Paul would not let him go on so, and therefore he
leaves him and the Gospel and all.

Now before I go any further, give me leave to answer two questions.



subject, happily his heart is not disquieted for the crown of the kingdom, for
he has no hope nor likelihood of it, he looks not to attain it; but now if
he were the heir apparent of the crown, and had by conspiracy gotten fair
way to the crown and kingdom, he would lose life and all rather than go
without it: and as it is with an adulterous woman, when she comes first into
the family, she loves her husband and the house and all; but when her
companions come in and entice her to cursed dalliance, then she leaves the
house and her husband and all; she was bad before, but she had not the
occasions before: this is the falsenesse in this wretch, having no hope to get
wealth, he is not troubled with it, and having no hope to get honors, he is
not troubled with it; but though his heart was as bad before, yet the
falsenesse of it did not so discover it self before, because he had not these
occasions offered; and this is the reason why many a man that has been very
forward in profession, and has suffered much for the truth, yet one man is
plucked off from the profession of the truth by the world, and he proves a
muck-worme, and the world eats out the power of that grace which he seemed to
have: And another man is taken by his base lusts of adultery, or the like,
their hearts were as bad before, but they never had these temptations before;
and therefore they abide troubles, because these temptations came not: and
therefore when these come, they decline and fall away, and this is the cause of
the base declining and falling away of all such wretches, which the world is
pestered withal: and you that are Ministers, and Christians, should do well
to abandon the society of all such as make a profession of the truth, but deny
the power of it in their conversations.





Man in honor understands not; as if he had said, honor and prosperity
blind the understanding and bribe the mind of a man. They that are now and
then overtaken with drink, may easily be cheated, and it is no wonder though
they be, for they are not themselves: so a man may be drunk with the world,
and with honors, and if he be now and then cousened, you can look for no
other. This is the reason of all those fair kind of colors which men put
over their courses, they confess their judgments were so indeed beforetimes,
but now they have had learned counsel, that is, from their parts, and ease,
and honors, etc. And shall I do such a thing? and shall I walk in such a
way? and they tell him there is great liberty, and it is good law: thus a man
is transported and taken aside most fearfully; nay here prosperity puts a
pretense of a great deal of good that a man may do in the Church; and a great
deal of honor, he may bring to God; and hence they say, a man of such parts,
and such judgment and holiness, if he were a man of place, what a world of
service might he do to God, and to the Church, the world could not miss him;
nay it is ten thousand pities that a man of such parts and gifts should not be
in high place; the Church misseth much good by the shift, and God loses much
honor. The meaning is, he loses much honor, this cousens a man's judgment,
when that which is the argument within a man is profit, or ease, or the like,
whereas persecution does no such matter; for in the time of persecution, then a
good cause appears more plainly, and a naughty cause appears more vilde. A
man in persecution is not drunk, he is himself, and therefore he is able to
pass sentence as they do deserve: persecution comes like an open enemy, and a
man is aware of it, and therefore prepares for it; but prosperity comes like a
traitor, and suddenly stabs us before we are aware of it.

It is to be observed in nature, if the fishers go and show the bare hook
only, the fish will fly from it, but when it is baited, then the fish will
run to it: so the bait of prosperity deludes a man, and he is deceived
therewith, and is taken aside from the power and profession of the truth:
Judges 4.17. Baracke pursued Sisera, but he overcame him not; and the reason
was this, he was not at peace with Baracke, but he was at peace with Iael,
and therefore she cunningly slew him: so here prosperity is a good blessing,
and ease, and honor, and peace, these are all our friends, and we are at
peace with them: therefore these wound our hearts, and break our necks in
conclusion.

Secondly, as our judgments come most of all to he cousened thereby, so it is
that which deads our affections, and kills our diligences, and takes off the
edge of our endeavors, and makes us dead and sluggish in a Christian course,
and hence it is that we are desperately overthrown thereby: persecution and
trouble makes a man seek more diligently, and cry and pray more earnestly,
and labor more exactly than before, and consequently seeking to God for
succor, he receives more succor from the Lord, against all these troubles
and trials: David was never tempted to that base lust in the wilderness, when
he was pursued by Saul, because then he sought daily to the Lord, and had aid
and succor from him; but when he was at ease in his house, then he grew dead
hearted and careless, and was overcome in prosperity: men trust to themselves,
and therefore they are foiled, but now persecutions and troubles make a man see
himself helpless in regard of himself; and therefore he goes to the Lord,
and so is supported and succored by the Almighty, Esaias 26.16. Lord in trouble
have they visited thee, they powered forth a prayer when thy chastening was upon
them; God cannot be visited in the time of prosperity, when we are full and
aforehand, but in the time of adversity and persecution, then they will power
forth their prayer, not drop out an idle lazy prayer, but pray with fervencie,
and importunity, and so find favor; so the Prophet Jeremy complains, I have
spoken to thee in thy youth, but thou have denied to hear me; in our
adversity, then Gods mercy and truth may take some place in our hearts, but in
the time of prosperity, then we turn the deaf care upon him, and we think
we have enough of our selves, as it is with the trees, the wind shakes them,
and so the sap comes more to the root, and it settles more firmly into the
earth; but now if there comes a great drought, or an exceeding heat, that does
take away both sap and root, and all: so when the soul is shaken and tottered
with the wind of persecution and temptation, the soul is settled more deeply
upon the promise, for the guiding of himself in a good way; but ease, and
peace, and prosperity, dry up a man's endeavors, and all the sap of grace and
good which formerly a man seemed to have; then if it be so that prosperity
bribes the judgment and couzens us, and if by prosperity our care and
diligence is deaded, no wonder then though honor and case prevail so much
against us, to hinder us more than persecutions can do: thus you see this man's
falsenesse.

Now the evidences whereby he discovers his falsenesse, they are two: and it is
pretty to observe, how his baseness within will discover it self without; the
first is this:

Luke 8.14. it is said there, that the thornie ground brought forth no fruit to
perfection, it brought forth fruit, but the thorns did choke it, and so it
brought forth nothing to any perfection; as it is in the thorny ground, the
come happily has a full ear with all the grain of it, and is as green as a
leeke, but it continues not green still, and comes not to ripeness and
perfection, because the thorns choke it; so this man has his full ear, and
is as green as a leeke: you will fast and pray, so will he; you will profess,
so will he; you will confer holily, so will he in the outward appearance, but
he never comes to good, because he bestows the strength of his affections upon
the world, or upon some base lusts; you cannot beat this man to lay down his
profession, and to make him say, I confess I am dead, and my heart is vilde,
and my profession is nothing but hypocrisy, no, he will have his profession
and his corruption too: thus observe the chapman, when a Christian comes into
his shop, he will tell him a fine religious discourse, and so in the end
cousen him; and if a vilde wretch comes in, he has another tale for him, he
joins with him, only that he may put a cracked commodity into his hand, and
he joins with the good man, that he may cousen him too: so the Inkeeper, when
a Christian comes to his house, he tells him a fine religious tale; and if a
drunkard comes it, he gives him his full measure; thus his thorns grow, and
his corn too, he holds his profession, and his corruptions too.

his honor and ease may not be lost, he will be of that side, that the thorns
of profit and pleasure may not be plowed up, and therefore it is observable,
that those things which may hazard his liberty, he will not by his good will
question them, but he carries out the matter bravely before him: so long as a
man may have the substance, says he, that is, Christ and religion, he would
not have men to trouble themselves about lesser matters; but the Lord Christ
says, he that is unfaithful in the least, is unfaithful in much, and he
that makes not conscience of the smaller circumstances, will not make
conscience of the substance, and if he be compeld to enquire, and to make
question of his course, he will be satisfied by those shows, and that argument
shall content him, which may content his honor, and maintain his ease, and
honor, and liberty, and he goes away well apaid and fully quieted, and when
this man is put to it, and the dent of the truth dasheth all those probable
truths of his, then his last hold is this, he does not believe it, and he
cannot think it, but if you cannot believe and entertain that which you
cannot answer, then it is a sign that thy heart is naught; and if a man follow
him further, and say, if a man set himself, and lift up himself, and his
conceits against the truth of God, that man's heart is naught, then says he,
all the Ministers under heaven shall not make me believe it, but when he can
say nothing against the truth, he will keep his hold still, and he will not
believe it; thus you see this man at his full breadth and height: as it is with
a plow, that goes to plow up a thorny tree, they tug, and pull, and make the
traces fly, and break the plow, but the tree stands still, it will not yield;
so it is with this wretched hypocrite, all the reasons in the world, and all
the truths cannot prevail with him, he is resolved to stand to it, and not to
believe it: will thou not now believe it? well, thou shall believe it when thou
art in hell, past hope, past help, thou will believe it then, thus the thorns
choke the word, that is, strangle the truth, and stop the breath of the truth,
so he says, I pass not, I believe it not, this stifles all reasons, and the
power of all Scriptures, that all prevails not with him, nor takes no place in
him, to make him know what it is to be a grower in the truth: by this time I
presume you may easily guess at him what his fashion is, and what he can say
for himself, and wherein his falsenesse lies, and wheresoever you find these,
that both the corn and the thorns grow together, and that he does thus as in
the former two, then this man is one of the sturdy hypocrites.

Now I come to the third thing, namely, to show wherein this man falls short of
saving faith, that a man that sees it, may amend when he comes after him, and
that he may not fail as the former have done: the failing of this man appears
in two particulars:

First, he fails in the point of humiliation, he was not rightly humbled, as
in that place of the parable, he had horror of heart enough for the measure
of it, but not enough for the uprightness and sincerity of it, he plowed deep
enough, but he left some thorns standing, and he had some lusts that his
heart was more affected with, he would not be thus, but there were some base,
inordinate, earthly affections, which were closely fastened to his heart, and
his heart glued to them, he would not plow them up, and this was ill
husbandry, if he had done right, he would have plowed up every thorn as well
as some: all the passages of Scripture run this way, as Luke 3.5. Every valley
shall be filled, and every hill and mountain shall be brought low, and every
crooked thing shall be made strait; he does not say, this or that mountain,
but every mountain; not one sin, but every sin; not the heart to be
loosened from one particular sin, but from every sin whatsoever; if ever
you be humbled, and that you make work of it, you must blow up all, as Matthew.
13.44. the wise merchant man went and sold all to buy the field; not sold some,
but all; so this sturdy hypocrite should have sold all his lusts and
corruptions, and every cursed haunt of heart, and every sinful withdrawing of
soul: you know the privy prankes of your hearts, if there be but one sinful
lust maintained and continued in, it will condemn you as well as an hundred
thousand: there is no bargain to be made with Christ, if you dally with him
and stand dodging, he will not yield to you, no, no, you must sell all, this
man had his heart humbled in the consideration of some sin, and it was either
for the fear of the punishment of his sin in general, or else for fear of
plague, and of hell, and of Gods wrath, or else because of the shame and
disgrace that would come thereby, but if he had been truly troubled for sin,
because it is the breach of Gods commandments, then every sin would have
struck upon his heart, and troubled him; thus it is with the heart rightly
torn up by the law, but if it have only here a bauke and there a bauke, then
it is base dealing, and you will never have harvest nor hope of mercy upon
this ground, but if a man play the good husband, he must plow up all, from one
corner of his conscience to the other, and from the beginning of his heart to
the ending, there must be no corruption settled, but hate sin as sin, and
therefore every sin, this is the temper of the soul that the Lord will do
good unto, and here is the failing of most unsound hearts, many religious men
and professors too, what they be the Lord knows, they will dally with this
sin and that sin, but a true broken heart shakes at the least sin more
than at all punishments, and had rather endure the torments of hell, than that
the least sin should be committed by him; this is a good heart which makes
good work of it, and herein this hypocrite fails, so that though he had
legal terror enough, for the measure of it, yet it was not right for the
manner of it, for it could not be any saving work of grace, therefore it must
needs be a terror for sin, and yet the heart never truly humbled, nor never
plowed in pieces by the law, and by the work of Gods grace, thereby fitting
the heart for himself.

will marry men, not to make them their husbands, but their servants, and they
could be content to have comfort and service from them, but not to be under the
rule and authority of them as their husbands: so this sturdy hypocrite, and
this malapert heart, would have Christ to be at his beck, that Christ may
provide honors, and ease, and pleasures for him, but that Christ may order
him, and his, and all that he has, to dwell at his command, to be where he
will, and be at his beck, that he will not do by no means. Thus much of the
sturdy hypocrite.

The last sort of counterfeits, which is the chief and the upshot of all, is
him, whom I call the shifting stately hypocrite, he is a man that does carry a
mavelous high strain, and goes with a great sail in the profession of the
truth, as the master cutpurse in his outside seems to be a man of no small
account nor mean place, in regard of his attendants, apparel, and he will
ruffle it out in his silks and velvets, as if he were some great Gentleman of
the country, and yet he is a base vilde wretch; so it is with this base
shifting hypocrite: there are two passages in his life, and I use to call him
by these two names, Shifting, and stately, he had all that the sturdy hypocrite
had, and he also goes beyond him in the several passages of his course and
practice, he is a fine spun hypocrite, and has not only an ordinary color of
profession, but he lays on a sevenfold gilt upon his course and profession,
so that as it is with some counterfeit gold, if a man be not a good Goldsmith
indeed, he will say, it is good gold: so if he be not a mavelous judicious
wise man, and able to find him out, he will say, that this man is a sound
Christian indeed: Now that we may know this man, I will as in the handling of
the other, do three things.









First, he has not only so much strength that he is able to bear
persecutions, and not to be daunted, as the former had; but he has that
wisdom and strength of understanding, that he is able to pass by, and to
casheere the honors, and riches, and preferments of the world, and all the
renown of all the high places in the world, so that prosperity, I mean all
the honors and preferments of the world, are not able to prevail with him.
Oh, says he, the sturdy Hypocrite was a fool, and was caught with the bait;
but I see the bait in all these profits and commodities, and I am able to judge
of the baseness of all worldly things, and therefore I am not overtaken with
them: I know better than is in all these, if you go no further than liberty,
profit, ease, and worldly preferment; this Hypocrite has something better than
all these, as namely the excellency and beauty of the common graces which God
has wrought in him, and whereby God has made him able to do some duties, in
these he puts a greater excellency and confidence, than in Christ: this is
mavelous easy and apparent, even amongst the Heathens themselves. Many of
the Heathens themselves have been so far taken up with the admiration at,
and affecting of moral virtues, one man with patience, and another with
temperance, they have been so taken up in meditation, and in the admiration of
these, that they have trampled upon crowns, and have harsely esteemed of all
the honors of the world: many speeches of the Heathen we have to this
purpose, as that, when one said, honors, riches, etc. cannot properly be said
to be good, for then they would make him good which has them: as we see
wisdom makes a man wise that has it; but they that have riches and honors,
for the most part are most wicked and vilde wretches; therefore only the wise
man is the happy man, and an ignorant man is a miserable man; therefore he
seeing the excellency of, and putting a high price upon these moral virtues,
this has made them put a high price on the one, and trample on the other.

Now if Heathen men may be so far taken up with these moral virtues, which
have only the light of nature to guide them, and never had the knowledge of
Christ to drive them beyond themselves, that yet they will do all this; then a
Hypocrite may come to see a greater beauty than is in all these, when they come
from the Spirit of grace; for the Heathens had but the very shell and outside
of these, but the Hypocrite knows the virtue and benefit of these, and the
eternal good that will come by these, this he is able to discern, and
therefore he is able to put a high price upon these, and it is no wonder; when
the people came to make Saul King, he hid himself amongst the stuff, 1 Samuel
10.22. as if he were unworthy of the kingdom: so that a man may for by-ends
cast off preferment, and ease, and honor.

mistake me not, for I do not speak this to dishearten a good cause, or the
zeal and forwardness of any good man, no, God forbid; nay, let that tongue
faulter, and cursed be the head that contrives, or the mouth that speaks any
thing against the zeal and forwardness of any man in any good cause: the way
is warrantable and lawful, and must be done; for though mere moral virtues
will not save a Christian, yet without them no man shall ever come to Heaven:
but I speak all this to show that all this may be done, and yet all be stark
naught. I do not speak this to discourage any man, for you see I commend of
this man, he is not swept down from the firmament of his profession, as the
sturdy hypocrite was, by the tail of the Dragon; but he maintains his
profession with credit, and is zealous in it, he goes for a mavelous broken
hearted Christian, he scorns to be a linsey-woolsey-man, half one and half
of another, he stands in the open defense of the truth, and dares side with
the Lord Jesus Christ; and says as Iehu, who is on my side, who? 2 Kings
10.16. Come see my zeal which I have for the Lord of Hosts; thus it was with
Paul; Gal. 1. 14. He profited above many of his brethren in the Jewish
religion, being more exceeding zealous of the traditions of the Fathers: and
Phil. 3.6, 7. he was a Pharisee, and concerning zeal, he persecuted the
Church; touching the righteousness of the Law, he was blameless; and these he
counted gain: This was all the gain that Paul had, namely, that he had such
parts, and gifts, and abilities to do duties; this was all his gain: and
because he had all these, he thought he must needs go to Heaven: nay, nay,
it is harder to go to Heaven than you think, for it is another manner of
work than so: the greatest hindrance that ever Paul had in his conversion, was
the carnal confidence which he had in himself, there he stuck.

Now wherein does the falsenesse of this man appear? I answer, Amongst many
others it discovers it self most grossly and notoriously in these particulars:

First, you shall find that as for lesser sins, the reformation of which
might spoil him in the venting of his commodities, and marring his market,
that he cannot set himself, his parts and commodities at sale; he will slight
those sins, and make no account of them, and swallow them down without any
chewing; because such as these be, would hinder him in his trading, that he
could not vent and show himself; and he makes no great matter of them: this
is for his outward practice.

But if a man's exactness in a Christian course be sincere, then he will be
exact in all things; but if his exactness may give way to some sin, then it
is but hypocrisy, it is but a cloak and no soundness at all: why do thou
hear, and pray, and take up duties, though these must be done, if thy duties
be sincere, and if thou love duties abroad, thou will love them at home too:
1 John 2.3. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; if
a man keep all the Commandments of God, then he shall savingly know God; and
hereby he shall know that he knows God: this is a sign that saving faith is
there, because it makes a man keep all the Commandments of God; but cursed
be that prayer which seems to set it self against sin, and yet gives
allowance unto sin. That prayer and performance which maintains sin, is
accursed, and God will never accept of it: this is for his out side.

to pray, and yet never pray in their own families, nor never humble
themselves before God; as if the performance of a service publicly, could
abate all the rest in secret: It was not for his state to pray privately in his
closet, but only amongst others; some of these we have heard of, and we make
no question but there are more of this feather; if you know any such, either
make them revoke these things, or else casheere them; the servant happily is
religious, and therefore he is resolved, he will not dwell but where he may
have liberty to hear, and he will indent with his master and mistres, that he
will have the fellowship and communion of such and such; this is all very good,
and I love such a heart: but mark now when they return home they are idle,
and unfaithful, and sturdy, and they are masters and mistresses, and will not
be governed, and their plea is this; My master is a carnal man, my mistres is
a carnal woman; but if they are carnal, the Commandment is spiritual, and
the duties enjoined are holy: and therefore those prayers of thine which
maintain thy sin, will one day be an accusation against thee, but will never
comfort thy conscience: this is not true religion; all your setting your selves
to sale, and all your outside shows and reformations, it is not all worth a
rush, unless there be the discharge of all those duties that God requires: If
there were saving faith, and if ever thy soul rested upon Jesus Christ, he
would enable thee to all duties, as well as one, and cause thee to make
conscience in all, as well as in one; faith would make thee show forth the
power of godliness, guiding thee, faith would make thee pray in private as
well as in public; For as faith does crucify the flesh, Gal. 5.24. so also it
makes a man a new creature: 2 Cor. 5.17. It makes a new husband, a new wife, as
well as a new Christian: therefore let them profess what they will, follow
them home to their houses and closets, and you shall find them to be errand
thieves and robbers, and rob God of his glory, the Lord of Heaven will find
out such, and condemn them continuing so.

went off easily, and he was respected for his parts and gifts: And mark what
follows, either God will humble him, and bring him upon his knees, or else he
will fall off from his profession, and all, and will rather be content to be a
base varlet, than to have no credit: If the Lord break his heart and humble
him, blessed be his Name for it; but if God do not humble him, but that he
falls off, then he commonly proves an enemy to Religion, and God, and Gospel,
and all goodness.



All this will not do the deed, brethren, it is not rowing but landing which
will do the deed; it was the guise of those wretched Hypocrites in Esaias 56.3.
they plead with God, and begin to wrangle, because he heard them not, and said,
Why have we fasted, and thou regardest it not? as if they had said, Thou must
needs do it, what shall I weep so much, and knock my breast so hard, and cry
out, and turn to the Lord, and will not all this do the deed? no, for if thou
could howl till thy mouth failed, and go mourning all thy days, and go
howling down to the grave, if thou have not Christ in all these, it will never
do thee any good: what availes it a man to sail up and down in the ship, and
can never get to land? he must certainly perish if he have no comfort: so do
not delude your own hearts, you may row up and down in holy duties, and go
from sin to duty, and from duty to sin, and never come to Christ, faith
rests upon Christ, and not upon duties; we must not neglect duties, but we must
not rest in them. Thus you see where this man falls short of saving faith: now
to set it home a little, you see there are but few that have saving faith, if
the ignorant man went out at one door, and the carnal Gospeller at the other,
and the mere civil man at the other, and all the hypocrites were put into a
corner, where would there be any faith found upon the face of the earth? how
few have faith? and how difficult is it to get faith? the Lord convince your
judgments of it; you see how far men go, and yet never have one grain of
saving faith: what remains then? there are two things evident from hence:

First, you that are gracious, and are the Saints of God, and see the baseness
of the hearts of wicked men, go your ways home and fall to praying; Oh that
we could leave preaching and hearing a little, and all of us fall to praying,
and to examination; brethren, let us leave preaching and hearing, and all of us
fall to mourning, that there are so few believers: you masters, go your ways
home and mourn, that so many live in your families, and yet so few have gotten
good by the ordinances of God; you that travel up and down, mourn in secret,
and say, Here is every man busy in the world, one makes haste this way,
another that way; so many chapmen and clothiers going up and down every week,
and yet how few go home to Christ by faith, and receive mercy from him? in
truth I condemn my own soul, because I have not a heart to mourn for them;
we reprove their sins, and condemn them for their sin, and we must do
so; but where are the heart blood petitions that we put up for them? and where
are the tears that we make for the slain of our people? if they will needs
go to hell, let us bury them with bitter lamentations, and not only should we
do this, but also you tender hearted mothers, and you that live one with
another; you tender hearted wives, you have husbands, and you prize them, and
love them, and some good you have from them, consider this when you see your
husbands take lewd courses, let your hearts break over them, and say, Oh woe
is me for that poor husband of mine, John 3.18. He that believes not, is
condemned already; he is cast in heaven and in earth, both by law and Gospel,
there is no relief for him: can you sit by a condemned husband, and eat and
drink, and lie by a condemned husband, and never mourn for him? happily you
follow him from one taphouse to another, and still a condemned man: do you
love your husbands? if they were poor, you would mourn for them, if they were
dead, you would mourn for them, and say, alas, I am left a poor widow! but he
is a condemned husband, and has not a dram of faith, and yet you cannot mourn
for him: me thinks the sight of this should make you sink again, but alas
our hearts are flinty, and we cannot mourn: and the like I may say of you
mothers, there are many of you, whom God has given children, beautiful,
obedient, and wise, Oh mourn for them that so many come into the world, and so
few come home to Christ by faith, the Lord be merciful to us in this last age
of the world, we merely scramble for our own comfort, and regard not our
salvation, therefore get you home and mourn for them, and say, Oh these poor
children which I have brought up, and had much comfort from, they are poor
condemned children! this were enough to sink us.

thy own soul, and say, Have I found faith in the Lord Jesus Christ? if there
be not, then I can tell my own doom, the sentence is past already, shall we
think of these, and yet live quietly? lay this under your pillow, and say, How
can I sleep? a condemned man and sleep? what if God should take away my life
ere morning? hell is prepared, and I fall into it: let every man take account
of his own heart, and say, Have I any faith? husband, wife, child, have thou
any faith? It may be, says one, I have it as well as another, but how do you
prove it? and how will you do if you have it not? no ignorant person, no
carnal Gospeller, none of all these has faith; what so many men that have so
much knowledge, and yet fall short of faith and salvation? Lord, what shall
become of me? is there any faith here? make it good then, or else yield the
day, and confess, that there is no faith, and then there is some hope, say, I
am a thousand miles off from faith, I never knew what it was to be thus
enlightened, and to be wounded for sin, I can commit sin, and play with
sin, but I never knew what it was to be wounded for sin, I never knew what
it was to be zealous in a good course, there are many strict truths that I have
not a heart to receive, I confess, I have no faith; now if you yield this,
then there is some hope that you may get out; therefore take this advice, go
to some faithful, humble, experienced Christian, and to some faithful
Minister, and entreat them to advise you how to get faith, but do not go to a
faithless heart, that has no savor of grace, nor godnesse in him, how can he
tell that which he never had experience of? make privy search, whether ever
you had grace or no, and if not, then labor to know the way how to come to it;
if a man's state did lie at hazard, he would have every man's opinion, and he
would inquire of this man and that man, whether his evidences were sound, and
his title good, and he would spare for no pains not cost; much more should we
do it for the title of eternal life: there is much conterfeit faith in the
world, and thousands perish upon this ground, like motes in the sun, and
never know where they are, till they are in hell; therefore go to the Lord by
prayer, ask the counsel of some faithful Minister, and never rest till thy
heart is persuaded of it.



First, you must labor to get it.

Secondly, you must labor to use it when you have it.

John 6.28. O how shall we work the works of faith? mark how he answers,
Why? this is the work of God, that you believe; why, would you do that which
God might take contentment in? O this pleases the Lord admirably, and
contenteth him wonderfully, when he sees the soul leaves honor, and leaves
prosperity, and leaves the world, and comes to Christ, and lies at his
footstool, and will never leave him nor forsake him, this pleases the Lord
admirably: it is true, all duties are good with this grace, but none of them
will please God without this; thou may pray until thy eyes are weary, until
thy heart sinketh, and thy Spirit faints, yet without faith the Lord cares
not for thy best performances: if a poor Christian, whose parts are not so
strong, whose prayers are not so powerful, can but sob and sigh out a prayer
in faith, this is more pleasing to the Lord: Eccles. 7. a man will do any
thing, that he may live; all a man's labor, it is that he might live; what will thou labor for clothes to cover thee, and meat to nourish thee, and wares for
thy shop, and not for Christ and faith to save thy soul? therefore when your
carnal friends would withdraw your endeavors, and say, what needs all these
prayers? and what needs all these endeavors? answer, what, would you not have
me live? observe the scope of all motions, and the end of all labor is rest;
the poor seafaring man, his eye is upon the shore, when his hand is tugging
at the oar; the traveller his body is in the way, and his heart is at home;
the soldier fights, that he might have a peaceable victory; the people in
the wilderness were traveling, and at last they had rest; Heb. 4.3. we are
thus wildering, we are thus travelers, and we are thus poor seafaring men,
that are tossed up and down the waters of the world, and in seas of sorrow,
and the truth is, we are so in wrath, and vengeance, (...) horror of
conscience, and would not you have rest? Heb. 4.4. He that does believe, does
enter into that rest, he has entered into that rest: Brethren, the truth is we
are tossed, we are thus troubled; miseries without, horror within. Would you
not now be at rest? there is no more horror to trouble you, no more vengeance
to plague thee, no more wrath to haunt thee; let thy eye be upon the shore;
pray to believe, and hear to believe, and labor to believe, labor for that
rest.

For the further clearing of the point, I will here discover three particulars:
1 I will show you the hindrances of faith. 2 I will show you the means to get
faith. 3 I will show you the motives to persuade you to labor for it.


1 What these be that hinder a man from getting faith, and here in the general
know thus much; they are very many, and very dangerous: it is therefore a point
of wisdom to be careful to foresee these hindrances, and to be watchful to
prevent these: Satan above all does labor to hinder a poor soul this way,
he would not have a man chaste, he would not have a man regenerate, he would
not have a man meek and humble, but above all, he would not have him believe,
for then he knows he is gone: If he be so violent to cast hindrances in our
way, we should be as watchful and careful to avoid these hindrances. It is
that we shall observe concerning Peter; Satan, says our Savior, desires to
winnow thee: Now that Christ aimed at, was that he would winnow his faith, and
Christ labored to fortify that, for says he, I have prayed that thy faith
fail not; as if he had said, if faith holds, all holds: the Devil sights
neither against small nor great, but only against faith; he deals with faith,
as one enemy does with another in the field in fight one against another; if
the enemy perceive that there is some castle, or some trench, to which the
contrary side have resort upon all occasions, all their aiming is to cut off
their passage and the bridge, that they may not come to the shelter, and then
they can conquer them, and prevail against them as they list. This is an
ordinary care that one enemy has against another: So Satan deals with the
soul, he easily perceives that the Lord Jesus Christ, and his promises, are
the castle of a distressed soul; they are the trenches wherein the soul may
refresh it self, and find succor upon all occasions. Now Satan labors to
cut off the passage of confidence, and take away the bridge of belief, when
he hinders a man from resting and believing in Christ, he cuts him from
coming to his shelter and castle, therefore he can prevail against him as he
please. Therefore let the soul be so much the more wary to prevent these
hindrances, because Satan is so careful and watchful to lay hindrances in the
way, and to fortify all sides that we may not believe in Christ; this is the
greatest labor of Satan, to hinder us, let it be our greatest endeavor to
attain it.

Now to deal more plainly, the hindrances that Satan casts in our way to keep
us from believing, are of two sorts. The first are those hindrances that do
disinable a man from coming to Christ, as having no title to him, no interest
in his mercy: some hindrances do really withhold a man, that he cannot rely
upon, and repair unto the Lord Jesus Christ: Other there be again, that do
not take away our interest in the promises; they do not hinder our title we
have to Christ, but we hinder our selves from coming to Christ, because we
are not wise to prevent these hindrances as we should, and avoid them as we
ought.

First, we will begin with the former, and the question is, what are those
real hindrances that keep the soul that it cannot believe in the Lord Jesus,
that it never shall believe in the Lord Jesus, upon these terms in that estate
and condition, those hindrances are especially four: The first is this: A
blinded careless and senseless security and presumption, which commonly takes
possession of the hearts of men, whereby they content themselves with their
condition, because they know not the misery of their condition: Mark what I
say, this same sluggish senseless, this same careless presumption of a man's
welfare, when there is no such matter, he is only blinded and deluded. When men
cry peace, peace, to their souls, when they conclude their estates are good,
they desire to be no better, because they see no other, because they see not
the misery of it. These cannot see the excellency of faith, therefore cannot
make a step to go to Christ by faith; such a soul is rivetted and scrued to
his base wretched condition: therefore there is no trading with him in matters
of faith, till his conscience be a wakened, and his sins discovered. The text
says, The whole need not the Physician, and therefore will not seek him; nay,
he will not receive him when he comes, he cares not for him; while we think
our selves whole, and safe, and sound, and seared, and speak peace to our
souls in our natural condition; we look not after Christ, neither will we
receive Christ, if he come to our doors. It is a fine passage of Saint Paul,
and it is the ground he makes of the unbeleefe of the Jews: Romans 11.25. the
text says, Hardness is come upon the Jews, till the fullness of the Gentiles
is come in: the word in the original is pretty.

There is a kind of sleepy, sluggish, stupid, benumbed senselessness in the
Jew, till the Gentiles came in; the one are hindered from coming to Christ, and
believing in him, because they are rocked asleep: therefore the word in the
original signifies a stillness: for when a man has got a stupid benumbed
heart, he is all stilled, all quiet and at rest; he sees nothing, he looks
after nothing, he cares for nothing, but rests in the condition he is in: and
in this the Jews shall dwell, till the Lord awakes him out of this security.
This is the cause men complain, they cannot endure sharp preaching, and to
have their sins discovered, and their consciences awakened. I wonder
Ministers should make this ado, cannot men go to Heaven without such a
stir? they see no need therefore they desire no trouble: this is that the
Lord observes of the Church of Laodicea: Revel. 3. which was an argument of the
base estate she was in. Thou say thou art rich and need nothing, and
know not that thou art poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked, because
she knew not her misery, she never labored to go to Christ, to be freed
from her misery; and it is observed Zephany 3.12. when the Lord would discover
a people that should believe, he says, I will leave an afflicted and a poor
people, a poo^e soul that trembles at Gods Word, and sees his misery; he is
like to look out for succor from the Lord Jesus: nay famous is that place,
John 12.39. mark a passage or two, they are very observable and useful for
the point in hand.

There our Savior speaking of the Jews, says, they could not believe; he
adds the reason, for I say says, The heart of this people is waxen fat, he
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, lest they should see with
their eyes, and believe with their hearts, and should be converted, and I
should heal them: There are two passages observable, one by the by, that
believing and converting are all one in Scripture, he says, they could not
believe, that they might not he converted; but here was the ground why they
could not believe: Their eyes were blinded, and their hearts were hardened. They
were in a senseless benumbed secure cursed course, they hope to be saved, and
all is well, and they never see what condition they are in, till they are in
Hell; therefore they never seek out for mercy: Therefore Christ says to the
Jews, Ye will not come to me to be saved, for how can ye believe, when ye
seek the honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God.
It is impossible for a man to be in Hell and in Heaven both at once, for light
and darkness to be together in one place, for a man to rest upon sin, and
upon the feee grace of Christ, as long as thou art settled, as long as thou
restest in thy base course, as long as thou live in a natural sleepy
condition. Tell it to your children, you that are Parents; tell it to your
husbands, you that are wives; husband, how can you believe? child, how can you
believe? when thou seek not the honor of God, but setlest thy self upon
thy base rebellions, and restest upon thy corruptions: Thus we see the
hindrance, it is a sleepy secure carelessness of condition.

Now the cure of it is this, namely, labor to enforce thy self, touching
thine own estate, and pinch thine own heart, awaken and stir up thy soul,
and pinch thine own heart in the apprehension of that misery, and woefulness
of that condition thou art in, and you shall help one another. A man that is
asleep cannot awaken himself, but another man that is but new awake, that
scarce has his senses about him, can stir another better than himself: be
you so wise: Every poor sinner is asleep and secure in sin, when will his
eyes be open? he will never see, he can never awaken himself; and jog him, and
pinch him, awaken him you must, believe the word, you are in a fearful
condition, in a miserable estate.

A natural man, is an accursed man; thus deal one with another, and resolve
of this in two or three passages. Let every man say the Word is true, and
reason undeniable, unless I be altered in my condition, I shall be confounded
in my condition; unless I be another man, I am an accursed man; unless I be
borne again by the Word, it had been better for me I had never been borne
into the world. I must not think that Christ will carry my soul and my sins
to Heaven together: I must not persuade my heart that flesh and blood can enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: no heart, it will not be, you are sleepy and
sluggish, and you think Christ will save you; no, no, it is true Christ came to
save sinners, and it is as true Christ came to humble sinners, and to sanctify
sinners, and to convert sinners: Christ came to save his servants from sin,
as well as from Hell: Tell thou thy own heart thus, and never be quiet till
thou affect thy soul with the apprehension of Christ; I am a miserable man,
and shall be so for ever, if I continue in this condition.

Secondly, again, imagine that the heart is now awakened a little, that the
sinner begins to see that he must change; he looks about, and conceives
God is angry, and his sins are heinous, and hell is gaping for him; and the
Lord tells him, there is your portion, thither you will go one day, either you
must be another man, or else an accursed man: When the soul begins to think
of this, that he must be altered and changed; the other hindrance of faith is
this, that a sinner thinks he can change himself: this is another maine
hindrance, and it is one of the greatest hindrances under Heaven. First, the
soul thinks it needs no change, what says the soul? do you tell me of
Hell, and stagger my conscience, I think my self well enough, but that
Ministers will not let me alone. But now he sees he must change, and thinks
with himself, either I must have my soul humbled, and my life reformed, or
else go down to Hell; and then he shuffles for himself, and sharkes for his
own comfort, and hopes to change himself, and help himself out of misery,
he conceives it is in his power, to procure his safety, and to satisfy all
the wrong done to God, he now becomes a Savior of himself.

Where is Christ now? he keeps the staff in his own hand now, and he will
still have it in his own power to procure his own happiness: This is that
every man is naturally given to, since he must alter, he will have it in his
own power to alter himself, and save himself.

This seems to me to be the meaning of the young man's speech, Matthew 19.
when he came to trade for life and happiness: What shall I do, says he, to
gain eternal life? Christ says, go thy way, and keep the Commandments:
Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, etc. I have kept all
these from my youth, says he, what want I yet? as who should say, if thou
have not enough, thou shall have enough before I go; I will pay thee upon the
nail, I will be aforehand with thee, I will not owe thee a farthing token:
What want I yet? as though he would not be only even hand, but before hand
with God; as who should say, he could not miss Heaven, if he could do as he
thought he was able to do. To have all a man's good in another, to receive all
spiritual good from another, this is that nature is hardly brought unto, and
yet this must be done, if ever we believe.

To make the matter plain otu of Scripture, this was the maine hindrance that
kept the Jews from embracing Jesus Christ: men think they are the bravest
Christians in the world, because they have this, and can do that, because they
enjoy these abilities, nay perform these services; not that a man should now
not do these, but the resting here, and to think to help a man's self by
this means, and the taking up a man's rest in these means, and the opinion of
merit, this is the bane of religion, Romans (...) 2. For I bear them record,
says the text, that they have zeal for God, but not according to knowledge:
the Jews had a zeal for God, they loved religion, and they were Christians,
and circumcised, and do not these attain to life and salvation? no, for says
the text, they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God in Christ: what is the reason of this? because they went
about to establish their own righteousness.

Three things there be in the third verse for our purpose:

First, that a man cannot be saved by his own righteousness, but by the
righteousness of God, in and through Christ.

Secondly, that it is a point of submission and subjection, (Oh mark this) and
it is a great point, it is a point of humility and submission to take and
receive righteousness from another. It is a great point of submission, to have
all from Christ, and nothing in our selves to have grace from Christ, and
comfort from Christ, this is admirable.

Now what hinders this submission? why? thirdly, the text says, They went
about to establish their own righteousness of their own works, as if that
could do the deed, or nothing: thou must count them dung in respect of the
righteousness of Christ; that is the first, the whole nation of the Jews fell
short of Christ in this point: the second place, is Romans 9.31, 32. mark how he
reasons the^ What shall we say then? as who should say, you will think we
speak strange things, and it is a strange thing, but it is a true thing, that
the Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained unto
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith; but Israel which
followed the law of righteousness, have not attained the law of
righteousness; why? because they sought it not by faith, but by the works of
the law. Three things again here in the text consider:

First, what shall we say? is it possible? what, a Gentile saved, and a Jew
condemned? what, a Gentile that knew not God, attain mercy, and the Jews and
people of God, cast off from mercy? what shall we say then? why? mark the
text, a Gentile that never trusted to his own righteousness, that is, a
miserable sinful creature he sees himself nothing, happily a cursed drunkard,
or an adulterer, the Lord opens his eyes, discovers his sins, and makes him
see he is a lost man, and makes him see, that a Christ must save him from the
sins of his prayers, and a Christ must save him from the sins of his
performances, or else he is an undone man for ever: Another man now, the Jew he
sought after the law, that is, they were strict in the performance of the law,
they had their circumcision, their washing, and all services, upon all
occasions curiously; how comes this to pass now, that the one is saved, and
the other damned? because the one will be beholding to Christ, the other will
not, therefore the one has mercy, the other has not.

Now we will explain the point, and the practice of it: will you see how men
procure their own ruin in this kind? take a poor sinner that is fallen into
a base course, what is the course he takes to save himself? he is informed
what to do, and his conscience is awakened, therefore he goes aside, and
forces himself, and labors to force his heart to a melting for, and hatred
against his corruptions, whereby God has been displeased, now happily God
breaks his heart, and tears flow abundantly, and the man rises off his
knees, and here takes up his stand, and thinks all is well, and in conclusion
thus he lives, and is as bad as ever he was before; and the next temptation
that is offered to him, he is taken aside with the same sin again, the
reason is, he went away, and thought, my heart has been enlarged, I have
confessed my sins, and God has humbled my soul, and therefore I shall be
saved, and rests upon his humiliation, and not upon Christ; upon his
confession, and not upon Christ; so that his humiliation and confession is his
Savior, he has made provision at home, therefore will not go to the Lord
Jesus Christ: another man, God opens his eyes, and makes him see his ignorance,
(the Minister tells him, he must humble his soul, and pray in his family) now
he finds himself mavelous blind, and unable to do it, now he bewailes
his ignorance and carelessness, and waits upon God in his ordinances, and gets
ability to perform those duties, so that now he performs holy duties after
an excellent manner, and there he stays, and in conclusion returns to his
old fashion again: what is the reason? he establishes his own
righteousness, (he settled upon duty alone, and there was an end) he fell
short of Christ, and rested upon doing of duties, and so went no further at
all: well then, we have the hindrances.

Then for the cure remember two passages:

First, be fearful and jealous of thy self, when through Gods assistance and
help thou art able to get some power in the performance of service, to get
some measure of sufficiency, when thou have abilities about thee, be most
fearful and jealous, because then thy estate lies in most hazard: do in this
case as seafaring men do, they hoise up sail, and go amain, where there is
no hazard, and where there is sea room enough, but if they go in a straight
or in a sand, where many have suffered shipwreck, and there is a remembrance
of it, such a man perished here, and such a man suffered shipwreck here: how
careful are they then to stern aright, and observe all curiously and exactly,
lest they fall where others fell before them, and suffer shipwreck where others
were overthrown: or look as it is with men that travel, if they come to some
suspicious or theevish places, though they were careless before, yet when they
come there, lest they be surprised on the sudden, and to fortify themselves,
one rides with his sword drawn, and another with his hand upon his sword, and
they make what speed they can, because they suspect an assault: so it is here,
Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands: I tell you,
carnal security has killed many, but carnal confidence has sunk down ten
hundred thousands into hell: when you come then to this stand, when God has
enlightened your minds, and given you some parts, and bestowed some abilities
upon you, and now you clap and applaud your selves, and say, this is somewhat,
this it is to be a Christian, poor novices must come and live upon my crumbs,
and desire my information, the Lord has enlightened my eyes, and wrought upon
my heart, thou art now upon a sand, for the Lord Jesus sake, take heed to thy
self; here Saint Paul had like to have suffered shipwreck, and here those
hypocrites in Isay 28. suffered shipwreck; here is the skull of one man, and
the hand of another man, and the soul of another man; I mean, thousands have
suffered shipwreck here: now look to heaven, and suspect thine own soul, and
think, if the Lord keep me now, I shall escape the worst, but here is the
most hazard, therefore I must be most careful hereof: it is pretty to observe
in experience, poor Christians that are lowly and humble, how tenderly do
they walk, how fearful are they of their hearts, of their pride, and
peevishness, and idleness, and carelessness; when you shall see a bold brazen
faced, presumptuous, carnal wretch, because he can pray, and read, and hear,
he will follow riotous fashions, and continue in base courses, and carry all
away with his abilities.

The second thing I would have you consider, is this, grow every day up in the
observance of thine own baseness, and in the acquaintance of thine own
weakness in the best of thy duties; this is a sweet pitch of a Christian, the
more God bestows, and the more grace God vouchsafes; he goes away, and hangs
down his head, and wonders at Gods goodness, that ever the Lord should help a
poor creature, so to call upon his Name, and says, Lord it is thy grace, it
came from the assistance of thy Spirit; but that ever a wretch should say to
his services and duties, ye are my gods; abhor this in thy soul, and keep a
mavelous dislike of thy self, and a low esteem of thy duties, and be
wondering at Gods grace, and admiring at Gods mercy, and return to God, that
he has given thee power to perform any service, and lie thou in the dust,
and trample upon thine own performances; do therefore as Paul did, Phil. 3.7.
he says, Now these things I counted gain, I count loss for Christ: Oh, my
zeal for the Law, and the exact strictness of the Pharisees; I thought that
would have carried me to Heaven, but they are dung, I will tread them
underfeet; nay doubtless, I count all things, not only the services I did
before, and the prayers before God called me, but even since the best prayers
and performances I ever did, dung in the comparison of Christ. What availes it
for a man to fail fai^e on the Sea, and suffer shipwreck in the haven? he had
been as good have perished at Sea: thou sailest fair in the world, in thy
duties, and thou suffer shipwreck in the haven, and restest in thy duties,
and go down to hell, thou, and thy duties, and all: therefore labor to see
a need of a Christ, even to heal and to pardon thy best performances, that
ever thou made, and never leave thy soul and thy service, till thou grow to
(...) apprehension of the baseness therein, and so (...) to Christ.

The third hindrance is this, the sinner by this time is driven from these two
holds, and driven two stairs higher to Christ; the sinner sees he must
change, and that he cannot help himself, his prayers and performances are
good things, good means, but the Physician is in another place, a man's legs
may carry him to the Physician, but they cannot cure him; so a man's services
are good things, but he cannot help himself, he must go to another for
help. Another hindrance is this, when the sinner sees he cannot help
himself, yet he thinks he is able to go to another for help; it is a thing
incident to our nature, and it is usual, that we think, that it is in our
power to believe, and that the matter of resting upon Christ, is not a matter
of that difficulty, and that hardness, as some Ministers pretend, and the
Word seems to express unto us, and this is that keeps a man utterly from
going out; I beseech you observe it, though a man cannot help himself in
nature, yet a man will say, he can call to another for help, though a man
cannot succor himself in his want and necessity, yet to take supply from
another, that is an easy matter: so when we cannot do what duties we should,
when we cannot satisfy Gods justice as he requires, and answer the law, we
think though we our selves cannot help our selves, yet we can go to Christ,
and entreat him, and beseech him to help us, and we can receive succor and
help from him, this is not so hard a matter, this is our nature, take notice of
it in experience, look into the course of men's carriages and lives, we shall
observe, that every man will acknowledge his infirmities in other things, but
now his inabilities in this, there is not one man confesses: one complains,
his abilities are poor, he cannot pray as he should; another, his parts are
mean, he cannot confer as he ought; another, his passions are unruly and
heady, and he cannot master them as God requires and commands: thus every one
will confess his infirmities in other things, but go to every man's door, and
ask, do you not believe? why? all the swearers, and drunkards, and sots in
the town, they can believe, they can do this, though they can do nothing
else; they cannot pray, they cannot understand, they cannot remember, they
cannot subdue their corruptions, but they shall be taken away with company, and
fall into that sin, but they can believe in Christ with all their hearts:
thus we see that every man thinks it in his power, and within the compass of
his ability naturally to rest upon Christ. Now mark what follows, why
should a man desire that he has? why should he seek for that he has
attained? why should he labor to be possessed of that which is in his own
power, and he is possessed of already? if I can believe naturally, if it be in
my power to go to Christ when I list, why shall I use all means, and receive
ability to do that which I can do by my own power? and this I take to be
one maine ground, why the endeavors of men are taken off from attending, and
why the labors of Christians are taken off from seeking often this blessed
precious grace of faith: there are many grounds why men are driven to this
kind of conceit, there are many reasons that make way for this conceit:

As first, to believe, is a spiritual thing between God and thy own soul,
to pray and reform, belongs to the outward practice, but to believe, is a
closure of the heart, with an entertaining of the Lord and his truth, and the
giving way of our souls thereunto: now because men cannot see their faith,
therefore no man will yield, but he does believe.

Secondly, men conceive, that it is an easy matter to take of mercy from
Christ, and say they, is there any man that will not have mercy? is it such a
hard matter to receive favor offered, or to take a gift when it is tendered
unto us?

Thirdly, these do apprehend, that the assenting to the Gospel of Christ,
wherein is revealed the riches of Gods mercy, is all that is required in
faith, when the Lord says, He has sent his Son into the world, that he has
prepared salvation in him, and wrougt redemption through him: they acknowledge
and assent to the truth, and conceive, this is whole to believe; upon this
ground, poor creatures think it is in their power to believe, and take grace
and help from Christ, though they cannot help themselves; therefore they
labor not to get grace from God to do this work, because they think they
can perform this work by their own ability and power.

The cure of this hindrance is this, and it lies specially in these three
meditations:

First, see thy self, and convince thy own heart, how thou art cozened, and
thy conscience how thou art deceived in common sense, when such thoughts creep
into thy mind, and reason thus; were it in my power alone to believe, or in
any man's power else, would any man go to hell for want of believing? if it
were in my power, or any man's power else to get faith, would any man perish for
want of faith? Take a little experience from those that lie on their death
beds: A riotous wretch that has run headlong against the Lord and his truth, a
man that has lived stubbornly and stoutly under the means of grace, and has
taken up arms against God and his grace, he lies gasping, and then he looks
to Heaven, and considers what shall become of him: The Minister says he must
renounce himself, and apply Christ and his promises to his soul: Oh, says
he, I cannot believe the Lord will save me, and pardon me, and comfort me, I
cannot rest upon the promises of God: What, I such a sinner, and saved? what, I
such a sinner and comforted? I cannot believe it, if all the Angels in Heaven
tell it me; is it in this man's power to believe now when he sees Hell open
before him, and the devils ready to receive him? do you think he would rush
into Hell, if he could believe and escape it?

Secondly, look into the depth of thine own heart, and weigh seriously thine
own weakness by the balance of the Sanctuary, and thine own infirmities by
the blessed Word of the Lord, and see that thou must not only have a gift from
God to take it; God must not only give a man a gift, but power to receive it:
Ioh. 3.27. No man can receive any thing, unless it be given him from above;
therefore judge your own abilities, not according to your own conceits, and
overweening imaginations, but judge by the Word, and judge righteous judgment,
that a man can receive no good thing, unless God give him power. The gift must
come from above, and the power must come from above, whereby he must receive
it.

Thirdly, consider and settle thine own heart in this same determination and
resolution, that there must be a supernatural power put forth to make thee
believe, or else all the power under Heaven cannot furnish thee with
sufficiency thereunto; a man is able to do the condition of the first
covenant, as to observe the condition of the second covenant: he is as well
able to keep the Law, as to believe the Gospel, unless there be a power to
enable him: James 1.18. Her has begotten us according to his own will, by the
Word of truth; a child cannot beget himself: So it is here spiritually, as
there naturally, the Lord does beget us according to his own will, it is not
in our own will to beget our selves, as the Pelagians dreamed, it is not in
our will to dispose of our hearts, to take Christ when we will, to let him
stand at door so long as we see fit, and take him in when we see fit: but it
is the Will of the Lord that must beget us, and not our will, that can beget
our selves: Therefore that faith that grows upon the ground of thy own
natural ability, it is a fancy, it is no sound faith. God must come down from
heaven to thy soul, before thou can go up to heaven again; faith must be
first wrought in thy soul, before thou can be carried to God by faith; there
must be a power in all means, above all means; there must be a spirit in all
endeavors above all endeavors, to help us to believe, or else we shall never
believe while the world stands: therefore avoid those proud imaginations of
heart, when men think they may refuse grace, and take grace when they list,
shut Christ out of doors over night, and take him in the morning, it is
against sense, and there is nothing more cross and contrary to the power of
grace: No, go secretly between God and thine own soul, and confute it;
what, I Lord, and my parts Lord; what, in my will Lord to believe, and in my
power, and so forth: no, if all men and Angels should conspire together, and
all the Ministers under Heaven join together to work faith in my soul, it
will never be, the power of Angel, Men or Word, will never work it, but it
must be the power of the Lord that must work it; as we may see, Ephesians. 1.18.
The same power that brought Christ out of the grave, must bring the soul to
Christ, or else it will never come while the world stands: be persuaded of
these things, they are true, choose whether you will believe them; but the Lord
make you believe them, that you may receive comfort to your souls.

We come now in the second place, to those second kind of hindrances which
do not deprive a man of the title to Christ, but through our own folly and
weakness they stop us from coming so readily to Christ; we have interest in
a promise, but through our own ignorance, and Satan's subtilty, we go not so
readily to a promise we have title to. The ground of all these hindrances is
one, and that is this; namely when men out of carnal reason contrive another
way to come to Christ than ever God ordained, than ever the Word revealed; when
we set up a standard by Gods standard, when out of the heady haughty
imaginations of our minds, we make other terms and conditions of believing,
than ever God made, then ever Christ required; we lay bars in the way, and lay
boults upon our feet, and manacles upon our hands, and then we complain we
cannot go; the fault is your own, and the impediments are many, because
carnal reason is fruitful to devise, and Satan follows, and fires, these
imaginations. I will only mention three hindrances which are mainly
observable, by which many a gracious heart is wonderfully damped from coming
to, and receiving benefit from the Lord Jesus Christ.

and worthiness, and sinfullnesse, and then he dares not come to Christ: he
viewes the number of his sins so many, the nature of his abominations so
heinous, the continuance of them so long, the soul of a distressed man sends
his thoughts affarre off, and viewes all, both the abominations of his life,
and the distempers of his soul, and sees his iniquities mustering up
themselves, and Satan helps him forward; for this is his policy; First, he
will keep a sinner if he can, that he shall not see sin, and then all will
be whole; and the sinner thinks there is mercy enough in a Savior, and why
should I trouble my self? but when he sees the sinner will pore upon his
sins, then he shall see nothing else but sin, so that he dares not go to
God for mercy: this is that I desire to trade in, and follow Satan as far as I
can. Now the sinner that is in this case, tell him that mercy is in Christ, and
redemption offered in a Savior, he dares not hear of it, he dares not
think of it: what says he, shall I once imagine or think that there is any
mercy for me? that I have any title to, or interest in Christ? that were
strange, and the soul is here foiled and fastened upon his own misery, and
never goes to the Physician; he stares in the wound and never goes to a
Savior; for a man is as well kept from going to Christ, by poring continually
upon his distempers by despair, as by resting upon his own sufficiency by
presumption; he that sees not his sins, he thinks he has sufficiency, and
therefore will not go to Christ, and when a sinner sees and feels the
burden of his iniquities, he dares not go to a Savior; this is the course of
Satan, and here in he is mavelous cunning: but this should not be any
discouragement to our hearts from coming to the Lord Jesus Christ: for I
beseech you observe it, for whom did Christ come into the world? for whom did
Christ die? when he came, it was not for the righteous, that needed him not;
but for the sinners, that had condemned themselves; and he came to save those
that could not save themselves: 1 Timothy 1.15. It is a faihfull saying, Christ
came to save sinners, whereof I am the chief: Zachary 13.1. There is a
Fountain set open for all people to wash in, all sorts of sins, and all
sorts of sinners; there is a fountain set open for them, be they what they
will be, be they what they can be; their sins never so great, the time never so
long, and the heinousness never so vilde, come they that will come, come and
welcome. There was a fiery Serpent in the wilderness, and there was a brazen
Serpent to cure them that were stung; so if thou be stung with the fiery
Serpent of sin, Christ is the brazen Serpent that will heal thee. Esaias
43.24. When the Jews had tired God with their wickedness, and wearied him
with their distempers, yet the Lord for his own Name sake pardoned all their
iniquities, and remembered their sins no more: I say this, though our sins be
never so heinous, never so vile and abominable in themselves: if the soul can
see these, and be burdened with these, they do not hinder the work of faith,
and the work of mercy. I would feign have you think of that which I now say;
it is not our sinfulness properly, I mean our unworthiness, but our
haughtiness that hinders us from coming to a Savior; it is not a man's
baseness and sin that hinders him, but his own haughtiness that lets him
from coming to a Savior; we would have somewhat in our selves, and not all
from Christ; therefore when we have nothing in our selves, we are loath to go
to Christ: were your sins lesser, and your holiness greater, then you would
go; then mark what follows; thou go to Christ, not because of the
freeness of his grace, but because thou have something in thy self to
encourage thee to go to Christ; thou will have something before thou will go
to Christ, and therefore wilt not have all from Christ: therefore it is not thy
baseness, and thy sins that hinder thee from Christ, but it is thy
haughtiness and pride.



Esaias 57.18. the text says, for his wickedness I have smitten him, and was
angry with him, yet he turned after the way of his own heart; by this means
Judah should never be recalled: but mark what the Lord adds, I will heal
him, and restore comfort unto him: as if he had said, poor soul, I have
striven with him, but he scorned me; I offered him grace, he received it not,
but went after the stubbornness of his own heart; he sees not his misery,
but I see it, and I will pardon it: Ierem. 3.2. Yet return to me, says the
Lord: there is no time to late, if a man have a heart to return: Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers; that is, thou have followed many sins,
and addicted thy self to many distempers, yet return unto me. If a man put
away his wife for fornication, will he receive her again? no, he will not do
it: yet you have had many base haunts and backdoores, yet return unto me,
after all that stubbornness whereby you have opposed my grace, and slighted my
mercy: yet return unto me, and receive grace offered. There is no limit of the
pardon and free grace of God offered to a poor sinner, except the sin
against the Holy Ghost; the Lord stands, and waits, and knocks, if any man will
open; though he call till he be hoarce, and knock till he be weary, yet if
any man will open, be the drunkard never so base, the adulterer never so vile,
if he will open, the Lord will come, and will bring his comforts with him, and
will s^p with him, and restore consolation to him.

me, I have a heart not only that does not, but that cannot mourn.

Micah 7.18. The Lord pardons sins, and subdues iniquities; not because thou
please him, but because mercy pleases him: wherefore did the Lord show most
mercy to Saul when he showed most hatred against him; Saul is posting to
Damascus, and breathing out threatenings against Christ; the Lord is opposed by
Saul, and the Lord in the mean time pities and shows mercy to Saul; Saul
persecutes him, and he makes his moan to Saul; Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? the bloody jaylour that opposed the means of grace, the Lord
overcame him by the means of grace; he that resisted the means of grace, was
brought home by the power of the means to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Saul and the jaylour were bad enough, yet they were bettered by the means,
but this is the hopeless condition of my heart, prayer will not work, the
means of grace will not prevail; sometimes I think, Lord, this Lords day
will do, and this sermon will work it, but to this very day the word of the
Lord profits not, nor works upon me for my good, and is there such a heart in
hell? is there any hope that I shall ever have grace, when the means which
should work grace will do me no good? this is the last plea of the soul,
and indeed of Satan, whereby he holds many a distressed foul in hand, that
God intends no good toward him.



when it shows thee the stubbornness and deadness of thy own heart, and
makes thee apprehend, that a broken spirit is the gift of God, and not of man
and means; therefore the Lord will make thee look to him to work it and
continue it; therefore know that this is a work of God; for to see deadness
is life, and to feel hardness is softness; only beware, that there be not
a haunt of heart and distemper, that thy soul cleaves to, and pants after, and
thou art loath to part withal; for then the word will harden thee, because thou
hardenest thy self, but if thou art content that the word should lay open the
bowels of thy heart, and discover what ever is amiss, and reveal what ever is
cross to Gods command, and pluck away every corruption and distemper; then if
the word reveals any hardness in thee, know that the word works comfortably,
that reveals hardness and baseness, and does drive thee out of thy self to
God for succor.

give thee grace when thou will, but when he pleases; no, it is not for us to
know the times and the seasons that God has appointed; what if thou go upon
thy hands and knees begging of mercy to the last gasp, and if then the Lord
be pleased to shine in a drop of goodness and mercy, it is more than the Lord
owes; therefore hear to day, and attend to morrow, thou know not whether
God will bless this sermon, or that means, or the other ordinance; and do
not complain upon the means, but attend Gods leisure, and remember the Lord
has waited long for thee in the time of your rebellion, in the day of your
ignorance, before you looked toward the Lord; and therefore if the Lord now
make you wait for mercy and assurance of his love, know that the Lord deals
equally, and kindly, and lovingly with you, and so as all shall be best for
you; and know that this distemper of heart opposes the tenor of the covenant
of grace, for the Lord gives what he will, when he will, and after what manner
he will; therefore stint not God in his giving, but wait when and what he will
bestow upon thee.

wrought more than all these. If I think and am persuaded I have power to go
out of my self, in conceiving I have power, and staying there, I stay in my
self, when I think to go out of my self; it is a supernatural work, and
the same hand must bring us out of our selves, that must bring us to Christ,
the same hand must pluck us out of our selves and sins, that must bring us to
the Lord Jesus Christ; therefore if I think, and through Satan's delusion
conceive, that I have ability to go out of my self, I repose upon my own
ability, when I profesly renounce my own ability, I maintain a repose upon
my own ability, when I renounce it, I say, I can do nothing, and yet rest
upon that I can do; it is a point very profitable, therefore mark what I say,
this is self denial in truth, when the soul knows it has nothing, and
therefore is overpowered by the almighty work of Gods Spirit, and is stopped,
as it were, in so much that the soul of a sinner does not look to expect any
power, or any principle from it self; or any creature, or any duty, the soul
of an humble sinner knows he is a dead man in sin; he cannot direct his
own ways; therefore when he is brought to deny himself, it is by the
almighty work of Gods Spirit, when the Lord draws the soul, that it looks
not inward, it looks not downward, it looks not to the creature, it expects
no principle from within, no power from the means to perform any duty, when
then I think with my self, I have power and ability to go out of my self,
then I say, I have a power within me to do something pleasing to God, namely,
I can deny my self, which is contrary; for to deny a man's self, is to
look for no power, or expect any power or sufficiency from himself, or from
the creature to perform that God requires: therefore we must listen and look
only to the voice of Christ, he that calls us from darkness, must call us to
the glorious light of himself: we must as well listen to the voice that must
pluck us out of our selves, and expect power from Christ to pluck us out of our
selves, as we must expect power from Christ to go unto him: the conclusion
therefore is this; I would have a sinner say, and think with himself, I
expect no power, Lord, from my self, I intend to wait upon the Lord, that
hides himself from the house of Israel, and I will look up, I will use all
means, and improve all helps I can, but I will not look to hearing, from
that to receive any thing; I will not look to the Minister, from him to
receive any thing; but in these means of hearing, and prayer, and in the use
of all ordinances, I will look up unto God that hides his face from his
servant for the while, and will look up to that wisdom to be informed, that
is wiser than the wisdom of the means, and I will look up to that power to
be strengthened, that is stronger than the power of the means: Habak. 3.17.
when he saw all began to fail, though the fig tree blossom not, and the vine
flourish not, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and stay my self upon the God of
my salvation; mark this, when all means under heaven fail, when the fig
tree blossoms not, when the vine flourishes not; when all means fail, yet
there is mercy with the Lord, there is power and strength and sufficiency in
the Lord, to do my soul good; and say thou, though my sins be great, and
exceeding great, though my heart be hard and comes not under the power of Gods
ordinances, and the means of grace work not upon my soul, yet I will look up
to the Lord, and my eyes shall be toward him; my eyes shall not be inward to
look upon any thing in my self, but my eyes shall look upon to the Lord, and
expect all from him: and thus much shall suffice for the second hinderance.







Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, says David he was justified and
sanctified, and had faith, and yet had not this joy; nay Job had faith, and yet
he had no sense and feeling of Gods favor: Thou make me a b^^^ to shoot as,
faith he, and thine arrows have drunk up my spirits; and yet he says, Though
he kill me, yet will I trust in him; his faith was strong, though his feeling
were nothing, trust to the goodness of the Lord, and not to those shadows,
and brittle bottomes, that will break under you.

Psalm. 77. My soul refused comfort, like a little child that will not eat his
meat, because it is not in a golden dish; he does not say, God did not offer
me consolation, but I refused consolation out of a discontented spirit:
because you cannot have comfort upon your own terms, and please your own
pallats; because you cannot have a dish for your tooth, you will have none at
all; you want comfort, not because God will not give it, but because you will
not take it upon Gods terms: these and many more are the hindrances. One
says, God has followed me with crosses in my life and estate; another, the
wrath of the Lord lies heavy upon me, I am still doubting and perplexed, and I
cannot believe. The upshot of all these is upon one and the same ground, these
are hindrances, which we out of our own folly, and the subtilty of Satan,
make to hinder us from coming so freely to Christ, and believing in him, as
otherwise we might; and yet in truth these are no hindrances, we only make
them so. Therefore we will now come to the cure of all these, and show how we
may take off these hindrances if it be possible, as in truth it is possible;
and not only to remove these hindrances, but all other of this kind, quality
and condition, if you will attend to the means that shall be propounded, it is
possible to cure them; and the cures are these, whereby the soul may be
fortified against these, or pass by, and leap over all these hindrances; and
notwithstanding all, go to Christ in the promise.

Abraham took, that was the Father of all the faithful: Romans 4.19. when God
had promised him a son, and not only a natural son, but a son that
should be a Type of Christ, whereby he and all the faithful should be saved:
Now this promise was made unto him when he had a dead body, and Sarah a barren
womb; he unable to get, and Sarah unable to bear; now what course took he to
heal this? why the text says, He being not weak in faith, considered not his
own body which was now dead, nor Sarahs womb which was now barren; he knew
his deadness, and Sarahs barrenness, but he considered it not, that is, he
did not daily pore thereupon, and quarrel with himself and say, how can Sarah
bear a child, her womb is barren and unable to bear, my body is dead, and
unable to beget, there is no ground here to bear up his confidence; if he
considers Sarahs barrenness, there is no child to be looked for; if he look
upon his own deadness, there is no child to be expected: now therefore what
does he do? he looks to the promise only, and there rests and stays
himself; though he had a dead body, the promise was living, and though Sarahs
womb was barren, the promise was fruitful; and though he were weak, the Lord
was strong, and able to perform whatsoever he had promised: so we must see our
sins, and know our infirmities, and consider our weaknesses; but we must never
settle our selves, and sit down in the consideration of our own distempers,
and thereby be hindered from coming to the Lord, and from receiving that mercy
the Lord offers unto us in the Lord Jesus Christ, and we may freely take; for
when a man is continually poring upon his sins, and daily meditating upon his
corruptions, two things follow.

turn the frame of the soul downward, and the frame of the heart inward, and
shut down the sluice, whereas by believing we open the floodgates of the
promise, that the streams of mercy may flow a main in upon our souls, when we
return inward, and do settle our hearts upon our own distempers, we shut
down the sluice of the promise; and with the daily poring, and looking, and
attending to his own wickedness. Therefore the wisdom of the woman of
Canaan is to be observed, and her humiliation is to be regarded by us:
observe the humiliation of her heart, and the wisdom of her mind: Matthew
15.27. she came to him to beseech him to heal her daughter, that was possessed
with a devil: at the first, he would not listen unto her, but she would not
be put off so, but cried after him; then he answered, I am not sent but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, not to you that are Gentiles: yet for all
this she would not leave him, but came and fell down, and worshipped him,
saying, Lord, help me: then at last he compares her to a dog, It is not meet
to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs; as who should say, you
Gentiles are dogs, and the glad tidings of the Gospel are bread, and therefore
belong not unto you: Now had she pored and settled her self upon the words of
our Savior, she had never been made partaker of that mercy which Christ
bestowed, and she stood in need of: now mark what she says, Truth Lord, but
the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters table. Here observe a
heart truly humbled, and also truly wise to apprehend its own weakness; she
confessed all that Christ spoke. Thou say I am carnal, I yield it; thou
say I am a dog, I confess it; my sins are more for number, they are more
heinous for nature, than either my tongue can utter, or my heart can conceive:
but though I am a dog, Lord, yet I will not go out of doors, but lie under
the table; she yielded she was as bad as might be, and confessed all that
Christ spoke, yet she will not from under the table: so we ought to do, when
our corruptions are apprehended by us, and our baseness presented to the view
of us, when we see our selves damned creatures, and dogs, and lost in our
selves, then let us say, Truth Lord, we are worse than can be spoken of us,
we are worse than can be conceived of us, yet let us not fly out of doors, but
lie under the table, and at the foot of our Savior, and take a crum of mercy
at the hands of our Savior. But you will say:

I considered my ways, says David, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

be settled in thy infirmities, and to have thy soul so discouraged, as
thereby to be driven from Christ; therefore see thy sins thou should,
that thou may apprehend them loathsome, and find them burdensome to thy
soul; see thy sins also thou must, till thou see an utter insufficiency in
all things under heaven, to help thee out of thy sins; see thy sins thou
must also, till thou see an absolute necessity of a Savior, and of the mercy
that is in the Lord Jesus Christ, to recover thee out of thy sins: and when
the soul has done these three particular passages;







Away then for thy life to the throne of grace, there is pardon enough to
remove the guilt that sin has brought upon thee, there is grace enough to
take away all those corruptions that have defiled thy poor soul. What
madness and extreme folly is it for a poor sick man, that is overtaken with
some grievous disease, or some sore wound, not to go to the Physician before
he be whole, because he is ashamed the Physician should see him so distempered
or wounded? In reason we should rather go first to the Physician, that he may
heal us, than be first healed, and then go to the Physician and show our
selves: so it is the desperate folly of many poor sinners, we would have our
sins removed from us, and our hearts quickened in the way of well doing, and
when we are healed, then we will go to Christ, and when we have things about
us, then we will lay hold on the promise, and then we will purchase
salvation, or at the least be joint purchasers with Christ in the great work
of redemption: no, let this be thy course; see thy sins, and take notice of
thy corruptions, and then away to the Physician to be healed; go first to the
Physician to be healed; but be not first healed, and then go to the Physician;
1 Samuel 12.10. this was the advice of the holy man Samuel, when the people of
Israel had dealt basely with the Lord, by casting off his yoke, (for when they
cast off Samuel, they rejected the Lord) at last the Lord opens their eyes, and
affects their hearts with those their sins; now, says Samuel in the tenth
verse, Stand and see this great thing which the Lord will do before your eyes,
is it not now when harvest? I will call upon the Lord, and he shall send great
thunder and rain, that you may perceive that your wickedness is great, that
you have done in the sight of the Lord; now the Lord accordingly as Samuel had
said, thundered terribly from heaven; now when they heard this, and saw Gods
anger therein, they were driven to a kind of a maze, and were almost at their
wits end, and said, Pray ye unto the Lord for us, that we die not, for we
have sinned greatly, and to all other sins we have added this, that we have
asked for us a King; now mark what a direction Samuel orders unto them; Samuel
well saw that this is the nature of all men, by reason of their sinful
distempers, that when we think we are in a good case, we never look after
mercy; and when we are apprehensive of our own baseness and wretchedness,
we dare not look toward mercy: before they saw their sins and Gods anger
for them, they never cared for mercy, but now they heard the thunder, and
apprehended Gods displeasure therein, they durst not go to God for mercy: now
mark how Samuel chalkes out a middle way between them both, in the twentieth
verse, Fear not, says he, you have done all this wickedness, yet depart not
from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your hearts, neither turn
your backs after vain things that can profit you nothing; as who should say,
I will not lessen your sins, you have sinned grievously, you have sinned
fearfully, and hainously, I intend not to excuse or extenuate your wickedness:
but depart not from the Lord; as who should say, you will be gone from God now;
you will look for no mercy; you will expect no favor; the Lord you have cast
off, and therefore you think he will cast off you, take heed of that, depart
not from the Lord, for that is to follow lying vanities, and that is to forsake
your own mercies: so the soul of a poor sinner should reason thus; It Is true,
my sins are many, my wants are exceedingly multiplied, I have sinned against
God, and am discouraged, and shall I be more discouraged, and sin more
against God? I am miserable by departing from God, and shall I depart more from
God, and be more miserable? thou dare not go to Christ for mercy, why?
because thou have sinned, and will thou depart from God still, and be more
sinful? that is against all reason.

more heinous than you imagine: for when thou concludest certainly thy estate
is naught, and God has given you no grace, upon these grounds, mark against
how many Commandments thou sinnest; first, thou do wrong thine own honor
that God has put upon thee in giving thee grace; thou sinnest also against the
third Commandment, in wanting that reverence which is due to Gods name, and
the work of grace he has wrought in thy soul, thou dampest thy own heart,
and art a spiritual murderer, and so sinnest against the sixth Commandment:
thou robbest thy self of that comfort of heart, and refreshment of mind that
God has prepared for thee, and offered unto thee, and so sinnest against the
eighth commandment; nay, you do bear false witness infinitely, you speak
against your selves, to the overthrowing of your souls, and you bear false
witness against Christ, and his Spirit, and the work of his grace, whereby
you are sealed up to the day of redemption, and you join sides with the Devil
in this case. But you will say:



witness must be upon ground and knowledge, so thou peremptorily affirmest;
what, I grace? no, will God vouchsafe any good to me? I will never believe it;
now thou certainly affirmest of thy self, that thou have no true grace, when
there is no ground for it, but suspicion, and fear, and the like, and
therefore thou bear false witness against thy soul: observe this the
rather, because of the sinful distempers that creep into the hearts of many
Christians broken and humbled, and it is usual and common; this is their guise
out of a self will of carnal reasonings, and out of a base haunt of heart,
they swell against themselves and their own souls, their hearts come to be
persuaded, that they are not in a right course, that they walk not in a right
way, unless they be quarrelling and opposing the work of Gods grace in their
souls, and out of a self conceit of theirs, that they are molded into by
custom, they think they have liberty to do so, and that they do well in so
doing: now think of it you that are humble, know that you sin fearfully all
this while, and it is very remarkable to take notice of the soul in this
kind: in a case of conscience, when a poor broken hearted sinner has his
judgment informed, when reasons are plain, and when the comforts are clearly
evidenced, when Scriptures are undeniable, these poor creatures now do not so
much attend what you speak, and what the Minister says, and the Word delivers,
but all their care is, how they may answer a man's reason, and put off the force
of an argument, and they count it a matter of weakness, if they cannot answer
any thing that is propounded to them for their comfort; it is admirable to
consider, and but that daily experience teaches us, we would not speak it,
nor could we believe it; therefore take notice of it, and know, that howsoever
you give leave to your own souls to do this, and have invented reasons and
arguments to gainsay the power of the truth, and to defeat the power of the
Word; go aside and wonder, that the Lord has not taken away from thee all the
work of his grace, and all the comfort of his Spirit, admire at this, that
when thou have cast off all grounds of comfort, yet God does vouchsafe it to
thy soul: the Prophet David prays, that the Lord would turn away his eyes
from beholding of vanity; now if a man must turn away his eyes from beholding
of vanity, he must turn away his thoughts from attending to vanity much
more; has God ever given me a mind to consent to Satan? has God ever given
me a tongue to parley with Satan? I have something else to do, I must attend to
the counsels of God, I must attend and listen to the voice of God, I must not
listen to the suggestions of Satan, that I have nothing to do withal, I sin
deeply in so doing, no man in reason will deal with a cheator, if he know him
to be a cheator, unless he mean to be couzened: so it ought to be our
wisdom, carnal reason is a cheator, and an old deceiver; let us not therefore
attend thereunto, nor be ruled thereby, unless we resolve to be cheated: but
if the sin cannot scare you, yet let the misery that will follow thereupon
force you, and drive your hearts from it: in Esa. 50.2. last verses, the text
says, Who is among you that fears the Lord, let him hear the voice of his
servant, he that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the
Lord, and stay upon his God; there is a comparison made between the Saints of
God, that will listen to the voice of the Lord, and the direction of his
servants, and those that will follow their own humors, and carnal
reasonings, and stay thereupon: he that walks in darkness, and has no
light, let him trust in the name of the Lord; that is, though a sinner be
never so perplexed with sorrow of heart, though there be nothing but misery
without, and horror of heart within, yet if he will hear the voice of Gods
servants; you broken hearts, that have not stopped your ears to the comfort
that God has revealed, let them trust in the Lord: but now mark what is said
in the last verse, Behold all that kindle a fire, and are compassed about with
sparks, walk you in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled: this shall you have at my hands, you shall lie down in sorrow; I will
first open the place, and then apply it; what is meant by fire and sparks
here, in a word, in the old law there was always fire kept in the sanctuary,
heavenly fire that came down from heaven, and this did show the wisdom and
direction of God in his word; but now there was strange fire which Nadab and
Abihu offered, that is, they did not take of the fire of sanctuary which God
sent from heaven, but they took fire of their own, that is, their own
devices, and imaginations, and disputes; the sparkles and pleas of your own
thoughts, they are your own fire; every poor creature carries his tinder box
about him, and is anvilling and forging his own conceits: I think it not, I
conceive it not, I am not persuaded of it; this is your own fire, that is the
first thing: then mark what follows, walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that you have kindled, you shall lie down in sorrow: walk in the
light of your fire. He does not allow this, but he takes it as a thing
forlorn, as who should say, You will follow your own conceits and
imaginations; you have hammered out sparks, and you will strike fire out of
your own carnal reasonings, and you will be taken aside by them; there is no
reproving of you, there is no removing of you from it: so that two things are
clear: First, the heart will coin carnal reasons, and forge sinful
conceits, and then it will persist in them; and mark what follows, this is
that which you shall have at my hands, you shall lie down in sorrow; this will
bring sorrow to thy soul, when the fire of the sanctuary burns clear, when
comforts are plain, and Scriptures are pregnant, and reasons undeniable, you
will kindle your own fire, and compass your selves about with your own
sparks, and you will attend to them, and be ruled by them; well, do so: but
this I tell you, there is no hand shall succor you, and bring comfort unto
you, you shall have this at the hand of the Lord; you shall lie down in
sorrow, and then you shall repent you happily, and fling away your tinder box,
and your carnal reasonings and imaginations: this is the second cure.

conscience; for if I know not the things of this nature, and if no man else
knows them, how shall any man administer comfort, or how shall I be able to
receive comfort? therefore take heed of it. It is in this case with a sinner,
as it is with a traveller; thieves overtake him, and pretend to lead him a
fair way, at last they carry him into a wilderness, and lead him into a
desert where no man comes by, where no man's voice can be heard, and there they
do what they list, because there is no help to be expected, no passenger
comes near: So it is with the soul, when Satan gets him into these straits,
and wilders him in the deserts of Gods secret counsels of election and the
like, there is no passenger comes by this way, no man can apprehend these
secret things of Gods counsel, and therefore no man can administer succor or
comfort: therefore for your caution and direction in this case, I will suggest
these three rules.

Ephesians. 3.20. the text says, that God is able to do exceeding abundantly,
above all that we can ask or think: Genesis 17.1. I am God All-sufficient:
attend to Gods sufficiency, and rest upon the Almightinesse of his power, and
support thy heart thereby.





hearts therefore, and when Satan would lead you out into a wilderness, and
suggest these things unto you, How do you know God has elected you? do you
pray? and what if you do pray? do you hear? and what if you do hear? When
it is thus with thee, check thine own heart for prying into Gods secrets, and
meddle with that thou have to do withal: Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong to
God, revealed things belong to us, and our children: What have you to do with
Gods secrets? what has that proud heart and curious mind of yours with Gods
secrets? Election belongs to God, it is his prerogative: 1 Corin. 2.16. Who
has known the mind of the Lord? You that will be aloft in the sky, and
mounting up to heaven, who ever knew the mind of the Lord? Satan and your
thoughts tell you so, that you were never elected; why, Satan is a liar, he
knows it not, nor thou know it not neither: who ever knew the mind of the
Lord? mind you your own matters, do you what God commands, perform those
duties God injoynes you, keep your own station; all the Angels in Heaven, and
all the men upon Earth, never knew the mind of the Lord: therefore never pry
into Gods secrets. Jonah 3.9. When God had threatened Ninivie to destroy it, and
had sent Jonah to speak fire and powder: Oh, all you drunkards of Ninivie, and
all you blasphemers of Ninivie, and all you profane wretches of Ninivie,
vengeance shall come upon you, and fire from Heaven shall destroy you; they
were now at a maze, and driven to a stand: now mark what the King says, He
caused a fast to be proclaimed both for man and beast, and commanded all to
cry mightily unto the Lord, and to turn from their evil ways; for who can
tell, says he, whether the Lord will turn away his fierce wrath from us that
we perish not? who can tell but that the Lord may yet show mercy and favor in
the pardoning of us? so say thou when Satan tempts thee, and temptation
suggests unto thee; You seek to God for pardon in the use of the means that
God has appointed, and you enjoy the precious means of grace and salvation:
But it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy: but God will never show any favor to you, God will never
vouchsafe any mercy to you, God will never bestow any grace upon you, if you
pray till your tongue falters, and your eyes sink in your heads, and your
heart fails, it will do you no good, God will never give you grace: why, how
can Satan tell this? all the devils in hell know not this, all the Angels in
Heaven know it not; therefore walk thou in thy own ways, follow thine own
talk, do that thou oughtst to do, and perform what God requires, and let God
do what he please, and say, let me do what I should, who can tell what God
may do? who knows but God may break my hard heart? who knows but God may
pardon my sins? who knows but God may give me power over my corruptions?
nay, who knows but God will too? Satan himself cannot tell: that is the
second rule.

Esaias 55.7. Mark there the exhortation of the Prophet, Let the wicked forsake
his ways, and the unrighteous man his own thoughts, and return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon: As if he had said, all you unrighteous, you that have couzened and
detained, and dealt falsely and unjustly; you that have lived wickedly and
profanely, let them all forsake their wicked ways, and turn from their vain
imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and return not to themselves, and
their own conceits, but let them come unto the Lord, and he will abundantly
pardon; but the soul replies;







but mark what the Prophet ads; My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are
your ways my ways, says the Lord: as if he had said, a poor sinner thinks
his sin unpardonable, and conceives that it is impossible to get his sins
subdued, and his soul comforted: indeed it is true, you are sinful men, you
have foolish thoughts; But as the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are my
ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts higher than your thoughts:
therefore I can give you mercy, though you cannot conceive it; I can do you
good, though you cannot think it; but the poor soul will still be ready to
object and say,



Matthew 9.33. when Christ had there done a miracle, the text says, the like
was never seen in Israel; all the people stood gazing, and were taken up in
admiration, at the power of the Lord, and said, Never was any such thing done
in Israel: therefore God can do things that were never done before. Imagine
the Lord did pardon never any as bad as thee, which is false; yet God can do
that which was never yet done; nay, the place is incomparable, Job 9.10. He
does great things past finding out, yea mavelous things without number; the
Lord does great things which are unsearchable, and works wonders without
number: though you could never find out such things, yet God can do them;
though the thing be never so great, he can do it; though the thing be never
so hard, he can accomplish it; nay though thou can not number and account
them, God can do great things without number, and work wonders beyond measure;
and therefore judge not God, by what thou conceivest and imaginest; judge not
his infiniteness according to the weak scantling of thy imaginations.

appeal to the Word: if a man have a suit in law, and some petty lawyers
would handle it, if he be wise, he will not let them, he will stay till the
Judge comes to the assizes, then he will determine it: so deal with thy soul,
do not put thy estate to be tried, and thy condition to be scanned with a
company of wrangling lawyers; as imaginations of heart, and vanities of mind,
and carnal reasonings, but stay till the Judge comes, and yield to the verdict
of the truth; Ephesians. 5.13. the text says, All things when they are reproved of
the light, shall be made manifest, for it is light that makes all things
manifest; the light is the light of the word, and the evidence of the truth:
now observe it, all sense, and feelings, and carnal reasonings, are like
clouds and mists, that a man cannot see his way; but bring all to the light,
and then the case will be discovered and thy estate made manifest what it is;
Matthew. 11.29. apply the counsel which Christ there gives, and we should
follow, Learn of me, says he, for I am humble and meek, and you shall
finderest unto your souls; as the Psalmist observes it, I will hear what the
Lord says to my soul; so take Gods counsel, and say, I will hear what the
Lord Jesus Christ will say, and to him I will attend, not what carnal reason,
or doubts, or fears, or suspicions will say, but what the Lord will say; this
is the cause we want rest, the cause why men have restless conditions, and
daily doubtings and quarrellings, and can find no so^ring for their souls to
rest upon, no bottom to bear, no foundation to hold them up; the ca^^e is,
because they will not learn of their Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
hence it is that distressed souls cast off comfort; what, I grace? and what I
ever receive good, and I title to the promise? that were strange, no, it
belongs to humble and broken hearted ones, were I so humbled as such, and so
enlarged as such Christians, then there were some hope, but I that am so full
of weaknesses, and of frailties, and now and then overcome by distempers; what,
I faith? no, I can never think it, I suspect I never had it, I doubt I never
shall have it; nay, I conclude all is naught for the while; who told you so?
where learned you that, where learned you all these kinds of resolutions and
conclusions? why? I fear it, I suspect it, and imagine it, and the like; why?
then fear told you so, and not the Lord Jesus Christ; this is the case, and I
exhort you, that are servants of the Lord, observe and take notice of this, I
say, learn of the Lord, and take notice of the truth of the Lord, and then you
shall find rest to your souls; you complain you have not quiet and comfort,
and you shall never be assured of Gods love, but you shall go with grief and
sorrow to your graves: why? it is your own fault, learn of your father, and
then you shall have rest; you put your estates to be determined by carnal
reason, and your doubts and infirmities tell you so, you shall never come to
rest while the world stands; why? here is no rest to be had, no ease to be
expected, learn of the Lord Jesus, his word is sure, himself faithful, and
his promise true, and when you repair thither, you shall find rest; if you
rest upon a right bottom, you shall have comfort and consolation vouchsafed
unto you. But you will say;



therefore now judge thy self by that which shall judge thee, when this life
shall not be.

Now for our direction herein four things are observable; how to order our
selves aright, to learn this skill to repair to the word, and to gain
evidence and clear apprehension of our own estates, by attending to the
truth: these rules are especially observable; and here lies the maine cure of
carnal reason, that does press in upon the mind, and dampes the heart
thereof, that we may so use the word, that we may be established thereby:

against them accordingly, but he takes them at the best hand; Romans 4.22. it is
a thing very remarkable concerning Abraham; Abraham believed, and it was
counted to him for righteousness; when did God speak concerning Abraham's
faith; the time was when Abraham believed not; his faith is discovered, Genes.
15. in the beginning we shall see he believed not, but was doubting and
staggering concerning Gods giving him a Son, now God looks not at his
infirmities, but God takes him at the best, Abraham believed, etc. a little
before Abraham doubted, thou have promised a Son, but I perceive it not, then
God led him into the fields, and discovered his power and goodness, and then
Abraham believed; and this is still recorded and registered of Abraham to all
posterity: so 1 Pet. 3.6. where Sarah is spoken of, as a pattern to all holy
women, not for her broidered hair; but the text says, She was clad with a
meek spirit, and called her husband Lord, Genes. 18. there we shall read, that
she called him Lord, and it was her duty, and she did well in so doing: but
there we shall read in the same place, that she denied the tidings of the
Angel, now the Lord buries her failings, and does not record and register
that, but he took her at the best, and recorded that; so we must deal with
our selves, we must not lie at the catch with our hearts, and say, this is
naught, and this is vile, but observe what so ever is upright and sincere, and
bless God for that, and rejoice in that, and weigh that as well as the other;
nay, that rather than the other: if a man should have a case handled after this
fashion, and if the Judge should observe only what is foul on one man's side,
and go no further, the most upright man might be cast in the best case,
therefore the course of the court is, he will hear the reasons and witnesses
on both sides, if there be any bonds or evidences brought in, or any argument
to be made, he will hear all read, there must be an equal proceeding: should
a man have a suit with another about the forfeiture of a bond or indenture, if
the Judge hear one and not the other, he might carry the cause against the
most upright man; therefore the other cries out, and says, good my Lord, hear
all, and let all be read; one says, you may see the falsnesse of this man;
aye, says the other, but hear all my Lord; and then the Judge is sufficiently
satisfied before witnesses; whereas if the Judge had but heard the first part,
and not the second, the case would have gone against the man, though never so
good: so many Saints deal with their souls, what a wretched heart, what pride
and stubbornness have I? my heart will not leave the world, it is unfit for
service, and dead in service; but hear all, read all; is not thy soul
burdened with these, and is not thy heart troubled with those, is it not a
grief to thy soul, and does it not lie heavy upon thy heart, that thou can
not walk exactly before God? Oh, says the soul, it is the greatest evil
that ever befell me, and I would be content almost not to be, that I might not
be so sinful; why? then thou art an upright hearted man, now take thy soul on
this side, and hear the best of it: look as it is with a man's hand, the back
of his hand cannot take hold of a staff, but his palm can; if a man complain
that he cannot hold a staff, and turn the back of his hand; no wonder,
turn the right side of your hand, and then you will graspe it, and hold it
easily; so turn the right side of your soul to the promise, the promises of
God are the staff that upholds our souls, and our souls should rest
thereupon, and trust thereunto: now we turn the backside of our hearts to the
promise, stubbornness great, and doubtings many, and corruptions fierce, the
wrong side of the heart is to the promise, and this will hinder thee from
coming to, and receiving good from the word; but thy soul sees these, and is
willing to be freed from these; thy soul hates these, and thy self for
these; this is the right side of the heart that lies level to the promise:
therefore attend the word, and repair daily thereto, and attend the better
side, do not attend to weakness and feebleness, but to soundness and
sincerity; that is the first rule.

any want of the assurance of Gods love, and settling thereof to thy soul, so
that the evidence of the work of grace does not come powerfully in upon thy
heart, but there is some guilt of sin still remaining, and conscience still
begins to accuse thee, and condemn thee: the truth is, though reason be
informed, yet happily conscience will breed new broils at every turn, and put
in new pleas, and so nip, disquiet and torment our hearts in staggering our
hearts: therefore as we must have our judgments informed out of the Word, that
there is some good and soundness in our souls; so we must get conscience
persuaded of it, that conscience may be on our side and speak for us. A man
must deal in this case as a debtor, if he be engaged to many creditors, the
only way to get safety is to agree not with some, but with all; for if he
agree with all but one, that one may imprison him and undo him, as well as ten
thousand: therefore take order with all creditors, that is the wisest way: so
it is with the soul that lies at the mercy of the Lord, that is in so deep
arrerages, that it cannot help it self; the only way is to take order with
all occasions, not only answer judgment, that it may not object against us,
but labor to still conscience that it may not accuse us, but be on our side,
and then all will be on our side. The want of this is the cause why new suits
are made and new bills put up against the soul, the want of satisfying
conscience, as experience teaches us in cases of conscience: take a poor
sinner that has all objections and cavils answered fully; ask a poor
distressed soul, are these all the doubts you have, and objections that you
have? yes: and are they all answered? aye; have you any thing to object against
the answers? no, therefore now does conscience say it is a sin to deny you
have any grace: here he stounds, and staggers, and demurs upon the matter, and
shakes his head, and says, Alas, I dare not say so; nay, I rather say the
contrary, mark how reasons were answered, the books drawn, the accounts made
up, and yet conscience is not satisfied, but puts in a new plea; therefore call
a court and trace the business again; has not God wrought this in you, that
though you are now and then captived by sin, yet you say you are willing to be
deterred from it, willing that God should take possession of you, and rule you,
is not this in your heart? the soul says, I should deny the work of Gods
grace to say the contrary; why then this is the work of grace, then it is
against conscience to deny this, therefore conscience give up your bill, and
cancel all this, for I say, has not this man grace? yea I affirm he has,
let conscience be fully satisfied in this case; and when conscience is brought
on our side and speaks for us, all the cavils that Satan casts and the heart
makes, conscience will clear the heart, and stands by a man, and clears all
these cavils: 1 John 3.12. For if our conscience condemn us not, then have we
boldness before God; the meaning is, if our conscience acquit us, and speak
for us, then we are bold before God. I know the man, he is yet alive, that in
the extremity of horror of heart and desperate fear, said that he had sinned
against the holy Ghost, and therefore would make away himself; now that which
kept him from that wicked attempt was this, his conscience told him before,
that at such a time his heart was sincere before the Lord, and that restrained
him from that attempt, and sustained him against the fiery push of temptation,
and God afterward blessed him with the assurance of his love and favor.

a stoutnesse not fully conquered, it gaine-sayes it, and raises up new, and
keeps the old quarrels, those old quarrels that have been answered long ago,
that a man would have thought they had been dead long ago, a man's stout heart
will bring those in afresh again: it is in this case with a poor sinner, as
it is with a man that has a contentious adversary that delights in wrangling,
the case happily has been tried in all the courts in England, at last it comes
into the Chancery, and there it is concluded against him, and the decree
passed, so that now all the business is established; the Lawyers have pleaded
it, the Judge determined it, and the man is overthrown, and therefore now in
reason he should sit down, and yield, but the wrangling party persuades him
that he will not yield, but he will go to law again, and sell all he has
before he will let let it go thus: therefore he begins the suit again, and
puts in the old plea, till at last the Judge knowing the man, casts off his
plea, and flings off his cause, and puts him in prison: How dare you against
the court and the sentence set down, put in the old plea, and trouble the
court, and the law in this nature? so it is with the soul, the heart of a
gracious man humbled in some mea^ure and in truth, could be content now and
then to yield to the evidence of reason, and verdict of conscience, and the
soul comes to be cheered; Blessed be God, my estate is better than I thought;
but there is an old breed-bate, and proud stout heart, a sturdy selfe-wild
heart, and that begins to bring in the old plea, and will maintain the old
quarrel, though reason confuted them, and conscience condemned the weakness
thereof, and they have been answered from day to day, yet against knowledge,
and conscience, and truth, and reason and all, the sinner you shall find out
of his distemper of spirit, will keep his old objections, and maintain his old
cavils; and if they were answered over night, he will have them again in the
morning, whereas a man would have thought they would never have durst appeared
before the evidence of the truth any more, because the case was so fully
answered, and so fully satisfied; therefore the wound is here, labor therefore
to cure it, namely get thy heart so far awed, get thy soul so far overpowerd
with the sovereign command, royal authority of the truth, that it may submit
it self, and yield to what ever word the Lord reveals, to what ever truth the
Lord discovers to the soul, and beware especially that thou do not out of a
selfewild waywardness reject and refuse the evidence of the truth and the
verdict that the Word passes upon thy soul for thy everlasting good; that
because thou have not comfort as thou will, therefore thou will have none at
all; and it is not so much, because thou can not receive the promise, but
because out of a waywardness of heart thou will not entertain the promise,
that causes all this debate, here lies the root of this bitterness, and the
ground of this wretched estate: we will express our selves by practice: hence
it is (...) when the Word has been clearly discovered to the soul, all
objections are blown away, and reason is satisfied, and conscience convinced:
yet ask the soul, are you persuaded that God has accepted of you in Christ,
and intended good unto you? no, all the world cannot make me believe it, I
cannot be persuaded of it, Ministers are merciful, and Christians are
compassionate, and they speak charitably, and will not discourage me; but did
they see that which I see, did they but know those weaknesses, and take notice
of those distempers that are in my heart, they would never think it: what, I
grace? it is a thing I could never persuade my heart of, nay I doubt I shall
never be persuaded of it, I cannot think it, all the world cannot make me
believe it; reason is answered, and the conscience is satisfied, but the heart
will not yield: it is out of stubbornnes of soul, that you will not take that
mercy that God offers, and that grace God propounds for your good, and it is
horrible, it is hellish, it is devilish pride: If there be any such spirit in
the congregation, let them know it, and take this home with them, it is
infinite pride. But you will say,



of Heaven, and that I will show in two particulars.



miserable fool? this is your case, you have no grace, because you have not so
much grace; you have no zeal, because you have not so hor zeal: you have no
humiliation, because not so great humiliation: this is nothing but pride, and a
world of pride: therefore mark what I shall say; labor to bring thy soul to
this pass, and to this humble submission and subjection to the truth of God,
take it as well a duty to receive comfort when God gives it, as to entertain
duty of love when God requires it: Answerably know, it is a sin to refuse
mercy when God offers it, and thou have title thereunto: It is as well a sin,
though not so much a sin; persuade thy heart of this, and bring thy soul to
yield to this. And therefore learn this lesson, you poor Saints of God, that
have been pestered marvellously in this kind, and have been enemies to your
own comfort, labor to eye your own souls, when they begin to slide away
from the authority of the truth, when reasons are sound, arguments clear, and
conscience satisfied, and yet the heart slides off from the Lord, and from
under the covert of Gods wings. Reason thus, This is the proud, surly, dogged,
way-ward disposition of my heart; what would I have? what can I desire? is not
the Word clear? are not reasons sound? and is not conscience satisfied? and
shall I deny this, and so wrong the glory of God, and the work of his blessed
Spirit in my heart? the Lord forbid: but the heart pleads;

Must I eat my own words, and never cavil more, and never complain more, and
must I confess I have grace, when I never thought I had grace?

Esaias 7.13. when the Lord offered a great offer to Ahaz, to ask a sign in
heaven or in earth, the text says, he cast off Gods kindness, God bids him
ask a sign, he says, I will not tempt God; he refused Gods kindness with
mavelous stubbornness; now mark what God answers, Is it a small thing for
thee, not only to grieve man, but the good Spirit of the Lord; so think you
with your selves, when the Lord bids you take comfort, comfort ye, comfort
ye, says my God, You that have been wearied, come and be refreshed; you
that have been lost, shall be found, the soul faith, I dare not take it, I
will not entertain it: do you think it a small thing, not only to grieve
man, and the heart of a poor Minister, but to grieve the Lord and his Spirit?
Job 15.11. Seems the consolation of the Lord a small thing unto you? that God
stoopes to your meannesse, and condescends to your weakness, and supports your
hearts, and restores comfort to your souls, that you trample his kindness
under your feet, and make nothing of it? take heed of it, lest that stubborn
soul of thine, that now refuses consolation when God offers it, thou shall
creep upon thy hands and knees, and eat thy flesh, and beg one offer of grace,
which thou have denied often: John 13.8. see how Christ does school the humble
pride of Peter, for so I term it, our Savior Christ rose from supper, and
bound himself with a towell, and went to wash his Disciples feet, but when he
came to Peter, he was very squamish, he was loath Christ should stoop so low;
what, wash my feet? thou shall never wash my feet: a man would think this was
great humility; Peter was a very lowly man, he would not let Christ yield to
him, but he would stoop to him rather; this was noth^ng but a kind of
refractarinesse, and therefore see how Christ took him up, and this is the
only way to cure it, If I wash not thy feet, thou have no part in me; if you
will go on in your own humor, get you down to hell, and enjoy your own
will; if I wash you not, you shall never see my face with comfort; and then his
stomach came down, and he said, Not only my feet, but my body also Lord, when
Christ had subdued his pride, and brought down his haughty heart. That is
humility of heart, to take what God gives, and receive what God offers, and
do what God commands; do so with thy humble pride, when men are complaining,
and think it a great skill to answer arguments, and put by the reasons that
Ministers propound, and then they think that they are humble, and bewailing
their estates, and happily they may be so; but here is the wound, you have proud
hearts, therefore labor to dismay that proud heart of thine, with the
authority and command of God, and with the threatenings of the Lord, and severe
judgments of God, and tell thy proud heart, lay aside your gainsaying humor,
and take the mercy God offers, and bless God that you may take mercy, and
that you may take grace upon these terms, upon good grounds, and reasons, and
evidences out of the word; bless God, I say, and take it, lest God take away
his Spirit from you, and his comforts from you, and strip you naked of all that
favor he now vouchsafes, and make you run down in anguish of soul to your
grave, though he save your souls, he may make you live in hell here, though
he bring you to heaven afterward: I would have every one touch his soul to
the quick, and deal as Job did, Once have I spoken, but I will say no more,
yea twice, but I will proceed no farther; so all you broken hearted Christians,
that have mourned under the burden of your sins, and cried mightily for
mercy, and yet receive no comfort to your souls, the fault is your own; now
see the ground of it, and say, I am vile, when the word revealed, and the
Minister discovered comfort, I would not receive it, I have gainsayed it, I
will gainsay it no more, once have I spoken, and now I speak it to my shame
and sorrow, I might have had much comfort, and bound up my heart in the
assurance of Gods mercy, had I had an humble heart, to receive that which God
offered, I thought it humility of heart to refuse it, but it was pride and
doggednesse of spirit; for why did I not rather receive reasons that could not
be answered, than more questions that have been removed, and assoiled from day
to day; I have been enlarged in this, because it is the maine ground whereupon
many humble sinners have been hindered from a great deal of comfort God would
have given, and they might have received at his hands.



How the soul being tempted, may answer Satan's accusations.
Satan, when a man has got a little advantage, he will begin to play the
lawyer:

Satan. What, do thou not yet see what wants thou have, and how many
failings, how unfit for service, and how weak in service?


Poor soul. Answer. It is true, but it is written, Prove. 28.13. He that
confesses, and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy; though I be weak,
and feeble, and unfit, yet I confess and forsake my sins, therefore I shall
find mercy.


Satan. Aye, says Satan, that you do indeed, do thou not apprehend, and
does not thy conscience witness, that thy heart is averse, and untoward to
duty, unwilling to come thereunto, weary therein, and desirous to be free
therefrom?


Keep still to the point, and answer; Poor soul I have may sins and many
failings, it is true, but yet it is as true, he that confesses, and etc. but
I confess, and forsake, therefore I shall find mercy.


Satan. Aye, but says Satan, are you tampering with Gods privy counsel? do
you know to whom mercy belongs? secret things belong to God, he must give his
mercy to whom he please, and his goodness to whom he sees fit.


Keep still to the point, and say, Poor soul. I know not what Gods secret
will is, but I know what the word says, and what the Lord says, and what
conscience says: I know, I confess, and forsake, therefore I, etc.


But Satan replies; Satan. Many cousen themselves, mercy is a rare gift, few
have it, and many dream of it, that shall never share therein, nor partake
thereof, and why may not you be one of those?


Keep still to the point, and answer; Poor soul. It is true, I may cousen my
self, and my heart may be deceived; but the Lord will not cousen me, and the
Word cannot deceive me, and the Lord and the Word say, He that confesses,
etc. but I confess, etc.


Satan. How do you know that you do apply the Word aright? may you not be
deceived in that? the Word is true and certain: but how do you know that you
do fitly apply this Word?


Answer. Poor soul. I know it not but by the Word, and I repair thither,
that I may know it, and the Lord knows all, and the Word informs me, that
whosoever conf^sseth and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy; and my
conscience knows, that I do confess and forsake, therefore I, etc. and
Satan, if you will show me any other text contrary to this, I will yield but
otherwise I will never yield while the world stands.


Thus you see, how you may hold Satan to the Word, and keep him there; but if
he lead you into wildernesses, and bypath, and take you to fears and
suspicions, you are gone; Psalm. 119.98. By thy commandments thou have made me
wiser that mine enemies; but what is the reason of it? they are ever with me;
so Satan is wise, and carnal reason, and the world, and temptations are
subtle; but blessed be our God, that makes every poor ignorant creature, that
believes in him, and rests upon him, wiser than all his enemies, wiser than the
cunning serpent, wiser than the subtle pleas of carnal reason, wiser than the
cunning of all temptations: let the Word be continually with you, from day to
day, and that will make you discover all the sleights and stratagems, and all
the cunning tricks of Satan, and not only show you what is amiss, but thereby
you shall get ground to your souls, to answer all Satan's pleas: Satan deals
with the soul of a proud sinner in this case, as enemies in the war; as
Iosuah 8. you know when Iosuah went to defeat the men of Ai, he towled them
out of the City, his army fled before them as formerly, and they all fallied
out of the City upon them, and when he had them out of the City, the men in
ambush circumvented them, and then they that fled, turned back upon them
before, and the rest burnt the City; had the men of Ai kept within the City,
it is true, God could have overthrown it, but yet they might have put it to
the venture, they might have tried it out; but when they had left the City,
there was no hope: so Satan deals with the soul, our castle or trenches are
the promises of God, Gods Word and ordinances, especially the promises, are the
trenches, whereby the souls of Gods servants are fortified; now if Satan can
but get you out of your trenches, and towle you out of your castle, he has
what he would have; if you will listen to every carnal reason, and to every
temptation, and talk and parley with it, then Satan has you in ambush, and
will surprise you; if he can make you lose ground in the promise, he damps your
spirits, and will entangle you in temptations, and hinder the comfort of your
souls; the advice I give you in this case, is that of John, 1 John 2.28.
Little children, if ye abide in Gods commandments, ye abide in God; if we
abide in Gods counsels, and ordinances, and promises, we abide in him: he
speaks to the weak, as if he had said, you are weak and feeble, I know the
blindness of your minds, how unable you are to foresee temptations, and weak
and unable to bear temptations, and I know, that Satan goes about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; and you are little lambs, weak,
and feeble, and unable to withstand him: but little children abide in God, keep
home, keep home, and then you are sure to be safe. Whenever dangers are
abroad, or any danger in the streets, we keep the door shut, to keep little
ones within, that they may catch no harm abroad; and if they get out, and get
a knock, and come crying, we say, why did you not keep within then, who bade
you go out then? so you that are little ones in the Lord Jesus Christ, when
Satan and all the armies of hell are combining against you, keep within your
trenches, dwell in God, and abide in him; you will go out now and then, and
tamper with carnal reasons, and Satan's cavil, and come home with a broken
heart, and troubled spirit, and comfort is gone, and assurance is gone, and all
is gone; keep home then I charge you, what have you to do abroad? therefore
entrench your selves in the promises of God, and keep your selves within the
Castle of Gods Ordinances and Commandments, and then be safe and sure. The
issue then is this, judge thy soul by the Word, and look upon the sincere
part, and do not take thy soul on the worst hand, and what thou so judge to
be in, labor to convince thy conscience thereof, and to have conscience speak
for thee: what reason is informed, and conscience convinced of, labor to make
thy heart subject, and submit and yield thereunto without any gainsaying; what
reason allows, and conscience witnesses, let thy soul entertain, and not a
word more; and what thy heart submits unto, hold to that and maintain it for
ever, and never let it go: this is the means whereby a soul distressed may
repair to God in the use of Gods ordinances, and may receive joy and
established comfort to thy dying day, and may go singing to thy grave; let
Satan tempt, let the world allure, let corruption stir, and the heart
quarrel, keep within doors, keep within your trenches, and remain safe
from danger. Look as it is with a man that has his house well prepared, and
his foundations firmly built, when the winds blow, and the storms beat upon
his house, he sleeps most quietly, because he is in a house where he is safe,
and free from danger; the winds blow not in him, the water pierces not
through; you that have title to Christ and grace, and to the promises, they are
they that will keep you, and defend you against wind and weather; though the
winds roar from East to West, though the storms beat, though Satan be never
so subtle, and corruptions never so violent; nay though hell gates were open,
and all the devils in hell rored upon thy soul, and all the fierceness of
temptations assault you from day to day, lie close and bring your hearts to
fasten to the promises of the Lord Jesus Christ, keep within doors, keep
within your castles: sit still and repose your souls upon the promises of God,
and upon the riches of Gods free grace, and you shall see that the storm will
over, and Satan will be defeated: and you shall have comfort, and you may go
singing to your graves, though you have many weaknesses and failings, and
distempers: yet stay here, and nothing can do you harm.

Now we come to the means, that here may usefully be considered for the
bringing on of the heart to believe: but you will say, what be the means that
a man may use through Gods blessing and grace, to attain this grace of faith,
and the use thereof; for this is certain we must use the means, but there is
no means under Heaven, alone will do it; yet you must wait upon God in the use
of the means: for it is not the means alone, that will work faith, but the
Spirit of God in the use of the means; and therefore the text says, to you it
is given to believe; for faith is the free gift of God, it is God that must do
it, and yet he will not do it without us, because we are reasonable men and
women, the Lord affords us means, and therefore we are to wait upon him in the
use of those means, let the Lord do what he will, and let us do what we
should, use the means which God has appointed: and those are these four.

Mark 5.26.27. when the poor woman in the Gospel had spent all her goods
upon the Physicians, and if she had had but a little means left, yea, but one
farthing token, for any thing I know, she would never have gone to Christ; but
when all these failed, then she was forced to seek to Christ, that was ready
and willing to do any thing for her distressed nature: so our souls must have
something to support themselves upon, for they cannot live without some
support. Now therefore when all our carnal hopes are taken away, we must
needs stay upon the promise, because we have nothing else; yet I say, it is not
requisite that a man should cast away those outward comforts that God affords
him, but take them when God gives them, but only this, that though you have
all, yet labor to get your hearts to see the vanity, and acknowledge the
emptiness of all these, and let not the heart seek too much content in them,
for these are all but lying vanities, and broken staves which will not only
cozen a man, but pierce him too. Now when the soul sees these things cannot
succor him but lay him in the dust, then he will be content to have his heart
severed from them. It is with the soul as it was with Noah's Dove; When the
Arc began to rest upon the mountain Arraret, Noah sent out the Dove, but the
Dove found no rest for the sole of her foot: no question there were many dead
darkasses, but the Dove found no rest till she came to the Arc again: So
when a man finds no rest in any thing the creature affords, and can get no
footing for the soul to to stay it self upon them, then it betakes it self
to Christ, and goes home to the promise, and rests there, and expects from
thence what is needful: as in the Art of swimming, he that will swim, must
pluck his feet from the bottom, and commit himself to the stream to bear
him up, so we must pluck our hearts from these things here below, and them
from us; and though we have honor and preferments, yet we must not put any
confidence in them, but learn by our believing to commit our selves wholly to
the power of the promise, and receive comfort from thence only: as Rabshakeh
said sinfully; Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad, etc. Rely not upon
them, for the gods cannot help you: so should we reason, when we find our
hearts hankering after honor, riches, pleasure, etc. why say, let not the gods
of this world, honor, and profit, and pleasure deceive thee; did the pride of
Pharaohs heart deliver him? did the riches of Dives save him? did Herod's
applause that he had deliver him? did these gods secure them? nay, have they
not left them in the lurch? therefore let us take our hearts off from these
things, and have a base esteem of them, and see a vanity, and emptiness, and
insufficiency in them, that we may be forced to seek to Christ, and say as
David said, Help Lord, for vain is the help of man, vain is the help of
all other things.

make that account of the promise, as the word says it is worth; I say, leave
not thy heart till thou see the promise of grace most beautiful in thy eye,
and that thy heart may gain some earnest touching of the goodness of God, and
the riches of his grace toward thee; and bring thy heart to know and see that
the promise is better than all the riches and honors that thou can have, or
the world can bestow. David says Psalm 9.10. They that know thee will trust
in thee, for thou Lord, have never failed them that seek thee: this kind of
knowledge ever breeds confidence and resolution, and persuades the heart. We
dare trust a friend whose faithfulness we have tried; and rest upon that
which we know by experience; the promises are of a tried truth, seek from one
end of the Heavens to the other, turn all the Bible over, and see if ever any
man leaned on the promise, and the Lord did not perform that which he had
promised for the good of his soul: Psalm. 119.92. Except the Lord had been my
delight, I should have perished in my troubles: Psalm 73.26. David says, my
flesh fails me, and my heart also; but thou art the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever: again, I had perished in my affliction, but that thy Word
vpheld me; the promises are worth trusting to, and leaning upon: though David
in the midst of his affliction was ready to sink, yet then the promise upheld
him: Esaias 26.4. Trust in God, for in Jehovah is everlasting strength: now there
is not strength in these things below, or not everlasting strength, but in
Christ: in the promises is everlasting strength, here lies a great weight, and
it is a work of mavelous difficulty, and great necessity; and therefore that
thy heart may sit down satisfied in the sufficiency of the promise, I will
propound three rules how you may improve the promise for your uttermost benefit.

of this life and a better; we know he that offers most for the bargain
carries it away; therefore we should observe the goings out of our hearts, and
what offers it self to give us most content, and present our souls with a
greater good in God, in Christ, in the promise, than in all things else: look
as it is in marrying, if parts give content, then the wisest prevail; if they
would have riches, then the wealthy obtain: why now woo thy soul, and look
what will please it best, and make it appear to thy soul, there is a greater
good in the promise: honors and riches have spokes-masters, and seek
commendations: had I but such honor, oh, it were admirable; had I but so much
wealth, oh, it were excellent; all this while the promise is shut out, and it
cannot come to the speech of the soul; labor therefore to have access to the
promise with thy soul, and speak a good word for it, and say, stand by world,
stand by riches, profits, and pleasures, and preferments, room for the Lord
Jesus Christ, and put a wonderful price upon the promise, whatsoever the soul
does account as best, that it will choose, and leave all others for it: do as
Dalilah did, she besieged the heart of Sampson, and would not leave him, till
he powered out his heart to her; so let the promise have ingresse and regresse,
let the promises besiege thy heart, that thy heart may give up it self to it,
Hosea 2.7. I will return to my first husband, for then it was better with me
than now: so when the heart comes to see and know that there is better riches,
ease, pleasures, profits, preferments in Christ in the promise, than in all the
world, then it will return thither: I would have the soul outbid the world,
and labor to out-shoot the Devil in his own bow, and those things which the
Devil casts in thy way, for hindering thy soul from coming to the promise,
let those things be as means to usher in the promise, as thus, when thou
see thy heart look after friends, let those friends usher the way to think
on the infinite love and favor of God in Christ; and when thy heart would
feign hunt after wealth, let this usher a way to the promise, and say, if the
heart find such content in riches, what would it find in the riches of Gods
grace in Christ; thus present a greater good in the promise, than in any thing
else.

Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for; it gives a kind of
being and substance to all; there is no substance in honor and riches, if they
be not in faith, they are clogs and snares to a man, except faith give a
blessing therewith, all our prayers have no substance in them, but are poor
and empty words without faith in the promise, to have what we pray for: the
most broken and mean prayer, if it be mingled with faith, it is a very
powerful prayer; and the substance of all your hearing and my preaching, lies
chiefly in faith, otherwise they are but lost labor; for faith is it that
gives a kind of being, to whatsoever we speak or do.

David says, Thy Word is sure in heaven: and Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive comfort and mercy in time
of need; not when I see it sit, but when God sees it fit; this is it which
carries away many poor sinful hearts from resting upon the promise of God,
sometimes the heart is a little affected with the excellency of the riches of
Gods grace, and sees what great things the Lord has done for his soul; and
says, Oh that I were such a one, and let me dye the death of the righteous,
but when it comes to pass, that he has not present ease and comfort, then
he casts away the good promise of the Lord, and the Devil prevails
wonderfully with those poor creatures, therefore says the Prophet, Heb. 3.17.
When the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall the fruit be on the vines,
when the labor of the olive shall fail, and yield no fruit, then will I
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation: let the promise so
surpri^e thy heart, that it may be possessed with the all-sufficiencie of it:
and therefore persuade thy heart, the good of the promise will come, when it is
most seasonable; let riches satisfy when death comes, then call for your
cordial: I tell you, the promise will help when all fail.





Psalm. 119.49. O Lord, remember thy word to thy servant, wherein thou have
caused me to trust: when men are enlarged in love to a man, and make fair
promises, this persuades the heart to trust to them, and to rely upon them for
good; therefore a man does use to say, I durst not have thought it, nor
expected, if you had not promised it: so the promise of God made to the soul,
makes the soul to rest upon it: to expect faith without a promise is all one,
as if a man should expect a crop without seed, for the promise is the immortal
seed of Gods word, whereby the Spirit breeds this faith in the hearts of all
that are his: John 5.25. The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live; it is
spoken of raising of a dead man from the grave of sin: First, there is the
voice of Christ to the soul, before there can be an echo again of the soul
to Christ; so the power of the promise must come to the soul, and we must
hear the voice of God in the promise, before we can return an echo again to
the Lord: the Lord says, Come to me; and the soul says, I come Lord: when
thou see much deadness and unfitness of heart, do not thou go away, and
look off from the promise, and say, Thus I am, and so it is with me; but
rather go to the promise, and say, Whatsoever frailties I find in my self,
yet I will look to the Lord, and to his promise; for if I want faith, the
promise must settle me more and more therein; I must not bring faith to the
promise, but receive faith from thence, and therefore I will wait till the Lord
please to work it.

expect all good from it, and be content to go to the promise, and take of God
whatsoever he has therein offered: Esaias 55.1, 2. B^y without money, this is
the condition, that God offers mercy upon; Buy wine and milk, that is, grace
and salvation, without money, that is, without sufficiency of your own; for
we must not look for sanctification, till we come to the Lord in vocation:
for this is all the Lord requires of thee, to see thy sins, and be weary of
them, and be content that the Lord Jesus shall reveal what is amiss, and take
it away, and that the Lord should give thee grace, then the Lord will bring
thee to himself, and thou shall receive mercy from him, and then all thy
corruptions shall fall to the ground. To sum up the point briefly thus:

First, when we have plucked away all carnal props, there is way made for the
promise to come to us.

Secondly, when our hearts are possessed thoroughly of the sufficiency of Gods
promise and grace, then the promise draws near to the soul.

Thirdly, when we expect all from the promise, even power to come to the
promise, then the promise lays hold upon us.

Fourthly, when we are content to yield to the equal conditions of the
promise, then the promise carries us quite away.

Thus we have seen the hindrances removed, and the means propounded, and now
that we may be moved and persuaded importunately to seek after this blessed
grace of God: I Will propound three motives:

get all: 2 Corin. 3.18. We all with open face behold, as in a glass, the
glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory;
I have opened the place before, to have the glorious grace of God, his
me^knesse and patience, that the soul may be transformed, and of an impatient
man, be made meek and patient, and to have the glorious grace of God imprinted
upon the soul: how will all this come? we all by faith look upon the riches
of Gods grace in Jesus Christ; Christ is the glass, and the glorious grace of
God; Christ is compared to the glory of the Lord; therefore first we must
behold grace, before we can receive it; first see humility in Christ, and then
fetch it; and there see courage, to put metal into the heart that is cowardly.

Secondly, as all grace comes by faith, for it is faith that closes with
Christ, and from Christ receives grace for grace; as the seal leaves the same
impression upon the wax, that is upon it self, so secondly by faith we are
delivered from all, and made conquerours over all: either enemies that can
assault us, or miseries that can trouble us: we have many enemies, the Devil
and the world, but especially a vile, base, and corrupt heart, if you know and
feel these miseries; here is one special privilege of faith, it will rid all
these, and make you conquerours over all these enemies; this only faith can
do: every man labors for mastery and victory; this is the white that every
man shoots at, as it is in a pitched field, though it be but for one victory,
how every s^de draws on the forces, and use all the means and skill that can
be, to get the day: but if there were an engine or instrument that would
overcome all enemies, and break all forts and trenches, if there were any such
engines, no man would stick at any price, or spare any means and endeavors to
get the engine, because if they have this, they have the victory; and although
there never was, nor never can be any such engine for temporal deliverances
as this is; yet certain it is, this saving faith is a spiritual engine and
instrument, a^ I may so say, that gives victory and conquest over all
spiritual enemies: 1 John 5.4. They that are borne of God overcome the world,
and sin, and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even your
faith; mark the phrase, and it is not for the conquest of some one corruption,
but for the overthrowing of a world of wickedness, it quenches all the fiery
darts of the Devil, be the corruptions never so strong, yet faith gives the
conquest to a poor sinner, it is not hope alone, nor love, nor zeal, they are
all good soldiers, and they may strive much, and lend much helps to a poor
sinner, but they will grow weak, and feeble, and dead, except saving faith
come in to rescue an^ bring a supply; how often do we find, that wh^^ our
hope fails, and our love grows cold, and ou^ zeal dead, then at last, faith
goes to heaven, (...) fetches new grace, even grace for grace and th^^ hope is
stirred, and desire quickened, and zeal enflamed: Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted,
unless I had beloved to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
^^ving; it was says that did save him at a dead lift: it is with the soul, as
it is with the body, take a man that is swounding, there is one friend that
weeps over him, another that comforts him, but he that will cure him, must go
to the Apothecaries shop, and bring some Aqua vitae, and that will fetch him
again: so it is with a poor sinner, being under the pressure of horror of
heart, (you wicked ones are not acquainted with this, but you may be in time, I
have known the stou^^st heart to stoop) the poor sinner in his extremity
faints, and profits, and pleasures, and friends weep over him, saying, Oh that
we could have quieted and refreshed you, but the poor man is go^e, till at
last, faith goes to heaven, and brings a pardon to save him, and mercy to
comfort him, and has supply there, and faith brings the water of life, even
the freeness of this grace, and that cheares, comforts, and revives the heart
thus sinking, so that the poor sinner by this time begins to look up, and to
come to himself again, as David says, Psalm. 73.1. Yet God is good to Israel,
he w^^ even sinking, but faith over came the temptation: Oh, says he, the
world is naught, and men are mavelous wicked, and malicious to oppose, and
^^y own heart is malicious and bad, but God is good, and he will be good to
me, and cure this vile h^^rt of mine: 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the power
(...) God through faith unto salvation; that which gets the victory is faith,
and next under God in Christ; we owe our everlasting salvation unto faith, even
(...) that blessed grace; you that are acquainted with troubles, and anguish of
conscience, and with many corruptions, would it not do you good at the heart,
to see all your deadly enemies laid down at your feet? would it not do you
good, to have all your strong lusts and masterly corruptions of pride and
malice, those mighty and Goliath sins, that you have a deadly envy against,
and that you have stood so long against? would you not see them all mastered
and overcome? I doubt not, but you that feel these and undergo the burden of
these, you would account it the best day that ever you did see: if the conquest
be worth the striving, then get faith, and then the day is yours, and you shall
see your lusts bleed, your lusts break; and though your pride and other lusts
now get ground against you, yet then they shall be led captive, as the text
says, then Christ shall lead captivity captive; faith brings Christ into the
field, and so the victory is gotten.

Heb. 4.2. The Gospel was preached unto them, as unto us, but it did not
profit them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard it: had
thou the greatest parts and abilities under heaven, if thou had not faith
with them, they would not profit thee; men think to go beyond all with their
power, wit, and policy, but I say, All will not profit them without faith; if
thou can receive the Sacraments with faith, it will strengthen thee; if thou
can hear the Word with faith, the terrors of the law will humble thee, and
the commands thereof will direct thee, and awe thee, but otherwise all is
nothing, though an Angel should come from heaven, and preach to you: as it is
with the means of the body, if a man eat never so much meat, and cannot digest
it, if the stomach be clogged with it, there is nothing but sickness and
diseases come from it, but if a man take but a little meat, and digest it well,
it will nourish him, and do him much good: so it is here, that which is the
stomach and liver of the soul, is faith, and that turns the Word, and
Sacraments, and ordinances into good blood; it is a lowly believing heart, that
gets good by this.

Without faith, it is impossible to please God; and I say, That without faith
it is impossible that thou should please God, though thy judgment is weak,
and thy parts humble, and thy ability poor and feeble; but yet if thou can
but sigh up to heaven by faith, that sigh is accepted in heaven with faith, all
thy weaknesses are pardoned, and all services are accepted, whereas without the
grace of faith, had thou the greatest abilities under Heaven; and though thou
can please thy great Patron, thine own proud heart, yet thou will never
please the great God: he that hears holy faith, and walks by faith, though
he can please none else, yet he shall be sure to please his God.

Phil. 1.14. For this I know that by the supply of the Spirit of Christ, this
shall turn to my good and salvation through your prayers.

To wind up the point, let us consider all these motives, and consider whether
we can move our hearts to labor for this grace; would you not be glorious in
all the graces of God, as humility, meekness and patience, and have conquest
over all your enemies, and the baseness of your own hearts, and would you not
have a blessing upon what you enjoy, and would you not have all work for your
good, if these be worth the having, then get this grace of faith, that having
this you may have all. He that has faith, let him go on in it; and he that
has not faith, let him know that he never had any thing. To this purpose it
will be very seasonable, to call upon our hearts upon all occasions, when you
find your hearts hunting to settle upon these things here below, and when you
begin to view all the contentments of this life, and to say, this is great
Babell, and I have gotten friends and means, etc. then put the question to thy
soul and say, have thou faith too? thou have friends to stand for thee, and
means to enrich thee, but have thou faith to save thy soul? if thou have not
faith, thou art a beggar whatsoever thou have, nay often startle your secure
and careless hearts, and put this plea to your hearts; and parley with them, in
this manner and say, do not many and most men want faith, and why may not I
want it? and do not many secke faith and do not attain it, and what if I
should miss it? the Lord forbid it, for then thou art an undone man for ever
thou have lost all thy labor. John 2.8. Look to your selves says the
Apostle, that you ^^se not the things that you have wrought, thy hearing, and
thy praying, and all thy Sacraments, and all means, and whatsoever thou have or
do, thou have lost all, and thou art gone down the stream, nay miss of
faith, and all the means under heaven cannot releeve thee; I tell thee if thou
missest of faith, thou missest of heaven and salvation; nay, I may speak it
with reverence, mercy it self cannot say thee; Christ will not, nay Christ
cannot save thee without faith, for he has sworn he shall never enter into
his rest, continuing without faith: therefore call home your hearts, and stir
up your souls, and look up to the Lord Jesus, and reason in this manner, and
say, as Paul to the Philippians says, To you it is given to believe, Lord it
is given to thy poor servants to believe, thou gave Manasses, Paul, and the
Iayler power to believe, I am a vile stubborn profane wretch, Lord give me
power also to believe; whether thou will give me honor; wealth, riches, or no,
I leave that to thy self; but Lord deny not thy servant an humble broken and
believing heart, lest I perish, and be undone for ever. As Rachel said, Give
me children, or else I die, so say thou, Lord give me faith, or else I
perish: Lord I know all my labor cannot work faith, and all means under
Heaven cannot give it, but it is thou, Lord, that must do it, and as the text
says, Many believed through grace: Lord therefore through that grace of thine,
draw this heart to thee, and keep it with thee, and make thy poor servant
blessed for ever. Thus much for the use of exhortation, namely, that we should
get faith.

Now I come to the second part of exhortation, and here we are to endeavor if
God be pleased to go out with us, to persuade the heart of those that be
faithful to live by faith: the Lord brought thy unfaithful heart to believe;
now then labor to husband this grace well, and to improve it for thy best
good, and live by it. It is a mavelous great shame to see those that are
borne to fair means, I mean the poor Saints of God, that have a right and
title to grace and Christ, and yet to live at such an under rate: I would have
you to live above the world, though thou have not a coat to cover thee, nor a
house to put thy head in, yet if thou have faith, thou art a rich man:
therefore husband thy estate well, it is a shame, I say, to see them, that they
cannot husband that happy estate which they have, they live as if they had it
not, so full of want, so full of care and pride, so weak, and unable to master
their sins, whereas the fault is not in the power of faith, nor the promise,
nor in the Lord, for the Lord does not grudge his people of comfort, but would
have them live cheerfully, and have strong consolations, and mighty assurance
of Gods love. And therefore the text says, Rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say rejoice, and make your calling and election sure: Heb. 6.18. God
has sworn that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God
should lie, we might have strong consolations; nay, the Lord rejoices in the
prosperity of his servants, and therefore he has provided mercifully and
richly for you, that you may rejoice; therefore we do the Lord and his
promises a great deal of wrong, and bring an ill report upon that grace and
mercy of his, when we open the mouths of the wicked, and make them say, Oh,
these precise people talk of quiet, and contentment, and joy in the holy
Ghost, there is great talking of these things, but we could never see it yet:
Oh brethren it is a great shame; are the riches and revenues of faith so great,
that a christian may live like a man all his days? Let all the drunkards and
malicious wretches against God, laugh and be merry, yet they cannot see one of
those days that a poor Saint can^ though he should lie in prison all his
days: Matthew 17.20. If a man had but faith as a grain of mustard seed, and
should say to this mountain go hence, it should be done; whether this is
spoken of justifying faith or no, I will not now dispute, but this I am sure
of, if you will resist the Devil, he will flee from you, and you may trample
under all your lusts and corruptions, this is the life of faith, and this life
may we live, and this life we ought to live. If a tradesman have a good
estate put into his hand, and have a fair stock and quick returns, if he
goes down the wind, and begin to decline and decay, every man will say, he
w^^ left mavelous well, but either he knew nor how to use it, because he
wanted skill, or else he ar^^ded not unto it, and was careless, another man
would have lived bravely upon half of that means which he had. So there is
never a poor Christian, Note this.
which trades in a Christian course, but he has a fair estate, and may live
like a man. One promise is enough to make a man live comfortably all his days,
though he were in never so much want; but if he be cast behind hand, and
goes down the wind with comfort and joy, and sinks because of his pride, and
distempers, and vexation, the fault is not in the estate, for the Lord left him
very well, he had a childs portion, he had an heart to fear God, and love
God, as David says, O be merciful unto me as thou usest to (...) to those
that love and fear thy Name: the fault was not in the promises that they could
not, nor in his faith that it would not help him, but he let the promises lie
by, they came into the table, but he never cast them up, neither did he
husband then aright: he had a world of comforts and consolations that would
have given a man liberty in prison, and honor in shame and disgrace, and
comfort in the time of distress, but he did not husband them. Therefore be
advised to do as the tradesman does, he will not spend of his stock, but
live of his trading. So I would have every Christian to make a living of his
faith, whatever strength thou needst, fetch it from grace in Christ, and what
ever comfort thou want, fetch it from Christ, but live by faith, and make a
good living of it too, and then thou do improve the promise aright: bring but
an empty believing heart with thee, and the oil will never fail, and the
meal in the barrel will never decay, but continually supply thee as it did
that poor widow: So go with an humble heart to the promises, and husband it
well, and thou may draw life and grace from the promises till doomes day. And
thus in general.

the world that lives this life, but the best life of all is little looked
after.

Note.
Now for the answer know thus much, that there are three particulars necessary
for the training up of the heart to learn this skill of living by faith.

How to live by faith.
First, we must labor to get matter for our faith to work upon.





comfort, and sometimes the advice of a friend, and they have faith, but they
want matter for their faith to work upon, and therefore they are scarcely able
to uphold their souls in trouble.

Now the matter of our faith is in the whole Word of God, Where the matter of
faith is.
as it is with the Be in gathering honey, as the spider gathers poison out of
every flower, so the Be gathers honey out of the same flower, and out of the
sweetest flower there she suckes most honey: and the Word of God; the sharpest
course, and the fearfullest plagues denounced, a gracious heart will gather
some good by it, and a man has need of these; but above all, the sweet of the
promises of the Gospel, and the sap and sweet therein, and the blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ that is communicated thereby; Oh the faithful soul sucks
most there.

Now that we may provide matter for our faith, three rules are to be
observed, which are commonly observed in all provisions:

When to provide matter for our faith.
this is the practice of him that would husband his estate wisely, his care is
to buy at the best hand.

So I would have a good Christian to store up all the good promises of God,
Remember this first.
in all the good Word of God seasonably; I mean when all thy parts and
abilities are strong, and nature is able to fight it out, and while the Fair
day of Gods favor lasts, and while the Word and Sacraments are dispensed:
this is the best time to lay in the promises of God, that we may not want them,
when we have use of them: it is a mavelous weak, nay, a preposterous
course, when a man is weak, his eyes dim, and his heart and strength fails,
and he is ready to give up the ghost, then to lay in grace and provision of
mercy, and then for him that has hated a Minister, and loathed the means of
grace, and abused the patience and long suffering of God; Oh then to have a
Minister come to him, and have a promise in the day of persecution, then for a
man to bethink himself of the comforts and promises of the Gospel, and when a
man should spend on the promises, then to get it; this is but ill husbandry:
the better way is this, now to be buying at every turn; and this is the reason
why our Savior says, Oh if thou had known in this thy day the things that
belong unto thy peace; while the Word, and thy life, and the Sabbaths, and the
ordinances last, this is thy day; we know not how soon God may take all from
us. Oh the estate of the poor Palatinates, (if it be true that we hear of
them) they have lost all the means of grace, and they have idolatry now
amongst them, and there the enemies force them to go to mass against their
consciences, and they cannot see a good Minister, nor a good Christian, but
they weep to consider the times that once they had: therefore let us labor to
be wise in the Lord, now while the Fair is, and consider how God deals with
his children; Psalm. 48.9. We have thought of thy name, O Lord, in the midst of
the table, It is spoken there of the goodness of God toward Zion: a cup of
poison, and a stone of stumbling: when he had spoken of all the bulwarks that
God had made, and all the goodness and mercy that he had showed to his people,
and the malice and wrath of his enemies, he says, This God is our God, even
for ever; as if he had said, The Lord did provide for his people in Egypt, and
overthrew proud Pharaoh, that set himself up against God; and this God is our
God: when thou art in the wilderness, this God is thy God; when thou art in
persecution, this God is thy God, and the God of all: thus he stores up while
the season lasts.

Note this.
so labor to treasure up thine own experiences: 2 Timothy 4.18. He has
delivered us, and he does, and will deliver us, says the Apostle: and the
Prophet David says, I remember thy judgments of old; O well fare a good old
store: I remember, says he, how thou did rebuke Abimelech, and overthrow
Nimrod, and Nebuchadnezar, and Achitophel; Oh it is admirable to consider these
things: I received comfort, says he, God will overthrow every enemy; and this
is store for thy faith, to work upon: Psalm. 89.49. Where are thy former
mercies? David is before hand with God now; he is not come to buy food just at
the time of famine, but it is laid up before hand.

How to lay in matter for our faith.
and it is the wisdom of a man to have somewhat to spare, and to have an
overplus aforehand, that a man may not live feebly and poorly, and be at his
wits end at every turn, and knows not which way to shift for himself, and
have no bread in his house, I mean no provision of promises by him: Isay
42.23. Whose is wise, let him hear for after times; as if he had said, You
must not only lay in promises just for the present, but store them for
afterward: as the chapman says, I shall want this at such a time: and so the
husbandman says, I shall have occasion for this or that at such a time, and
therefore they get aforehand: O that God would give us these hearts, it is good
(as we may so say) to keep promises in pickle, that we may spend them at
leisure: 1 Kings 17.6, 7, 8, 9. Iezebel had threatened to kill Eliah, but she
mist of her work, for she was slain her self, and he went to heaven, and
never died at all: the text says, He went and hid himself by the brook
Kerith, and when all victuals failed, the ravens brought him bread and flesh in
the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and when all that failed too,
the Lord said unto him, Arise, get thee to Sareptha, I have commanded a widow
there to sustain thee: 1 King. 18.4. Obadiah hid a hundred of the Prophets of
the Lord, by fifties in a cave, and fed them with bread and water: and in
another place the text says, In the days of famine thou shall have enough:
these precious promises will be good meat in Lent, when happily thou shall sit
under an hollow tree, and creep among the bushes, then three or four of these
promises will give a man a good meal of comfort, therefore store them up, for
they will do you no harm; and when you are driven from house, and friends,
and all, and God takes away the Gospel from us, (which God of his mercy
prevent, Amen.
and give us hearts to speak to him, that he may prevent it) only your
wisdom will be this, to get all promises for this and a better life; for the
getting of grace, and the preserving in grace, and not only to pray by a
promise, but to live by a promise, and trade by it, and to enjoy all that you
have by a promise, if you will have comfort in it, therefore be sure that you
sort the promises aright; every promise is not for every purpose, but each
promise suits for each occasion, and therefore suit them all: imagine a man
wants comfort and strength against sin, why, then that promise will not fit
them, wherein the Lord says, He will be with them in six troubles, and
deliver them in seven; that for a temporal deliverance, he does not want that,
but power against his corruptions. Again, if a man fear that he shall not
hold out in perseverance; now that promise does not sit, wherein the Lord
says, He will pardon all his sins, and cast them all as a millstone into the
bottom of the sea; this is not for perseverance in grace, if thou seek for
succor there, thy hand is in the wrong box; but that promise is for this
purpose, wherein God says, I will knit them to me with an everlasting love;
and I will write my laws in their inward parts, that they shall never depart
from me any more. So there are promises for deliverances in trouble, and for
comfort in affliction, and in a word, Gods infinite free grace is scattered in
so many promises, according to so many necessities and several occasions, that
is, all healing and saving virtue is in God, so he dispenses it to so many
drops and several promises; therefore we must do with the promises, as the
Apothecarie does with his drugs, he puts Bezar stone into one, and Studdine,
that if the body be weak and low, then your Bezar stone is good for him, and
so for the rest; so that as the Apothecary has all drugs, so he has sorted
them all: so deal you with the promise and word, have the command of God to
own thee, and the promise of God to comfort thee; and that thou may sit
thine own soul, let it be a suitable promise: suppose thou find thy heart
proud and stubborn, then thou may not look upon mercy and pardon, but look
upon the justice of God; and how he looks upon the proud afar off, he
gives grace to the humble, but resists the proud; here is studdy for thee, to
pull down thy proud heart; and when thou find thy heart full of venom and
malice against the Ministers of God, now that Bezars stone does not fit thee,
therefore apply this, He that hates his brother in his heart, is a manslayer,
and no manslayer shall enter into the kingdom of God: and he that hates his
brother is a child of the Devil: these are vomits that fit thee.

To lay up the promises.
bring your provision home, and leave it not in the market; it is a folly for a
man to say, I have as good provision as can be, but I have it not here: Colos.
3.16. Let the Word of God dwell in you plenteously, and richly in all wisdom;
First, observe the plenty of our provision, it must not be scantie, but richly
and wisely, and it must dwell in you, that you may but step aside, and have it.
Now you have the matter for your faith to work upon. Secondly, we are to fit
faith for the service that it may succeed with more comfort and better speed,
for though a man be a believer, yet there is a great deal of dullness and
bluntness comes upon this grace, though he have it; Luke 24.25. see how our
Savior chides his Disciples, saying, O fools, slow and dull of heart to
believe, etc. so we ought to whet our faith, that it may line and square the
promises (as it is in the Hebrew) that it may pierce through the vale of all
the riches of the freeness of Gods grace, and so bring comfort to us. It is
with the hand of faith, as it is with the hand of the body; sometimes though
the thing be near one, that he may reach it, and the hand has life, yet if it
be nummed, and stiff, and frozen, a man must warm it and rub it, before he
can lay hold upon, and take the thing, and do the work in hand: so it is with
the hand of faith, for faith is the hand of the soul, it takes hold of that
mercy and comfort, which God has prepared for us in Christ Jesus; now that
faith is nummed and stiff through carelessness and looseness: therefore it is
not enough for a man to have faith, but he must supple and oil the finewes of
faith, that he may catch more speedily at the promise of life, and receive
comfort from thence.



How to make faith limber.
undeniable, without controlement: I say, a faith once gotten, (mark it, I
speak not now of those that have not faith, it is in vain to bid a man live by
faith who has no faith, but it is for those, in whose hearts God has been
pleased to work this blessed grace of faith) this must be the care of every
man that has gotten faith, he must know the nature of faith in general, and
of his faith in particular, whither his faith be of the right stamp, and will
stand him in stead in the day of account, and whither it be of that faith,
which Peter speaks of, (for there is a great deal of copper faith in the
world) as, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, and the like:
now when thou have gained evidence, that thou have faith, then fill it up, and
keep it by thee, and labor to have the demonstration of this work so plain
in thy soul, that it may be past denial: What a mavelous folly is it, for a
man to question, when he should use it? the work must needs be marvellously
hindered, though he have never so much faith, when he begins to cavil with it,
and to question whither it be good or no; it is a proverbiall speech, he that
doubts of his way, ^^sisseth of his way, for while he is doubting; he goes no
way in conclusion: so he that does question, whether he has faith or no, and
therefore gets little good by it: tell a poor sinner of living by faith, and
he says, it is good news, if I had it: it is poor comfort to bid a man to
go warm him, when he has no fire to warm him by; and so it is a poor
comfort, to bid a man live by faith, when he never had any faith: the
quarrelling and doubting, when a man has it, it wholly hinders the use and
benefit of faith, that would come to us: as it is with a man that has a fair
estate, and has land worth so many hundreds a year, all the while his lands
are in question and controversy, he lives exceeding poor, and scarce makes
so many scores a year; whereas if his lands were settled to him, he might so
many hundreds: so it is here, every poor faithful soul is borne to a fair
estate, and has rich promises, and while he is yet in the law, and makes
question of his faith, the truth is, the promises lie by, and he dares not
meddle with them, and he suspects, whether he may venture upon them or no,
and the reason is, he is quarrelling with, and doubting of his faith, when he
should live by it: Matthew. 24.29, 30, 31. when the Disciples saw Jesus walking
on the sea, they thought it was a Spirit, but Jesus said unto them, Be of good
comfort, it is I; now when Peter knew it was our Savior, ^e being somewhat too
venterous, he said, If it be thou Lord, bid me come unto thee on the water;
and Christ said, Come; and Peter going, the waters be^^^ to be something
bo^sterous, his heart began to s^ck, etc. and Christ said unto him, O thou of
^it the faith, why do thou doubt? as if he had said, ^^t is now no time of
doubting, but a time of believing, the Lord bad him to come, and he had ground
enough to come, and strength of faith to come, but when he saw the waves great
and trouble some, he began to doubt, whereas he should have improved the
promise, and not have doubted of it: so we doubt, and sit afraid, and quarrel
with the promise, and improve not the grace that God bestows: it is with the
soul in this case, as it is with a gun or piece, that is rusty and not well
scoured, or not well stockt; he that goes to use the gun, in stead of hitting
the mark, it recoils and hurts him, because that either it was not well
stockt, or else it was rustie; so it is with a poor faithful soul, though
the heart does believe, and his heart is of a right stamp, and is able to lay
hold on the promise, if that faith grow rusty with our doubting, and is
unstable or unsettled, it recoils again upon us, and we sit down dismayed,
whereas we might have gone to Christ, and received mercy from him: and
therefore our Savior says of the wise Virgins, Matthew. 25.7. They trimmed
their lamps, and when the Bridegroom came, they entered with him into the
chamber; so it should be with our souls: it is not enough for a gracious heart
to have true faith and true oil, but if there grows any snuff of doubting
that dims the light of our links, throw it away, and quarrel not, and then we
shall be fitted to see the way, and to enter into eternal happiness by the
power thereof: and I beseech you to observe this, the very questioning and
quarelling against the work of faith, it many times as much dis-inables a man,
to put forth the power of his faith, as if he had no faith at all: as some that
are melancholy, they think they cannot speak nor go; this has made men not
to speak for many years together, though they can and do speak to this day:
therefore for the conclusion of this first rule, go then to God, and to his
Word, and to thine own heart, and to the Ministers of his Word, and advise
wisely and judiciously of thine estate, and labor to see sound evidences of
the work of grace in thy soul, and see them every day, and read them every
morning, noone, and evening, and get them by thee, and learn them by faith,
that when thou come to improve thy faith, thou may not question whether
thou have it or not; and if thou will not be persuaded, yet look to the
promise; but if thy doubting comes still upon thee, and controversy still
oppresses thee, and is set on foot against thee, then reason thus with thine
own soul, If I have not faith nor grace, I am sure I shall never get it by
looking upon mine own corruptions and distempers: where must I have it, if I
want it? the promise only must do it, therefore look you to that: It is with
a doubting man, as with a man that is melancholy, if he would but set upon the
work, he should see his own folly; and by going, he would be able to go; and
by speaking, he would be able to speak: so this vain dismaiednesse of heart,
and these discouragements of a doubting soul, does more hinder the work of
faith, than any distemper else; therefore when thy fears and discouragements
come in upon thee, go thou to the promise, and in going thou will be able to
go. Now faith is whetted, the shield of faith scoured, and it is fitted, that
a man may improve it in some measure to his good.

How to carry our hearts for the keeping of faith.
then labor to bring thy heart to a mavelous stillness and calmnesse from
time to time, that you may give way to faith, and that faith may have its full
scope to frame thy heart; it is a point of great experience that we have had,
as the chasing away of doubting, scoures the work of faith; so a staidness
and stillness of soul, frames the heart to hold the shield steedily: a man
must not only scour and furbuse the shield, but hold it so as he may defend
himself: so then first the maintenance of the evidence of faith, and the
calmnesse and staidness of heart, makes a man hold the shield stedily, and
bear the blow comfortably, when it comes: those boisterous affections, those
crowds and troops of troublesome imaginations, as fear, and jealousy, and
superstition, these do unranke the frame of the soul, that the soul is not
at the command of faith: as it is in an army, when it is unranked, though the
commander be never so wise and skillful, yet no man can march on: so though
we had never such so victorious a faith, yet if the soul were hurried up and
down with those boisterous distempers, the soul could not command faith: Luke
24.41. when it was told the Disciples that Christ was risen from the dead, and
had manifested himself to them, the text says, They believed not, and
wondered; they would not believe for the while, and it was through the violence
of their joy, which made them, that they had no leisure to believe: as it is
true of immoderate affection, so it is true of strange fear, and care, and
distemper, because these hurrie the soul so violently, and transport the soul
of a man, that he cannot believe: as it is in a crowd or tumult, the
travellour is fitted to go on his journed, but the crowd is so strong, that
they cross him, and oppose him in the way, and overturne him, and over power
him, and so make him go another way; the fault was not, because he would not,
or was not able to go, but because they did oppose him, and hinder him: just
so it is with a soul thus troubled with tumultuous thoughts, especially
melancholy, and those enemies of vain imaginations of fears, and sorrow, and
distempered thoughts and cares, that though the heart is willing and able to
believe, yet those stirrings of boisterous affections, they cross faith in the
way, and bear down faith, that it cannot go on in the way of the promise
toward God, nor receive help from him: Psalm. 43.5. there David chides his
own heart, and rocks it asleep, and would bring it quiet, saying, Why art
thou so disquieted, Oh my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? this
signifies, to lay a man flat upon his back; again, why art thou so
tumultuously troubled? this is taken from a wave in the sea, that is carried up
and down: there are three things in this text fitting for our purpose:

First, that a tumultuous distemper of heart, makes a man lie flat upon his
back, and sink into a swound.

Secondly, it hinders the work of faith; mark what follows, Still trust in
God; as if he had said, leave those distempers of heart, and rest upon the
freeness of Gods grace.

Thirdly, David chides his own heart, and brings it into a calmnesse and
stillness, he rocks his heart, and quiets it; as if he said, still look up to
God, and wait upon him for mercy, for he is yet my God. The virtue of this
rule we find in experience, especially in melancholy persons, when they have
swarms of thoughts buzzing in their minds, sometimes restless fears that
do chase their hearts, as the hound does the Dear in the forest, and after
this comes another affection, and after that another, and so at last they come
altogether: sometimes the horror of a man's conscience makes hue and cry after
him, and makes him say, Oh how my heart smites me! me thought, I saw hell
gaping for me, and the Devils even standing at my elbow, ready to hurry me
down to everlasting destruction, this makes his soul to have such an
amazement, and gasternes of spirit, that he cannot reach the promise of God,
because of those distempers: therefore labor for that which the Lord himself
advises by his Prophet, Fear you not but stand still, and behold the
salvation of the Lord; that is, lay aside those restless imaginations, and
those crowds of foolish conceits, and those needles fears; stand still and be
quiet, that is, with the eye of faith behold the salvation of God, and look
upon his promises.

How faith may be fitted for the work.
in the want of any means do not first seek for them, and in the presence of
any means God affords; look not first to them for succor and supply, but
first go to the promise, that the promise may supply what you need, and that
the promise may bless what means you have. It is an uncomfortable and
disorderly course for a man barely and firstly to look at those things which
are within the compass of sense, and so range up and down for comfort in the
use of the means, and the promise, and Christ, are the last things thought of
in our hearts; we only look to bring in this, or that for our comfort and
relief; as for instance that every man may take his portion in the time of
poverty, how does the soul behave it self, and unfit it self for the
promise? When a man sees that his estate is low, and he is like to come to
misery, he says, I have some good friends that will not see me want, and I
have so much means yet left, and I have my health and strength, and I hope I
shall get a poor living, and there is not one word of the promise all this
while; but happily death takes away all friends, and sickness takes away thy
health and strength, and the fire or thieves takes away all thy goods: whither
will thou go now? then at a dead lift he is feign to go to that mercy which
endures for ever; he might have gone thither first: Therefore now reason
thus, I am like to be poor, and my friends may die, and the thieves may rob me
of all my goods, but the mercy of the Lord endures for ever. Again, the
Minister that is faithful desires to preach fruitfully, and to benefit the
congregation, and then we catch at the helps that are near at hand, and go
to our books and studies, our wit and pains, and think that these will do the
deed; we do well in thus doing, but the fault is in the order of them: happily
God knocks off man's wheels, and a man is not able to come to the bottom of
the point, and if he be able to compass the truth in some measure, yet God
blasts all that he does, and there is no good comes to the souls of his
people; at last he is feign to go to the promise, and then the poor Minister
says, Lord, thou have said thou will be with thy faithful Ministers to the
end of the world, little strength is in us, but be thou with us Lord; now the
work goes on again, the tradesman is honest, and painful, and he hopes to
compass a good estate by his calling, his stock is good and great, and his
skill is sufficient, and his penny worth shall be as reasonable as any others,
and his acquaintance are many; then God blasteth all these, and at last, he
comes home to the promise, and says, as it is in Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever the
righteous does, it shall prosper: hold here and say, I expect all from the
promise, go first to the promise and expect mercy and succor from the
promise. This was the course that Jacob took, Genesis 32.9. First he wrestled
with God, and overcame him, and then he wrestled with his brother Esau, and
says, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isacke; Lord which
said unto me, return unto thy Country, and I will do thee good, I am not
worthy of the least of all thy mercies, Lord deliver me from the hand of my
brother Esau, for I fear him: Thus he wrestled with the Lord, and by virtue of
a promise overcame him, and then overcame Esau, Heb. 13.45. Marriage is
honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers, and
adulterers, God will judge; let your conversation be without covetousness, and
be content with those things you have.

But how will you have help against this covetousness? a man would have said
thus: you have gotten a good portion, and but little charge, and many friends;
but this course God takes, for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee: He does not say thou have much means, and many friends, but I
say, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Now faith is fitted for the
work, when I have chased away doubting, then faith is ready, and the shield is
scoured.

Secondly, when my heart is calm and quiet then faith may go on, there is a
free passage.



Now I come to show how we must come to order faith in the work, How to order
faith in the work.
and here two things are to be attended unto.

First, how the soul should get to the promises?

Secondly, how the soul should take, receive, and improve this sufficiency and
excellency of God, that is in the promise?



Gal. 2.20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. It is not
I that lives by any power of my self, but Christ lives in me. It was Christ
quickening, and reviving, and inabling him, though he had faith, Ier. 10.23. O
Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in a man to
direct his own steps: so do thou say if ever thou would have thy heart
fitted to go to the promise, it is not here Lord, it is not in this vain
mind, it is not in the power of this dead heart, or any passage that ever I
received, whereby I am able to believe in thee; I mean the principal of life
is not here, the root of faith is in the promise, and from thence it comes into
the soul. As it is with a mariner when the ship is upon the ground in the ebb
and low water, he does not expect to tugge his ship to the shore by any power
of himself; it is not in my wisdom that can direct me, and it is not in my
weapon that can defend me; it is not this humility that can bring my soul
down, it is not here, it is not I Lord, that can rest, or go to a promise;
even all our abillities are at an ebb, all that we have or can do is to empty
our selves, and fit our selves, and to get up the maine mast, that is, let the
soul be ready for the promise by virtue of that to be carried heaven ward,
and Christ ward; take notice of this in your own souls, that the heart would
begin at home; if a temptation come, the heart of it self would overcome it;
and if a duty to be done, the heart of it self would perform it; and if
opposition come, the heart of it self would resist it: O remember that it is I
a man offers an injury against, reason, sense, and religion, and all. Now thy
faith begins to wrestle with him, and his dealings and conscience checks and
thou will tear thine own heart out of thine own bosom; brethren, this will
not do it. When a ship of a hundred tuns is upon ground, the mariners may pull
and tug their hearts out before they can get it go: O go then and say, it is
not I that can be patient, and put up a wrong, be quiet and expect it not from
hence; let the heart lie still till the wind and tide, and promise come and
that will carry thee.

that there is an Almighty power, and a fullness in the promise: then lay that
promise upon thine heart and know it, and conclude it, and look for virtue
from thence, to draw thy soul to it again. I have several passages to
express my self by it, you may understand it: Jacob would not believe that
Joseph was alive, or if he were alive, he had but little means, and was poor,
Genesis 45.26, 27, 28, 29. but when he saw the Chariots that Joseph had sent him,
then he believed, and said I have enough, Joseph my son lives; the Chariots
sent from Joseph to Jacob, brought Jacob to Joseph: so every believing soul,
is poor and feeble, and dis-nabled to go to God, and to believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ; therefore look thou unto the Chariots of Israel first, and that
will convey thee to the promise. As it is with the miller, first he pares the
mill fitly, and orders all the occasions thereof; and when the stones are fit
and laid to go, yet it will not go, till the sluice be pulled up, and the
water runs that drives the mill: so the soul is humbled, and lies level with
the Lord and his truth, and is content to yield to his conditions, but the
soul of it self in it self cannot go, It has not the principle of going;
but let down the sluice of the promise, and let that come to thy heart, and it
will bring thy soul home to the Lord. The promise must come to thee, and make
thee come to it: It is not here Lord, but in the promise, bring that promise,
and set open the sluice, and let the wind, blow, and it will convey thee
comfortably; as Luke 19.9. This day salvation is come to thy house, not to the
walls of thy house, but to the men that are in the house: they did not come to
salvation, but salvation came to them: the Lord sent salvation to salute the
house of Zacheus, and that brought him to salvation: this is the foiling of
many poor believers; O, say they, if I could believe, then the promise did
belong unto me, but I dare not venture upon it: but I say unto thee, whomsoever
thou art, thou shall never live by faith upon these terms, thou must first let
the promise come to thee, and then it will carry thee unto it.

Luke 15.4. The Prodigal is said to be like a lost sheep; mark this, for it
concerns you poor creatures. The poor sheep is wildered up and down, now
in the mouth of the Lion, and then in the briars, and sometimes in the pit. The
text says, He leaves the ninety nine to seek that; that is in comparison of
what care he expresses to the lost sheep; he leaves a man regenerate, not
carelessly, but he will not express so great love, as to a poor lost man: and
though thou can not find the way to Heaven, yet he will find thee; lie thou
upon the shoulders of Christ, as in the 5. verse of this Chapter, when thou
find thy heart feeble and weak, and thy self unable to believe, then the
Lord Jesus Christ brings the spirit of grace, and that comes to seek, and
Jesus Christ will lay that soul of thine upon his shoulders, that is, upon the
riches of the freeness of his grace: therefore let thy heart be transported
by the power of that grace, and by the virtue of that mercy, that God has
made known unto thee for thy everlasting good; when the chariots are come, get
thee up into them, the Lord Jesus Christ is gone up to heaven, and he has
sent his chariots for thee; therefore get thee up, and say, Lord take me up
with thee, let the Lord convey thee by the power of his grace: when the mariner
has sea room enough, he cares for no more, if he can but observe the
channel, he looks not so much at his oar, or any thing, so he can observe
the channel, this channel is the full tide of the promise: therefore lay thy
self upon the promise, and say, Lord in the virtue of that grace, and in the
power of that Spirit carry me, and in the riches of that mercy of thine;
Lord, convey the heart of this poor sinner, and make me happy with thy self
for ever.



There are two things especially observable.

First, labor to husband the promises, and to manage them wisely when we
have them for our best advantage.

Secondly, labor to live by the sweetness of the promises so managed: as it
is with a man that has a fair estate, and is left mavelous well, if he
would have the benefit of his estate, first he must manage it, secondly, he
must maintain him and his out of the gain of it so managed.



Now that we must manage the promises aright, two things are mainly
observable; though there are many others ready at hand, yet I will insist upon
those that are most useful for the benefit of the work.

Heb. 11.1. not only that good which the promise will yield for the present,
but eternal and everlasting good, which every promise will make thy soul
assured of, if thou have a heart to improve it aright, and care to bestow thy
self thereupon. The only way for a man to thrive in his estate, is this, he
must dwell upon his own means, and have it all in his own occupying: for as
we use to say, If a man lease it out, why may not he get something by keeping
of it, as another by hiring of it? If he would do thus (say we) he must needs
get more than he does now: so it ought to be in our spiritual estate, and so
faith will enable us that we may do, not only to take the present benefit
that the promise will afford in this life, but the promise is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen: all that glory and
happiness in heaven, not yet seen, and not yet in fruition, faith will make
all that happiness within view, and puts us into possession of them, and makes
them have a being to our souls: faith it is that brings Christ, and makes
Christ present, and in Christ all presented, all glory is in Christ, who is
the Author of it; and faith makes all that glory present, all happiness in
Christ, who is the worker of it; and faith makes all that happiness to be
present; so that by faith laying hold on thy Savior, not only to take comfort,
but to make all that happiness and good, that is eternally to be present; as
Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock; but might they not say, How shall we choose
but fear, seeing there is nothing but sins within that deserve punishment,
and enemies without that breath forth threatenings? O but a Savior says, Fear
not little flock; why? it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom; you
are not in the kingdom as yet, yet you are in the way to it; and though you
are now in the wilderness leading to Canaan, yet you shall come to Canaan, and
so you shall have a kingdom; remember that, and so you shall be comforted and
refreshed, live upon this: when you look only to the present benefit of the
promise (it is true) this is more than we can conceive, yet we let the better
part of our stock and estate lie by us, for there are two parts of the promise,
the present good and peace, and the eternal and everlasting good and comfort
of it; now when we look only to the present good of it, this is ill husbandry,
for we let the better part of the stock lie dead by us, and do not trade
with it, as it is in the world for temporal means, so it is for our
spiritual estates: for spiritual succor and supply, though a man have little
for the present, yet if he have some old reversions to come, this bears up
his heart in the time of poverty and misery; and he says, if he can but make a
scrambling shift for so long time, then he hopes to live as well as any man in
the Country. So that there is not some of the promise that we have in
possession, but there is the reversion of old rents, as old rents of farms,
that were let long ago, when the leases come out, they are worth treble the
rent they were let at the first: So there are the old rents of comfort and
mercy, as, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you: then no more tears, no more trouble, no more sorrow, no more sin, get
those into your hands, and have them in use, and say, The day will come, when
we shall have happiness, bliss and joy, beyond all that the tongue of man
can express, or the heart of man conceive, though we are buffeted with many
temptations, and wearied with a world of corruptions, yet we shall be saved,
says faith. Thus a man may make a pretty good shift to live upon these terms,
though we have nothing else to live upon in the world: therefore remember what
now I speak, Labor to fasten this truth upon thy heart, that there is not
only present good in thy self, but in another, and reserved by another for
thy comfort; and be thou content that it should be so, not only to look what
thou have, but consider, that the greatest part of thy glory, is in the glory
of a Christ, and the greatest part of thy wisdom, is in the wisdom of a
Christ; and thy liberty, in the liberty of a Christ; and thy riches, in the
riches of a Christ; and know, that whatsoever is in Christ, thou have it all as
thine: John 3.12. Behold what love the Father has showed to us, that we are
now the Sons of God; I tell you brethren, this is a mavelous privilege, and
if you had no more but this, you had a childs portion: but it appears not
what we shall have, we have but a glimse now, what will the harvest be? and now
we have only some sips of it, what shall then the full cup be, when we shall
see Christ as he is? thus Moses did improve his estate, Heb. 11.26. he bare all
afflictions comfortably, yea, he esteemed the rebukes of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt; why? because he had an eye to the recompense of
the reward; we account of a man's estate, for what he has for present
possession; but what is like to befall him, and what he is borne unto, what
Moses did, do thou, that thou may account the misery and disgrace of a
Christ, greater riches than all the pleasures of the world: have all thy estate
in thy own hand, if thou will be a good husband: as it is with a husbandman,
though he have no money in his house, and little provision, yet if his ground
be well stockt, and he has a good crop, this supports the heart of a poor
husbandman, there is that upon the ground that will pay all his debt, and he
shall have wherewithal to live like a man too: so it ought to be with these
provisions, promises of life, and salvation: though thou find many wants and
corruptions, and many disgraces cast upon thee, and thou art cast behind hand
for comfort; yet remember this, that though there is little strength, and
little grace here, yet there is enough in the promise and in heaven, which the
promise will bring to thee, and that will pay for all; though thou art now in
dishonor, yet there is honor enough in heaven to take away all thy dishonor;
though now in persecution and misery, yet there is comfort enough, and liberty
in Christ: let thy soul therefore be careful to make all these present with
thee for thy good: this is our folly, we live merely by sense, and lay out
the least part of the promises, whereas if we could live comfortably, we should
improve all.

best advantage, and have thy whole stock a going, and so expect nothing from
the promise, but that which is suitable to it: say not with thy self then, had
I that power, and that honor, and those abilities to do duties, and those
means outward for my comfort, which others have in superfluity; and if God
would but give such a place, what honor might I bring to God, and what comfort
might I have to my soul too; this is more than the promise will give thee, and
this is to wrong the promise, and to say, as it were in effect, were God so
wise as I, then things would go with far better success: nay, but know that
the Lord will not give thy heart content in the promise, but what he sees
fit, and what may be best for thy good and his glory, and to look for that in
the promise, which is not there to be had, is all one to throw the promise
down the stream, thou do abuse the promise, and pervert it; for that which
is in the promise, is this; That which God sees most fit and necessary for
thee, that God will give, and that thou may expect, and nothing else: it is
in this condition spiritual, as it is in a man's estate temporal; he that
will husband a piece of land well and wisely, that is fallen to him by free
gift, or by an inheritance, his course is this, he will observe what best
befits every soil, and what each piece of ground will bear, one piece of
ground for meadow, another for grazing, another for plowing; if a man should
go and plow up his meadows, and mow his fallowes, we would think this man
very ignorant in mannaging his business: so it is with the precious promises
of God, thou must not think to have what thou would in the promise, but
think what will best grow there, and what is the intent and aim of God, in
making of the promise and what comfort it will yield; so improve it, and expect
good thereby; the want of this wisdom is that which brings a great deal of
misery, and casts men behind hand, and makes them live poor, and scantly in
a good course: O, says one, had I a title and an interest in the promise, it
could not be so with me as it is; it were not possible, that an ignorant heart
should still possess me, and that these distempers should still crowd in, and
hinder me; you think you are good husbands all this while; but the truth is,
you lose the promises, and make a spoil of them; and it is no wonder that you
live poorly and beggarly, and undo your selves; for I know not any one
promise, from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelation, that ever
shows any such thing as this, That the man which has grace, should never
find the plague of a naughty heart, and never be pestered with corruptions
within, and sorrows without; there is not one place which promises thus much,
you improve not the promise the right way: I confess that this is true, that
all they that are in Christ, there is no condemnation to them, and they live
not after the flesh, and they are not at the command of their corruptions, and
sin shall not be King and Ruler over them; this the word does promise, but
that he may not be sometimes overcome of, and captived by his corruptions, I
know no such promise; the Apostle Paul found it otherwise, Romans 7.23. I find a
law in my members, warring against the law of my mind; It is a desperate part
of ill husbandry, for a man to lay out his money so, that he shall not only
not see his own, but lose all that he lays out; it is the only way to undo
him utterly: so you do not only lose the good of the promise, and not see
your own, but you spill the promise, because you have a conceit to reap that
by the promise, which God never intends, neither will he ever bestow.



and in his own time; I will open them all, because many do here bungle
wonderfully.

in discontent, the reason is, there is a proud heart, and a sturdy disposition
of spirit, that will not come unto Gods terms: as it is with a Physician, he
will not give a cordial to his patient when he will, for if he were in a
burning fever, it were the next way to send him going; first he purges and
makes him fit, and then gives him a cordial: so it is in these things which
thou cravest, the Lord will then give thee the^, when thou shall not surfeit of
comfort, and assurance, and prosperity; and when thy heart is emptied and
purged, and able to digest these things, then the Lord will give them.

John 2.3, 4. The mother of Jesus comes to our Savior, they have no wine,
says she; she thought she had Christ at command, but he answers her, Woman
what have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet come: So it is with our
souls, we want comfort and strength against corruptions, and assurance and
assistance: What have I to do with that proud heart of thine, says our
Savior? My time is not yet come; you would have it now as they said, Will thou
now restore the Kingdom to Israel? God will do it in his own time, and we
must wait his leisure. This is one thing that does necessarily accompany the
covenant of grace (as I have showed before) that the Lord should dispense of
his Kingdom when he pleases, and not when we will, when the Lord sees these
blessings of spiritual mercies and temporal favors are ripe, and most
seasonable to thy necessities, then thou shall have them, but the time is in
Gods hand.

Feed me with food convenient for me, there was faith; he refers himself to
God. When a man comes to the taylers to have a garment made, he does not cut
out the garment himself, but refers it to the judgment of the workman; so we
must do, refer our selves to God, and know God promises nothing, but as he
sees it fit for thy good: It may be thou shall not have this blessing, or
that grace: As it is with a Potter, he is minded to make so many vessels of
honor, but it is reserved in the mind of the Potter, how big he will make
every vessel of honor: so if the Lord make thee a vessel of honor, go away
contented, whether thou have so much prosperity, and so much good and grace or
no, it skils not, it is enough that thou art elected to eternal happiness:
Now you see how to manage and improve the promise aright for your best
advantage, and to expect from the promise that which it will yield.

The second particular in this third rule of living by faith is this; how to
take, and how to enjoy the sap and sweet of the promise, and to live by it:
when the Husbandman has sown his ground, and his fruit is ripe, and he has
reaped it, then he must gather in his come, that he may live upon it: So let
us gather in the promises, when we see the best advantage, now let us take the
gain, and live by it, and that comfortably too in the proof of Gods goodness
therein. For this end, let me suggest these five rules or directions.

Psalm 37.5. Commit thy ways unto the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring
it to pass; root thy self, and lay all thy weight of all thy occasions upon
the Lord. Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5.7. Hurl your care upon the
Lord, for he cares for you. It is Gods proper office and work, He cares for
thy soul, therefore lay it all upon him, and put over all thy care into his
hands, and set his power and faithfulness a work; only this is here a little
to be scanned. I speak not this, that we should take no care at all; but I
say, hang all thy weight and burden of thy care upon the Lord. The Brewer he
tumbles the barrel of beer and roules it, but the earth that bears it; so
whatsoever trouble is in thy ear, roll it upon the Lord: That is thus, the
weight of a man's occasions, lies especially in three things, which a man must
hurl off himself, and lay upon the Lord: either a man shall not be able to
know what he shall do, or what he is commanded, or else secondly, he shall
not be able to do what God commands, and he knows; or else thirdly, he shall
not find success in what he does. It is not a trouble to do what we can, or
to employ our selves as we are able, but this is the trouble, when the heart
says, I shall not know what Gods mind is, or I shall not do what I know, or
it will not succeed, or no it is not in my power. Now we leave all these with
God, and meddle not with them, but put them over to the Lord, and meddle with
thy own duty and work, and let God alone with his; and say thou unto the
Lord, In truth Lord it is not in my power, it is not in my parts or work
either to compass that wisdom that is able to direct my self, or to have
any power to do all that is commanded, much less to give good success; Lord,
I will not meddle with that, but leave it to thy Majesty; if thou in thy power
can not, nor in thy faithfulness and goodness carest not for thy poor
helpless creature, then I am content, and if thou will not be faithful, then
I am content to be miserable, and so thou may suppose a man that has
promised to undertake some business for a friend, and then in the end it
proves somewhat troublesome, and therefore he wishes his friend to take it
again into his own hands, for it is very troublesome: but a man will leave it
unto him and say, he has engaged himself to do it, and he will not look
after it, I will not meddle with it any more: so what end it is that is in Gods
royal prerogative, leave it with God, and do not meddle with it; let God
look to it, leave it to Gods faithfulness and power to accomplish it. So did
Abraham, Romans 14.18, 19, 20, and 21. verses, Abraham above hope, believed under
hope, that he should be the Father of many Nations; Sarahs womb was barren,
and his body dead, and yet he must have a son; and therefore he sets Gods
power on work, and says in the 21. verse; Lord this body is dead, and Sarah
is barren, there is no help here, but thou art able, and thou have engaged thy
self to do it: he sets Gods power to work, and puts over all the right and
burden of the care upon the Lord. Hester 4.14. Therefore Mordecay says, If
thou hold thy peace at this time, comfort and deliverance shall come from some
other place; he was resolved that God had deliverance for his Church, and
would not deny his own truth, salvation will come, says the text, he knows
not the place, or by what means, but he knows that salvation will come. So set
thou Gods power and faithfulness to work, and not thy own care, commit it to
the Lord, and hurl thy care upon him so far as concerns the burden of it.



Observe thou his providence, and do thou what God requires, for otherwise we
live not by faith, but tempt God, and throw away the promise and all, and
deprive our selves of that good which God would bestow, unless we walk in
that way which he has appointed, Luke 24.49. When our Savior was to go to
Heaven, he said, Behold I send the promise of my Father amongst you, but tarry
you in the city of Jerusalem, until you be endued with power from above:
Christ would endue them with the Spirit, but they must tarry at Jerusalem and
wait for it. So I say, would thou have grace and the spirit from above, and
the wealth of the world? then walk in that way which God has appointed, stay
at Jerusalem, and be in the way, and meet God in his providence, and then
receive from his power and faithfulness what thou need. Thou would have
God bless thee in thy estate, and yet thou would be idle and careless: but
this will not do the deed; God would give thee a blessing, but thou art not
there to take it; this is the excellency of the promises of God, as they
require conditions before they bestow mercies, so they make us able to be
partakers of the conditions, and give the conditions as for example, Ezech. 36.
The Lord in the former part of the Chapter promises to give many things to
them, but how? It must be by prayer, and humbling themselves before him, he
will give a blessing in thy family by prayer in it, and a blessing in private,
by praying in private, and strength against sin, and power against
corruption; but I will be sought unto for all these, says the Lord, and the
text says, Blessed is the man that walks in his integrity, and his children
after him; therefore walk thou in the integrity, that is the condition of a
Christian in general, or as a husband, or as a wife, or as a servant in the
particular, this the promise requires: but mark this now, the same promise
that requires the condition, will help us to perform the conditions, and the
same Lord that says, I will be entreated and sought to, for all these, the
same Lord says, Psalm. 10.17. He prepares their hearts to pray; go thou
therefore to God, to help thee to pray, that he may bestow his blessing upon
thee, which he has promised: Ezech. 26.27. He will first give them a new
heart, and then teach them to walk in his ways; so if thou will walk in Gods
ways, thou shall have his blessings: therefore go thou by the power of faith
to the promise of God for strength and grace, and that thou must use the means
appointed, and then expect a blessing from it in the course of his providence:
now is Gods power and faithfulness set a work.

John 3.33. There by leaning, is called sealing to the promise: this is the
nature of sealing, when a man has drawn the articles of agreement, and when
they have sealed, all is done: so faith must make the promise authentical, and
put a seal to it, that is true, and says, it is done in heaven, and I am
fully resolved, and setledly persuaded thereof, that I shall have whatsoever I
have believed, and thou have promised, and I have used means, for in the way
of thy providence, famous is that of Abraham, Genesis 22.5. the Lord had bidden
him sacrifice his son, and yet he said, that he should live: and therefore
when he came to the place, he said to his servants, Abide you herewith the
asses, for I and the child will go yonder and sacrifice, and will come again
to you; he thought to sacrifice him, and yet by faith he believed, that he
should bring Isaac again. So I would have a poor Saint of God to conclude,
when thou find thy comforts like Isaacks, in the ashes, and thy estate
hopeless and helpless; yet even then set Gods power on work, and wait upon
him in the use of the means, that he has appointed, and then conclude it,
and bring patience, power, and deliverance, and so in every kind, according to
all thy necessities: yet remember this, expect no more from the promise, than
God will give in the promise, but say, my sins shall be mastered one day,
and these temptations shall be one day overthrown, that have so long annoyed
the soul of thy poor servant, I have begged succor against these corruptions
within, and these temptations without, and yet it is not; but I know it is done
in heaven, it wants nothing but the taking out, thou will bestow upon thy
servant what thou see fit: 1 Samuel 1.18. Hannah wept sore, and prayed to the
Lord, and went away, and was no more sorrowful, and she said, Lord, I believe
that I shall either have a child, or that which is as good, or better; now the
business was done, but imagine the Lord delays, and does not suddenly
accomplish what he intends, and thou have used means to receive, he gives
not, and grants not, and sends not succor according to thy desire, and the
tenure of the covenant, as thou conceivest.

Psalm. 123.2. As the eyes of a servant look to the hands of his master, and
the eyes of a maiden to her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God,
until he have mercy upon us; not till I will, and till I see fit, and
according to my mind, but until the Lord have mercy: we suddenly slide away
from the covenant which the Lord makes with us, because we have it not when
we will, therefore we go away: 1 Samuel 13.13. when Samuel carried long, and
the people began to murmur, Saul went and offered a burnt-offering unto the
Lord, and therefore Samuel said unto him, Thou have done foolishly, and have
not kept the commandment of thy God, which he commanded thee, for now would
the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever; If Saul had stayed
the Lords time, he would have established the kingdom upon Israel for ever;
but he prevented the Lords kindness, and offered sacrifice unseasonably and
sinfully: so it is many times with a proud, pettish, rash, and distempered
heart, if we have not what we would, and just when we would, then we are all
amort, and murmur, and say, Why should we wait any longer? thou have done
foolishly, have thou prayed and looked to the promise thus long, and will thou
now give over? the Lord would have comforted thee, had thou gone on; but the
Lord has withdrawn himself from thee, because thou have withdrawn thy heart
from the promise: when the carriage is heavy, and the way is dead, there are
many sore pulls, and the wagon is at a stand, and if a man should then go away,
then all his work were lost; therefore stay thou till the Lord show mercy;
thus long thou have called, and sought, and looked to the promise, and waited
upon the Lord, and attended upon the freeness of his grace, once more would
have done it, thy heart was almost humbled, and thy sin was almost conquered;
O thou silly fool, why did not thou hold it out? it will come at last, my
life for thine: now take heed of this, if the time seem tedious, and thy heart
begins to sink, and thy spirit is weary, take heed of flying off, take heed of
shifting for thy own comfort, and looking to base end and aims: no, hold thy
mind to, and keep thy eye of faith upon the promise, and stay it out, till God
see the time fit, and know it is the best time for thee to receive it: Acts 27
31. Paul says, Except these abide in the ship, you cannot be safe; every man
was shipping over board to save himself, but Paul stayed them; a man would have
thought otherwise, but the Apostle knew it was not so, for the Lord had
revealed it unto him: so I say, be thy temptations never so strong, and thy
sins never so many, and thou beginnest to complain, and say, I have cried,
Lord, and sought earnestly, and yet my condition is worse, and my soul more
sinful, and I am less able to help my self, there is no more succor to be
expected: now take heed of going out of the ship, and from the use of the
means, keep in the ship, for in the ship you shall be safe; keep in the
promise, and still your hearts there, you shall have a happy arrival at
heaven; though it be upon a broken board, its no matter, stay Gods time.

Jacob, Genesis 32.26. there the Lord says, Let me go; I care not what becomes
of thee, I leave thee to thy self; but Jacob lays hold upon him, and would
not let him go: so the last work of faith is this; In an holy humility to
labor to contend with God, and by strong hand to overcome the Lord, for the
Lord loves to be overcome thus: be not fancy with the Lord, but in the sense
of thy own baseness, as it were: catch the Lord Jesus, and strive with him,
leave not till thou have those comforts which he has promised, and thou have
begged: this is the glory and victory of the ^^iumph of faith, that gives the
day to, and lays down the weapons, and yields himself as conquered: as it
was Jacob, when God saw he could not prevail, he said in the 28. verse, Thy
name shall be no more called Jacob, but Israel, because thou have prevailed
with God; God is ready to give what he has promised, but he will have us try
masterie with him; God overcomes himself, and we by faith in God overcome God;
as Iam. 2.13. Mercy triumphs over justice: Lord, says my soul, why should I
not have that mercy, supply, and succor? says justice; thou art a sinful
wretch, and thou have wronged me; says anger, thou have deserved to be
plagued, and thou shall rather be corrected by me. Now faith lays hold upon
the riches of the freeness of Gods mercy in Christ, and in him justice is
satisfied, and anger appeased for all, and now mercy is purchased, and mercy
triumphs over justice, and faith lays hold upon, and overcomes God himself
(as I may say) with an holy, humble baseness of heart. You know what the Lord
did to the woman of Canaan, when she had striven with him a great while, and
would take no denial, at last he says, O woman, great is thy faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will, take what thou will, if thou will have life for
thy child, and peace for thine own conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, take
it, for it is all thine: he (as it were) turns her loose to all her treasury;
if she had gone away at the first or second denial, she had found no help; but
because she held out, she had all her hearts desire: God would have us
wrestle with his Majesty, that he may be overcome in mercy and goodness. I
might here have taken some of the most desperate cases that could be, that you
might have seen what faith would have done in the midst of the want of all
means, and in the greatest extremity that could have befalne a poor sinner,
but I will not stand about it now at this time: now therefore consider what
has been said, lay these things up, and have them ever by you, and practice
them, and by often writing learn to write, and by often living learn to live:
many people live poorly, and make a poor shift to go to heaven; but I would
not have a Christian to live so, but be the master of his art; know and see
your way, and use the means, and labor to get good thereby, that you may have
sap and sweet of the promises, and go singing, and rejoicing, and triumphing
up to heaven. Now that which I conclude withal, is this; you see how far the
Lord has brought us, how the soul has been prepared, and cut off from sin
and himself, if fitted for the Lord Jesus by contrition and humiliation, and
that the soul comes to see, that there is no hope in the creatures, nor any
succor in heaven, but the Lord Jesus Christ, and so at last the sinner comes,
and lies at the footstool of the Lord Jesus Christ, and knows that either he
must be another man, or a damned man: now when he sees that prayer, and all
other means will not profit, and the power of the means yet prevail not, and
the power of his corruptions is not yet mastered, then he looks up to Christ,
and is contented, that he should do what he will with him: now when the Lord
Jesus Christ sees him lie wearied then with his corruptions, then the Lord
gives special notio^ to his soul, that it is his purpose to do him good, and
there is mercy for that broken heart of him, with that hope is stirred, and
says, is it possible? is it credible? shall all this wretchedness of mine he
pardoned? desire is kindled, and longs for that d^^^, O that I might once see
the funeral of all my sa^^ and then love and joy are cheared to entertain
this mercy, and says, O how is the soul bound to the God that offers free
and undeserved grace to a (...) borne rebellious hearted sinner; at last the
will says Amen to the promise, and says, O that m^^cie I will have, thus the
soul is come home to (...) by vocation; now the prodigal is come home to his
father, and the fathers heart leaps within h^^ breast, when he sees him lie at
the door: and as the father rejoices, so the Angels in heaven rei^^^^ and all
the faithful should rejoice, and say, O my husband, O my father, or my child
is come ho^^ again; and my wife that was a sinful woman, (...) come home
again to her first and best husband, you that have found it thus in your
selves, be comforted; you that know it in others, rejoice; the (...) have
heard, how the soul is ingrafted into the s^^^ Christ. Now afterward if the
Lord lend life and liberty, we shall come to show what the soul ^^ceives from
the stock: consider what I have sai^ and the Lord give you understanding.

FINIS.



