POESYES OF HORACE Meeter, by Lewis Euans Schoolemayster.
The second Poesy of Horace rebuking Uice.
The Argument.
Here Horace does by right rebuke, such as keep not the mean:
Not leaving eke untouched those, which to their lusts do lean.
THe rowte and crewe of dronken drabs, and oynctment they yt sell,
the beggars, bawdes, and all the kind of flatterers foul and fell
Are woeful sad when yt they hear, of Tigill: singers death:
For that he spent his wealth on them. But this will not uneath
(For fear to be so prodigal,) give to his fryende in need,
Thereby his hunger and his cold, to drive away with speed.
If thou the one demand why he his fathers wealth does wast,
And substance great on daintye fare, with persons vile unchaste,
Preparing so such gluttons feast, with money had by hyre?
Because (says he) to shun the name of Niggard I require.
Which one his mates do much comend, but him the wise do blame.
Fusidius fearth on the other side, of gluttons great the shame.
When that he has great grou^des and eke, much money lent for gain,
Who does require for every pound, five pound to him again.
And look thunthryfter any is, the more he wryngthe of him,
And so he haunteth yonkers out, that would go fine and trym.
But yet whom fathers hard do find, what God could now lo, lo,
Choose but exclayme, and cry on such, when those yt they do kno?
But this man's charge is as his gain, thou scarsly may belyeue,
How small a freynd unto him self, is he that thus does live.
Like as the father, ( Terence says) was sad, his son away,
No greater grief sustained he, then does this churl always.
If any now do ask of me, what mean these tales begun?
To show that fools avoiding faults, to faults ouerwartly run.
Malchinus walkthe with gown so long, as flappeth often the ground
A mecier man does wear again, a cutted cloak and round:
Rufillus smelthe of Muskbals still, and Gorgon stinkes as Got,
there is no mean, there are which will not touch but those I wot
whose gowns do traile the ground, and so ar wives and matrons such.
Another on the other part, but stynking hoores will tuche.
When that from stews was coming forth, a certain famous man
To him sage Cato said, proceed in virtue if thou can,
For lo, as soon as fylthy lust, the puffed up with desire,
Such youth then here for to descend right law does it require:
And not to tempte the matron wyfes: but I defye that praise,
Said he Cupennius which did love, none else but wifes always.
For you to hear is labor worth, which that aduowtrous men
Would not to speed, or have their will, how they are payned then
And how the pleasure rare they have, corrupted is with grief,
Still chaunsing unto dangers great, that daily been and rief.
The one from window high in house, has fallen headlong rownd,
the other whipped almost to death* yt third they thieves have fownd.
Another caught compelled is, to save him self with brybe,
With pyspots, Skoollions, dress the fyfte, and sixte I will describe.
Whose chance is for to suffer pain, and gelded for to be,
Which they deserve as all men say, yet nay says Galba he.
But how more safe the next degree of women men may use,
I mean all such as are made flee, whom Salust could not choose
But like aduowtrer fancy much, yet if that he had so
Been free, as wealth and wisdom would, and them would give no mo
Then might become one lyberall, and bounteous feign would be,
He should them give as that he might, not hurting his degree
As that should to his shame redound, but this was his desire,
And this he lykte, that he might say, no Matron I require.
As Marsaeus seruent Lover once, Origines of the queen.
Did give that daunsing drab his ground, his house nor substance mean,
and than did say with men their wifes, I never had lo to do,
But yet vile drabs and naughty queanes, thou Marsaeu often did kno
By whom thy name susteineth loss, more then thy goods I grant,
think thou enough to fly some sort, and that which hurts to hau^t?
For thee to lose good name, and spend thy fathers wealth away
Is ill and hurt, wherso thou spendes vnthryftly that I say,
What diffrence if thou sin, with matron grave or harlot gaye
Annius Milo son in law of Silla fool in this,
In having pleasure in such name, he suffered pain Iwys
More then enough, for buffets had, with sword he was beset
And driven forth when Longaren: within his love did get.
To him with words of pryuye part, perceauing all his woe.
If reason said what meanest thou? do I of thee look so,
To have a mate begotten thus, of Consuls stately race,
And clad in robes when that my lust, does thee so fervent chase?
What should he say? the maid is borne, of father noble great.
But by how much things far more meet, and contraring this yet
Does Nature rich her self us warn. But if thou well wylt now
work thine intent, and not things fond, to things being good if thou
Wylt join, to differ thynkst thou not, through folly if thou sin,
Or through the need or want of things, then linger not, begin
And leave to haunt the matron wyfes, by who^ of truth more pain
And hurt does come, then yt thereof, thou may receive of gain.
Nor of this matron brave with stones, being precious white and green,
(Although Cherinte thine be so) the lymmes are ryghtlyer seen.
But yea, sometimes of common Queanes, the lymmes are far more fine
Who what they have to sell do show, not forsynge face to shine.
And if some honesty they have, they brag not of the same,
Neither seek they how for to hyde, their bodies, faults and blame.
Rich men so use when they do buy, great Horses clad to knee,
To vewe the same least stature tall, and comely for to see.
Being often set forth with feet so light, a bayte to buy should be,
Or that for buttockes fair, short head, or neck courageous free.
They do this well, but thou will not, of matron mark with heed
The chiefest parts, when yet more blind, the^ Hipsea blind indeed:
Thou woldst behold the meaner parts, o leg, o arms, but well,
She boulged buttockes, and great nose, short side and feet has fell.
Of matrons thou may not behold nowght else but hew of face,
which with long gowns be hid unless, their legs have Catias grace.
But if the place forbid thou seek, that trenched is (for thee
That makes mad) much things a let, to thine intent shall be.
Her keepers, lycter, and such like, of Parasytes a thrall,
Her robe yt trailth to ground, and cloak most large yt covers all,
which do disdain that thou shuldst se, yt which we Cunnus call
The other strompet workth no fatche, whom in thin weed yt shall
As naked see, to vewe if leg, or fylthy feet do halt,
Thou may behold with sight her side, will thou therefore I say
Be so begylde and suffer dames, to have their gain away,
Before they purpose had? but yet as hunter deep in snow
Does hunt the Hare, not touching her, yt forth her self does show
Such as he takes with pain he eats, to whom my love is like,
which things so easy had does hate, and things hard out does pike
With verses such, and hopest thou away to put and pare
Quite from thy breast thy grief and heates, and crooked cursed care?
Has not to lust dame Nature made, a bound and measure such
As her what lykth or does myslyke, or what contents her much
To search does more avail? and so things fond from sit to set:
As when your tawes do dry for thryst, seek you of gold to get
A cup? whether hungryng loathe you, all meats and fare beside
A Pecocke and a Turbot both? when lust thee swelles so wide:
If maiden or bond boy be by, to whom should thy desire
Take place? or woldst thou rather burst through stifnes of thy ^ire?
I like not her (for one love I, all redye at desire,)
That will appoint anon (their mate being forth) but at more hyre,
Such one let pranking French men take, (says Philodem) for me,
Let one be had of meaner price, that glad to come will be,
So white, vpryght and fair let her appete that not more long
Nor fayrer more that would be seen, then nature wrought among:
When this in bed her self does lie, and I therein also,
Then Ilia her and Egeria I call by names and mo.
Nor fear I ought as I this do, least man from country come
And gates should burst, or dog should bark, and then again by some
Least that great noise be made in house, or that then pale from bead,
The dame should sleep, and call her self, both woeful and wretchead
For taken, she must fear her bones, yea least she dowry lose
And I my self with gown on gyrte, must barefoote flee my foes,
Least I should money pay and leese my ware, or else my name
To be taken is woo. I win, though Fabius Judge the same.
Thus ends the second Poesye of Hor^ce.
Imprynted at London in Fletestreate beneath the Conduite: at the Sign of S.
John Euangelyst, by Thomas Colwell.


