A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL of the Right Worshipful Sir Robert
Boteler Knight, of Wood-Hall:

In the Parish of Watton in Hertford-shire, the ninth of January, 1622.

PROVE. 10. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall rot.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for John Waterson, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and truly virtuous, the Lady FRANCIS BOTELER, late
wife to the Right worshipful Sir ROBERT BOTELER Knight, deceased.
MADAM, IT was your Ladyships importunity that brought these poor Meditations
to the Press, and it is your name likewise that must countenance them abroad
in the world, The Queen of Sheba heard very much of Salomons glory: yet when
she came in person to see it, she found it was far greater then the report.
But here it is otherwise. For though happily some that do ouer-loue either me
or my Sermon, have told you more of it then it deserves; Yet when you come to
see it, to read it, I doubt, you will find less in it then you do expect:
And so will others too. But the difference is, that you can blame none but your
self; and they will blame none but me. Yet notwithstanding, as it was a great
comfort unto me at the first, that my auditors were pleased to accept it then
as a discharge of that debt, that service which I did owe unto the memory of
that Noble Gentleman your loving husband: So will it be now likewise, if this
dedication may any way express that reuer entiall observance, which the
virtues that are in you above your Sex, and the favors that you have done me
beyond my desert, shall ever challenge at my hands. In the meanetime what is
wanting in my endeauours, I will supply by my prayers for your Ladyship, that
God would be pleased to afford you a daily increase of comfort in the happy
growth of that tender plant, your little Daughter, and to multiply his
blessings upon you, and his graces in you both, to his glory.

Your Ladyships faithful servant in Christ Jesus, T. H.

1. PET. 1. 24. All flesh is as grass.
TOuching obsequies and Funeral solemnities, wherewith all times and
religions, have in some kind or other honored their dead, it is the
conclusion of a heathen man, and Christianity denies it not, Totus hic locus
etsi contemnendus in nobis, tamen non negligendus in nostris; Though we ought
not to make them any part of our care as touching our selves, yet
notwithstanding, where either a commixtion of blood by affinity and kindred, or
a secret inter-inanimation, an union of souls by amity and love, or any other
collateral and binding relation, has entailed upon us the memory of the dead,
there, it will be an act of a reuerentiall and a pious affection, to provide
that those rites and those ceremonies may accordingly have their course.
Augustine.
But yet St. Austin has set them their bounds too: we may not carry them so
high as to think that they are mortuorum subsidia, any whit available unto
those who are gone; but the respect that is due unto them, and the use that is
to be made of them must end and determine in this, that they are Viuorum
solatia, they do indeed in some measure assuage and lessen the sorrow, and so
add something to the comfort of those that survive. And this use do we make
of them, this comfort do we milk from them now; as being an act, not of
safety only, but of piety too, that we are thus met together, you, to
contribute your presence and condolencie, and I, (most unworthy) my poor
meditations to the celebration of this day. For we shall thereby not only
quitt our selves of a debt, wherein we all stand bound (though by different
obligations) to the memory of that noble Gentlemen, whose day this is; but some
gain also will arise, happily some advantage may accrue unto us, if we shall
contemplate, exemplarily in him, and doctrinally in this text, Figmentum
nostrum, (as the Prophet David calls it) our own composition and structure,
and mould, and mortality; Omnis caro vt foenum, All flesh is as grass.

In the handling of which words, we shall first pass through those
considerations that are most obuious, and nearest hand; as first, the various
acceptations of this word Caro, Flesh, in Scripture, and which of them we are
to pitch upon here; then the extent, the latitude of it in that acceptance,
and that is carried here as far as any term, any expression can do it, for
it is Omnis Caro, All flesh; Lastly the condition, the nature of flesh in this
latitude, in this universality, and that is set down by a similitude, a
comparison, and the thing whereto it is likened, whereto it is compared is,
Grass, Omnis Caro vt foenum, All flesh is as grass. And when these
particulars have passed our discussion, we will then fall upon those
resultances, those emergent and collateral considerations, wherein the text
and the time shall best agree.

To begin then; This word Caro, flesh, is diversely taken in Scripture. Amongst
other things which the Prophet David ascribes unto God by way of praise, Psalm.
136. One is that he does, Dare escam omni carni, he gives food to all flesh;
there, flesh is taken for every creature that has life. In the 29. of Genesis
Laban says to Jacob, Os meum es, and caro mea, Surely thou art my bone and my
flesh; there flesh is taken for consanguinitie and kindred. Among other
articles of the Creed, we believe (...), the resurrection of the flesh: there,
flesh is taken for the body of man. In the 7. to the Romans St. Paul says, I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh, that is, in my soul, as far as it
inclines unto, and is guided by the flesh, I know there dwells no good: there
flesh is taken for the soul of man. In the 6. of Genesis God saw that Omnis caro,
all flesh had corrupted their ways; there flesh is taken for those that had
forsaken God. In the 2. of Joel, God says, I will power out my Spirit super
omnem carnem, upon all flesh; there flesh is taken for those that should be
called to the knowledge of God. Many other significations it has; sometimes it
is taken for the people of the Jews; sometimes for the ceremonies of the old
law; sometimes for the corruption of nature, sometimes for the infirmity of
nature; and many times in a larger capacity it comprehends all men, and so it
is taken here, Omnis caro, All flesh, that is, all men are as Grass.

Now if you ask me the reason why men in Scripture are called by the name of
flesh, (besides the reason of gra^mer, that the part is here siguratiuely taken
for the whole) St. Chrysostom renders it thus:chrysostom. Because (says he) they
are so wholly given over to the works and lusts of the flesh, ac si sola carne
circundati, carerent anima: As if they were nothing else but a mass, a lump
of flesh, that had no soul to quicken it, no reason to guide it at all.

But yet we must take heed that we stretch not this reason of St. Chrysostom
too far. For though it be true in most men, yet it is not true in all: God
forbid that all men should be so fleshly. Greg. And therefore St. Gregory
thought fit to correct and to limit it by a distinction, In sacro eloquio
aliter dicitur caro iuxta naturam, aliter iuxta culpam vel corruptionem, (says
he) The sin, the corruption of flesh, is one thing: and the nature, the
constitution of flesh, is another thing: these are two different
considerations, and the Scripture takes them so: And therefore where it is
taken in the first sense, there St. Chrysostomes reason is good, but not
otherwise, for it holds not here; since it is only the nature, the
constitution of flesh that is aimed at in this place, and in that sense it
grows to an universality, which is the second thing we observe, Omnis caro,
All flesh is as grass.

All flesh: That flesh which is but coursely fed, with any thing that comes
next hand: and that flesh which eats nothing but what is far fetched and
dearly bought. That flesh which is clothed in rags, or perchance not so
well; and that flesh which wears only what is raked out of the intrails of
beasts, and out of the bowels of the earth, and out of the bottom of the Sea.
That flesh which is so macerated with fasting, that the skin is ready to
cleave to the bones, much like a walking Anatomy: and that flesh which is so
pampered and blown up by riot and excess, that the skin can scarce hold it.
That flesh wherein is lodged and cloystered up as much learning, as much
wisdom, as makes a man a walking Library: and that flesh which entertaines
nothing but ignorance and folly. That flesh which is painted and trimmed up as
Iezabells was; and that flesh which is squallida and fletibus siccata,
neglected, and squallid, and dried up with tears; Hierom.
as St. Hierome writes of that virtuous Lady Paula. That flesh which is
smoothly playsterd on; and that flesh which is but rough-cast. The face that is
so amorous and so angelical, that it rauisheth a beholder; and the face that
is so ill-fauoured, so There sites-like, that it may well serve for a
skarre-crowe in a garden of Cucumbers. The body that is so eleganly contrived,
so methodically laid together, with such an eutaxy of proportion, such a
concinnity, such a harmony of limbs and members, as if nature meant to make it
her masterpiece; and the body that is so misshapen, so discomposed, as if
nature had shuffled it up in have, or made it in the dark. The man that is so
transported with the conceit of his riches or his honor, that he is ready upon
every occasion to swagger in St. Bernards terms, Quis ille, vel ille, aut quae
domus patris eorum? What is this fellow, or that base fellow, and what is the
house of their father that they should affront me? And the man that glories
only in his infirmities, and accounts all but dross and dung in respect of
Christ crucified, as St. Paul did: Omnis caro, all faces, all bodies, all men,
all flesh is but as grass.

Yea but Omnis caro non eadem caro. (says St. Paul) all flesh is not the same
flesh, there is one manner of flesh of Men, and another of Beasts, and another
of Birds, and another of Fishes. It is true: but yet mark the distinction
that Tertullian gives here: Tertull.
All flesh is not the same flesh, in equality of prerogative; but, all flesh is
the same flesh, in community of nature. It is differentia honoris, not
differentia generis, (as he says there) a difference of honor, not of kind
that St. Paul puts between them. Now then, make an Allegory of it; understand
by men, those that are the best of men, those that live as men should do, that
is, religious and exemplar Christians; Understand by beasts, men of a carnal
and a bestiall conversation; by birds, contemplative men, that soar up aloft
to hidden and heavenly things; by fishes, men that are satisfied only with a
baptismall aspersion, non-proficients in Christianity, that stand at the Font
still, and are gone no further then their Godfathers first brought them: and
then, though in regard of personal and particular qualities it may be true in
this figurative, this Allegorical sense too, Omnis caro non eadem, all flesh
is not the same flesh; though there be a great difference between the humors
and affections and inclinations of men, yet notwithstanding, whatsoever their
beginning or their progress be, they will meet still in the Center of nature,
they are all but flesh, and Omnis caro foenum, and all flesh is as grass.

It is obseruable, that the first thing which ever sprung out of the earth, was
grass; and the last creature that was made of the earth, was man. And surely
(besides that infinite difference in nature) when God at first did put such a
difference between the manner of their creation, Germinet terra, let the earth
bring forth grass, but faciamus hominem, let us make man our selves, let that
be our own immediate handy-worke; when he put such a distance between the
time of their making, (for grass was brought forth the third day, and man was
made the sixth day; and he was the last creature that was made, as being Gods
masterpiece here on earth, and the vp-shot and the Epilogue and the complement
of all;) when he did thus separate these two at the beginning, it was not
likely that there should be, neither did he intend any such degeneration, any
such declination in nature, that they should ever meet togeither in terms of
comparison. Yet, see the confusion that sin has brought in: Man that was so
glorious a creature at the first, is now fallen so far, and grown so mean,
so vile, that grass and he are grown to a resemblance, to an affinity, and
they are both weighed here, one against another in the balance, this text,
Omnis caro vt foenum, All flesh is as grass.

As grass, in diverse respects: 1. grass is light; and so is man. Sometimes a
wind of doctrine, some newfangled opinion, blows him out of the faith.
Sometimes a wind of preferment, an ambition of honor blows him out of the
society of his friends. Sometimes a wind of persecution blows him out of the
Church. Every little blast of distemper makes him droope and hang toward the
earth; but the impetuous gust of a violent disease blows him quite out of the
world.

Secondly, grass is short; and so is the life of man too. The Scripture, at
longest, makes it but a spanne; and yet this spanne is continually cut off by
inch-meales too. Sometimes it is cut off an inch above, when a Father or a
Mother dies; and sometimes it is cut off an inch below, when a Son or a
Daughter is taken away: and sometimes it is cut off quite in the middle, when a
wife is parted from her husbaud, or a husband from his wife; death is still
nibling at it, every day, every hour, till at length it has eaten it so low,
so near the ground, that there is nothing left.

Thirdly, grass is brittle, apt to be bruised with the least touch; so is man
likewise: So thin, and so slight, and so weak of constitution, such brittle
ware, that it falls to pieces many times, even by the least mischance. The
light of the knowledge of Gods glory in the face of Christ Jesus, is the
greatest, the richest treasure that we can enjoy here; and yet when we have
it, Habemus thesaurum hunc in vasis fictilibus, says St. Paul, we have this
treasure but in earthen vessels, and such vessels, you know, are quickly
broken. A pin, or a fishbone, or a crumme, or a hair, these are but poor
and weak, and despicable things: and yet history tells us that men have lost
their lives, even by these. It is strange, you will think, they should do so;
and yet I shall tell you that which is more strange then this too. Chilon the
Spartan, when his son returned home a conqueror from the Olympian games,
dyed, prae gaudio, merely for joy. When Clidemus the Athenian had a crown of
gold set upon his head, he died prae gloria, only with the conceit of that
glory. Plato died in a dream; and Crassus died in a laughter; and Tertullian
reports all this too. So tender a piece is the body of man, so frail, and so
feeble, and so brittle is his constitution.

Fourthly, grass is subject to beasts, they may eat it up and tread it down:
so are men too, for whilst they are as tenacious of wrongs as a Cammell, as
lustful as goats, as deceitful and crafty as Foxes, whilst they lick up
the dust of the earth by covetousness, with the Serpent, and foame with anger
like a Boar, and are ready to devour one another by oppression, like Wolves;
they make themselves a prey to these beasts, that is, to these base and
beastiall affections, which trample upon, and tread down their souls to the
nethermost hell.

Fifthly, grass is subject to Mowers, they may cut it down when they please;
so are men too, if you consider them in respect of a civil and temporal
estate; so, the Potentates, the great ones of this world they are mowers,
inferior people are as grass: if there be any that stand in their way, and
ouershadow their steps never so little, that thrive and grow up faster then
they would have them, they have their sithes ready, oppression and policy and
supplantation, to cut them down. If otherwise you consider them in respect of
a vital subsistence, a natural being, which is the consideration that we are
to stop upon here; so there is one that has been a mowing ever since the
beginning of the world to this present, that is, Death; and yet there is a
repullulation of grass, a succession of men every day: and where he is the
mower, there great men, and mean men, and all men, Omnis caro, All flesh is as
grass. He that comes to mow down a field, does not spare and pass by the
flowers that are in it, but cuts down all, perchance a Cowslip, or a
Primerose, or a hony-suckle, as soon as other ordinary grass. Though we
ascribe so much to the nobles and great ones of this world, as to account them
the flowers of the field, the glory of a people; yet when death comes with his
sith, he does not pass by them, and suffer them to stand and to flourish
still, whilst others are cut down and fade away; but he takes all before him,
flowers and grass, Prince and people, rich and poor, without any difference
or distinction at all. A mower does not pass by an herb, though happily it
be very wholesome and medicinable, but cuts down that too, as well as the
weed that is good for nothing. Though men in the general are said to be as
grass, yet some men are as wholesome and sovereign, and medicinable herbs,
there is much virtue in them. There is virtue in a good Statesman to cure the
maladies, and to ease the grieuances of a Commonwealth. There is virtue in an
honest Lawyer, to support and to strengthen a weak and a feeble, and a crazie
estate. There is virtue in a good physician to recover and restore to health an
indisposed, and a languishing body. There is virtue in a learned Divine to
bind up a broken heart, and to heal the wounds of a distressed conscience:
these are wholesome herbs indeed; happy is that land wherein they grow: yet
notwithstanding Death will not spare these neither, but cuts them down too, as
well as the weeds, as well as debosh'd and idle and ignorant people, that are
not only not useful, but very hurtful and combersome to a Commonwealth.

Thus have you a Catalogue, and an Inuentory of man's infirmities: so light is
he, and so unsettled in his course; so short in continuance; so brittle of
constitution; so subject to vile and bestiall affections, and so apt to be
mowen down by the hand of death, that St. Peter did rightly cast it up, when
he made the sum of all to be but grass, Omnis caro vt foenum, All flesh is
as grass.

Now, if the weakness, the frailty of humane nature be such, that flesh is
but as grass; if this weakness, this frailty be so universal, so
vnlimitable, that there is no exemption, no immunitie from it, quia omnis caro,
for all flesh is as grass; Surely then amor corporis ebrietas animae, as St.
Chrysostom calls it, Chrysostom.
the love of the body is the drunkenness of the soul; nay, St. Bernard gives
it a higher term, Bern.
and says, that it is Spiritualis phrenesis, A spiritual kind of Lunacie:
they are drunk and mad indeed, Qui sic intendunt tabernaculo suo ac si
nunquam esset casurum, (as he speaks) that are so curious, so busy about the
tabernacle of the body as if they thought it should never fall; so fond and so
tender, and so careful over their flesh, as if it should never see corruption.
But it is a lamentable complaint that St. Austin makes here; Quid meruit anima?
whilst the flesh is thus magnified, and so much made of, that all the
storehouses of nature are ransackt and exhausted to serve those two unthrifts,
the back and the belly; quid meruit anima? What has the poor soul deserved
all this while, that men should be so careless of her, as that she is all
naked and ready to starve, whilst they provide not for her any one drop of the
comfort of the Spirit, any little ragge of righteousness to hang upon her?
Quid meruit anima? How has the soul deserved so ill, that she should be thus
neglected, for whom Christ died; and quid meruit caro? How has the flesh
deserved so well, that it should be thus cocker'd and pampered up, since it is
but grass? Omnis Caro vt foenum, All flesh is as grass.

Yet notwithstanding, as in those particulars which we specified before, flesh
was compared to grass in respect of its weakness and mortality; so there is
yet a further analogy and relation, and a resemblance between these two, that
makes not a little for its grace and for its glory. Though grass be eaten up
or cut down never so low, yet there is a root still left in the ground, and
that root is capable of a repullulation: as soon as the warmth of the Sun,
and the influence of heaven comes at it, it springs up again, more green and
more lively then it was before. So likewise, though happily affliction may
bring a man to so low an ebb and declination of fortune, as to level him
with the ground; though death bring him yet lower, and lay him in his grave;
yea, though his race, and his name, and his memory perish among the living, as
if he had never been; yet there is a root still left in the earth, the body
that sleeps in the dust, and that body is capable of a resurrection: as soon
as the Spring of Judgment shall begin to advance, and that glorious Sun of
righteousness to appear and shine in his strength; Surget caro, and quidem
omnis, and quidem ipsa, and quidem integra, (as Tertullian speaks) flesh
shall rise, Tert.
and all flesh shall rise, and that flesh shall rise which was buried before,
and it shall rise with a full proportion of feature and perfection of parts
without any diminution at all.

Though you heap upon it all the terms of ignominy and infirmity that may be
devised: Say that it is Immunda a primordio, Unclean from the very beginning,
as being made of the slime of the earth; and unclean in its propagation, as
being conceived in sin: say that it is friuola, infirma, criminosa, onerosa,
molesta, a weak, and a frivolous, and a sinful, and a burdenous, and a
troublesome thing. Say further, that it is Caduca in originem terram, that it
will dissolve again into that dust of which it was first made; that it will
change the name of a man into the name of a carcass, and say that it falls
from that name too, In omnis iam vocabuli mortem, (as Tertulltan does elegantly
deliver it:) say that it dies so far to all expression, that no term, no
name can be found for it; yet notwithstanding all this weight of Rethoricke,
and of infirmity cannot keep it down, or diminish one hair, one atome of
it, but it will rise again, Quia in deposito est apud Deum; God himself has
taken it into his tuition, his custody, Et quis eripiet? And who shall take it
out of his hands? And surely it is a good reason that Tertullian gives for it,
Tertull.
because (says he) it stands in better congruitie with the nature and majesty
of God, to restore to a being that which he once rejected, then utterly to
destroy that which himself once made, and liked well too. Et sic caro foenum,
in this respect also flesh is as grass, it will spring and rise up again, and
this makes for its glory.

Yet this is not all its glory neither. It Is true, that in the 6. of Genesis God
says, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, quia Caro, because he is
but flesh; there indeed flesh is branded with infirmity. But in the 2. of
Joel, God says that he would pour out his Spirit, Super omnem carnem, Upon
all flesh; there flesh is advanced to a great deal of glory. St. Paul says,
that in carne, in his flesh there dwelt no good; this was St. Paul's infirmity:
But Job was confident, that in carne, in his flesh he should see God, and this
was Jobs glory. St. Peter says here, Caro foenum, flesh is as grass; What
greater infirmity? and yet St. John says, Verbum caro, the Word was made
flesh; and what greater glory?

St. Austine Aug. has a passage to this purpose too; Let no man think (says
he) that God does not regard the sins of the flesh: For, know ye not (says
the Apostle) that ye are the Temple of God? If therefore you sin, you defile
Gods Temple. Yea but dicit aliquis, happily some wicked man will say, it is my
soul that is Gods Temple, not my body; that is no fit place for him to dwell
in, and adijcit testimonium, perchance he brings this testimony to confirm
it, Omnis caro vt foenum, all flesh is as grass. Infelix interpretatio,
punienda cogitatio, (says the good Father:) this is a dangerous exposition, a
damnable imagination. For flesh is therefore called grass, quia moritur,
because it fades, it dies; but Quod ad tempus moritur, vide vt non resurgat cum
crimine, take heed, that that which dies for a time, but for a time, take
heed that it rise not again laden with sin: For the same Apostle says
elsewhere, that our bodies also are the Temples of God; and therefore vide quid
agas de Templo Dei, take heed how thou use thy body, thy flesh, for it is
Gods Temple. Now then, Caro Dei Templum, that flesh should be so highly
advanced as to be called Gods Temple; this is man's excellency and this is his
glory: but Caro foenum, that flesh, notwithstanding all this, should be as
grass, this is man's infirmity and this is his frailty. And this infirmity,
this frailty Christ himself could not take from our nature, though he took
our nature upon him. Verbum Caro, the Word was made flesh; and yet Caro foenum,
that flesh also was as grass, he dyed too.

So that the sum, and the resultance; and the harmony of this text is
briefly this; that as in diverse other places of Scripture, so here also,
grass is set down as an emblem and an Hieroglyphique of man's mortality,
which is the Center, wherein all those lines that we drew before, have their
concurrence and period.

Now, though the very Heathen themselves have declaimed so largely and so
elegantly upon this theme, that we may dig silver enough out of their Mines,
learning enough out of their books to make us rich in this knowledge, that we
must die: yet notwithstanding if we desire to find out that fine Gold of
saving knowledge, to make such uses of our mortality, as may conduce to our
salvation, we must seek for that elsewhere, we must dig for that in
another Mine, that is, the Scripture. Every Poet and every Philosopher can tell
us that our life is a moment, but that it is momentum tanti momenti vt ab eo
pendeat aeternitas, a moment of so great moment, as that thereupon depends
happiness or misery, joy or sorrow that shall be as endless as eternity it self,
this is more then they can tell us; and this we learn out of the Scripture.
When they had traveled over all that Microcosme, that little world, Man, and
curiously observed all that was in it; when they had made an exquisite suruay,
an exact description of every Country, every climate; his generation and his
nativity, and his infancy, and his childhood, and his adolescency, and his
man's estate, and his middle age, and his old age; when they had passed over all
these; yet when they came once to that same Mare mortuum, that dead Sea, the
grave, there they sat them down, and set up a pillar, as Hercules did, and
they wrote upon it Nil vltra: Further they could not go, for they thought
there was no further being. But Christianity has taught us that there is Plus
vltra; we have discovered another world besides this, and a far greater then
this, whereof this earth is but the Center. We know that the grave is
Diuersorium non domicilium, it is but an Inn wherein the flesh must soiourne
for the while, not the house wherein it must dwell for ever. The Scripture says
that the dead do sleep in the dust: If so, then the grave is a bed: we know
that we shall lie in this bed but one night, but a St. Lucies night; and when
that great and glorious day of Judgment shall once begin to dawne, we know
that then we must lie there no longer.

Now, in this abundance and plenty of knowledge, what remains but that we
commit it to the good Joseph of the land, the memory; that if happily there do
fall out a famine of grace in the soul, she may find whereby to sustain her
self. Memorare nouissima, (says the Son of Syrach) Remember thy end, and
thou shall be sure not to do amiss.

He that will guide a Ship well, must put himself into the hinmost part of
it, the Stern; so likewise he that will shape the course of his life aright
according to the card and compass of Faith and Hope, that finally he may
arrive at the land of living, must convey himself to the hindmost part of his
life, by a continual meditation of Death.

That great tempest mentioned in the Gospel, wherein the disciples were like to
be cast away, it rose (as the text says there) while Christ was asleep in
Puppi, in the hinmost part of the Sip: so likewise the tempests of Gods
judgments and the storms of the Devils temptations, wherein many a soul does
suffer Shipwreck, they rise whilst we sleep too in Puppi: in the hinmost
part of the Ship, the latter end of our life; whilst we are secure and
careless, and think not of Death. It Is true, there is no man so brutish, as to
think that he shall never die; but yet, alas! how many are there so Godless,
that they never think they shall die? So strangely does the Devil blind their
eyes, that they may not see that ditch, that deep infernal ditch, into the
which he leads them.

But as Christ in the Gospel restored that blind man to sight by applying to
his eyes a plaster of spittle clay, so must we do in this case too; we must
take spittle, that is, the tears of repentance, and clay, that is, the
consideration of our own frailty, and temper these two well together, and
apply them to the eyes of our Soul; and then we shall easily discover any
danger that is before us, and prevent it too. Pliny writes of Bees, that when
they swarm and fly up into the air, if you do but cast a little dust amongst
them, they will quickly come down. When vaineglorious, and ambitious and
aspiring thoughts do swarm in our hearts, let us learn to do so too: That
is, to intermingle them with the meditation of that dust into which we must one
day be dissolved; and then they will soon fall from that pitch to humility and
mortification. I have heard, that it is a present remedy to assuage a swelling
in the body, if you rub it with a dead man's hand: when there rises up any
tumor of pride in thy heart, do thou so too; rub and chase it well with this
consideration, that Caro foenum, Flesh is but as grass; that the body which
thou do so much tender and value at so high a rate, shall at length become a
liuelesse, and a stinking carkas; and surely thy proud heart will quickly
down: So useful and so operative and so sovereign is the meditation of our
mortality, that as David s^ake of Goliabs sword, so may we of it, Non est ei
altera simili^, There is no other like unto it.

Yet notwithstanding how little do the world makes of it in these days, I
shall show you by a homely comparison, I confess, and yet suitable enough to
the disposition of most men. When a Hog is killed; it is an usual thing for
the rest of the Hogs to run together, and to make a great noise, a grunting
for the time; but anon they go all away, and return every one to his mire and
to his wallow again. So likewise when a neighbor dies, it is a common custom
for people to flock about his Corse, and to follow it to the Church, and
perchance some lamentation is made, some good thoughts are entertained for the
time; but when the solemnity is once over, they all part, and return every one
to his own home, to his old sin again, as if there had bin no such matter.
But I hope better things of you, who have at this time, not only a text and a
precept to put you in mind of your mortality, but an instance also and an
example, the example of a worthy Gentleman; unto whose memory we do now offer
up this last act and sacrifice of our love: In which love I hold my self to be
so far interessed, that I cannot but ascribe unto him those terms and titles
of worth, which all you do know better then my self, to be but his due. As he
was descended of an ancient and worthy family, so did he entertain those
dispositions and those affections, whereunto men of such a race do commonly
incline: so humble he was and so affable, and so inoffensiue in his behavior;
so upright and so conscientious in his dealings; so liberal and so bountiful
in his hospitality; so even and so equal in his temper: but above all, so well
devoted to religion (as will appear by some special evidences) that now nomen
eius quasi vnguentum effusum, his name is like a sweet ointment powered out,
the box is broken, and the fragrancy of it is dispersed over the wholehouse.
And those tokens, those evidences of his piety were these. 1. He was quite out
of that common fashion which too too many of his quality are in, that is, he
was no swearer; he hated it in himself, and he hated it in others too. 2. He
was so tender and so chary over the truth, that he could not abide to hear it
tossed and tumbled up and down in a controversy, least peradventure heat and
impatience might do it wrong. 3. He was much and often grieved at the
irregularities and exorbitancies of those present times; which I take to be,
not a probability, but a demonstration of an honest and a Christian heart.

Touching his sickness, which is usually the abstract and Epitome of the whole
volume of a man's life, what I saw, I will relate.

As God has given to all things in the world their several instruments to
laud and to magnify his name; the heavens have their motion, their light,
their influence; the seasons their succession, their vicissitude; the elements
their conducibility to the use and service of man, and all creatures their
sustenance and being; so man has his instrument for this purpose too, that is,
his tongue: and this instrument did he dispose and tune to the sweetest
harmony that can be under heaven, that is, he prayed. Sometimes he made his
chamber a Church, Ego and domus (as he spoke) he and his family joined together
in prayers and supplications unto God. Sometimes he made himself a Church:
for wheresoever a man gathers together the powers and faculties of his soul to
pray, there is a Church and there is a congregation, Ibi duo vel tres, there
are two or three, Et ibi Deiu, and there is God in the midst of them. Sometimes
he prayed in a continued form, and sometimes he prayed by Eiaculatious, as the
pauses and intermissions of his agony gave him leave. When his tongue fayl'd
him, then his hands took their turn, and by a frequent elevation testified
his zeal, and did (as it were) say Amen to the prayers of those that were
about him. And when his hands lost their strength, then his eyes were lifted
up; and surely vbi amor ibi oculus, his eyes were fixed where his love was
fixed, that is, upon the Kingdom of heaven. And when all these failed him, I
doubt not, but the heart, as it is vltimum moriens, the last thing that dyed in
nature, so was it in religion likewise; it lived longest, and it prayed longst
too. Yet for all this, he was but a man; his breath was in his nostrells, and
his foundation in the dust. Et quid de mortali nisi mortale expectandum, What
can be looked for at the hands of a mortal man, but that he must dye?

Now, though David prayed earnestly unto God, that he would not take him away
in the midst of his age; yet let no man think this good Gentleman the less
happy, because he was taken away much about that time, for he was but two
years over, 37. years old when he died: do not think him the less happy in
this respect; for Christ himself died before he came to the middle of man's
age, when he wanted two years of it, when he was but 33. years old: Et quis
Christo beatior? Who can be more happy, who can be so happy as Christ is?
Neither yet let any say that they have lost him, though he be dead: as, I have
lost a loving husband, or I have lost a loving brother, or I have lost a loving
friend, or I have lost a good Landlord, or I have lost a good Master: for
though he were all these, and though this be the usual phrase of the world,
yet it is a plain solecisme in the language of Christianity. For why should
we think that lost, which God has? Non est amissus sed praemissus, He is not
lost, but only sent before us into heaven. And now, that which lies upon us to
do, is, that we endeavor and strive to follow him thither.

Which that we may the better do, first it will easily be granted that we must
follow, Quiae omnis caro vt foenum, For all flesh is as grass.

Secondly, two places of Scripture there are, wherewith I shall close up this
exercise, and which will be, perchance, not unworthy your remembrance. The
first is that of our Savior in the Gospel, Facite vobis amicos, Make you
friends of unrighteous Mammon, that when ye die, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations: and upon this text I shall descant by way of history.
I remember I have heard of a certain man, that had three friends; it fortuned,
that suite being commenced against this man, he was summoned to appear before
the Judge. In which extremity, he did as all men use to do in the like case;
that is, he went to his friends, for advice and assistance. When he came to
the first, his answer was, that he would lend him a good cloak to go before
the Judge in a decent and a handsome fashion, and that is all he would do for
him. When he came to the second, his answer was, that he would go along with
him to the Court gate, and there he would leave him. But when he came to the
third, his answer was, that he would accompany him into the Court, and stand
before the Judge, and speak for him too. This man that we speak of is a
Christian, and he has three friends too, his wealth, his kindred, and his
good works. When death arrests him by some mortal disease to appear before
the Tribunal seat of Almighty God, if he come to his riches, they will lend
him a winding sheet, and that is all they can do for him. If he come to his
kindred, his acquaintance, they will attend him to the door, the grave; that is
all they can do for him. But when he comes to his good works, they answer,
That they will never leave him, they will go up with him into the Court of
heaven, and plead his cause before almighty God. Happy is the man that has
store of such friends, for they will receive him into everlasting habitations.

The second place of Scripture that I would commend to your memory, is that of
the Preacher, Vbicurque ceciderit arbor, ibi erit; and upon this text I shall
descant by way of Allegory. Wheresoever the tree falls, there it lies; if it
falls toward the North, then it lies toward the North; and if it fall toward
the South, then it lies toward the South: but which way soever it falls,
there it lies. Now, look which way we would have a tree to fall, it is an
usual thing to loppe off the boughs on the contrary side, that their weight
may not carry it that way; and then when it does fall, it will fall according
to our desire. Beloved, every man is a tree, his inclinations and affections
the branches; though he spread never so far, and grow up never so high, yet
the hand of Death must one day cut him down: and he has but two ways to
fall; either toward the cold and pinching North of damnation; or toward the
warm and comfortable South of salvation: but wheresoever he falls there he
lies. If thou then would feign have thy tree fall the right way, be sure that
thou begin betimes to cut off all the luxuriant boughs on the contrary side,
those carnal and rebellious desires, that grow and weigh toward hell. Cut off
that lower branch of covetousness, that does so houer over earth; and cut off
those middle branches of lustful and licentious affections; and cut off that
top branch of ambition and pride; cut off all on that side: but cherrish those
branches on the other side, good affections, good desires; and then when this
time comes that thou must fall, their weight will carry thee the right way
toward salvation, toward heaven. Which the Lord of his infinite mercy grant
unto us all, for the all-sufficient Merits of his only Son and our alone
Savior Christ Jesus: To whom, etc.

FINIS.

